
1. Expert Rev Mol Med. 2016 Mar 21;18:e4. doi: 10.1017/erm.2016.3.

The microRNA miR-124 suppresses seizure activity and regulates CREB1 activity.

Wang W(1), Wang X(1), Chen L(1), Zhang Y(1), Xu Z(1), Liu J(1), Jiang G(1), Li
J(1), Zhang X(1), Wang K(2), Wang J(3), Chen G(1), Luo J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology,Chongqing Key Laboratory of Neurology,The First
Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University,1 Youyi Road,Chongqing
400016,China. (2)Peking University School of Medicine,38 Xueyuan Road,Beijing
100091,China. (3)The Institute of Biophysics,Chinese Academy of Sciences,15 Datun
Road,Beijing 100101,China.

miR-124, a brain-specific microRNA, was originally considered as a key regulator 
in neuronal differentiation and the development of the nervous system. Here we
showed that miR-124 expression was suppressed in patients with epilepsy and rats 
after drug induced-seizures. Intrahippocampal administration of a miR-124 duplex 
led to alleviated seizure severity and prolonged onset latency in two rat models 
(pentylenetetrazole- and pilocarpine-induced seizures), while miR-124 inhibitor
led to shortened onset latency in pilocarpine-induced seizure rat models.
Moreover, the result of local field potentials (LFPs) records further
demonstrated miR-124 may have anti-epilepsy function. Inhibition of neuronal
firing by miR-124 was associated with the suppression of mEPSC, AMPAR- and
NMDAR-mediated currents, which were accompanied by decreased surface expression
of NMDAR. In addition, miR-124 injection resulted in decreased activity and
expression of cAMP-response element-binding protein1 (CREB1). a key regulator in 
epileptogenesis. A dual-luciferase reporter assay was used to confirm that
miR-124 targeted directly the 3'UTR of CREB1 gene and repressed the CREB1
expression in HEK293T cells. Immunoprecipitation studies confirmed that the CREB1
antibody effectively precipitated CREB1 and NMDAR1 but not GLUR1 from rat brain
hippocampus. These results revealed a previously unknown function of miR-124 in
neuronal excitability and provided a new insight into molecular mechanisms
underlying epilepsy.

PMID: 26996991  [PubMed - in process]


2. Transl Psychiatry. 2016 Mar 15;6:e757. doi: 10.1038/tp.2016.4.

MiR-582-5p/miR-590-5p targeted CREB1/CREB5-NF-<U+03BA>B signaling and caused
opioid-induced immunosuppression in human monocytes.

Long X(1), Li Y(1), Qiu S(1), Liu J(2), He L(1), Peng Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, China. (2)Discipline of Physiology, School of Medical
Sciences, the University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.

Chronic opioid abusers are more susceptible to bacterial and viral infections,
but the molecular mechanism underlying opioid-induced immunosuppression is
unknown. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are emerging as key players in the control of
biological processes, and may participate in immune regulation. In this study, we
investigated the molecular mechanisms in opioid-induced and miRNA-mediated
immunosuppression, in the context of miRNA dysregulation in opioid abusers. Blood
samples of heroin abusers were collected and analyzed using miRNA microarray
analysis and quantitative PCR validation. The purified primary human monocytes
were cultured in vitro to explore the underlying mechanism. We found that
morphine and its derivative heroin significantly decreased the expression levels 
of miR-582-5p and miR-590-5p in monocytes. cAMP response element-binding protein 
1 (CREB1) and CREB5 were detected as direct target genes of miR-582-5p and
miR-590-5p, respectively, by using dual-luciferase assay and western bolt.
Functional studies showed that knockdown of CREB1/CREB5 increased tumor necrosis 
factor alpha (TNF-a) level and enhanced expression of phospho-NF-<U+03BA>B p65 and NF-<U+03BA>B
p65. Our results demonstrated that miR-582-5p and miR-590-5p play important roles
in opioid-induced immunosuppression in monocytes by targeting CREB1/CREB5-NF-<U+03BA>B
signaling pathway.

PMID: 26978739  [PubMed - in process]


3. J Environ Sci (China). 2016 Jan;39:218-27. doi: 10.1016/j.jes.2015.11.011. Epub
2016 Jan 2.

Chronic TCDD exposure results in the dysregulation of gene expression in splenic 
B-lymphocytes and in the impairments in T-cell and B-cell differentiation in
mouse model.

Feng Y(1), Tian J(2), Krylova I(3), Xu T(2), Xie HQ(2), Guo TL(4), Zhao B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100085, China. Electronic address: fyuivy@163.com. (2)Research Center for
Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China.
(3)XCellAssay, LLC, San Francisco, CA, 94107, USA. (4)Department of Veterinary
Biosciences and Diagnostic Imaging, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Georgia, Athens, GA 30602-7382, USA. (5)Research Center for Eco-Environmental
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China. Electronic address:
binzhao@rcees.ac.cn.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) exposure in humans is associated with 
marked immune suppressions and increased incidence of lymphoblastic diseases. To 
elucidate mechanisms of impairments in humoral immune responses, we used a murine
model. Following a 20-week administration of low doses of TCDD, we observed
severely reduced antibody titers, dramatically decreased number of splenic Th1
and Th2 cells and an increase in CD19(+) B cells. Transcriptional profiling of
CD19(+) B cells showed that markers of pre-B cells were significantly elevated,
indicating delayed B cell maturation. These changes in B cells were accompanied
by decreases of T helper cell numbers and reduced IgM and IgG titers. A
transcriptome analysis of splenic B cells followed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis 
(IPA) revealed a set of differentially expressed genes known to play roles in
tumorigenesis, cell-proliferation and cell-migration. The most up-regulated
transcript gene was Eph receptor A2 (EphA2), a known oncogene, and the most
down-regulated transcript was ZBTB16 that codes for a negative transcriptional
regulator important in epigenetic chromatin remodeling. IPA identified
cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) and cAMP-responsive element binding
protein 1 (CREB1) as top upstream regulators. Consistently, a MAPPER promoter
database analysis showed that all top dysregulated genes had CREM and/or CREB1
binding sites in their promoter regions. In summary, our data showed that chronic
TCDD exposure in mice caused suppressed humoral immunity accompanied with
profound dysregulation of gene expression in splenic B-lymphocytes, likely
through cAMP-dependent pathways. This dysregulation resulted in impairments in
T-cell and B-cell differentiation and activation of the tumorigenic transcription
program.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26899660  [PubMed - in process]


4. Schizophr Res. 2016 Feb 15. pii: S0920-9964(16)30068-8. doi:
10.1016/j.schres.2016.02.012. [Epub ahead of print]

A network of synaptic genes associated with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.

Forero DA(1), Herteleer L(2), De Zutter S(3), Norrback KF(4), Nilsson LG(5),
Adolfsson R(4), Callaerts P(6), Del-Favero J(7).

Author information: 
(1)Applied Molecular Genomics Unit, Department of Molecular Genetics, VIB,
Belgium; University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium; Laboratory of Behavioral and
Developmental Genetics, VIB, Belgium; Catholic University of Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium; Laboratory of NeuroPsychiatric Genetics, School of Medicine, Universidad
Antonio Nariño, Bogotá, Colombia. (2)Laboratory of Behavioral and Developmental
Genetics, VIB, Belgium; Catholic University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Applied Molecular Genomics Unit, Department of Molecular Genetics, VIB,
Belgium; University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. (4)Department of Clinical
Sciences, Division of Psychiatry, University of Umeå, Umeå, Sweden; Sunderby
Hospital, Sweden. (5)Department of Psychology, Stockholm University, Stockholm,
Sweden. (6)Laboratory of Behavioral and Developmental Genetics, VIB, Belgium;
Catholic University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address:
Patrick.Callaerts@cme.vib-kuleuven.be. (7)Applied Molecular Genomics Unit,
Department of Molecular Genetics, VIB, Belgium; University of Antwerp, Antwerp,
Belgium. Electronic address: jurgen.delfavero@molgen.vib-ua.be.

Identification of novel candidate genes for schizophrenia (SZ) and bipolar
disorder (BP), two psychiatric disorders with large epidemiological impacts, is a
key research area in neurosciences and psychiatric genetics. Previous evidence
from genome-wide studies suggests an important role for genes involved in
synaptic plasticity in the risk for SZ and BP. We used a convergent genomics
approach, combining different lines of biological evidence, to identify genes
involved in the cAMP/PKA/CREB functional pathway that could be novel candidates
for BP and SZ: CREB1, CREM, GRIN2C, NPY2R, NF1, PPP3CB and PRKAR1A. These 7 genes
were analyzed in a HapMap based association study comprising 48 common SNPs in
486 SZ, 351 BP patients and 514 control individuals recruited from an isolated
population in Northern Sweden. Genetic analysis showed significant allelic
associations of SNPs in PRKAR1A with SZ and of PPP3CB and PRKAR1A with BP. Our
results highlight the feasibility and the importance of convergent genomic data
analysis for the identification of candidate genes and our data provide support
for the role of common inherited variants in synaptic genes and their involvement
in the etiology of BP and SZ.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26899345  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. J Mol Neurosci. 2016 Feb 19. [Epub ahead of print]

Aripiprazole Increases the PKA Signalling and Expression of the GABAA Receptor
and CREB1 in the Nucleus Accumbens of Rats.

Pan B(1,)(2), Lian J(1,)(2), Huang XF(2), Deng C(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Antipsychotic Research Laboratory, Illawarra Health and Medical Research
Institute, Wollongong, NSW, 2522, Australia. (2)Centre for Translational
Neuroscience, School of Medicine, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW,
2522, Australia. (3)Antipsychotic Research Laboratory, Illawarra Health and
Medical Research Institute, Wollongong, NSW, 2522, Australia. chao@uow.edu.au.
(4)Centre for Translational Neuroscience, School of Medicine, University of
Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW, 2522, Australia. chao@uow.edu.au.

The GABAA receptor is implicated in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia and
regulated by PKA signalling. Current antipsychotics bind with D2-like receptors, 
but not the GABAA receptor. The cAMP-responsive element-binding protein 1 (CREB1)
is also associated with PKA signalling and may be related to the positive
symptoms of schizophrenia. This study investigated the effects of antipsychotics 
in modulating D2-mediated PKA signalling and its downstream GABAA receptors and
CREB1. Rats were treated orally with aripiprazole (0.75 mg/kg, ter in die
(t.i.d.)), bifeprunox (0.8 mg/kg, t.i.d.), haloperidol (0.1 mg/kg, t.i.d.) or
vehicle for 1 week. The levels of PKA-Ca and p-PKA in the prefrontal cortex
(PFC), nucleus accumbens (NAc) and caudate putamen (CPu) were detected by Western
blots. The mRNA levels of Gabrb1, Gabrb2, Gabrb3 and Creb1, and their protein
expression were measured by qRT-PCR and Western blots, respectively. Aripiprazole
elevated the levels of p-PKA and the ratio of p-PKA/PKA in the NAc, but not the
PFC and CPu. Correlated with this elevated PKA signalling, aripiprazole elevated 
the mRNA and protein expression of the GABAA (ß-1) receptor and CREB1 in the NAc.
While haloperidol elevated the levels of p-PKA and the ratio of p-PKA/PKA in both
NAc and CPu, it only tended to increase the expression of the GABAA (ß-1)
receptor and CREB1 in the NAc, but not the CPu. Bifeprunox had no effects on PKA 
signalling in these brain regions. These results suggest that aripiprazole has
selective effects on upregulating the GABAA (ß-1) receptor and CREB1 in the NAc, 
probably via activating PKA signalling.

PMID: 26894264  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Math Biosci. 2016 Apr;274:73-82. doi: 10.1016/j.mbs.2016.01.009. Epub 2016 Feb
11.

Stochasticity and bifurcations in a reduced model with interlinked positive and
negative feedback loops of CREB1 and CREB2 stimulated by 5-HT.

Hao L(1), Yang Z(2), Bi Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Mathematics and Systems Science and LMIB, Beihang University,
Beijing 100191, China. (2)School of Mathematics and Systems Science and LMIB,
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China. Electronic address:
yangzhuoqin@buaa.edu.cn. (3)School of Mathematics and Systems Science and LMIB,
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China; School of Statistics and Mathematics, 
Inner Mongolia University of Finance and Economics, Hohhot 010070, China.

The cyclic AMP (cAMP)-response element-binding protein (CREB) family of
transcription factors is crucial in regulating gene expression required for
long-term memory (LTM) formation. Upon exposure of sensory neurons to the
neurotransmitter serotonin (5-HT), CREB1 is activated via activation of the
protein kinase A (PKA) intracellular signaling pathways, and CREB2 as a
transcriptional repressor is relieved possibly via phosphorylation of CREB2 by
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK). Song et al. [18] proposed a minimal
model with only interlinked positive and negative feedback loops of
transcriptional regulation by the activator CREB1 and the repressor CREB2.
Without considering feedbacks between the CREB proteins, Pettigrew et al. [8]
developed a computational model characterizing complex dynamics of biochemical
pathways downstream of 5-HT receptors. In this work, to describe more simply the 
biochemical pathways and gene regulation underlying 5-HT-induced LTM, we add the 
important extracellular sensitizing stimulus 5-HT as well as the product Ap-uch
into the Song's minimal model. We also strive to examine dynamical properties of 
the gene regulatory network under the changing concentration of the stimulus,
[5-HT], cooperating with the varying positive feedback strength in inducing a
high state of CREB1 for the establishment of long-term memory. Different dynamics
including monostability, bistability and multistability due to coexistence of
stable steady states and oscillations is investigated by means of codimension-2
bifurcation analysis. At the different positive feedback strengths, comparative
analysis of deterministic and stochastic dynamics reveals that codimension-1
bifurcation with respect to [5-HT] as the parameter can predict diverse
stochastic behaviors resulted from the finite number of molecules, and the number
of CREB1 molecules more and more preferentially resides near the high steady
state with increasing [5-HT], which contributes to long-term memory formation.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26877074  [PubMed - in process]


7. Cell Death Dis. 2016 Feb 4;7:e2088. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.274.

c-Met and CREB1 are involved in miR-433-mediated inhibition of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in bladder cancer by regulating
Akt/GSK-3ß/Snail signaling.

Xu X(1), Zhu Y(1), Liang Z(1), Li S(1), Xu X(1), Wang X(1), Wu J(1), Hu Z(1),
Meng S(1), Liu B(1), Qin J(1), Xie L(1), Zheng X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China.

Emerging evidence has suggested that microRNAs (miRNAs) have an important role in
tumor development and progression by regulating diverse cellular pathways. Here
we describe the function and regulation network of miR-433 in bladder cancer
(BCa). miR-433 is frequently downregulated in BCa tissues compared with adjacent 
non-cancerous tissues. Epigenetic mechanisms may be involved in the regulation of
miR-433 expression. Enforced expression of miR-433 significantly inhibits
proliferation, colony formation, migration, and invasion in BCa cells. In
addition, miR-433 inhibits the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in BCa
cells by regulating c-Met/Akt/GSK-3ß/Snail signaling pathway. Both c-Met and
CREB1 are downstream target genes of miR-433. CREB1 can also indirectly regulate 
c-Met/Akt/GSK-3ß/Snail signaling via MITF. Furthermore, CREB1 expression is an
independent prognostic factor for overall survival in patients with BCa. Finally,
there appears to exist a reciprocal regulation between c-Met and
miR-433/miR-409-3p. Taken together, this study reveals that
miR-433-c-MET/CREB1-Akt/GSK-3ß/Snail signaling is critical to EMT in BCa.
Targeting the pathway described here may open up new prospects to restrict
metastatic progression of BCa.

PMID: 26844702  [PubMed - in process]


8. Eur Thyroid J. 2015 Dec;4(4):213-21. doi: 10.1159/000441355. Epub 2015 Nov 21.

miR-130b-3p Upregulation Contributes to the Development of Thyroid Adenomas
Targeting CCDC6 Gene.

Leone V(1), Langella C(1), Esposito F(1), De Martino M(1), Decaussin-Petrucci
M(2), Chiappetta G(3), Bianco A(4), Fusco A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale-CNR, Dipartimento di
Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Scuola di Medicina e Chirurgia di
Napoli, Università degli Studi di Napoli 'Federico II', Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Pathology, Lyon Sud Hospital Center, Hospices Civils de Lyon,
Lyon, France. (3)Istituto Nazionale per lo Studio e la Cura dei Tumori
'Fondazione Giovanni Pascale', IRCCS, Naples, Italy. (4)Dipartimento di Sanità
Pubblica, Università di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy. (5)Istituto di
Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale-CNR, Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare
e Biotecnologie Mediche, Scuola di Medicina e Chirurgia di Napoli, Università
degli Studi di Napoli 'Federico II', Naples, Italy; Instituto Nacional de Cancer 
(INCA), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

We have previously studied the function of microRNAs (miRNAs) in thyroid cells
using the differentiated rat thyroid PC Cl 3 cells that need thyrotropin (TSH)
for their growth. The miRNA expression profile examination allowed the detection 
of a set of miRNAs downregulated and upregulated by TSH. Here, we first
demonstrated that upregulation of miR-130b-3p occurs through a protein kinase
A-cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB)-dependent mechanism. Then, we
analyzed its expression in human thyroid follicular adenomas, where a
constitutive CREB activation is frequently present. miR-130b-3p results in
upregulation with a high fold-change in most thyroid follicular adenomas. Then,
we identified CCDC6, coding for a protein that interacts with CREB1 leading to
the transcriptional repression of CREB1 target genes, as a target of this miRNA. 
The targeting of CCDC6 by miR-130b-3p likely accounts for the mechanism by which 
its upregulation contributes to the development of thyroid adenomas increasing
CREB1 activity.

PMCID: PMC4716415 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26835423  [PubMed]


9. Genes Cancer. 2015 Nov;6(11-12):490-502.

High expression of cellular retinol binding protein-1 in lung adenocarcinoma is
associated with poor prognosis.

Doldo E(1), Costanza G(1), Ferlosio A(1), Pompeo E(2), Agostinelli S(1), Bellezza
G(3), Mazzaglia D(1), Giunta A(1), Sidoni A(3), Orlandi A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Anatomic Pathology, Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Tor Vergata
University of Rome, Italy. (2)Thoracic Surgery, Tor Vergata Policlinic of Rome,
Italy. (3)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Anatomic Pathology and 
Histology, Medical School, University of Perugia, Italy. (4)Anatomic Pathology,
Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Tor Vergata University of Rome, Italy; 
Department of Anatomic Pathology, Tor Vergata Policlinic of Rome, Italy.

PURPOSE: Adenocarcinoma, the most common non-small cell lung cancer is a leading 
cause of death worldwide, with a low overall survival (OS) despite increasing
attempts to achieve an early diagnosis and accomplish surgical and multimodality 
treatment strategies. Cellular retinol binding protein-1 (CRBP-1) regulates
retinol bioavailability and cell differentiation, but its role in lung
cancerogenesis remains uncertain.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: CRBP-1 expression, clinical outcome and other prognostic
factors were investigated in 167 lung adenocarcinoma patients. CRBP-1 expression 
was evaluated by immunohistochemistry of tissue microarray sections, gene copy
number analysis and tumor methylation specific PCR. Effects of CRBP-1 expression 
on proliferation/apoptosis gene array, protein and transcripts were investigated 
in transfected A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells.
RESULTS: CRBP-1(High) expression was observed in 62.3% of adenocarcinomas and
correlated with increased tumor grade and reduced OS as an independent prognostic
factor. CRBP-1 gene copy gain also associated with tumor CRBP-1(High) status and 
dedifferentiation. CRBP-1-transfected (CRBP-1(+)) A549 grew more than CRBP-1(-)
A549 cells. At >1µM concentrations, all trans-retinoic acid and retinol reduced
viability more in CRBP-1(+) than in CRBP-1(-) A549 cells. CRBP-1(+) A549 cells
showed up-regulated RARa/ RXRa and proliferative and transcriptional genes
including pAkt, pEGFR, pErk1/2, creb1 and c-jun, whereas RARß and p53 were
strongly down-regulated; pAkt/pErk/ pEGFR inhibitors counteracted proliferative
advantage and increased RARa/RXRa, c-jun and CD44 expression in CRBP-1(+) A549
cells.
CONCLUSION: CRBP-1(High) expression in lung adenocarcinoma correlated with
increased tumor grade and reduced OS, likely through increased
Akt/Erk/EGFR-mediated cell proliferation and differentiation. CRBP-1(High)
expression can be considered an additional marker of poor prognosis in lung
adenocarcinoma patients.

PMCID: PMC4701228
PMID: 26807202  [PubMed]


10. Oncol Rep. 2016 Jan 20. doi: 10.3892/or.2016.4579. [Epub ahead of print]

Oncogenic cAMP responsive element binding protein 1 is overexpressed upon loss of
tumor suppressive miR-10b-5p and miR-363-3p in renal cancer.

Li Y(1), Chen D(1), Li Y(2), Jin L(1), Liu J(1), Su Z(1), Qi Z(2), Shi M(2),
Jiang Z(2), Ni L(2), Yang S(1), Gui Y(2), Mao X(1), Chen Y(3), Lai Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Peking University Shenzhen Hospital, Institute of
Urology of Shenzhen PKU-HKUST Medical Center, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518036, P.R.
China. (2)The Guangdong and Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Male Reproductive Medicine
and Genetics, Peking University Shenzhen Hospital, Institute of Urology of
Shenzhen PKU-HKUST Medical Center, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518036, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Ultrasound Division, Peking University Shenzhen Hospital,
Shenzhen, Guangdong 518036, P.R. China.

Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common kidney cancer in adults and has a
poor prognosis. cAMP responsive element binding protein 1 (CREB1) is a
proto-oncogenic transcription factor involved in malignancies of various organs. 
However, its functional role(s) have not yet been elucidated in RCC. We
investigated the expression pattern, function and regulation of CREB1 in RCC.
CREB1 was overexpressed in the RCC tissues and cell lines. Downregulation of
CREB1 inhibited RCC tumorigenesis by affecting cell proliferation, migration and 
apoptosis. Multiple computational algorithms predicted that the 3'-untranslated
region (3'-UTR) of human CREB1 mRNA is a target for miR-10b-5p and miR-363-3p.
Luciferase reporter assay, qPCR and western blot analysis confirmed that
miR-10b-5p and miR-363-3p bind directly to the 3'-UTR of CREB1 mRNA and inhibit
mRNA and protein expression of CREB1. qPCR data also revealed a significantly
lower expression of miR-10b-5p and miR-363-3p in RCC tissues. Introduction of
miR-10b-5p and miR-363-3p mimics led to suppressed expression of CREB1 and
inhibited cell proliferation, migration and apoptosis reduction. Taken together, 
we propose that CREB1 is an oncogene in RCC and that upregulation of CREB1 by
loss of tumor suppressive miR-10b-5p and miR-363-3p plays an important role in
the tumorigenesis of RCC.

PMID: 26796749  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 11;291(11):5452-60. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.672733. Epub 2016
Jan 12.

Transcription Factors and DNA Repair Enzymes Compete for Damaged Promoter Sites.

Moore SP(1), Kruchten J(1), Toomire KJ(1), Strauss PR(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biology, Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts
02115. (2)From the Department of Biology, Northeastern University, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115 p.strauss@neu.edu.

Transcriptional regulation is a tightly regulated, vital process. The
transcription factor cyclic AMP-response element-binding protein 1 (CREB1)
controls ~25% of the mammalian transcriptome by binding the CREB1 binding site
consensus sequence (CRE) sequence (TGACGTCA). DNA lesions within CRE modulate
CREB1 binding negatively and positively. Because appropriate DNA lesions also
interact with base excision repair proteins, we investigated whether CREB1 and
repair glycosylases compete with each other. We incubated 39-mer CRE-containing
double-stranded oligonucleotides with recombinant CREB1 alone or with UNG2 or
OGG1, followed by EMSA. The CpG islet within CRE was modified to contain a G/U or
8-oxoG (°G)/C mispair. OGG1 and CREB1 reversibly competed for CRE containing an
°G/C pair. Also, OGG1 blocked CREB1 from dimerizing by 69%, even when total CREB1
binding was reduced only by 20-30%. In contrast, bound CREB1 completely prevented
access to G/U-containing CRE by UNG2 and, therefore, to base excision repair,
whereas UNG2 exposure prevented CREB1 binding. CREB1 dimerization was unaffected 
by UNG2 when CREB1 bound to CRE, but was greatly reduced by prior UNG2 exposure. 
To explore physiological relevance, we microinjected zebrafish embryos with the
same oligonucleotides, as a sink for endogenous CREB1. As predicted,
microinjection with unmodified or lesion-containing CRE, but not scrambled CRE or
scrambled CRE with a G/U mispair, resulted in increased embryo death. However,
only the G/U mispair in native CRE resulted in substantial developmental
abnormalities, thus confirming the danger of unrepaired G/U mispairs in
promoters. In summary, CREB1 and DNA glycosylases compete for damaged CRE in
vitro and in vivo, thus blocking DNA repair and resulting in transcriptional
misregulation leading to abnormal development.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4786688 [Available on 2017-03-11]
PMID: 26757817  [PubMed - in process]


12. J Huntingtons Dis. 2015 Dec 27;4(4):371-82. doi: 10.3233/JHD-150172.

Analysis of White Adipose Tissue Gene Expression Reveals CREB1 Pathway Altered in
Huntington's Disease.

McCourt AC(1), Parker J(2,)(3), Silajdic E(1,)(4), Haider S(2), Sethi H(5),
Tabrizi SJ(2), Warner TT(6), Björkqvist M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Brain Disease Biomarker unit, Department of Experimental Medical Science,
Wallenberg Neuroscience Centre, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. (2)Institute of
Neurology, Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL, London, UK. (3)Magnus
Life Science, Rayne Building, 5 University Street, London, UK. (4)Faculty of Life
Sciences, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK. (5)Victor
Horsley Department of Neurosurgery, The National Hospital for Neurology and
Neurosurgery, London, UK. (6)Reta Lila Weston Institute, UCL Institute of
Neurology, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: In addition to classical neurological symptoms, Huntington's disease 
(HD) is complicated by peripheral pathology and both the mutant gene and the
protein are found in cells and tissues throughout the body. Despite the adipose
tissue gene expression alterations described in HD mouse models, adipose tissue
and its gene expression signature have not been previously explored in human HD.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated gene expression signatures in subcutaneous adipose
tissue obtained from control subjects, premanifest HD gene carriers and manifest 
HD subjects with the aim to identify gene expression changes and signalling
pathway alterations in adipose tissue relevant to HD.
METHODS: Gene expression was assessed using Affymetrix GeneChip® Human Gene 1.0
ST Array. Target genes were technically validated using real-time quantitative
PCR and the expression signature was validated in an independent subject cohort.
RESULTS: In subcutaneous adipose tissue, more than 500 genes were significantly
different in premanifest HD subjects as compared to healthy controls. Pathway
analysis suggests that the differentially expressed genes found here in HD
adipose tissue are involved in fatty acid metabolism pathways, angiotensin
signalling pathways and immune pathways. Transcription factor analysis highlights
CREB1. Using RT-qPCR, we found that MAL2, AGTR2, COBL and the transcription
factor CREB1 were significantly upregulated, with CREB1 and AGT also being
significantly upregulated in a separate cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: Distinct gene expression profiles can be seen in HD subcutaneous
adipose tissue, with CREB1 highlighted as a key transcription factor.

PMID: 26756592  [PubMed - in process]


13. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Jan 6. pii: gkv1528. [Epub ahead of print]

Integrative analysis identifies targetable CREB1/FoxA1 transcriptional
co-regulation as a predictor of prostate cancer recurrence.

Sunkel B(1), Wu D(2), Chen Z(2), Wang CM(3), Liu X(4), Ye Z(3), Horning AM(3),
Liu J(3), Mahalingam D(3), Lopez-Nicora H(5), Lin CL(3), Goodfellow PJ(4),
Clinton SK(6), Jin VX(3), Chen CL(3), Huang TH(3), Wang Q(7).

Author information: 
(1)Ohio State Biochemistry Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
43210, USA Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA The Ohio State University
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (2)Department of Molecular 
Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
OH 43210, USA The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH
43210, USA. (3)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA. (4)The Ohio State
University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (5)Department of
Plant Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (6)The Ohio 
State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA Division of
Medical Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (7)Ohio State Biochemistry Program, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology 
and Medical Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA The Ohio
State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
qianben.wang@osumc.edu.

Identifying prostate cancer-driving transcription factors (TFs) in addition to
the androgen receptor promises to improve our ability to effectively diagnose and
treat this disease. We employed an integrative genomics analysis of master TFs
CREB1 and FoxA1 in androgen-dependent prostate cancer (ADPC) and
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) cell lines, primary prostate cancer
tissues and circulating tumor cells (CTCs) to investigate their role in defining 
prostate cancer gene expression profiles. Combining genome-wide binding site and 
gene expression profiles we define CREB1 as a critical driver of pro-survival,
cell cycle and metabolic transcription programs. We show that CREB1 and FoxA1
co-localize and mutually influence each other's binding to define disease-driving
transcription profiles associated with advanced prostate cancer. Gene expression 
analysis in human prostate cancer samples found that CREB1/FoxA1 target gene
panels predict prostate cancer recurrence. Finally, we showed that this signaling
pathway is sensitive to compounds that inhibit the transcription co-regulatory
factor MED1. These findings not only reveal a novel, global transcriptional
co-regulatory function of CREB1 and FoxA1, but also suggest CREB1/FoxA1 signaling
is a targetable driver of prostate cancer progression and serves as a biomarker
of poor clinical outcomes.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMID: 26743006  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. J Psychiatr Res. 2016 Mar;74:22-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2015.12.008. Epub
2015 Dec 12.

Single nucleotide polymorphism near CREB1, rs7591784, is associated with
pretreatment methamphetamine use frequency and outcome of outpatient treatment
for methamphetamine use disorder.

Heinzerling KG(1), Demirdjian L(2), Wu Y(2), Shoptaw S(3).

Author information: 
(1)UCLA Department of Family Medicine and Center for Behavioral and Addiction
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: kheinzerling@mednet.ucla.edu.
(2)UCLA Department of Statistics, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (3)UCLA Department of
Family Medicine and Center for Behavioral and Addiction Medicine, Los Angeles,
CA, USA.

Although stimulant dependence is highly heritable, few studies have examined
genetic influences on methamphetamine dependence. We performed a candidate gene
study of 52 SNPs and pretreatment methamphetamine use frequency among 263
methamphetamine dependent Hispanic and Non-Hispanic White participants of several
methamphetamine outpatient clinical trials in Los Angeles. One SNP, rs7591784 was
significantly associated with pretreatment methamphetamine use frequency
following Bonferroni correction (p < 0.001) in males but not females. We then
examined rs7591784 and methamphetamine urine drug screen results during 12 weeks 
of outpatient treatment among males with treatment outcome data available
(N = 94) and found rs7591784 was significantly associated with methamphetamine
use during treatment controlling for pretreatment methamphetamine use. rs7591784 
is near CREB1 and in a linkage disequilibrium block with rs2952768, previously
shown to influence CREB1 expression. The CREB signaling pathway is involved in
gene expression changes related to chronic use of multiple drugs of abuse
including methamphetamine and these results suggest that variability in CREB
signaling may influence pretreatment frequency of methamphetamine use as well as 
outcomes of outpatient treatment. Medications targeting the CREB pathway,
including phosphodiesterase inhibitors, warrant investigation as
pharmacotherapies for methamphetamine use disorders.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26736037  [PubMed - in process]


15. J Cell Biochem. 2016 Jan 5. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25479. [Epub ahead of print]

The CREB Transcription Factor Controls Transcriptional Activity of the Human
RIC8B Gene.

Maureira A(1), Sánchez R(1), Valenzuela N(1), Torrejón M(1), Hinrichs MV(1),
Olate J(1), Gutiérrez JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias
Biológicas, Universidad de Concepción, Concepción, Chile.

Proper regulation of gene expression is essential for normal development,
cellular growth and differentiation. Differential expression profiles of mRNA
coding for vertebrate Ric-8B during embryo and adult stages have been observed.
In addition, Ric-8B is expressed in few cerebral nuclei subareas. These facts
point to a dynamic control of RIC8B gene expression. In order to understand the
transcriptional regulation of this gene, we searched for cis-elements in the
sequence of the human RIC8B promoter region, identifying binding sites for the
basic/leucine zipper (bZip) CREB transcription factor family (CRE sites) and
C/EBP transcription factor family (C/EBP sites). CRE sites were found clustered
near the transcription start site, while the C/EBP sites were found clustered at 
around 300 bp upstream the CRE sites. Here, we demonstrate the ability of CREB1
and C/EBPß to bind their respective elements identified in the RIC8B promoter.
Comparative protein-DNA interaction analyses revealed only the proximal elements 
as high affinity sites for CREB1 and only the distal elements as high affinity
sites for C/EBPß. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses, carried out using a
human neuroblastoma cell line, confirmed the preferential association of CREB to 
the proximal region of the RIC8B promoter. By performing luciferase reporter
assays we found the CRE sites as the most relevant elements for its
transcriptional activity. Taken together, these data show the existence of
functional CREB and C/EBP binding sites in the human RIC8B gene promoter, a
particular distribution of these sites and demonstrate a relevant role of CREB in
stimulating transcriptional activity of this gene. This article is protected by
copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26729411  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Feb;13(2):1746-64. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4707. Epub 2015 Dec
22.

Differential gene expression analysis and network construction of recurrent
cardiovascular events.

Liao J(1), Chen Z(1), He Q(1), Liu Y(1), Wang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Guang'anmen Hospital, China Academy of Chinese
Medical Sciences, Beijing 100053, P.R. China.

Recurrent cardiovascular events are vital to the prevention and treatment
strategies in patients who have experienced primary cardiovascular events.
However, the susceptibility of recurrent cardiovascular events varies among
patients. Personalized treatment and prognosis prediction are urged. Microarray
profiling of samples from patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI), with
or without recurrent cardiovascular events, were obtained from the Gene
Expression Omnibus database. Bioinformatics analysis, including Gene Oncology
(GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), were used to identify
genes and pathways specifically associated with recurrent cardiovascular events. 
A protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed and visualized. A
total of 1,329 genes were differentially expressed in the two group samples.
Among them, 1,023 differentially expressed genes (DEGs; 76.98%) were upregulated 
in the recurrent cardiovascular events group and 306 DEGs (23.02%) were
downregulated. Significantly enriched GO terms for molecular functions were
nucleotide binding and nucleic acid binding, for biological processes were signal
transduction and regulation of transcription (DNA-dependent), and for cellular
component were cytoplasm and nucleus. The most significant pathway in our KEGG
analysis was Pathways in cancer (P=0.000336681), and regulation of actin
cytoskeleton was also significantly enriched (P=0.00165229). In the PPI network, 
the significant hub nodes were GNG4, MAPK8, PIK3R2, EP300, CREB1 and PIK3CB. The 
present study demonstrated the underlying molecular differences between patients 
with AMI, with and without recurrent cardiovascular events, including DEGs, their
biological function, signaling pathways and key genes in the PPI network. With
the use of bioinformatics and genomics these findings can be used to investigate 
the pathological mechanism, and improve the prevention and treatment of recurrent
cardiovascular events.

PMID: 26708382  [PubMed - in process]


17. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 23;10(12):e0145182. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145182.
eCollection 2015.

Expression Patterns of CREBs in Oocyte Growth and Maturation of Fish.

Senthilkumaran B(1,)(2), Sreenivasulu G(1), Wang DS(2), Sudhakumari CC(1,)(2),
Kobayashi T(2), Nagahama Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of
Hyderabad, P.O. Central University, Hyderabad, 500 046, Telangana, India.
(2)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, National Institute for Basic Biology,
Myodaiji, Okazaki, 444-8585, Japan.

In fish, oocyte meiotic maturation is regulated by 17a,
20ß-dihydroxy-progesterone through cAMP. To study the role of cAMP response
element binding protein (CREB) in meiotic maturation, we cloned and characterized
the expression pattern of CREBs from two fish models, the Nile tilapia and
catfish. In the Nile tilapia three different CREBs were identified where in CREB1
was found in many tissues including gonads with abundant expression in testis.
CREB2, few amino acids shorter than CREB1, was expressed in several tissues with 
abundant expression in ovary. In addition, a 3'UTR variant form, CREB3 was
exclusively found in ovary. During natural 14-day ovarian cycle of the Nile
tilapia, CREB1 expression was stable throughout vitellogenesis with a sharp
decrease on the day of spawning. In contrast, CREB2 remain unchanged throughout
the ovarian cycle, however elevated in 11-day full-grown immature ovarian
follicle and after hCG-induction. Interestingly, CREB3 expression was induced
three folds on the day of spawning as well as during hCG-induced oocyte
maturation. Based on the synergistic expression pattern, CREB1 is likely to
control oocyte growth, whereas CREB 2 and 3 contribute to oocyte maturation in
tilapia and the latter seems to be critical. In catfish, a single form of CREB
showed a maximum expression during spawning phase and hCG-induced maturation both
in vivo and in vitro augmented CREB expression. These results suggest that
spatial and temporal expression of CREBs seems to be important for final oocyte
maturation and may also regulate oocyte growth in fish.

PMCID: PMC4689397
PMID: 26700177  [PubMed - in process]


18. Mol Cancer. 2015 Dec 22;14:214. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0485-z.

BALR-6 regulates cell growth and cell survival in B-lymphoblastic leukemia.

Rodríguez-Malavé NI(1,)(2), Fernando TR(3), Patel PC(4), Contreras JR(5,)(6),
Palanichamy JK(7,)(8), Tran TM(9), Anguiano J(10), Davoren MJ(11,)(12), Alberti
MO(13), Pioli KT(14), Sandoval S(15), Crooks GM(16,)(17,)(18,)(19), Rao
DS(20,)(21,)(22,)(23).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, USA.
nirodriguez@mednet.ucla.edu. (2)Cellular and Molecular Pathology Ph.D. Program,
UCLA, Los Angeles, USA. nirodriguez@mednet.ucla.edu. (3)Department of Pathology
and Laboratory Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, USA. trfernando@mednet.ucla.edu.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, USA.
pcpatel@mednet.ucla.edu. (5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
UCLA, Los Angeles, USA. jrcontreras@mednet.ucla.edu. (6)Cellular and Molecular
Pathology Ph.D. Program, UCLA, Los Angeles, USA. jrcontreras@mednet.ucla.edu.
(7)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, USA.
drjayanth@aiims.edu. (8)All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New
Delhi, India. drjayanth@aiims.edu. (9)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, USA. ttran@mednet.ucla.edu. (10)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, USA.
janguiano@mednet.ucla.edu. (11)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, UCLA,
Los Angeles, USA. mdavoren@g.ucla.edu. (12)Molecular Toxicology Interdepartmental
Ph.D. Program, UCLA, Los Angeles, USA. mdavoren@g.ucla.edu. (13)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, USA.
malberti@mednet.ucla.edu. (14)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
UCLA, Los Angeles, USA. kpioli@mednet.ucla.edu. (15)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, USA. salemizsandoval@mednet.ucla.edu.
(16)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, USA.
gcrooks@mednet.ucla.edu. (17)Cellular and Molecular Pathology Ph.D. Program,
UCLA, Los Angeles, USA. gcrooks@mednet.ucla.edu. (18)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer
Center, UCLA, Los Angeles, USA. gcrooks@mednet.ucla.edu. (19)Broad Stem Cell
Research Center, UCLA, 650 Charles E. Young Drive, Factor 12-272, Los Angeles,
CA, 90095, USA. gcrooks@mednet.ucla.edu. (20)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, USA. drao@mednet.ucla.edu. (21)Cellular
and Molecular Pathology Ph.D. Program, UCLA, Los Angeles, USA.
drao@mednet.ucla.edu. (22)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, UCLA, Los Angeles,
USA. drao@mednet.ucla.edu. (23)Broad Stem Cell Research Center, UCLA, 650 Charles
E. Young Drive, Factor 12-272, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA. drao@mednet.ucla.edu.

BACKGROUND: A new class of non-coding RNAs, known as long non-coding RNAs
(lncRNAs), has been recently described. These lncRNAs are implicated to play
pivotal roles in various molecular processes, including development and
oncogenesis. Gene expression profiling of human B-ALL samples showed differential
lncRNA expression in samples with particular cytogenetic abnormalities. One of
the most promising lncRNAs identified, designated B-ALL associated long RNA-6
(BALR-6), had the highest expression in patient samples carrying the MLL
rearrangement, and is the focus of this study.
RESULTS: Here, we performed a series of experiments to define the function of
BALR-6, including several novel splice forms that we identified. Functionally,
siRNA-mediated knockdown of BALR-6 in human B-ALL cell lines caused reduced cell 
proliferation and increased cell death. Conversely, overexpression of BALR-6
isoforms in both human and mouse cell lines caused increased proliferation and
decreased apoptosis. Overexpression of BALR-6 in murine bone marrow
transplantation experiments caused a significant increase in early hematopoietic 
progenitor populations, suggesting that its dysregulation may cause developmental
changes. Notably, the knockdown of BALR-6 resulted in global dysregulation of
gene expression. The gene set was enriched for leukemia-associated genes, as well
as for the transcriptome regulated by Specificity Protein 1 (SP1). We confirmed
changes in the expression of SP1, as well as its known interactor and downstream 
target CREB1. Luciferase reporter assays demonstrated an enhancement of
SP1-mediated transcription in the presence of BALR-6. These data provide a
putative mechanism for regulation by BALR-6 in B-ALL.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support a role for the novel lncRNA BALR-6 in promoting
cell survival in B-ALL. Furthermore, this lncRNA influences gene expression in
B-ALL in a manner consistent with a function in transcriptional regulation.
Specifically, our findings suggest that BALR-6 expression regulates the
transcriptome downstream of SP1, and that this may underlie the function of
BALR-6 in B-ALL.

PMCID: PMC4688921
PMID: 26694754  [PubMed - in process]


19. Am J Transl Res. 2015 Oct 15;7(10):2053-9. eCollection 2015.

MicroRNA-205 functions as a tumor suppressor in colorectal cancer by targeting
cAMP responsive element binding protein 1 (CREB1).

Li P(1), Xue WJ(1), Feng Y(1), Mao QS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University Nantong
226001, China.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNA) have been documented playing critical roles in
cancer progression. Aberrant expression of miR-205 has been reported in several
types of cancer. However, the role and mechanism of miR-205 in colorectal cancer 
(CRC) remains unclear.
METHODS: In this study, the expression levels of miR-205 in CRC tissues and cell 
lines were detected by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). MTT assay and
transwell assays were applied to assess the effect of miR-205 on CRC cell
proliferation, migration and invasion abilities in vitro. Furthermore,
Dual-luciferase reporter assay was conducted to confirm the direct binding of
miR-205 and target genes.
RESULTS: In the present study, we found that the expression level of miR-205 in
CRC tissues and cell lines was significantly down-regulated. Functional assays
showed that overexpression of miR-205 suppressed CRC cell proliferation,
migration and invasion in vitro. In addition, cAMP responsive element binding
protein 1 (CREB1) was identified as targets of miR-205. Silencing CREB1 had
similar effects of miR-205 restoration on proliferation, migration and invasion
in CRC cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrated that miR-205 may act as a tumor suppressor 
by targeting the CREB1 gene and suppressing CRC cell proliferation, migration and
invasion. Thus, miR-205 may represent a potential therapeutic target for CRC
intervention.

PMCID: PMC4656782
PMID: 26692949  [PubMed]


20. Mol Psychiatry. 2015 Dec 15. doi: 10.1038/mp.2015.187. [Epub ahead of print]

Polygenic associations of neurodevelopmental genes in suicide attempt.

Sokolowski M(1), Wasserman J(1), Wasserman D(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Suicide Research and Prevention of Mental Ill-Health,
Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. (2)WHO collaborating Centre for
research, methods, development and training in suicide prevention, Stockholm,
Sweden.

The risk for suicidal behavior (SB) is elevated in schizophrenia (SCZ), bipolar
disorder (BPD) and major depressive disorder (MDD), but also occurs in subjects
without psychiatric diagnoses. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) on SB may
help to understand this risk, but have been hampered by low power due to limited 
sample sizes, weakly ascertained SB or a reliance on single-nucleotide protein
(SNP)-by-SNP analyses. Here, we tried to mitigate such issues with polygenic risk
score (PRS) association tests combined with hypothesis-driven strategies using a 
family-based sample of 660 trios with a well-ascertained suicide attempt (SA)
outcome in the offspring (Genetic Investigation of Suicide and SA, GISS). Two
complementary sources of PRS information were used. First, a PRS that was
discovered and validated in the GISS SA revealed the polygenic association of
SNPs in 750 neurodevelopmental genes, which was driven by the SA phenotype,
rather than the major psychiatric diagnoses. Second, a PRS based on three
different genome-wide association studies (on SCZ, BPD or MDD) from the
Psychiatric Genomics Consortium (PGC) showed an association of the PGC-SCZ PRS in
the SA subjects with and without major psychiatric diagnoses. We characterized
the PGC-SCZ overlap in the SA subjects without diagnoses. The extended major
histocompatibility complex region did not contribute to the overlap, but we
delineated the genic overlap to neurodevelopmental genes that partially
overlapped with those identified by the GISS PRS. Among the 590 SA polygenes
implicated here, there were several developmentally important functions (cell
adhesion/migration, small GTPase and receptor tyrosine kinase signaling), and 16 
of the SA polygenes have previously been studied in SB (BDNF, CDH10, CDH12,
CDH13, CDH9, CREB1, DLK1, DLK2, EFEMP1, FOXN3, IL2, LSAMP, NCAM1, nerve growth
factor (NGF), NTRK2 and TBC1D1). These novel genome-wide insights, supported by
two lines of evidence, suggested the importance of a polygenic neurodevelopmental
etiology in SB, even in the absence of major psychiatric diagnoses.Molecular
Psychiatry advance online publication, 15 December 2015; doi:10.1038/mp.2015.187.

PMID: 26666204  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


21. Cell Biol Int. 2015 Dec 4. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10567. [Epub ahead of print]

Induction of pancreatic ß cell gene expression in mesenchymal stem cells.

Mehrfarjam Z(1), Esmaeili F(2,)(3), Shabani L(3), Ebrahimie E(4,)(5,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Razi Herbal Medicines Research Center, Lorestan University of Medical
Sciences, P.O. Box 681499468, Khorramabad, Iran. (2)Department of Biology,
Faculty of Basic Sciences, University of Isfahan, P.O. Box 8174673441, Isfahan,
Iran. (3)Research Institute of Biotechnology, Shahrekord University, P.O. Box
115, Shahrekord, Iran. (4)Institute of Biotechnology, Shiraz University, Shiraz, 
Iran. (5)School of Information Technology and Mathematical Sciences, Division of 
Information Technology Engineering & Environment, University of South Australia, 
Aselaide, Australia. (6)Department of Genetics and Evolution, School of
Biological Sciences, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. (7)School
of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Flinders University, 
Adelaide, Australia.

Transdifferentiation potential of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) into
insulin-producing cells (IPCs) has been suggested recently. In our recent works, 
we demonstrated the high performance of mouse neonate pancreas extract (MPE) in
production of functional IPCs from carcinoma stem cells. In this study, MPE was
used to generate IPCs from MSCs without any genetic manipulation. To this end,
bone marrow MSCs were isolated and characterized. In order to differentiate, MSCs
were induced by selection of nestin-expressing cells and treatment with 100<U+2009>µg/ml
MPE. Morphological features of the differentiated cells were confirmed by
dithizone staining. Immunoreactivity to insulin receptor beta, proinsulin,
insulin and C-peptide was observed by immunoflourescence. We also quantified
glucose-dependent insulin production and secretion by ELISA. Real-time PCR
indicated the expressions of ß cell related genes, PDX-1, INS1, INS2, EP300 and
CREB1 in IPC cells. Possible pathways governed by CREB1, EP300, and PDX-1
transcription factors in differentiation of MSCs to IPCs were determined based on
Gene Set Enrichment (GSE) approach at p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.05. Pathway discovery highlighted the
negative regulatory effects of MIR124-2, HDAC5 protein, REST and NR0B2
transcription factors on expression of CREB1, EP300, and PDX-1 and inhabitation
of IPC differentiations. In contrast, a crosstalk between FOXA2 and TCF7L2
transcription factors, DNA-PK complex, KAT2B protein positively interacting with 
PDX-1, CREB1, EP300 resulted in the induction of IPC and following insulin
production. In conclusion, we report an efficient, simple, and easy method for
production of functional IPCs from MSCs by MPE treatment.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26634639  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2016 Mar;266(2):181-93. doi:
10.1007/s00406-015-0658-1. Epub 2015 Dec 1.

Clinical and genetic factors associated with suicide in mood disorder patients.

Antypa N(1), Souery D(2), Tomasini M(3), Albani D(4), Fusco F(4), Mendlewicz
J(2), Serretti A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Psychology, Institute of Psychology, Leiden University,
Leiden, The Netherlands. (2)Laboratoire de Psychologie Medicale, Centre Europe´en
de Psychologie Medicale, Universite´ Libre de Bruxelles and Psy Pluriel,
Brussels, Belgium. (3)Department of Biomedical and NeuroMotor Sciences, Institute
of Psychiatry, University of Bologna, Viale Carlo Pepoli 5, 40123, Bologna,
Italy. (4)Laboratory of Biology of Neurodegenerative DisordersNeuroscience
Department, IRCCS Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche "Mario Negri", Milan,
Italy. (5)Department of Biomedical and NeuroMotor Sciences, Institute of
Psychiatry, University of Bologna, Viale Carlo Pepoli 5, 40123, Bologna, Italy.
alessandro.serretti@unibo.it.

Suicidality is a continuum ranging from ideation to attempted and completed
suicide, with a complex etiology involving both genetic heritability and
environmental factors. The majority of suicide events occur in the context of
psychiatric conditions, preeminently major depression and bipolar disorder. The
present study investigates clinical factors associated with suicide in a sample
of 553 mood disorder patients, recruited within the 'Psy Pluriel' center, Centre 
Européen de Psychologie Médicale, and the Department of Psychiatry of Erasme
Hospital (Brussels). Furthermore, genetic association analyses examining
polymorphisms within COMT, BDNF, MAPK1 and CREB1 genes were performed in a
subsample of 259 bipolar patients. The presence or absence of a previous suicide 
attempt and of current suicide risk were assessed. A positive association with
suicide attempt was reported for younger patients, females, lower educated,
smokers, those with higher scores on depressive symptoms and higher functional
disability and those with anxiety comorbidity and familial history of suicidality
in first- and second-degree relatives. Anxiety disorder comorbidity was the
stronger predictor of current suicide risk. No associations were found with
polymorphisms within COMT and BDNF genes, whereas significant associations were
found with variations in rs13515 (MAPK1) and rs6740584 (CREB1) polymorphisms.
From a clinical perspective, our study proposes several clinical characteristics,
such as increased depressive symptomatology, anxiety comorbidity, functional
disability and family history of suicidality, as correlates associated with
suicide. Genetic risk variants in MAPK1 and CREB1 genes might be involved in a
dysregulation of inflammatory and neuroplasticity pathways and are worthy of
future investigation.

PMID: 26626456  [PubMed - in process]


23. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Sep 1;8(9):10868-74. eCollection 2015.

MicroRNA-506 inhibits esophageal cancer cell proliferation via targeting CREB1.

Yao WJ(1), Wang YL(1), Lu JG(1), Guo L(1), Qi B(1), Chen ZJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xinxiang
Medical University Weihui 453100, China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) act as key regulators of multiple cancers. MicroRNA-506
(miR-506) functions as a tumor suppressor in various types of cancers. However,
its role in esophageal cancer remains unclear. In our study, we found that
miR-506 was significantly down-regulated in esophageal cancer tissues and cell
lines. In vitro assay, our results showed that ectopic over-expression of miR-506
inhibited esophageal cancer cells proliferation, meanwhile, cells proliferation
was promoted by miR-506 inhibition. In exploring mechanisms underlying the
inhibitive role, we found that miR-506 significantly decreased the expression and
transcription activity of cAMP responsive element binding protein 1 (CREB1).
CREB1, tumor oncogene, exhibited significantly promote effect on esophageal
cancer cell proliferation. Taken together, our data identify a new role of
miR-506 in esophageal cancer involving CREB1 suppression.

PMCID: PMC4637616
PMID: 26617801  [PubMed - in process]


24. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2015;78(21-22):1311-20. doi:
10.1080/15287394.2015.1085839. Epub 2015 Nov 3.

Effects of Testosterone Treatment on Synaptic Plasticity and Behavior in
Senescence Accelerated Mice.

Jian-xin J(1), Cheng-li C(1), Song W(1), Yan XS(1), Huo DS(1), Wang H(2), Yang
ZJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Human Anatomy , Baotou Medical College , Inner , Mongolia ,
China. (2)b School of Health Sciences , University of Newcastle , Newcastle ,
Australia.

Learning and memory are known to be influenced by circulating sex steroidal
hormones and these behavioral processes are diminished in aging. Thus, the aim of
this study was to examine the mechanism underlying testosterone-induced effects
on cognitive performance in the senescence accelerated mouse P8 (SAMP8) model.
Treatment with testosterone (T) as evidenced by the Morris water maze test
produced a significantly shorter escape latency and reduced path length to reach 
the platform compared to the control (C). No significant differences were noted
in mean swim speed among all groups. During the probe trials, the T group spent a
significantly greater percent of time in the target quadrant and improved the
number of platform crossings. Flutamide (F), an antiandrogen, significantly
inhibited the effects of T on behavioral and memory performances indicators.
Following Nissl staining, the number of intact pyramidal cells was markedly
elevated in the treated mice, and this effect was blocked by F.
Immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis showed that the expression levels 
of NMDAR1, SYN, and p-CREC/CREB protein levels were significantly increased in
the T group, while F inhibited the T-mediated effects. Western blot analysis
showed that there were no significant differences in the expression levels of
SYN, p-CREC/CREB, and NMDAR1 between C, F, and F + T groups.
Reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis showed that the
mRNA expression levels of NMDAR1 and SYN were significantly increased in
T-administered mice, while F inhibited the T-mediated effects. Data suggest that 
the T-mediated increase in SYN expression levels resulted in improvement in
behavioral performances and learning, which may involve stimulation of central
nervous system androgen receptors (AR).

PMID: 26529502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Transl Oncol. 2015 Oct;8(5):387-99. doi: 10.1016/j.tranon.2015.08.002.

Polycomb Repressor Complex 1 Member, BMI1 Contributes to Urothelial Tumorigenesis
through p16-Independent Mechanisms.

De Faveri LE(1), Hurst CD(1), Roulson JA(2), Wood H(1), Sanchez-Carbayo M(3),
Knowles MA(1), Chapman EJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Leeds Institute of Cancer and Pathology, St James's University Hospital,
Beckett Street, Leeds, LS97TF, UK. (2)Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology, 
St James's University Hospital, Beckett Street, Leeds, LS97TF, UK. (3)Bladder
Cancer Group, Lascaray Research Center, University of the Basque Country,
UPV/EHU, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. (4)Leeds Institute of Cancer and Pathology, St
James's University Hospital, Beckett Street, Leeds, LS97TF, UK. Electronic
address: e.j.chapman@leeds.ac.uk.

Urothelial carcinoma (UC) causes significant morbidity and remains the most
expensive cancer to treat because of the need for repeated resections and
lifelong monitoring for patients with non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC).
Novel therapeutics and stratification approaches are needed to improve the
outlook for both NMIBC and muscle-invasive bladder cancer. We investigated the
expression and effects of B Lymphoma Mo-MLV Insertion Region 1 (BMI1) in UC. BMI1
was found to be overexpressed in most UC cell lines and primary tumors by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry. In
contrast to some previous reports, no association with tumor stage or grade was
observed in two independent tumor panels. Furthermore, upregulation of BMI1 was
detected in premalignant bladder lesions, suggesting a role early in
tumorigenesis. BMI1 is not located within a common region of genomic
amplification in UC. The CDKN2A locus (which encodes the p16 tumor suppressor
gene) is a transcriptional target of BMI1 in some cellular contexts. In UC cell
lines and primary tissues, no correlation between BMI1 and p16 expression was
observed. Retroviral-mediated overexpression of BMI1 immortalized normal human
urothelial cells (NHUC) in vitro and was associated with induction of telomerase 
activity, bypass of senescence, and repression of differentiation. The effects of
BMI1 on gene expression were identified by expression microarray analysis of
NHUC-BMI1. Metacore analysis of the gene expression profile implicated downstream
effects of BMI1 on a4/ß1 integrin-mediated adhesion, cytoskeleton remodeling, and
CREB1-mediated transcription.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4631094
PMID: 26500029  [PubMed]


26. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 27;6(33):34924-40. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5318.

CREB1-driven expression of miR-320a promotes mitophagy by down-regulating VDAC1
expression during serum starvation in cervical cancer cells.

Li QQ(1), Zhang L(1), Wan HY(1), Liu M(1), Li X(1), Tang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Life Science Research Center and School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China.

The altered expression of miRNAs in response to stresses contributes to cancer
pathogenesis. However, little is known regarding the mechanism by which cellular 
stresses drive alterations in miRNA expression. Here, we found that serum
starvation enhanced mitophagy by downregulating the mitophagy-associated protein 
voltage-dependent anion channel 1 (VDAC1) and by inducing the expression of
miR-320a and the transcription factor cAMP responsive element binding protein
1(CREB1). Furthermore, we cloned the promoter of miR-320a and identified the core
promoter of miR-320a in the upstream -16 to -130 region of pre-miR-320a.
Moreover, CREB1 was found to bind to the promoter of miR-320a to activate its
expression and to induce mitophagy during serum starvation. Collectively, our
results reveal a new mechanism underlying serum starvation-induced mitophagy in
which serum starvation induces CREB1 expression, in turn activating miR-320a
expression, which then down-regulates VDAC1 expression to facilitate mitophagy.
These findings may provide new insights into cancer cell survival in response to 
environmental stresses.

PMCID: PMC4741499
PMID: 26472185  [PubMed - in process]


27. Comput Biol Chem. 2015 Dec;59 Pt A:117-25. doi:
10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.09.002. Epub 2015 Sep 9.

Predicting functional regulatory SNPs in the human antimicrobial peptide genes
DEFB1 and CAMP in tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS.

Flores Saiffe Farías A(1), Jaime Herrera López E(2), Moreno Vázquez CJ(3), Li
W(4), Prado Montes de Oca E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Personalized Medicine Laboratory (LAMPER), Medical and Pharmaceutical
Biotechnology, Guadalajara Unit, Research Center of Technology and Design
Assistance of Jalisco State, National Council of Science and Technology (CIATEJ
AC, CONACYT), Av. Normalistas 800, Col. Colinas de la Normal, CP 44270
Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico. Electronic address: adolfo.flores.saiffe@gmail.com.
(2)Industrial Biotechnology, CIATEJ AC, Zapopan Unit, CONACYT, Camino Arenero
1227, Col. El Bajío del Arenal, CP 45019 Zapopan, Jalisco, Mexico. Electronic
address: eherrera@ciatej.mx. (3)Personalized Medicine Laboratory (LAMPER),
Medical and Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Guadalajara Unit, Research Center of
Technology and Design Assistance of Jalisco State, National Council of Science
and Technology (CIATEJ AC, CONACYT), Av. Normalistas 800, Col. Colinas de la
Normal, CP 44270 Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico. Electronic address:
ing_cjmv@hotmail.com. (4)The Robert S. Boas Center for Genomics and Human
Genetics, Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, 350 Community Dr. Manhasset, 
NY 11030, USA. Electronic address: wtli2012@gmail.com. (5)Personalized Medicine
Laboratory (LAMPER), Medical and Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Guadalajara Unit, 
Research Center of Technology and Design Assistance of Jalisco State, National
Council of Science and Technology (CIATEJ AC, CONACYT), Av. Normalistas 800, Col.
Colinas de la Normal, CP 44270 Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico; Molecular Biology
Laboratory, Biosafety Area, Medical and Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Guadalajara
Unit, CIATEJ AC, CONACYT, Av. Normalistas 800, Col. Colinas de la Normal, CP
44270 Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico. Electronic address: eprado@ciatej.mx.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in transcription factor binding sites
(TFBSs) within gene promoter region or enhancers can modify the transcription
rate of genes related to complex diseases. These SNPs can be called regulatory
SNPs (rSNPs). Data compiled from recent projects, such as the 1000 Genomes
Project and ENCODE, has revealed essential information used to perform in silico 
prediction of the molecular and biological repercussions of SNPs within TFBS.
However, most of these studies are very limited, as they only analyze SNPs in
coding regions or when applied to promoters, and do not integrate essential
biological data like TFBSs, expression profiles, pathway analysis, homotypic
redundancy (number of TFBSs for the same TF in a region), chromatin accessibility
and others, which could lead to a more accurate prediction. Our aim was to
integrate different data in a biologically coherent method to analyze the
proximal promoter regions of two antimicrobial peptide genes, DEFB1 and CAMP,
that are associated with tuberculosis (TB) and HIV/AIDS. We predicted SNPs within
the promoter regions that are more likely to interact with transcription factors 
(TFs). We also assessed the impact of homotypic redundancy using a novel approach
called the homotypic redundancy weight factor (HWF). Our results identified 10
SNPs, which putatively modify the binding affinity of 24 TFs previously
identified as related to TB and HIV/AIDS expression profiles (e.g. KLF5, CEBPA
and NFKB1 for TB; FOXP2, BRCA1, CEBPB, CREB1, EBF1 and ZNF354C for HIV/AIDS; and 
RUNX2, HIF1A, JUN/AP-1, NR4A2, EGR1 for both diseases). Validating with the
OregAnno database and cell-specific functional/non functional SNPs from
additional 13 genes, our algorithm performed 53% sensitivity and 84.6%
specificity to detect functional rSNPs using the DNAseI-HUP database. We are
proposing our algorithm as a novel in silico method to detect true functional
rSNPs in antimicrobial peptide genes. With further improvement, this novel method
could be applied to other promoters in order to design probes and to discover new
drug targets for complex diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26447748  [PubMed - in process]


28. Mol Pharmacol. 2015 Dec;88(6):1072-83. doi: 10.1124/mol.114.097352. Epub 2015 Oct
1.

An Essential Role of cAMP Response Element Binding Protein in Ginsenoside
Rg1-Mediated Inhibition of Na+/Glucose Cotransporter 1 Gene Expression.

Wang CW(1), Su SC(1), Huang SF(1), Huang YC(1), Chan FN(1), Kuo YH(1), Hung
MW(1), Lin HC(1), Chang WL(2), Chang TC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences (C.-W.W., T.-C.C.), Department of
Biochemistry (S.-C.S., S.-F.H., F.-N.C., Y.-H.K., T.-C.C.), Institute of
Preventive Medicine (Y.-C.H.), and School of Pharmacy, National Defense Medical
Center, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China (H.-C.L., W.-L.C.); Department of
Research and Education, Veteran General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of
China (M.-W.H.); Graduate Institute of Basic Medical Science, China Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan, Republic of China (T.-C.C.); and Department of
Biotechnology, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan, Republic of China (T.-C.C.).
(2)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences (C.-W.W., T.-C.C.), Department of
Biochemistry (S.-C.S., S.-F.H., F.-N.C., Y.-H.K., T.-C.C.), Institute of
Preventive Medicine (Y.-C.H.), and School of Pharmacy, National Defense Medical
Center, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China (H.-C.L., W.-L.C.); Department of
Research and Education, Veteran General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of
China (M.-W.H.); Graduate Institute of Basic Medical Science, China Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan, Republic of China (T.-C.C.); and Department of
Biotechnology, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan, Republic of China (T.-C.C.).
tcchang@ndmctsgh.edu.tw wlchang@ndmctsgh.edu.tw.

The Na(+)/glucose cotransporter 1 (SGLT1) is responsible for glucose uptake in
intestinal epithelial cells. It has been shown that the intestinal SGLT1 level is
significantly increased in diabetic individuals and positively correlated with
the pathogenesis of diabetes. The development of targeted therapeutics that can
reduce the intestinal SGLT1 expression level is, therefore, important. In this
study, we showed that ginsenoside Rg1 effectively decreased intestinal glucose
uptake through inhibition of SGLT1 gene expression in vivo and in vitro.
Transient transfection analysis of the SGLT1 promoter revealed an essential cAMP 
response element (CRE) that confers the Rg1-mediated inhibition of SGLT1 gene
expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay and targeted CRE-binding protein 
(CREB) silencing demonstrated that Rg1 reduced the promoter binding of CREB and
CREB binding protein associated with an inactivated chromatin status. In
addition, further studies showed that the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
signaling pathway also plays an essential role in the inhibitory effect of Rg1;
taken together, our study demonstrates the involvement of the EGFR-CREB signaling
pathway in the Rg1-mediated downregulation of SGLT1 expression, which offers a
potential strategy in the development of antihyperglycemic and antidiabetic
treatments.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

PMID: 26429938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Ecol Evol. 2015 Sep;5(17):3628-41. doi: 10.1002/ece3.1630. Epub 2015 Aug 11.

Candidate gene-environment interactions and their relationships with timing of
breeding in a wild bird population.

Bourret A(1), Garant D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département de biologie, Université de Sherbrooke 2500 boulevard de
l'Université, Sherbrooke, QC, J1K 2R1, Canada.

Monitoring and predicting evolutionary changes underlying current environmental
modifications are complex challenges. Recent approaches to achieve these
objectives include assessing the genetic variation and effects of candidate genes
on traits indicating adaptive potential. In birds, for example, short tandem
repeat polymorphism at four candidate genes (CLOCK, NPAS2, ADCYAP1, and CREB1)
has been linked to variation in phenological traits such as laying date and
timing of migration. However, our understanding of their importance as
evolutionary predictors is still limited, mainly because the extent of
genotype-environment interactions (GxE) related to these genes has yet to be
assessed. Here, we studied a population of Tree swallow (Tachycineta bicolor)
over 4 years in southern Québec (Canada) to assess the relationships between
those four candidate genes and two phenological traits related to reproduction
(laying date and incubation duration) and also determine the importance of GxE in
this system. Our results showed that NPAS2 female genotypes were nonrandomly
distributed across the study system and formed a longitudinal cline with longer
genotypes located to the east. We observed relationships between length
polymorphism at all candidate genes and laying date and/or incubation duration,
and most of these relationships were affected by environmental variables
(breeding density, latitude, or temperature). In particular, the positive
relationships detected between laying date and both CLOCK and NPAS2 female
genotypes were variable depending on breeding density. Our results suggest that
all four candidate genes potentially affect timing of breeding in birds and that 
GxE are more prevalent and important than previously reported in this context.

PMCID: PMC4567867
PMID: 26380692  [PubMed]


30. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2016 Feb 4;65:96-103. doi:
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2015.09.004. Epub 2015 Sep 12.

miR-182 (microRNA-182) suppression in the hippocampus evokes antidepressant-like 
effects in rats.

Li Y(1), Li S(2), Yan J(3), Wang D(3), Yin R(3), Zhao L(3), Zhu Y(3), Zhu X(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, 212001,
China; Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, 212001, China. (2)Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, 210029, China. (3)The Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu
University, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, 212001, China. (4)Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, 
Jiangsu, 212001, China; The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University,
Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, 212001, China. Electronic address: jiangdalyf2009@126.com.

Depression is a serious and potentially life-threatening mental disorder with
unknown etiology. Emerging evidence shows that brain-derived neurotrophic factor 
(BDNF) and microRNAs (miRNAs) play critical roles in the etiology of depression. 
However, the molecular mechanisms are not fully understood. Expression of miR-182
and BDNF in the hippocampus were analyzed in a chronic unpredictable mild stress 
(CUMS) model. Male Wistar rats received bilateral intra-hippocampal infusions of 
BDNF- and miR-182-expressing (miR-182) or miR-182-silencers (si-miR-182)
lentiviral vectors (LV). miR-182 upregulation was correlated with decreased BDNF 
expression in the hippocampus of a CUMS model. Accordingly, an anti-depressant
like effect was observed when LV-BDNF or LV-si-miR-182 was injected into the
hippocampus. Moreover, BDNF and its target gene cyclic AMP responsive element
binding protein 1 (CREB1) decreased following LV-miR-182 injection and increased 
upon LV-si-miR-182 injection in rat hippocampus and cultured neuronal cells. In
contrast, miR-182 overexpression exacerbated depression-like behaviors and
decreased BDNF. Further, luciferase reporter evidence confirmed BDNF was a
miR-182 target. Taken together, the current results reveal a potential molecular 
regulation of miR-182 on BDNF and the pronounced behavioral consequences of this 
regulation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26368940  [PubMed - in process]


31. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2015 Nov 15;289(1):109-16. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2015.09.007. Epub 2015 Sep 12.

Prenatal caffeine exposure induced a lower level of fetal blood leptin mainly via
placental mechanism.

Wu YM(1), Luo HW(2), Kou H(1), Wen YX(2), Shen L(1), Pei LG(1), Zhou J(1), Zhang 
YZ(3), Wang H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Basic Medical School of Wuhan University, Wuhan
430071, China. (2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan
University, Wuhan 430071, China. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China; Hubei Provincial Key 
Laboratory of Developmentally Originated Disease, Wuhan 430071, China.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Basic Medical School of Wuhan University, Wuhan
430071, China; Hubei Provincial Key Laboratory of Developmentally Originated
Disease, Wuhan 430071, China. Electronic address: wanghui19@whu.edu.cn.

It's known that blood leptin level is reduced in intrauterine growth retardation 
(IUGR) fetus, and placental leptin is the major source of fetal blood leptin.
This study aimed to investigate the decreased fetal blood leptin level by
prenatal caffeine exposure (PCE) and its underlying placental mechanisms.
Pregnant Wistar rats were intragastrically administered caffeine (30-120 mg/kg
day) from gestational day 9 to 20. The level of fetal serum leptin and the
expression of placental leptin-related genes were analyzed. Furthermore, we
investigated the molecular mechanism of the reduced placental leptin's expression
by treatment with caffeine (0.8-20 µM) in the BeWo cells. In vivo, PCE
significantly decreased fetal serum leptin level in caffeine dose-dependent
manner. Meanwhile, placental mRNA expression of adenosine A2a receptor (Adora2a),
cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB), a short-type leptin receptor
(Ob-Ra) and leptin was reduced in the PCE groups. In vitro, caffeine
significantly decreased the mRNA expression of leptin, CREB and ADORA2A in
concentration and time-dependent manners. The addition of ADORA2A agonist or
adenylyl cyclase (AC) agonist reversed the inhibition of leptin expression
induced by caffeine. PCE induced a lower level of fetal blood leptin, which the
primary mechanism is that caffeine inhibited antagonized Adora2a and AC
activities to decreased cAMP synthesis, thus inhibited the expression of the
transcription factor CREB and target gene leptin in the placenta. Meantime, the
reduced transportation of maternal leptin by placental Ob-Ra also contributed to 
the reduced fetal blood leptin. Together, PCE decreased fetal blood leptin mainly
via reducing the expression and transportation of leptin in the placenta.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26367767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Anesthesiology. 2015 Nov;123(5):1154-69. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0000000000000850.

Spinal IL-33/ST2 Signaling Contributes to Neuropathic Pain via Neuronal
CaMKII-CREB and Astroglial JAK2-STAT3 Cascades in Mice.

Liu S(1), Mi WL, Li Q, Zhang MT, Han P, Hu S, Mao-Ying QL, Wang YQ.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Integrative Medicine and Neurobiology, School of Basic 
Medical Sciences, Shanghai Medical College, Institutes of Brain Science, Brain
Science Collaborative Innovation Center, State Key Laboratory of Medical
Neurobiology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Emerging evidence indicates that nerve damage-initiated
neuroinflammation and immune responses, which are evidenced by the up-regulation 
of proinflammatory cytokines, contribute to the development of neuropathic pain. 
This study investigated the role of spinal interleukin (IL)-33 and its receptor
ST2 in spared nerve injury (SNI)-induced neuropathic pain.
METHODS: The von Frey test and acetone test were performed to evaluate
neuropathic pain behaviors (n = 8 to 12), and Western blot (n = 4 to 6),
immunohistochemistry, real-time polymerase chain reaction (n = 5), and Bio-Plex
(n = 5) assays were performed to understand the molecular mechanisms.
RESULTS: Intrathecal administration of ST2-neutralizing antibody or ST2 gene
knockout (ST2) significantly attenuated the SNI-induced mechanical and cold
allodynia. On the 7th day after SNI, the expression of spinal IL-33 and ST2 was
increased by 255.8 ± 27.3% and 266.4 ± 83.5% (mean ± SD), respectively.
Mechanistic studies showed that the increased expression of the spinal
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor subunit 1 after SNI was reduced by ST2
antibody administration or ST2. The induction of nociceptive behaviors in naive
mice due to recombinant IL-33 was reversed by the noncompetitive NMDA antagonist 
MK-801. ST2 antibody administration or ST2 markedly inhibited the increased
activation of the astroglial janus kinase 2 (JAK2)-signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) cascade and the neuronal
calcium-calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMKII)-cyclic adenosine monophosphate
response element-binding protein (CREB) cascade after SNI. Moreover, intrathecal 
pretreatment with the CaMKII inhibitor KN-93 or the JAK2-STAT3 cascade inhibitor 
AG490 attenuated recombinant IL-33-induced nociceptive behaviors and NMDA subunit
1 up-regulation in naive mice.
CONCLUSION: Spinal IL-33/ST2 signaling contributes to neuropathic pain by
activating the astroglial JAK2-STAT3 cascade and the neuronal CaMKII-CREB
cascade.

PMID: 26352378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Nov;1853(11 Pt A):2929-36. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.09.003. Epub 2015 Sep 6.

Nicotinamide ameliorates palmitate-induced ER stress in hepatocytes via
cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway-dependent Sirt1 upregulation.

Li J(1), Dou X(2), Li S(3), Zhang X(3), Zeng Y(4), Song Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kinesiology and Nutrition, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, IL60612, USA; Department of Liver Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610041, PR China. (2)Department of Kinesiology and 
Nutrition, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL60612, USA; College of
Life Science, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310053, PR
China. (3)Department of Kinesiology and Nutrition, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL60612, USA. (4)Department of Liver Surgery, West China
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610041, PR China. (5)Department
of Kinesiology and Nutrition, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago,
IL60612, USA; College of Life Science, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310053, PR China. Electronic address: song2008@uic.edu.

Nicotinamide (NAM) is the amide of nicotinic acid and a predominant precursor for
NAD(+) biosynthesis via the salvage pathway. Sirt1 is a NAD(+)-dependent
deacetylase, playing an important role in regulating cellular functions. Although
hepatoprotective effect of NAM has been reported, the underlying mechanism
remains elusive. ER stress, induced by saturated fatty acids, in specific
palmitate, plays a pathological role in the development of nonalcoholic fatty
liver disease. This study aims to determine the effect of NAM on
palmitate-induced ER stress in hepatocytes and to elucidate molecular mechanisms 
behind. Both HepG2 cells and primary mouse hepatocytes were exposed to palmitate 
(conjugated to BSA at a 2:1 M ratio), NAM, or their combination for different
durations. Cellular NAD(+) level, Sirt1 expression/activity, ER stress, as well
as cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway activation were determined. NAM increased Sirt1
expression and enzymatic activity, which contributes to the ameliorative effect
of NAM on palmitate-triggered ER stress. NAM increased intracellular NAD(+) level
in hepatocytes, however, blocking the salvage pathway, a pathway for NAD(+)
synthesis from NAM, only partially prevented NAM-induced Sirt1 upregulation while
completely prevented NAD+ increase in response to NAM. Further mechanistic
investigations revealed that NAM elevated intracellular cAMP level via
suppressing PDE activity, leading to downstream PKA and CREB activation.
Importantly, cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway blockade abolished not only NAM-induced Sirt1 
upregulation, but also its protective effect against ER stress. Our results
demonstrate that NAM protects hepatocytes against palmitate-induced ER stress in 
hepatocytes via upregulating Sirt1. Activation of the cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway plays
a key role in NAM-induced Sirt1 upregulation.

PMID: 26352206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cell Signal. 2015 Dec;27(12):2380-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.08.021. Epub
2015 Sep 5.

Estrogen receptor a L429 and A430 regulate 17ß-estradiol-induced cell
proliferation via CREB1.

Pesiri V(1), Totta P(1), Segatto M(1), Bianchi F(2), Pallottini V(1), Marino
M(1), Acconcia F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Science, Section Biomedical Sciences and Technology, University 
Roma Tre, Viale Guglielmo Marconi, 446, I-00146 Rome, Italy. (2)Molecular
Medicine Program, Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of
Oncology, Milan, Italy. (3)Department of Science, Section Biomedical Sciences and
Technology, University Roma Tre, Viale Guglielmo Marconi, 446, I-00146 Rome,
Italy. Electronic address: filippo.acconcia@uniroma3.it.

17ß-Estradiol (E2)-dependent cell proliferation requires both estrogen receptor a
(ERa)-based integrated control of gene transcription and kinase pathways
activation. Such coordination of intracellular E2:ERa-dependent signaling
mechanisms is finely tuned by receptor association with specific partner
proteins. Recently, we identified the leucine (L) 429 and alanine (A) 430 within 
the ERa ligand binding domain as important residues for receptor non-covalent
interaction to ubiquitinated species [i.e., ERa ubiquitin-binding surface (ERa
UBS)] and for E2-induced ERa activation. To date, if these two ERa amino acids
are involved in the control of E2-dependent pathways required for cell
proliferation is unknown. Here, by using stably expressing ERa mutated in L429
and A430 (i.e., L429A,A430G - LAAG) cell lines, we show that L429 and A430 are
critical for E2-induced cell proliferation, PI3K/AKT pathway activation, and
ERa-mediated transcriptional changes. Moreover, we demonstrate that these two
receptor structural determinants direct the E2-induced PI3K/AKT/CREB1 pathway
activation and CREB1-mediated transcriptional activity that in turn control the
hormone-induced cell proliferation. As a whole, our data demonstrate for the
first time that the ERa UBS contributes to the modulation of E2-induced
ERa-mediated cell proliferation and provide a novel connection between the
receptor structure and the functional molecular mechanisms by which E2:ERa
complex can regulate cell processes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26348925  [PubMed - in process]


35. Pharmacogenomics. 2015;16(14):1547-63. doi: 10.2217/pgs.15.106. Epub 2015 Sep 7.

A glutamatergic network mediates lithium response in bipolar disorder as defined 
by epigenome pathway analysis.

Higgins GA(1,)(2), Allyn-Feuer A(1), Barbour E(1), Athey BD(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (2)Pharmacogenomic Science,
Assurex Health, Inc., Mason, OH 45040, USA. (3)Department of Psychiatry,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

AIM: A regulatory network in the human brain mediating lithium response in
bipolar patients was revealed by analysis of functional SNPs from genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) and published gene association studies, followed by
epigenome mapping.
METHODS: An initial set of 23,312 SNPs in linkage disequilibrium with lead SNPs, 
and sub-threshold GWAS SNPs rescued by pathway analysis, were studied in the same
populations. These were assessed using our workflow and annotation by the
epigenome roadmap consortium.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven percent of 802 SNPs that were associated with lithium
response (13 published studies gene association studies and two GWAS) were shared
in common with 1281 SNPs from 18 GWAS examining psychiatric disorders and adverse
events associated with lithium treatment. Nineteen SNPs were annotated as active 
regulatory elements such as enhancers and promoters in a tissue-specific manner. 
They were located within noncoding regions of ten genes: ANK3, ARNTL, CACNA1C,
CACNG2, CDKN1A, CREB1, GRIA2, GSK3B, NR1D1 and SLC1A2. Following gene set
enrichment and pathway analysis, these genes were found to be significantly
associated (p = 10(-27); Fisher exact test) with an AMPA2 glutamate receptor
network in human brain. Our workflow results showed concordance with annotation
of regulatory elements from the epigenome roadmap. Analysis of cognate mRNA and
enhancer RNA exhibited patterns consistent with an integrated pathway in human
brain.
CONCLUSION: This pharmacoepigenomic regulatory pathway is located in the same
brain regions that exhibit tissue volume loss in bipolar disorder. Although in
silico analysis requires biological validation, the approach provides value for
identification of candidate variants that may be used in pharmacogenomic testing 
to identify bipolar patients likely to respond to lithium.

PMID: 26343379  [PubMed - in process]


36. Org Biomol Chem. 2015 Oct 14;13(38):9746-50. doi: 10.1039/c5ob01395j.

Degradation of HaloTag-fused nuclear proteins using bestatin-HaloTag ligand
hybrid molecules.

Tomoshige S(1), Naito M, Hashimoto Y, Ishikawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo,
1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan. m-ishikawa@iam.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

We have developed a protein knockdown technology using hybrid small molecules
designed as conjugates of a ligand for the target protein and a ligand for
ubiquitin ligase cellular inhibitor of apoptosis protein 1 (cIAP1). However, this
technology has several limitations. Here, we report the development of a novel
protein knockdown system to address these limitations. In this system, target
proteins are fused with HaloTag to provide a common binding site for a
degradation inducer. We designed and synthesized small molecules consisting of
alkyl chloride as the HaloTag-binding degradation inducer, which binds to
HaloTag, linked to BE04 (2), which binds to cIAP1. Using this system, we
successfully knocked down HaloTag-fused cAMP responsive element binding protein 1
(HaloTag-CREB1) and HaloTag-fused c-jun (HaloTag-c-jun), which are ligand-unknown
nuclear proteins, in living cells. HaloTag-binding degradation inducers can be
synthesized easily, and are expected to be useful as biological tools for
pan-degradation of HaloTag-fused proteins.

PMID: 26338696  [PubMed - in process]


37. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Aug 20;16(8):19851-67. doi: 10.3390/ijms160819851.

Curcumol Inhibits Growth and Induces Apoptosis of Colorectal Cancer LoVo Cell
Line via IGF-1R and p38 MAPK Pathway.

Wang J(1,)(2), Huang F(3), Bai Z(4), Chi B(5), Wu J(2), Chen X(6).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Guilin Medical University, Guilin 541004, China.
wujiacaiwjc@hotmail.com. (2)Research Center for Science, Guilin Medical
University, Guilin 541004, China. wujiacaiwjc@hotmail.com. (3)College of
Pharmacy, Guilin Medical University, Guilin 541004, China.
huangfengxiang@glmu.edu.cn. (4)Intensive Care Unit, Zhuzhou Central Hospital,
Zhuzhou 412007, China. baizhun@163.com. (5)Research Center for Science, Guilin
Medical University, Guilin 541004, China. winatlast@163.com. (6)College of
Pharmacy, Guilin Medical University, Guilin 541004, China. chenxu@glmc.edu.cn.

Curcumol, isolated from the traditional medical plant Rhizoma Curcumae, is the
bioactive component of Zedoary oil, whose potential anti-tumor effect has
attracted considerable attention in recent years. Though many researchers have
reported curcumol and its bioactivity, the potential molecular mechanism for its 
anti-cancer effect in colorectal cancer LoVo cells still remains unclear. In the 
present study, we found that curcumol showed growth inhibition and induced
apoptosis of LoVo cells in a dose- and time-dependent manner. The occurrence of
its proliferation inhibition and apoptosis came with suppression of IGF-1R
expression, and then increased the phosphorylation of p38 mitogen activated
protein kinase (MAPK), which might result in a cascade response by inhibiting the
CREB survival pathway and finally triggered Bax/Bcl-2 and poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase 1 (PARP-1) apoptosis signals. Moreover, curcumol inhibited colorectal 
cancer in xenograft models of nude mice. Immunohistochemical and Western blot
analysis revealed that curcumol could decrease the expression of ki-67, Bcl-2 as 
well as CREB1, and increase the expression of Bax and the phosphorylation of p38,
which were consistent with our in vitro study. Overall, our in vitro and in vivo 
data confirmed the anti-cancer activity of curcumol, which was related to a
significant inhibition of IGF-1R and activation of p38 MAPKs, indicating that
curcumol may be a potential anti-tumor agent for colorectal carcinoma therapy.

PMCID: PMC4581329
PMID: 26307972  [PubMed - in process]


38. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Aug 25;112(34):E4762-71. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1423228112. Epub 2015 Aug 11.

Epigenetic mechanisms, T-cell activation, and CCR5 genetics interact to regulate 
T-cell expression of CCR5, the major HIV-1 coreceptor.

Gornalusse GG(1), Mummidi S(2), Gaitan AA(2), Jimenez F(2), Ramsuran V(3), Picton
A(4), Rogers K(1), Manoharan MS(2), Avadhanam N(2), Murthy KK(5), Martinez H(2), 
Molano Murillo A(2), Chykarenko ZA(6), Hutt R(7), Daskalakis D(7),
Shostakovich-Koretskaya L(6), Abdool Karim S(8), Martin JN(9), Deeks SG(9), Hecht
F(9), Sinclair E(9), Clark RA(2), Okulicz J(10), Valentine FT(7), Martinson
N(11), Tiemessen CT(12), Ndung'u T(3), Hunt PW(9), He W(2), Ahuja SK(13).

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Administration Research Center for AIDS and HIV-1 Infection, South
Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX 78229; Center for Personalized
Medicine, South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX 78229;
Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio,
TX 78229; Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Health Science Center, 
San Antonio, TX 78229; (2)Veterans Administration Research Center for AIDS and
HIV-1 Infection, South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX 78229; 
Center for Personalized Medicine, South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San
Antonio, TX 78229; Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health Science
Center, San Antonio, TX 78229; (3)HIV Pathogenesis Programme, Doris Duke Medical 
Research Institute, Nelson R Mandela School of Medicine, University of
KwaZulu-Natal, Durban 4013, South Africa; Centre for the AIDS Program of Research
in South Africa (CAPRISA), Doris Duke Medical Research Institute, Nelson R
Mandela School of Medicine, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban 4013, South
Africa; (4)Centre for HIV and Sexually Transmitted Infections, National Institute
for Communicable Diseases, Sandringham, Johannesburg 2131, South Africa; Faculty 
of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg 2193, South
Africa; (5)Department of Virology and Immunology, Texas Biomedical Research
Institute, San Antonio, TX 78245; (6)Department of General Pediatrics and
Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Dnepropetrovsk State Medical Academy, 49044
Dnepropetrovsk, Ukraine; (7)Department of Medicine, New York University School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10016; (8)Centre for the AIDS Program of Research in South
Africa (CAPRISA), Doris Duke Medical Research Institute, Nelson R Mandela School 
of Medicine, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban 4013, South Africa;
(9)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94110;
Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94110; San Francisco General Hospital, San Francisco, CA 94110;
(10)San Antonio Military Medical Center, Fort Sam Houston, San Antonio, TX 78234;
(11)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg
2193, South Africa; Perinatal HIV Research Unit, University of the Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg 2193, South Africa; Medical Research Council Soweto Matlosana Centre
for HIV/AIDS and Tuberculosis, Johannesburg 2193, South Africa; Center for
Tuberculosis Research, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
21205. (12)Centre for HIV and Sexually Transmitted Infections, National Institute
for Communicable Diseases, Sandringham, Johannesburg 2131, South Africa; Faculty 
of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg 2193, South
Africa; Medical Research Council Soweto Matlosana Centre for HIV/AIDS and
Tuberculosis, Johannesburg 2193, South Africa; (13)Veterans Administration
Research Center for AIDS and HIV-1 Infection, South Texas Veterans Health Care
System, San Antonio, TX 78229; Center for Personalized Medicine, South Texas
Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX 78229; Department of Medicine,
University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX 78229; Department of
Microbiology, University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX 78229;
ahujas@uthscsa.edu.

T-cell expression levels of CC chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5) are a critical
determinant of HIV/AIDS susceptibility, and manifest wide variations (i) between 
T-cell subsets and among individuals and (ii) in T-cell activation-induced
increases in expression levels. We demonstrate that a unifying mechanism for this
variation is differences in constitutive and T-cell activation-induced DNA
methylation status of CCR5 cis-regulatory regions (cis-regions). Commencing at an
evolutionarily conserved CpG (CpG -41), CCR5 cis-regions manifest lower vs.
higher methylation in T cells with higher vs. lower CCR5 levels (memory vs. naïve
T cells) and in memory T cells with higher vs. lower CCR5 levels. HIV-related and
in vitro induced T-cell activation is associated with demethylation of these
cis-regions. CCR5 haplotypes associated with increased vs. decreased gene/surface
expression levels and HIV/AIDS susceptibility magnify vs. dampen T-cell
activation-associated demethylation. Methylation status of CCR5 intron 2 explains
a larger proportion of the variation in CCR5 levels than genotype or T-cell
activation. The ancestral, protective CCR5-HHA haplotype bears a polymorphism at 
CpG -41 that is (i) specific to southern Africa, (ii) abrogates binding of the
transcription factor CREB1 to this cis-region, and (iii) exhibits a trend for
overrepresentation in persons with reduced susceptibility to HIV and disease
progression. Genotypes lacking the CCR5-<U+0394>32 mutation but with hypermethylated
cis-regions have CCR5 levels similar to genotypes heterozygous for CCR5-<U+0394>32. In
HIV-infected individuals, CCR5 cis-regions remain demethylated, despite
restoration of CD4+ counts (=800 cells per mm(3)) with antiretroviral therapy.
Thus, methylation content of CCR5 cis-regions is a central epigenetic determinant
of T-cell CCR5 levels, and possibly HIV-related outcomes.

PMCID: PMC4553789
PMID: 26307764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Clin Invest. 2015 Sep;125(9):3681-91. doi: 10.1172/JCI81860. Epub 2015 Aug 24.

Adipocyte iron regulates leptin and food intake.

Gao Y, Li Z, Gabrielsen JS, Simcox JA, Lee SH, Jones D, Cooksey B, Stoddard G,
Cefalu WT, McClain DA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2015 Sep;125(9):3422-3.

Dietary iron supplementation is associated with increased appetite. Here, we
investigated the effect of iron on the hormone leptin, which regulates food
intake and energy homeostasis. Serum ferritin was negatively associated with
serum leptin in a cohort of patients with metabolic syndrome. Moreover, the same 
inverse correlation was observed in mice fed a high-iron diet. Adipocyte-specific
loss of the iron exporter ferroportin resulted in iron loading and decreased
leptin, while decreased levels of hepcidin in a murine hereditary hemochromatosis
(HH) model increased adipocyte ferroportin expression, decreased adipocyte iron, 
and increased leptin. Treatment of 3T3-L1 adipocytes with iron decreased leptin
mRNA in a dose-dependent manner. We found that iron negatively regulates leptin
transcription via cAMP-responsive element binding protein activation (CREB
activation) and identified 2 potential CREB-binding sites in the mouse leptin
promoter region. Mutation of both sites completely blocked the effect of iron on 
promoter activity. ChIP analysis revealed that binding of phosphorylated CREB is 
enriched at these two sites in iron-treated 3T3-L1 adipocytes compared with
untreated cells. Consistent with the changes in leptin, dietary iron content was 
also directly related to food intake, independently of weight. These findings
indicate that levels of dietary iron play an important role in regulation of
appetite and metabolism through CREB-dependent modulation of leptin expression.

PMCID: PMC4588289
PMID: 26301810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Cancer Res. 2015 Oct 1;75(19):4188-97. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0858. Epub
2015 Aug 20.

Akt Kinase-Interacting Protein 1 Signals through CREB to Drive Diffuse Malignant 
Mesothelioma.

Yamada T(1), Amann JM(2), Fukuda K(3), Takeuchi S(3), Fujita N(4), Uehara H(5),
Iwakiri S(6), Itoi K(6), Shilo K(7), Yano S(8), Carbone DP(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University Medical Center,
Columbus, Ohio. Division of Medical Oncology, Cancer Research Institute, Kanazawa
University, Kanazawa, Japan. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State
University Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio. (3)Division of Medical Oncology,
Cancer Research Institute, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan. (4)Cancer
Chemotherapy Center, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Molecular and Environmental Pathology, Institute of Health
Biosciences, University of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.
(6)Department of Respiratory Surgery, Hyogo Prefectural Amagasaki Hospital,
Amagasaki, Japan. (7)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University Medical
Center, Columbus, Ohio. (8)Division of Medical Oncology, Cancer Research
Institute, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan. david.carbone@osumc.edu
syano@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp. (9)Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State 
University Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio. david.carbone@osumc.edu
syano@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

Diffuse malignant mesothelioma (DMM) is a tumor of serosal membranes with
propensity for progressive local disease. Because current treatment options are
largely ineffective, novel therapeutic strategies based on molecular mechanisms
and the disease characteristics are needed to improve the outcomes of patients
with this disease. Akt kinase interacting protein 1 (Aki1; Freud-1/CC2D1A) is a
scaffold protein for the PI3K-PDK1-Akt signaling module that helps determine
receptor signal selectivity for EGFR. Aki1 has been suggested as a therapeutic
target, but its potential has yet to be evaluated in a tumor setting. Here, we
report evidence supporting its definition as a therapeutic target in DMM. In
cell-based assays, Aki1 silencing decreased cell viability and caused cell-cycle 
arrest of multiple DMM cell lines via effects on the PKA-CREB1 signaling pathway.
Blocking CREB activity phenocopied Aki1 silencing. Clinically, Aki1 was expressed
in most human DMM specimens where its expression correlated with phosphorylated
CREB1. Notably, Aki1 siRNA potently blocked tumor growth in an orthotopic
implantation model of DMM when administered directly into the pleural cavity of
tumor-bearing mice. Our findings suggest an important role for the Aki1-CREB axis
in DMM pathogenesis and provide a preclinical rationale to target Aki1 by
intrathoracic therapy in locally advanced tumors.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26294214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Oct;55(2):159-68. doi: 10.1530/JME-15-0150. Epub 2015 Aug 
20.

Promoter-specific regulation of PPARGC1A gene expression in human skeletal
muscle.

Popov DV(1), Lysenko EA(2), Vepkhvadze TF(2), Kurochkina NS(2), Maknovskii PA(2),
Vinogradova OL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Exercise PhysiologyInstitute of Biomedical Problems, Russian
Academy of Sciences, Khoroshevskoye shosse, 76A, Moscow 123007, RussiaFaculty of 
Fundamental MedicineM.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Lomonosovskiy
prospect, 31-5, Moscow 119192, RussiaDepartment of GeneticsFaculty of Biology,
M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Leninskie Gory, 1-12, Moscow 119991,
Russia Laboratory of Exercise PhysiologyInstitute of Biomedical Problems, Russian
Academy of Sciences, Khoroshevskoye shosse, 76A, Moscow 123007, RussiaFaculty of 
Fundamental MedicineM.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Lomonosovskiy
prospect, 31-5, Moscow 119192, RussiaDepartment of GeneticsFaculty of Biology,
M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Leninskie Gory, 1-12, Moscow 119991,
Russia danil-popov@yandex.ru. (2)Laboratory of Exercise PhysiologyInstitute of
Biomedical Problems, Russian Academy of Sciences, Khoroshevskoye shosse, 76A,
Moscow 123007, RussiaFaculty of Fundamental MedicineM.V. Lomonosov Moscow State
University, Lomonosovskiy prospect, 31-5, Moscow 119192, RussiaDepartment of
GeneticsFaculty of Biology, M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Leninskie
Gory, 1-12, Moscow 119991, Russia. (3)Laboratory of Exercise PhysiologyInstitute 
of Biomedical Problems, Russian Academy of Sciences, Khoroshevskoye shosse, 76A, 
Moscow 123007, RussiaFaculty of Fundamental MedicineM.V. Lomonosov Moscow State
University, Lomonosovskiy prospect, 31-5, Moscow 119192, RussiaDepartment of
GeneticsFaculty of Biology, M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Leninskie
Gory, 1-12, Moscow 119991, Russia Laboratory of Exercise PhysiologyInstitute of
Biomedical Problems, Russian Academy of Sciences, Khoroshevskoye shosse, 76A,
Moscow 123007, RussiaFaculty of Fundamental MedicineM.V. Lomonosov Moscow State
University, Lomonosovskiy prospect, 31-5, Moscow 119192, RussiaDepartment of
GeneticsFaculty of Biology, M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Leninskie
Gory, 1-12, Moscow 119991, Russia.

The goal of this study was to identify unknown transcription start sites of the
PPARGC1A (PGC-1a) gene in human skeletal muscle and investigate the
promoter-specific regulation of PGC-1a gene expression in human skeletal muscle. 
Ten amateur endurance-trained athletes performed high- and low-intensity exercise
sessions (70<U+200A> min, 70% or 50% o2max). High-throughput RNA sequencing and
exon-exon junction mapping were applied to analyse muscle samples obtained at
rest and after exercise. PGC-1a promoter-specific expression and activation of
regulators of PGC-1a gene expression (AMPK, p38 MAPK, CaMKII, PKA and CREB1)
after exercise were evaluated using qPCR and western blot. Our study has
demonstrated that during post-exercise recovery, human skeletal muscle expresses 
the PGC-1a gene via two promoters only. As previously described, the additional
exon 7a that contains a stop codon was found in all samples. Importantly, only
minor levels of other splice site variants were found (and not in all samples).
Constitutive expression PGC-1a gene occurs via the canonical promoter,
independent of exercise intensity and exercise-induced increase of AMPK(Thr172)
phosphorylation level. Expression of PGC-1a gene via the alternative promoter is 
increased of two orders after exercise. This post-exercise expression is highly
dependent on the intensity of exercise. There is an apparent association between 
expression via the alternative promoter and activation of CREB1.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 26293291  [PubMed - in process]


42. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;36(6):2456-65. doi: 10.1159/000430206. Epub 2015 Jul
27.

Lactoferrin Inhibits IL-1ß-Induced Chondrocyte Apoptosis Through AKT1-Induced
CREB1 Activation.

Xue H(1), Tu Y, Ma T, Liu X, Wen T, Cai M, Xia Z, Mei J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Yangpu District Central Hospital, Tongji
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Chondrocyte apoptosis is largely responsible for cartilage
degeneration in osteoarthritis (OA). Interleukin-1 beta (IL-1ß) is widely used as
a chondrocyte apoptosis-inducing agent, while lactoferrin (LF) is an anabolic
reagent which has the potential to inhibit chondrocyte apoptosis. We assessed the
effects of LF on cartilage degeneration in IL-1ß-induced chondrocytes and in a
rat model of OA, and explored the potential molecular mechanisms involved.
METHODS: Human articular chondrocytes (HACs) were treated with IL-1ß alone or in 
combination with LF. MTT and flow cytometric assays were used to detect changes
after treatment with LF. Western blotting was used to examine the relevant
molecules regulating apoptosis.
RESULTS: We found that IL-1ß reduced the viability of HACs, whereas 200 µg/mL of 
LF significantly counteracted the inhibitory effect of IL-1ß. LF significantly
inhibited IL-1ß-induced HAC apoptosis. The protein expression of the apoptotic
markers Caspase-3 and PARP was also significantly reduced in the LF treatment
group when analyzed by western blotting. Furthermore, we found that LF triggered 
CREB1 phosphorylation in IL-1ß-induced HAC apoptosis through AKT1 signaling. In
addition, LF promoted the repair of articular cartilage damage in a rat OA model 
with elevated p-CREB levels.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies suggest that LF has an anti-apoptotic effect on
IL-1ß-induced chondrocytes, and thus may be a promising novel therapeutic agent
for OA.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26279447  [PubMed - in process]


43. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2015 Nov 15;309(10):F880-8. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00155.2015. Epub 2015 Aug 12.

PKC-a-dependent augmentation of cAMP and CREB phosphorylation mediates the
angiotensin II stimulation of renin in the collecting duct.

Gonzalez AA(1), Liu L(2), Lara LS(3), Bourgeois CR(2), Ibaceta-Gonzalez C(4),
Salinas-Parra N(4), Gogulamudi VR(2), Seth DM(2), Prieto MC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Química, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso,
Valparaíso, Chile; Department of Physiology, Tulane University School of
Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana; and. (2)Department of Physiology, Tulane
University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana; and. (3)Instituto de
Ciencias Biomédicas, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil Department of Physiology, Tulane University School of Medicine, New
Orleans, Louisiana; and. (4)Instituto de Química, Pontificia Universidad Católica
de Valparaíso, Valparaíso, Chile; (5)Department of Physiology, Tulane University 
School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana; and mprieto@tulane.edu.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2015 Dec 1;309(11):F914-5.

In contrast to the negative feedback of angiotensin II (ANG II) on
juxtaglomerular renin, ANG II stimulates renin in the principal cells of the
collecting duct (CD) in rats and mice via ANG II type 1 (AT1R) receptor,
independently of blood pressure. In vitro data indicate that CD renin is
augmented by AT1R activation through protein kinase C (PKC), but the exact
mechanisms are unknown. We hypothesize that ANG II stimulates CD renin synthesis 
through AT1R via PKC and the subsequent activation of cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway. In
M-1 cells, ANG II increased cAMP, renin mRNA (3.5-fold), prorenin, and renin
proteins, as well as renin activity in culture media (2-fold). These effects were
prevented by PKC inhibition with calphostin C, PKC-a dominant negative, and by
PKA inhibition. Forskolin-induced increases in cAMP and renin expression were
prevented by calphostin C. PKC inhibition and Ca2+ depletion impaired ANG
II-mediated CREB phosphorylation and upregulation of renin. Adenylate cyclase 6
(AC) siRNA remarkably attenuated the ANG II-dependent upregulation of renin mRNA.
Physiological activation of AC with vasopressin increased renin expression in M-1
cells. The results suggest that the ANG II-dependent upregulation of renin in the
CD depends on PKC-a, which allows the augmentation of cAMP production and
activation of PKA/CREB pathway via AC6. This study defines the intracellular
signaling pathway involved in the ANG II-mediated stimulation of renin in the CD.
This is a novel mechanism responsible for the regulation of local
renin-angiotensin system in the distal nephron.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4652074 [Available on 2016-11-15]
PMID: 26268270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Neuropharmacology. 2015 Dec;99:328-36. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.08.006.
Epub 2015 Aug 6.

Regulation of alternative gene transcription in the striatum in response to
antidepressant drugs.

Piechota M(1), Golda S(1), Ficek J(1), Jantas D(2), Przewlocki R(3), Korostynski 
M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neuropharmacology, Institute of Pharmacology PAS,
Krakow, Poland. (2)Department of Experimental Neuroendocrinology, Institute of
Pharmacology PAS, Krakow, Poland. (3)Department of Molecular Neuropharmacology,
Institute of Pharmacology PAS, Krakow, Poland; Department of Neurobiology and
Neuropsychology, IPS, UJ, Krakow, Poland. (4)Department of Molecular
Neuropharmacology, Institute of Pharmacology PAS, Krakow, Poland. Electronic
address: michkor@if-pan.krakow.pl.

The mechanisms that control the selection of transcription initiation and
termination sites in response to pharmacological stimulation of neuronal cells
are poorly understood. We used next-generation sequencing and bioinformatics to
construct a genome-wide inventory of protein-coding and non-coding transcripts
altered by antidepressant treatment. We analyzed available ChIP-seq data to
identify mechanisms that control drug-inducible expression of alternative gene
variants in the brain. We identified 153 transcripts of various biotypes
regulated in the mouse striatum in response to tranylcypromine or mianserin (at a
0.1% FDR threshold). Five drug-responsive gene patterns are enriched in
protein-coding variants (77%), regulated by different sets of transcriptional
factors (including SRF/CREB1 and GR/CTCF) and expressed in separate cellular
compartments of the brain. We found that alterations mediated by proximal
promoters in neurons are more specific in the selection of regulated
transcriptional isoforms compared with enhancer-dependent alterations in glia.
The change in transcriptional programs, from housekeeping to inducible, provides 
cells with the resource of functionally distinct proteins. We conclude that the
regulation of drug-induced brain plasticity may occur at the level of transcripts
rather than genes. The expression of specific isoforms in response to
antidepressants may constitute a trigger that initiates the long-lasting effects 
of these drugs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26254862  [PubMed - in process]


45. Neurosci Lett. 2015 Sep 14;604:58-63. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.07.041. Epub
2015 Aug 1.

Akt and cAMP response element binding protein mediate 17ß-estradiol regulation of
glucose transporter 3 expression in human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cell line.

Ni Y(1), Zhou Y(2), Zhou M(3), Zhang L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University, Nantong,
226002 Jiangsu, China. (2)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Medical
College, Nantong University, Nantong, 226001 Jiangsu, China. (3)College of Life
Science, Nantong University, Nantong, 226007 Jiangsu, China. (4)Department of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University, 
Xi si Road 20, Nantong, 226002 Jiangsu, China. Electronic address:
lupingzhang1218@163.com.

Impaired glucose uptake is involved in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and glucose
transporter 3 (Glut3) is the major neuronal glucose transporter. Estrogens
contribute its theorized protective role against AD. The present studies aimed to
examine the effect of 17ß-estradiol (E2, the natural estrogen) on Glut3
expression and the underlying mechanisms by using human SH-SY5Y cell line. The
results demonstrated that E2 increased Glut3 expression. E2 could stimulate the
activation of Akt signaling pathway and the subsequent phosphorylation of cAMP
response element binding protein (CREB). Akt/CREB pathway mediated E2-induced
increase in Glut3 expression. These results suggested the mechanisms underlying
E2-induced increase in Glut3 expression in human SH-SY5Y cell line and might
provide the new data for elucidating the neuroprotective role of E2 against AD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26240989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Melanoma Res. 2015 Oct;25(5):390-8. doi: 10.1097/CMR.0000000000000183.

DNA methylation contributes toward silencing of antioncogenic microRNA-203 in
human and canine melanoma cells.

Noguchi S(1), Mori T, Nakagawa T, Itamoto K, Haraguchi T, Mizuno T.

Author information: 
(1)aLaboratory of Molecular Diagnostics and Therapeutics bLaboratory of Small
Animal Clinical Science (Surgical Division), Joint Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
cBiomedical Science Center for Translational Research, The United Graduate School
of Veterinary Science, Yamaguchi University, Yamaguchi dLaboratory of Veterinary 
Clinical Oncology, Faculty of Applied Biological Sciences, Gifu University, Gifu 
eLaboratory of Veterinary Surgery, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Melanoma is a poor-prognosis cancer in both humans and dogs. We have elucidated
the antitumor mechanisms of antioncogenic microRNA (miR)-203 which is
downregulated in human melanoma, as well as in canine melanoma. The aim of this
study was to clarify the mechanism of this downregulation. We focused on
epigenetic aberration of miR-203 transcription. Treatment with
5-aza-2'-deoxycitidine (5-aza) markedly upregulated the expression level of
miR-203 in almost all of the cell lines tested. Furthermore, bisulfite sequencing
or methylation-specific PCR showed DNA methylation of CpG islands upstream of the
miR-203 coding region (MIR203) in both human and canine melanoma cells, as well
as in canine clinical specimens, but not in human normal melanocytes. The results
of a luciferase activity assay showed obvious suppression of the transcription of
miR-203 by DNA methylation. The use of the luciferase activity assay for CREB1
and an inhibition assay of miR-203 function performed with an miR-203 inhibitor
confirmed the contribution of miR-203 upregulation toward the negative regulation
of the target gene of miR-203. These results indicate that canine melanoma might 
be a preclinical model of human melanoma for epigenetic studies. In addition,
this study suggests that agents that can demethylate MIR203 could be a common
promising therapeutic agent for the treatment of human and canine melanomas.

PMID: 26225581  [PubMed - in process]


47. J Neurochem. 2015 Nov;135(3):598-605. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13258. Epub 2015 Aug 12.

DISC1 regulates expression of the neurotrophin VGF through the PI3K/AKT/CREB
pathway.

Rodríguez-Seoane C(1), Ramos A(1,)(2), Korth C(3), Requena JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)CIMUS Biomedical Research Institute & Department of Medicine, University of
Santiago de Compostela-IDIS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. (2)Department of
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (3)Department of Neuropathology, Heinrich
Heine University, Medical School, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Disrupted in schizophrenia (DISC1) is a risk factor for chronic mental disease.
In a previous proteomic study, we reported that knocking down DISC1 results in a 
sharp decrease in the levels of the neuropeptide precursor VGF (non-acronymic)
and leads to reduced activation of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB)
and protein kinase B (AKT) in neurons. The main objective of this study is to
complete the characterization of the route, or routes, involving AKT and CREB
through which DISC1 modulates the expression of VGF. For that we explored known
players upstream of AKT and the DISC1 binding partners glycogen synthase kinase-3
beta and Phosphodiesterase-4, which might in turn reach out to CREB in murine
neuron primary culture. We found that DISC1 modulates the activation of
Phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase (PI3K). Furthermore,
pharmacological inhibition of PI3K resulted in decreased expression of VGF. All
this suggests that the PI3K/AKT pathway plays a role in mediating the effects of 
DISC1 silencing on VGF expression. Given the important roles of VGF in mental
disease, and its drugability, the DISC1-VGF connection might prove to be
important for efforts to develop new therapies for these diseases.

© 2015 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMID: 26212236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. BMC Med Genomics. 2015 Jul 26;8:43. doi: 10.1186/s12920-015-0117-x.

Removing reference mapping biases using limited or no genotype data identifies
allelic differences in protein binding at disease-associated loci.

Buchkovich ML(1), Eklund K(2), Duan Q(3), Li Y(4,)(5,)(6), Mohlke KL(7), Furey
TS(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, 
USA. buchkovm@email.unc.edu. (2)Department of Genetics, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA. keklund@email.unc.edu. (3)Department of
Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA.
qduan@email.unc.edu. (4)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA. yunli@med.unc.edu. (5)Department of Biostatistics,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA. yunli@med.unc.edu.
(6)Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC,
27599, USA. yunli@med.unc.edu. (7)Department of Genetics, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA. karen_mohlke@med.unc.edu. (8)Department of
Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA.
tsfurey@email.unc.edu. (9)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA. tsfurey@email.unc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Genetic variation can alter transcriptional regulatory activity
contributing to variation in complex traits and risk of disease, but identifying 
individual variants that affect regulatory activity has been challenging.
Quantitative sequence-based experiments such as ChIP-seq and DNase-seq can detect
sites of allelic imbalance where alleles contribute disproportionately to the
overall signal suggesting allelic differences in regulatory activity.
METHODS: We created an allelic imbalance detection pipeline, AA-ALIGNER, to
remove reference mapping biases influencing allelic imbalance detection and
evaluate accuracy of allelic imbalance predictions in the absence of complete
genotype data. Using the sequence aligner, GSNAP, and varying amounts of genotype
information to remove mapping biases we investigated the accuracy of allelic
imbalance detection (binomial test) in CREB1 ChIP-seq reads from the GM12878 cell
line. Additionally we thoroughly evaluated the influence of experimental and
analytical parameters on imbalance detection.
RESULTS: Compared to imbalances identified using complete genotypes, using
imputed partial sample genotypes, AA-ALIGNER detected >95 % of imbalances with
>90 % accuracy. AA-ALIGNER performed nearly as well using common variants when
genotypes were unknown. In contrast, predicting additional heterozygous sites and
imbalances using the sequence data led to >50 % false positive rates. We
evaluated effects of experimental data characteristics and key analytical
parameter settings on imbalance detection. Overall, total base coverage and
signal dispersion across the genome most affected our ability to detect
imbalances, while parameters such as imbalance significance, imputation quality
thresholds, and alignment mismatches had little effect. To assess the biological 
relevance of imbalance predictions, we used electrophoretic mobility shift assays
to functionally test for predicted allelic differences in CREB1 binding in the
GM12878 lymphoblast cell line. Six of nine tested variants exhibited allelic
differences in binding. Two of these variants, rs2382818 and rs713875, are
located within inflammatory bowel disease-associated loci.
CONCLUSIONS: AA-ALIGNER accurately detects allelic imbalance in quantitative
sequence data using partial genotypes or common variants filling a critical
methodological gap in these analyses, as full genotypes are rarely available.
Importantly, we demonstrate how experimental and analytical features impact
imbalance detection providing guidance for similar future studies.

PMCID: PMC4515314
PMID: 26210163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. G3 (Bethesda). 2015 Jul 16;5(9):1909-18. doi: 10.1534/g3.115.020248.

GABPa Binding to Overlapping ETS and CRE DNA Motifs Is Enhanced by CREB1: Custom 
DNA Microarrays.

He X(1), Syed KS(1), Tillo D(1), Mann I(1), Weirauch MT(2), Vinson C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892. (2)Center for Autoimmune Genomics and Etiology,
Division of Biomedical Informatics and Division of Developmental Biology,
Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229
matthew.weirauch@cchmc.org vinsonc@mail.nih.gov. (3)Laboratory of Metabolism,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892 matthew.weirauch@cchmc.org vinsonc@mail.nih.gov.

To achieve proper spatiotemporal control of gene expression, transcription
factors cooperatively assemble onto specific DNA sequences. The ETS domain
protein monomer of GABPa and the B-ZIP domain protein dimer of CREB1
cooperatively bind DNA only when the ETS ((C)/GCGGAA GT: ) and CRE ( GT:
GACGTCAC) motifs overlap precisely, producing the ETS<U+2194>CRE motif ((C)/GCGGAA GT:
GACGTCAC). We designed a Protein Binding Microarray (PBM) with 60-bp DNAs
containing four identical sectors, each with 177,440 features that explore the
cooperative interactions between GABPa and CREB1 upon binding the ETS<U+2194>CRE motif. 
The DNA sequences include all 15-mers of the form (C)/GCGGA--CG-, the ETS<U+2194>CRE
motif, and all single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), and occurrences in the
human and mouse genomes. CREB1 enhanced GABPa binding to the canonical ETS<U+2194>CRE
motif CCGGAAGT two-fold, and up to 23-fold for several SNPs at the beginning and 
end of the ETS motif, which is suggestive of two separate and distinct allosteric
mechanisms of cooperative binding. We show that the ETS-CRE array data can be
used to identify regions likely cooperatively bound by GABPa and CREB1 in vivo,
and demonstrate their ability to identify human genetic variants that might
inhibit cooperative binding.

Copyright © 2015 He et al.

PMCID: PMC4555227
PMID: 26185160  [PubMed - in process]


50. J Biol Chem. 2015 Sep 11;290(37):22423-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.642710. Epub
2015 Jul 13.

Transcriptional activation of human CDCA8 gene regulated by transcription factor 
NF-Y in embryonic stem cells and cancer cells.

Dai C(1), Miao CX(2), Xu XM(2), Liu LJ(2), Gu YF(3), Zhou D(2), Chen LS(4), Lin
G(5), Lu GX(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Institute of Reproductive and Stem Cell Engineering, Central South
University, Changsha 410078, the National Engineering and Research Center of
Human Stem Cell, Changsha 410205, and the School of Basic Medical Science,
Central South University, Changsha 410013, China. (2)From the Institute of
Reproductive and Stem Cell Engineering, Central South University, Changsha
410078. (3)From the Institute of Reproductive and Stem Cell Engineering, Central 
South University, Changsha 410078, the School of Basic Medical Science, Central
South University, Changsha 410013, China. (4)the National Engineering and
Research Center of Human Stem Cell, Changsha 410205, and. (5)From the Institute
of Reproductive and Stem Cell Engineering, Central South University, Changsha
410078, the National Engineering and Research Center of Human Stem Cell, Changsha
410205, and linge_csu@yahoo.com. (6)From the Institute of Reproductive and Stem
Cell Engineering, Central South University, Changsha 410078, the National
Engineering and Research Center of Human Stem Cell, Changsha 410205, and
lugxdirector@aliyun.com.

The cell division cycle associated 8 (CDCA8) gene plays an important role in
mitosis. Overexpression of CDCA8 was reported in some human cancers and is
required for cancer growth and progression. We found CDCA8 expression was also
high in human ES cells (hESCs) but dropped significantly upon hESC
differentiation. However, the regulation of CDCA8 expression has not yet been
studied. Here, we characterized the CDCA8 promoter and identified its
cis-elements and transcription factors. Three transcription start sites were
identified. Reporter gene assays revealed that the CDCA8 promoter was activated
in hESCs and cancer cell lines. The promoter drove the reporter expression
specifically to pluripotent cells during early mouse embryo development and to
tumor tissues in tumor-bearing mice. These results indicate that CDCA8 is
transcriptionally activated in hESCs and cancer cells. Mechanistically, two key
activation elements, bound by transcription factor NF-Y and CREB1, respectively, 
were identified in the CDCA8 basic promoter by mutation analyses and
electrophoretic motility shift assays. NF-Y binding is positively correlated with
promoter activities in different cell types. Interestingly, the NF-YA subunit,
binding to the promoter, is primarily a short isoform in hESCs and a long isoform
in cancer cells, indicating a different activation mechanism of the CDCA8
transcription between hESCs and cancer cells. Finally, enhanced CDCA8 promoter
activities by NF-Y overexpression and reduced CDCA8 transcription by NF-Y
knockdown further verified that NF-Y is a positive regulator of CDCA8
transcription. Our study unearths the molecular mechanisms underlying the
activation of CDCA8 expression in hESCs and cancer cells, which provides a better
understanding of its biological functions.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4566217 [Available on 2016-09-11]
PMID: 26170459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2015 Oct;37(7):554-9. doi: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000000390.

Paraneoplastic Syndrome of Angiomatoid Fibrous Histiocytoma May Be Caused by
EWSR1-CREB1 Fusion-induced Excessive Interleukin-6 Production.

Akiyama M(1), Yamaoka M, Mikami-Terao Y, Yokoi K, Inoue T, Hiramatsu T, Ashizuka 
S, Yoshizawa J, Katagi H, Ikegami M, Ida H, Nakazawa A, Okita H, Matsumoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pediatrics §Pathology Division of Pediatric Surgery Division
of Molecular Genetics, Institute of DNA Medicine, The Jikei University School of 
Medicine <U+2225>Department of Pathology, National Center for Child Health and
Development Departments of ¶Pediatric Hematology and Oncology Research #Allergy
and Immunology, National Research Institute for Child Health and Development,
Tokyo, Japan.

We describe a 7-year-old girl with angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH)
presenting severe inflammatory symptoms. The cytokine/chemokine profile of serum 
samples before and after surgery demonstrated that interleukin (IL)-6 had
decreased by the greatest percentage. The AFH cells were immunopathologically
positive for IL-6 and Tyr705-phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator
of transcription 3. The EWSR1-CREB1 fusion gene detected in the tumor leads to
continuous activation of CREB1 and IL-6 production, because the promoter region
of IL-6 has a CREB binding site. Thus, IL-6 plays pivotal roles in both
paraneoplastic syndrome and the oncogenesis of AFH.

PMID: 26165403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Pathol Res Pract. 2015 Sep;211(9):688-92. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2015.06.001. Epub
2015 Jun 17.

An unusual association of malignant gastrointestinal neuroectodermal tumor (clear
cell sarcoma-like) and Ewing sarcoma.

Insabato L(1), Guadagno E(2), Natella V(2), Somma A(2), Bihl M(3), Pizzolorusso
A(4), Mainenti PP(2), Apice G(4), Tornillo L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dip. Scienze Biomorfologiche e Chirurgiche, Università Federico II Napoli,
Italy. Electronic address: insabato@unina.it. (2)Dip. Scienze Biomorfologiche e
Chirurgiche, Università Federico II Napoli, Italy. (3)Department of Pathology,
University Hospital of Basel, Switzerland. (4)SSD Oncologia medica Sarcomi dei
Tessuti molli e delle Ossa, Istituto Tumori, Fondazione G. Pascale, Naples,
Italy.

Very recently a new designation of "Malignant Neuroectodermal Gastrointestinal
Tumor" has been proposed for an aggressive form of neuroectodermal tumor with
features similar to that of Clear Cell Sarcoma of Soft Tissue, however without a 
melanocytic differentiation. Also known as "clear cell sarcoma-like tumors of the
gastrointestinal tract", these tumors show some features strongly suggesting an
origin from a gastrointestinal neuroectodermal precursor cell unable to
differentiate along the melanocytic lineage. They occur mainly in young and
middle-aged adults, and have a poor prognosis with a high rate of liver and
lymphnode metastases. Histologically they are composed of epithelioid or oval-to 
spindle cells with a sheet-like or nested pattern of growth, strongly positive
for neural markers (S-100, SOX10, and vimentin) and negative for the melanocytic 
ones. EWSR1 gene rearrangements including EWSR1-ATF1 or EWSR1-CREB1 GENE fusions 
are typically assessed in these tumors. Here we report a case of malignant
neuroectodermal gastrointestinal tumor which immunophenotypically unusually
expressed FLI-1, occurring in a 29-year-old man with a previous medical history
of Ewing sarcoma. We finally suggest that this case might be a further evidence
of a link between these two entities.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26163185  [PubMed - in process]


53. Exp Ther Med. 2015 Jun;9(6):2235-2240. Epub 2015 Apr 3.

Association study of three single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the cyclic
adenosine monophosphate response element binding 1 gene and major depressive
disorder.

Wei Y(1), Bu S(2), Liu X(2), Li H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, First Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, P.R. China ; Department of Geriatric Neurology,
Zhengzhou Central Hospital Affiliated to Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan
450007, P.R. China. (2)Department of Geriatric Neurology, Zhengzhou Central
Hospital Affiliated to Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450007, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, First Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, P.R. China.

Major depressive disorder is a common chronic emotional disorder, and cyclic
adenosine monophosphate response element binding protein 1 (CREB1) is
hypothesized to play a role in its pathogenesis. The aim of the present study was
to investigate the associations between major depressive disorder and relevant
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the CREB1 gene. A total of 1,038
subjects of Han Chinese descent were recruited, including 456 patients with major
depressive disorder (case group) and 582 healthy volunteers (control group). The 
frequency distributions of the genotypes and alleles were estimated in the case
and control groups, and analyzed for any correlation with major depressive
disorder. Three relevant SNP sites in CREB1 were analyzed using quantitative
polymerase chain reaction, and statistical analyses were performed to estimate
their use as risk factors for major depressive disorder. The analyses revealed
that rs2254137 and rs16839883 in CREB1 showed polymorphisms in the sample
population, and the genotype and allele frequencies of rs16839883 differed
significantly when comparing the patients and healthy controls (P<0.05). No
statistically significant differences were detected in the two SNP sites between 
the male and female patients (P>0.05). Furthermore, no statistically significant 
differences were detected in rs2254137 genotype and allele distribution when
comparing the male and female patients with their corresponding control groups
(P>0.05). However, statistically significant differences were observed in the
genotype and allele frequencies of rs16839883 when the male and female patients
were compared with their respective controls (P<0.05). Therefore, the results
demonstrated that there is a close correlation between the rs16839883
polymorphism in CREB1 and major depressive disorder, which suggests that this SNP
site should be further studied as a potential biomarker for major depressive
disorder.

PMCID: PMC4473368
PMID: 26136966  [PubMed]


54. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Sep;45(9):2661-71. doi: 10.1002/eji.201545471. Epub 2015 Jul 
20.

Endogenous prostaglandin E2 potentiates anti-inflammatory phenotype of macrophage
through the CREB-C/EBP-ß cascade.

Na YR(1), Jung D(1), Yoon BR(2), Lee WW(2,)(3), Seok SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Macrophage Laboratory, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, and
Institute of Endemic Disease, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, South Korea. (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Seoul National 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (3)Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

Macrophages have important functions in tissue homeostasis, but the exact
mechanisms regarding wide spectrum of macrophage phenotype remain unresolved. In 
this study, we report that mouse bone marrow derived naïve macrophages produce
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2 ) endogenously, resulting in anti-inflammatory gene
expression upon differentiation induced by macrophage colony stimulating factor
(M-CSF). Cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibition by indomethacin reduced endogenous PGE2 
production of macrophages and subsequently reduced arg1, IL10 and Mrc1, YmI and
FizzI gene expressions. Of note, PGE2 phosphorylates CREB via EP2 and EP4
receptor ligation, thereby transcriptionally increasing C/EBP-ß expression in
BALB/c bone marrow derived macrophages. Activated CREB directly binds to the
CREB-responsive element of the C/EBP-ß promoter, such that PGE2 ultimately
reinforces arg1, IL10 and Mrc1 gene expression. Cyclic AMP activator forskolin
also phosphorylated CREB and induced the C/EBP-ß cascade, but this was completely
blocked by the PKA inhibitor, H89. Consequently, M-CSF grown macrophages
inhibited T-cell proliferation but the inhibition ability was reduced when the
COX is inhibited by indomethacin or macrophage C/EBP-ß expression was decreased
by siRNA transduction. Our results collectively describe the molecular basis for 
homeostatic macrophage differentiation by endogenous PGE2 .

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26118414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Immunol. 2015 Aug 1;195(3):1218-32. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500146. Epub 2015
Jun 26.

IL-10 Production in Macrophages Is Regulated by a TLR-Driven CREB-Mediated
Mechanism That Is Linked to Genes Involved in Cell Metabolism.

Sanin DE(1), Prendergast CT(1), Mountford AP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Centre for Immunology and Infection, University of
York, York YO10 5DD, United Kingdom. (2)Department of Biology, Centre for
Immunology and Infection, University of York, York YO10 5DD, United Kingdom
adrian.mountford@york.ac.uk.

IL-10 is produced by macrophages in diverse immune settings and is critical in
limiting immune-mediated pathology. In helminth infections, macrophages are an
important source of IL-10; however, the molecular mechanism underpinning
production of IL-10 by these cells is poorly characterized. In this study, bone
marrow-derived macrophages exposed to excretory/secretory products released by
Schistosoma mansoni cercariae rapidly produce IL-10 as a result of MyD88-mediated
activation of MEK/ERK/RSK and p38. The phosphorylation of these kinases was
triggered by TLR2 and TLR4 and converged on activation of the transcription
factor CREB. Following phosphorylation, CREB is recruited to a novel regulatory
element in the Il10 promoter and is also responsible for regulating a network of 
genes involved in metabolic processes, such as glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid
cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation. Moreover, skin-resident tissue macrophages,
which encounter S. mansoni excretory/secretory products during infection, are the
first monocytes to produce IL-10 in vivo early postinfection with S. mansoni
cercariae. The early and rapid release of IL-10 by these cells has the potential 
to condition the dermal microenvironment encountered by immune cells recruited to
this infection site, and we propose a mechanism by which CREB regulates the
production of IL-10 by macrophages in the skin, but also has a major effect on
their metabolic state.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4505959
PMID: 26116503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Virol. 2015 Sep;89(18):9262-80. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01098-15. Epub 2015 Jun 24.

Screening of the Human Kinome Identifies MSK1/2-CREB1 as an Essential Pathway
Mediating Kaposi's Sarcoma-Associated Herpesvirus Lytic Replication during
Primary Infection.

Cheng F(1), Sawant TV(1), Lan K(2), Lu C(3), Jung JU(1), Gao SJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA. (2)Unit of Tumor
Virology, Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Immunology, Institut Pasteur
of Shanghai, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA shoujiag@usc.edu.

Viruses often hijack cellular pathways to facilitate infection and replication.
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is an oncogenic gammaherpesvirus
etiologically associated with Kaposi's sarcoma, a vascular tumor of endothelial
cells. Despite intensive studies, cellular pathways mediating KSHV infection and 
replication are still not well defined. Using an antibody array approach, we
examined cellular proteins phosphorylated during primary KSHV infection of
primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Enrichment analysis identified
integrin/mitogen-activated protein kinase (integrin/MAPK), insulin/epidermal
growth factor receptor (insulin/EGFR), and JAK/STAT as the activated networks
during primary KSHV infection. The transcriptional factor CREB1 (cyclic AMP
[cAMP]-responsive element-binding protein 1) had the strongest increase in
phosphorylation. While knockdown of CREB1 had no effect on KSHV entry and
trafficking, it drastically reduced the expression of lytic transcripts and
proteins and the production of infectious virions. Chemical activation of CREB1
significantly enhanced viral lytic replication. In contrast, CREB1 neither
influenced the expression of the latent gene LANA nor affected KSHV infectivity. 
Mechanistically, CREB1 was not activated through the classic cAMP/protein kinase 
A (cAMP/PKA) pathway or via the AKT, MK2, and RSK pathways. Rather, CREB1 was
activated by the mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinases 1 and 2 (MSK1/2). 
Consequently, chemical inhibition or knockdown of MSKs significantly inhibited
the KSHV lytic replication program; however, it had a minimal effect on LANA
expression and KSHV infectivity. Together, these results identify the
MSK1/2-CREB1 proteins as novel essential effectors of KSHV lytic replication
during primary infection. The differential effect of the MSK1/2-CREB1 pathway on 
the expression of viral latent and lytic genes might control the robustness of
viral lytic replication, and therefore the KSHV replication program, during
primary infection.IMPORTANCE: Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is a
human tumor virus associated with several cancers. Through genome-wide kinase
screening, we found that KSHV activates the MSK1/2-CREB1 pathway during primary
infection and that it depends on this pathway for viral lytic replication.
Inhibition of this pathway blocks KSHV lytic replication. These results
illustrate a mechanism by which KSHV hijacks a cellular pathway for its
replication, and they identify a potential therapeutic target.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4542378
PMID: 26109721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Immunol. 2015 Aug 1;195(3):1301-11. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500209. Epub 2015
Jun 19.

MicroRNA-9 Regulates the Differentiation and Function of Myeloid-Derived
Suppressor Cells via Targeting Runx1.

Tian J(1), Rui K(2), Tang X(2), Ma J(2), Wang Y(2), Tian X(2), Zhang Y(3), Xu
H(2), Lu L(4), Wang S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Affiliated People's Hospital, Jiangsu
University, Zhenjiang 212002, China; Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Jiangsu
Key Laboratory of Laboratory Medicine, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 210013,
China; and. (2)Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of
Laboratory Medicine, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 210013, China; and.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Affiliated People's Hospital, Jiangsu
University, Zhenjiang 212002, China; (4)Department of Pathology, University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong 999077, China. (5)Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Affiliated People's Hospital, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212002, China;
Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Laboratory Medicine, 
Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 210013, China; and sjwjs@ujs.edu.cn.

Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) play a critical role in tumor-associated
immunosuppression, thus affecting effective immunotherapies for cancers. However,
the molecular mechanisms involved in regulating the differentiation and function 
of MDSCs remain largely unclear. In this study, we found that inhibition of
microRNA (miR)-9 promoted the differentiation of MDSCs with significantly reduced
immunosuppressive function whereas overexpression of miR-9 markedly enhanced the 
function of MDSCs. Notably, knockdown of miR-9 significantly impaired the
activity of MDSCs and inhibited the tumor growth of Lewis lung carcinoma in mice.
Moreover, miR-9 regulated MDSCs differentiation by targeting the runt-related
transcription factor 1, an essential transcription factor in regulating MDSC
differentiation and function. Furthermore, the CREB was found to regulate miR-9
expression in MDSCs. Taken together, our findings have identified a critical role
of miR-9 in regulating the differentiation and function of MDSCs.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26091714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2015 Sep;51(8):797-807. doi:
10.1007/s11626-015-9892-0. Epub 2015 Jun 20.

Integrated miRNA and mRNA expression profiling of tension force-induced bone
formation in periodontal ligament cells.

Chang M(1), Lin H(1), Luo M(1), Wang J(1), Han G(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Basic Science of Stomatology
(Hubei-MOST) and Key Laboratory for Oral Biomedicine of Ministry of Education
(KLOBM), School and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, 237 Luoyu Road,
Wuhan, 430079, China. (2)State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Basic Science of
Stomatology (Hubei-MOST) and Key Laboratory for Oral Biomedicine of Ministry of
Education (KLOBM), School and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, 237
Luoyu Road, Wuhan, 430079, China. guanglihan@hotmail.com.

Tension force-induced bone formation is a complex biological process altered by
various factors, for example miRNAs and gene regulatory network. However, we know
little about critical gene regulators and their functional consequences on this
complex process. The aim of this study was to determine the integrated relation
between microRNA and mRNA expression in tension force-induced bone formation in
periodontal ligament cells by a system biological approach. We identified 818
mRNAs and 32 miRNAs differentially expressed between cyclic tension
force-stimulated human periodontal ligament cells and control cells by
microarrays. By using miRNA/mRNA network analysis, protein-protein interactions
network analysis, and hub analysis, we found that miR-195-5p, miR-424-5p,
miR-1297, miR-3607-5p, miR-145-5p, miR-4328, and miR-224-5p were core microRNAs
of tension force-induced bone formation. WDR33, HSPH1, ERBB3, RIF1, IKBKB, CREB1,
FGF2, and PAG1 were identified as hubs of the PPI network, suggesting the
biological significance in this process. The miRNA expression was further
examined in human PDLC and animal samples by using quantitative real-time PCR.
Thus, we proposed a model of tension force-induced bone formation which is
co-regulated through integration of the miRNA and mRNA. This study illustrated
the benefits of system biological approaches in the analysis of tension
force-induced bone formation as a complex biological process. We used public
information and our experimental data to do comprehensive analysis and revealed
the coordination transcriptional control of miRNAs of tension force-induced bone 
formation.

PMID: 26091625  [PubMed - in process]


59. Tumour Biol. 2015 Dec;36(12):9159-70. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3593-x. Epub 2015
Jun 19.

Influence of functional polymorphisms in TNF-a, IL-8, and IL-10 cytokine genes on
mRNA expression levels and risk of gastric cancer.

de Oliveira JG(1,)(2), Rossi AF(3), Nizato DM(4), Cadamuro AC(5), Jorge YC(6),
Valsechi MC(7), Venâncio LP(8), Rahal P(9), Pavarino ÉC(10), Goloni-Bertollo
EM(11), Silva AE(12).

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetics and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Biology, Sao
Paulo State University (UNESP), Rua Cristovão Colombo, 2265, São José do Rio
Preto, 15054-000, SP, Brazil. juliana.usc2012@yahoo.com.br. (2)Department of
Graduate Studies and Research, Sacred Heart University (USC), Rua Irmã Arminda,
10-50, Bauru, 17011-970, SP, Brazil. juliana.usc2012@yahoo.com.br.
(3)Cytogenetics and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Biology, Sao
Paulo State University (UNESP), Rua Cristovão Colombo, 2265, São José do Rio
Preto, 15054-000, SP, Brazil. rossi.anaflavia@gmail.com. (4)Department of
Genetics and Molecular Biology, São José do Rio Preto School of Medicine
(FAMERP), Av. Brigadeiro Faria Lima, 5416, São José do Rio Preto, 15090-000, SP, 
Brazil. danymanchini@hotmail.com. (5)Cytogenetics and Molecular Biology
Laboratory, Department of Biology, Sao Paulo State University (UNESP), Rua
Cristovão Colombo, 2265, São José do Rio Preto, 15054-000, SP, Brazil.
ctc.aline@gmail.com. (6)Cytogenetics and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department
of Biology, Sao Paulo State University (UNESP), Rua Cristovão Colombo, 2265, São 
José do Rio Preto, 15054-000, SP, Brazil. yvanacj@hotmail.com. (7)Genomics
Laboratory, Department of Biology, Sao Paulo State University (UNESP), Rua
Cristovão Colombo, 2265, São José do Rio Preto, 15054-000, SP, Brazil.
mcvalsechi@hotmail.com. (8)Laboratory for the Study of Hemoglobin and the
Genetics of Hematologic Diseases, Department of Biology, Sao Paulo State
University (UNESP), Rua Cristovão Colombo, 2265, São José do Rio Preto,
15054-000, SP, Brazil. larissa.bluerose@gmail.com. (9)Genomics Laboratory,
Department of Biology, Sao Paulo State University (UNESP), Rua Cristovão Colombo,
2265, São José do Rio Preto, 15054-000, SP, Brazil. prahal@ibilce.unesp.br.
(10)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, São José do Rio Preto School of
Medicine (FAMERP), Av. Brigadeiro Faria Lima, 5416, São José do Rio Preto,
15090-000, SP, Brazil. erika@famerp.br. (11)Department of Genetics and Molecular 
Biology, São José do Rio Preto School of Medicine (FAMERP), Av. Brigadeiro Faria 
Lima, 5416, São José do Rio Preto, 15090-000, SP, Brazil. eny.goloni@famerp.br.
(12)Cytogenetics and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Biology, Sao
Paulo State University (UNESP), Rua Cristovão Colombo, 2265, São José do Rio
Preto, 15054-000, SP, Brazil. anabete@ibilce.unesp.br.

Functional polymorphisms in promoter regions can produce changes in the affinity 
of transcription factors, thus altering the messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA)
expression levels of inflammatory cytokines associated with the risk of cancer
development. The goal of this study was to evaluate the influence that
polymorphisms in the cytokine genes known as TNF-a-308 G/A (rs1800629),
TNF-a-857 C/T (rs1799724), IL-8-251 T/A (rs4073), IL-8-845 T/C (rs2227532), and
IL-10-592 C/A (rs1800872) have on changes to mRNA expression levels and on the
risks of chronic gastritis (CG) and gastric cancer (GC). A sample of 723
individuals was genotyped using the polymerase chain reaction-restriction
fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) technique. Relative mRNA expression
levels were measured using quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR). Polymorphisms
TNF-a-308 G/A and IL-8-251 A/T were not associated with risks of these gastric
lesions. However, TNF-a-857 C/T, IL-8-845 T/C, and IL-10-592 C/A were found to be
associated with a higher risk of GC, and IL-10-592 C/A was found to be associated
with a higher risk of CG. The relative mRNA expression levels (RQ) of TNF-a,
IL-8, and IL-10 were markedly downregulated in the CG group (median RQs<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.128, 
0.247, and 0.614, respectively), while the RQ levels of TNF-a in the GC group
were upregulated (RQ<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.749), but were basal for IL-8 (RQ<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.053) and
downregulated for IL-10 (RQ<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.179). When the groups were stratified according
to wild-type and polymorphic alleles, only for IL-8-845 T/C the polymorphic
allele was found to influence the expression levels of this cytokine. IL-8-845 C 
allele carriers were significantly upregulated in both groups (GC and CG;
RQ<U+2009>=<U+2009>3.138 and 2.181, respectively) when compared to TT homozygotes (RQ<U+2009>=<U+2009>-0.407 
and 0.165, respectively). In silico analysis in the IL-8 promoter region revealed
that the presence of the variant C allele in position -845 is responsible for the
presence of the binding sites for two transcription factors (REL and CREB1),
which are involved in increased gene expression. Polymorphic alleles were not
shown to have any effect on the expression levels of TNF-a and IL-10. Taken
together, our findings provide evidence for an association of TNF-a-857 C/T,
IL-8-845 T/C, and IL-10-592 C/A with a higher risk of gastric cancer and also
demonstrate the influence that the polymorphic C allele of IL-8-845 has on
changes to the gene expression levels of this cytokine.

PMID: 26088449  [PubMed - in process]


60. Atherosclerosis. 2015 Aug;241(2):400-8. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2015.05.015. Epub 2015 May 19.

Effects of oral eicosapentaenoic acid versus docosahexaenoic acid on human
peripheral blood mononuclear cell gene expression.

Tsunoda F(1), Lamon-Fava S(1), Asztalos BF(1), Iyer LK(2), Richardson K(3),
Schaefer EJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Nutrition Laboratory, Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research 
Center on Aging, Tufts University, Boston, MA, USA. (2)Molecular Cardiology
Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA; Center for
Neuroscience Research, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Nutrition and Genomics Laboratory, Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research
Center on Aging, Tufts University, Boston, MA, USA. (4)Cardiovascular Nutrition
Laboratory, Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging, Tufts
University, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: Ernst.schaefer@tufts.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) have
beneficial effects on inflammation and cardiovascular disease (CVD). Our aim was 
to assess the effect of a six-week supplementation with either olive oil, EPA, or
DHA on gene expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC).
METHODS: Subjects were sampled at baseline and six weeks after receiving either: 
olive oil 6.0 g/day (n = 16), EPA 1.8 g/day (n = 16), or DHA 1.8 g/day (n = 18). 
PBMC were subjected to gene expression analysis by microarray with key findings
confirmed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR).
RESULTS: Plasma phospholipid EPA increased 3 fold in the EPA group, and DHA
increased 63% in the DHA group (both p < 0.01), while no effects were observed in
the olive oil group. Microarray analysis indicated that EPA but not DHA or olive 
oil significantly affected the gene expression in the following pathways: 1)
interferon signaling, 2) receptor recognition of bacteria and viruses, 3) G
protein signaling, glycolysis and glycolytic shunting, 4) S-adenosyl-l-methionine
biosynthesis, and 5) cAMP-mediated signaling including cAMP responsive element
protein 1 (CREB1), as well as many other individual genes including hypoxia
inducible factor 1, a subunit (HIF1A). The findings for CREB1 and HIF1A were
confirmed by Q-PCR analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that EPA supplementation was associated with
significant effects on gene expression involving the interferon pathway as well
as down-regulation of CREB1 and HIF1A, which may relate to its beneficial effect 
on CVD risk reduction.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26074314  [PubMed - in process]


61. Immunology. 2015 Sep;146(1):130-43. doi: 10.1111/imm.12489. Epub 2015 Jul 15.

C5a alters blood-brain barrier integrity in a human in vitro model of systemic
lupus erythematosus.

Mahajan SD(1), Parikh NU(1), Woodruff TM(2), Jarvis JN(3), Lopez M(3), Hennon
T(1), Cunningham P(4), Quigg RJ(1), Schwartz SA(1), Alexander JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA. (2)School of 
Biomedical Sciences, University of Queensland, St. Lucia, QLD, Australia.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, University at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

The blood-brain barrier (BBB) plays a crucial role in brain homeostasis, thereby 
maintaining the brain environment precise for optimal neuronal function. Its
dysfunction is an intriguing complication of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). 
SLE is a systemic autoimmune disorder where neurological complications occur in
5-50% of cases and is associated with impaired BBB integrity. Complement
activation occurs in SLE and is an important part of the clinical profile. Our
earlier studies demonstrated that C5a generated by complement activation caused
the loss of brain endothelial layer integrity in rodents. The goal of the current
study was to determine the translational potential of these studies to a human
system. To assess this, we used a two dimensional in vitro BBB model constructed 
using primary human brain microvascular endothelial cells and astroglial cells,
which closely emulates the in vivo BBB allowing the assessment of BBB integrity. 
Increased permeability monitored by changes in transendothelial electrical
resistance and cytoskeletal remodelling caused by actin fiber rearrangement were 
observed when the cells were exposed to lupus serum and C5a, similar to the
observations in mice. In addition, our data show that C5a/C5aR1 signalling alters
nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B translocation into nucleus and regulates the expression of the 
tight junction proteins, claudin-5 and zonula occludens 1 in this setting. Our
results demonstrate for the first time that C5a regulates BBB integrity in a
neuroinflammatory setting where it affects both endothelial and astroglial cells.
In addition, we also demonstrate that our previous findings in a mouse model,
were emulated in human cells in vitro, bringing the studies one step closer to
understanding the translational potential of C5a/C5aR1 blockade as a promising
therapeutic strategy in SLE and other neurodegenerative diseases.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4552508 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26059553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Cereb Cortex. 2015 Jun 4. pii: bhv104. [Epub ahead of print]

CREB1 Genotype Modulates Adaptive Reward-Based Decisions in Humans.

Wolf C(1), Mohr H(2), Diekhof EK(3), Vieker H(4), Goya-Maldonado R(5), Trost
S(5), Krämer B(5), Keil M(5), Binder EB(6), Gruber O(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Translational Research in Systems Neuroscience and Psychiatry,
Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Georg-August-University Göttingen,
Göttingen 37075, Germany Laboratory of Behavioral Neuroscience, National
Institute of Aging, Baltimore, MD 21224-6825, USA. (2)Center for Translational
Research in Systems Neuroscience and Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry and
Psychotherapy, Georg-August-University Göttingen, Göttingen 37075, Germany
Department of General Psychology, Technical University Dresden, Dresden 01069,
Germany. (3)Center for Translational Research in Systems Neuroscience and
Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Georg-August-University
Göttingen, Göttingen 37075, Germany Grindel Biocenter and Zoological Museum,
Institute for Humanbiology, University Hamburg, Hamburg 20146, Germany. (4)Center
for Translational Research in Systems Neuroscience and Psychiatry, Department of 
Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Georg-August-University Göttingen, Göttingen 37075,
Germany Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg 20246, Germany. (5)Center for Translational Research
in Systems Neuroscience and Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry and
Psychotherapy, Georg-August-University Göttingen, Göttingen 37075, Germany.
(6)Max-Planck-Institute for Psychiatry, Munich 80804, Germany.

Cyclic AMP response element-binding protein (CREB) contributes to adaptation of
mesocorticolimbic networks by modulating activity-regulated transcription and
plasticity in neurons. Activity or expression changes of CREB in the nucleus
accumbens (NAc) and orbital frontal cortex (OFC) interact with behavioral changes
during reward-motivated learning. However, these findings from animal models have
not been evaluated in humans. We tested whether CREB1 genotypes affect
reward-motivated decisions and related brain activation, using BOLD fMRI in 224
young and healthy participants. More specifically, participants needed to adapt
their decision to either pursue or resist immediate rewards to optimize the
reward outcome. We found significant CREB1 genotype effects on choices to pursue 
increases of the reward outcome and on BOLD signal in the NAc, OFC, insula
cortex, cingulate gyrus, hippocampus, amygdala, and precuneus during these
decisions in comparison with those decisions avoiding total reward loss. Our
results suggest that CREB1 genotype effects in these regions could contribute to 
individual differences in reward- and associative memory-based decision-making.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26045569  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


63. Behav Brain Res. 2015 Sep 15;291:399-406. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.05.047. Epub
2015 May 29.

Lithium chloride administration prevents spatial learning and memory impairment
in repeated cerebral ischemia-reperfusion mice by depressing apoptosis and
increasing BDNF expression in hippocampus.

Fan M(1), Jin W(2), Zhao H(3), Xiao Y(1), Jia Y(2), Yin Y(4), Jiang X(2), Xu
J(2), Meng N(2), Lv P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang 050017, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Hebei General Hospital, Shijiazhuang 050051, China.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Shijiazhuang Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital,
The Fourth Hospital of Shijiazhuang, Shijiazhuang 050011, China. (4)Department of
Rehabilitation, Hebei General Hospital, Shijiazhuang 050051, China. (5)Department
of Neurology, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang 050017, China; Department of
Neurology, Hebei General Hospital, Shijiazhuang 050051, China. Electronic
address: peiyuanlu@163.com.

Lithium has been reported to have neuroprotective effects, but the preventive and
treated role on cognition impairment and the underlying mechanisms have not been 
determined. In the present study, C57Bl/6 mice were subjected to repeated
bilateral common carotid artery occlusion to induce the learning and memory
deficits. 2 mmol/kg or 5 mmol/kg of lithium chloride (LiCl) was injected
intraperitoneally per day before (for 7 days) or post (for 28 days) the
operation. This repeated cerebral ischemia-reperfusion (IR) induced dynamic
overexpression of ratio of Bcl-2/Bax and BDNF in hippocampus of mice. LiCl
pretreatment and treatment significantly decreased the escape latency and
increased the percentage of time that the mice spent in the target quadrant in
Morris water maze. 2 mmol/kg LiCl evidently reversed the morphologic changes,
up-regulated the survival neuron count and increased the BDNF gene and protein
expression. 5 mmol/kg pre-LiCl significantly increased IR-stimulated reduce of
Bcl-2/Bax and p-CREB/CREB. These results described suggest that pre-Li and Li
treatment may induce a pronounced prevention on cognitive impairment. These
effects may relay on the inhibition of apoptosis and increasing BDNF and p-CREB
expression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26031381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Endocrinol. 2015 Jun;225(3):205-17. doi: 10.1530/JOE-14-0648.

Glucagon induces airway smooth muscle relaxation by nitric oxide and
prostaglandin E2.

Insuela DB(1), Daleprane JB(1), Coelho LP(1), Silva AR(1), e Silva PM(1), Martins
MA(1), Carvalho VF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Inflamação Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz,
Avenida Brasil, n° 4365, Manguinhos, CEP 21040-360 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Instituto de Nutrição Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, São Francisco
Xavier, n° 524, CEP 20559-900 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Laboratório de
Imunofarmacologia Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Avenida Brasil, 
n° 4365, Manguinhos, CEP 21040-360 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. (2)Laboratório de
Inflamação Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Avenida Brasil, n°
4365, Manguinhos, CEP 21040-360 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Instituto de Nutrição
Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, São Francisco Xavier, n° 524, CEP
20559-900 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Laboratório de Imunofarmacologia Instituto
Oswaldo Cruz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Avenida Brasil, n° 4365, Manguinhos, CEP
21040-360 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil vfrias@ioc.fiocruz.br.

Glucagon is a hyperglycemic pancreatic hormone that has been shown to provide a
beneficial effect against asthmatic bronchospasm. We investigated the role of
this hormone on airway smooth muscle contraction and lung inflammation using both
in vitro and in vivo approaches. The action of glucagon on mouse cholinergic
tracheal contraction was studied in a conventional organ bath system, and its
effect on airway obstruction was also investigated using the whole-body
pletysmographic technique in mice. We also tested the effect of glucagon on
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced airway hyperreactivity (AHR) and inflammation.
The expression of glucagon receptor (GcgR), CREB, phospho-CREB, nitric oxide
synthase (NOS)-3, pNOS-3 and cyclooxygenase (COX)-1 was evaluated by western
blot, while prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and tumour necrosis factor-a were quantified 
by enzyme-linked immunoassay and ELISA respectively. Glucagon partially inhibited
carbachol-induced tracheal contraction in a mechanism clearly sensitive to
des-His1-[Glu9]-glucagon amide, a GcgR antagonist. Remarkably, GcgR was more
expressed in the lung and trachea with intact epithelium than in the
epithelium-denuded trachea. In addition, the glucagon-mediated impairment of
carbachol-induced contraction was prevented by either removing epithelial cells
or blocking NOS (L-NAME), COX (indomethacin) or COX-1 (SC-560). In contrast,
inhibitors of either heme oxygenase or COX-2 were inactive. Intranasal
instillation of glucagon inhibited methacholine-induced airway obstruction by a
mechanism sensitive to pretreatment with L-NAME, indomethacin and SC-560.
Glucagon induced CREB and NOS-3 phosphorylation and increased PGE2 levels in the 
lung tissue without altering COX-1 expression. Glucagon also inhibited
LPS-induced AHR and bronchoalveolar inflammation. These findings suggest that
glucagon possesses airway-relaxing properties that are mediated by
epithelium-NOS-3-NO- and COX-1-PGE2-dependent mechanisms.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 26021821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Neurochem. 2015 Aug;134(4):677-92. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13176. Epub 2015 Jun 19.

The mitochondrial uncoupler DNP triggers brain cell mTOR signaling network
reprogramming and CREB pathway up-regulation.

Liu D(1), Zhang Y(2), Gharavi R(1), Park HR(3), Lee J(3), Siddiqui S(1),
Telljohann R(1), Nassar MR(1), Cutler RG(1), Becker KG(2), Mattson MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging Intramural Research
Program, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (2)Gene Expression and Genomics Unit, National
Institute on Aging Intramural Research Program, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Molecular Inflammation Research
Center for Aging Intervention, Pusan National University, Busan, Korea.

Mitochondrial metabolism is highly responsive to nutrient availability and
ongoing activity in neuronal circuits. The molecular mechanisms by which brain
cells respond to an increase in cellular energy expenditure are largely unknown. 
Mild mitochondrial uncoupling enhances cellular energy expenditure in
mitochondria and can be induced with 2,4-dinitrophenol (DNP), a proton ionophore 
previously used for weight loss. We found that DNP treatment reduces
mitochondrial membrane potential, increases intracellular Ca(2+) levels and
reduces oxidative stress in cerebral cortical neurons. Gene expression profiling 
of the cerebral cortex of DNP-treated mice revealed reprogramming of signaling
cascades that included suppression of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
and insulin--PI3K - MAPK pathways, and up-regulation of tuberous sclerosis
complex 2, a negative regulator of mTOR. Genes encoding proteins involved in
autophagy processes were up-regulated in response to DNP. CREB (cAMP-response
element-binding protein) signaling, Arc and brain-derived neurotrophic factor,
which play important roles in synaptic plasticity and adaptive cellular stress
responses, were up-regulated in response to DNP, and DNP-treated mice exhibited
improved performance in a test of learning and memory. Immunoblot analysis
verified that key DNP-induced changes in gene expression resulted in
corresponding changes at the protein level. Our findings suggest that mild
mitochondrial uncoupling triggers an integrated signaling response in brain cells
characterized by reprogramming of mTOR and insulin signaling, and up-regulation
of pathways involved in adaptive stress responses, molecular waste disposal, and 
synaptic plasticity. Physiological bioenergetic challenges such as exercise and
fasting can enhance neuroplasticity and protect neurons against injury and
neurodegeneration. Here, we show that the mitochondrial uncoupling agent
2,4-dinitrophenol (DNP) elicits adaptive signaling responses in the cerebral
cortex involving activation of Ca(2+) -CREB and autophagy pathways, and
inhibition of mTOR and insulin signaling pathways. The molecular reprogramming
induced by DNP, which is similar to that of exercise and fasting, is associated
with improved learning and memory, suggesting potential therapeutic applications 
for DNP.

© 2015 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMCID: PMC4516713 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26010875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Cell Rep. 2015 Jun 9;11(9):1350-7. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.04.052. Epub 2015
May 21.

The CREB Coactivator CRTC2 Is a Lymphoma Tumor Suppressor that Preserves Genome
Integrity through Transcription of DNA Mismatch Repair Genes.

Fang M(1), Pak ML(1), Chamberlain L(1), Xing W(2), Yu H(2), Green MR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular, Cell and Cancer
Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, UMass Memorial Medical Center and University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. (3)Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, Department of Molecular, Cell and Cancer Biology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. Electronic address:
michael.green@umassmed.edu.

The CREB-regulated transcription coactivator CRTC2 stimulates CREB target gene
expression and has a well-established role in modulating glucose and lipid
metabolism. Here, we find, unexpectedly, that loss of CRTC2, as well as CREB1 and
its coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP), results in a deficiency in DNA
mismatch repair (MMR) and a resultant increased mutation frequency. We show that 
CRTC2, CREB1, and CBP are transcriptional activators of well-established MMR
genes, including EXO1, MSH6, PMS1, and POLD2. Mining of expression profiling
databases and analysis of patient samples reveal that CRTC2 and its target MMR
genes are downregulated in specific T cell lymphoma subtypes, which are
microsatellite unstable. The levels of acetylated histone H3 on the CRTC2
promoter are significantly reduced in lymphoma in comparison to normal tissue,
explaining the decreased CRTC2 expression. Our results establish a role for CRTC2
as a lymphoma tumor suppressor gene that preserves genome integrity by
stimulating transcription of MMR genes.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4464986 [Available on 2016-06-09]
PMID: 26004186  [PubMed - in process]


67. J Neurosci. 2015 May 20;35(20):7927-37. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0548-15.2015.

Opposing role for Egr3 in nucleus accumbens cell subtypes in cocaine action.

Chandra R(1), Francis TC(1), Konkalmatt P(2), Amgalan A(1), Gancarz AM(3), Dietz 
DM(3), Lobo MK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology and. (2)Department of Medicine,
Division of Nephrology, University of Maryland School of Medicine Baltimore,
Maryland 21201, and. (3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, The Research
Institution Addictions, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New
York 14214. (4)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology and
mklobo@som.umaryland.edu.

An imbalance in molecular signaling cascades and transcriptional regulation in
nucleus accumbens (NAc) medium spiny neuron (MSN) subtypes, those enriched in
dopamine D1 versus D2 receptors, is implicated in the behavioral responses to
psychostimulants. To provide further insight into the molecular mechanisms
occurring in MSN subtypes by cocaine, we examined the transcription factor early 
growth response 3 (Egr3). We evaluated Egr3 because it is a target of critical
cocaine-mediated signaling pathways and because Egr3-binding sites are found on
promoters of key cocaine-associated molecules. We first used a RiboTag approach
to obtain ribosome-associated transcriptomes from each MSN subtype and found that
repeated cocaine administration induced Egr3 ribosome-associated mRNA in NAc
D1-MSNs while reducing Egr3 in D2-MSNs. Using Cre-inducible adeno-associated
viruses combined with D1-Cre and D2-Cre mouse lines, we observed that Egr3
overexpression in D1-MSNs enhances rewarding and locomotor responses to cocaine, 
whereas overexpression in D2-MSNs blunts these behaviors. miRNA knock-down of
Egr3 in MSN subtypes produced opposite behavioral responses from those observed
with overexpression. Finally, we found that repeated cocaine administration
altered Egr3 binding to promoters of genes that are important for
cocaine-mediated cellular and behavioral plasticity. Genes with increased Egr3
binding to promoters, Camk2a, CREB, FosB, Nr4a2, and Sirt1, displayed increased
mRNA in D1-MSNs and, in some cases, a reduction in D2-MSNs. Histone and the DNA
methylation enzymes G9a and Dnmt3a displayed reduced Egr3 binding to their
promoters and reduced mRNA in D1-MSNs. Our study provides novel insight into an
opposing role of Egr3 in select NAc MSN subtypes in cocaine action.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/357927-11$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4438133
PMID: 25995477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Behav Brain Res. 2015 Sep 15;291:46-59. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.05.014. Epub 2015
May 17.

Effect of human umbilical cord blood derived lineage negative stem cells
transplanted in amyloid-ß induced cognitive impaired mice.

Banik A(1), Prabhakar S(1), Kalra J(2), Anand A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Lab, Department of Neurology, Postgraduate Institute of 
Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India. (2)Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research,
Chandigarh, India. (3)Neuroscience Research Lab, Department of Neurology,
Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India.
Electronic address: akshay1anand@rediffmail.com.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is pathologically characterized by extracellular
deposition of insoluble amyloid-ß (Aß) plaques and intracellular tangles made up 
of phosphorylated tau in brain. Several therapeutic approaches are being carried 
out in animal AD models for testing their safety and efficacy in altering disease
pathology and behavioral deficits. Very few studies have examined the effect of
human umbilical cord blood (hUCB) derived stem cells in degenerative disease
models despite growing number of cord blood banks worldwide. Here we have
examined the therapeutic efficacy of hUCB derived lineage negative (Lin -ve) stem
cells in alleviating behavioral and neuropathological deficits in a mouse model
of cognitive impairment induced by bilateral intrahippocampal injection of Aß-42.
Lin -ve cells were transplanted at two doses (50,000 and 100,000) at the site of 
injury and examined at 10 and 60 days post transplantation for rescue of memory
deficits. These cells were found to ameliorate cognitive impairment in 50,000-60 
days and 100,000-10 days groups whereas, 50,000-10 days and 100,000-60 days
groups could not exert any significant improvement. Further, mice showing spatial
memory improvement were mediated by up-regulation of BDNF, CREB and also by
concomitant down regulation of Fas-L in their brain. The transplanted cells were 
found in the host tissue and survived up to 60 days without expressing markers of
neuronal differentiation or reducing Aß burden in mouse brain. We suggest that
these undifferentiated cells could exert neuroprotective effects either through
inhibiting apoptosis and/or trophic effects in the brain.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25989508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Oct;1853(10 Pt A):2383-91. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.05.016. Epub 2015 May 16.

Cyclin C interacts with steroid receptor coactivator 2 and upregulates cell cycle
genes in MCF-7 cells.

Bozickovic O(1), Hoang T(2), Fenne IS(3), Helland T(4), Skartveit L(5), Ouchida
M(6), Mellgren G(7), Sagen JV(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen N-5021, Norway;
Hormone Laboratory, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen N-5021, Norway.
Electronic address: Olivera.Bozickovic@uib.no. (2)Department of Clinical Science,
University of Bergen, Bergen N-5021, Norway. Electronic address:
Tuyen.Hoang@uib.no. (3)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen,
Bergen N-5021, Norway; Hormone Laboratory, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen 
N-5021, Norway. Electronic address: fenneingvild@gmail.com. (4)Department of
Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen N-5021, Norway; Hormone
Laboratory, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen N-5021, Norway. Electronic
address: Thomas.Helland@uib.no. (5)Department of Clinical Science, University of 
Bergen, Bergen N-5021, Norway; Hormone Laboratory, Haukeland University Hospital,
Bergen N-5021, Norway. Electronic address: Linn.Skartveit@uib.no. (6)Department
of Molecular Genetics, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry 
and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan. Electronic address:
ouchidam@md.okayama-u.ac.jp. (7)Department of Clinical Science, University of
Bergen, Bergen N-5021, Norway; Hormone Laboratory, Haukeland University Hospital,
Bergen N-5021, Norway. Electronic address: Gunnar.Mellgren@uib.no. (8)Department 
of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen N-5021, Norway; Hormone
Laboratory, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen N-5021, Norway. Electronic
address: Jorn.Sagen@uib.no.

Steroid receptor coactivator 2 (SRC-2) is a coactivator that regulates nuclear
receptor activity. We previously reported that SRC-2 protein is degraded through 
the action of cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) and cAMP response element
binding protein (CREB). In the study presented here, we aimed to identify
proteins that interact with and thereby regulate SRC-2. We isolated cyclin C
(CCNC) as an interacting partner with the SRC-2 degradation domain aa 347-758 in 
a yeast two-hybrid assay and confirmed direct interaction in an in vitro assay.
The protein level of SRC-2 was increased with CCNC overexpression in COS-1 cells 
and decreased with CCNC silencing in COS-1 and MCF-7 cells. In a pulse-chase
assay, we further show that silencing of CCNC resulted in a different SRC-2
degradation pattern during the first 6 h after the pulse. Finally, we provide
evidence that CCNC regulates expression of cell cycle genes upregulated by SRC-2.
In conclusion, our results suggest that CCNC temporarily protects SRC-2 against
degradation and this event is involved in the transcriptional regulation of SRC-2
cell cycle target genes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25986860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Sci Rep. 2015 May 14;5:9651. doi: 10.1038/srep09651.

Hippocampal memory enhancing activity of pine needle extract against
scopolamine-induced amnesia in a mouse model.

Lee JS(1), Kim HG(1), Lee HW(2), Han JM(1), Lee SK(3), Kim DW(4), Saravanakumar
A(1), Son CG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Liver and Immunology Research Center, Oriental Medical College of Daejeon
University, 22-5 Daehung-dong, Jung-gu, Daejeon, 301-724, Republic of Korea.
(2)TKM-based Herbal Drug Research Group, Korea Institute of Oriental Medicine,
Daejeon 305-811, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Applied Chemistry, Oriental 
Medicine College of Daejeon University, 62, Daehak-ro, Dong-gu, Daejeon, 300-716,
Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Anatomy, Brain Research Institute, Chungnam
National University School of Medicine, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

We evaluated the neuropharmacological effects of 30% ethanolic pine needle
extract (PNE) on memory impairment caused by scopolamine injection in mice
hippocampus. Mice were orally pretreated with PNE (25, 50, and 100 mg/kg) or
tacrine (10 mg/kg) for 7 days, and scopolamine (2 mg/kg) was injected
intraperitoneally, 30 min before the Morris water maze task on first day. To
evaluate memory function, the Morris water maze task was performed for 5 days
consecutively. Scopolamine increased the escape latency and cumulative
path-length but decreases the time spent in target quadrant, which were
ameliorated by pretreatment with PNE. Oxidant-antioxidant balance,
acetylcholinesterase activity, neurogenesis and their connecting pathway were
abnormally altered by scopolamine in hippocampus and/or sera, while those
alterations were recovered by pretreatment with PNE. As lipid peroxidation,
4HNE-positive stained cells were ameliorated in hippocampus pretreated with PNE. 
Pretreatment with PNE increased the proliferating cells and immature neurons
against hippocampal neurogenesis suppressed by scopolamine, which was confirmed
by ki67- and DCX-positive stained cells. The expression of brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and phosphorylated cAMP response element-binding
protein (pCREB) in both protein and gene were facilitated by PNE pretreatment.
These findings suggest that PNE could be a potent neuropharmacological drug
against amnesia, and its possible mechanism might be modulating cholinergic
activity via CREB-BDNF pathway.

PMCID: PMC4431316
PMID: 25974329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Int J Toxicol. 2015 May-Jun;34(3):274-83. doi: 10.1177/1091581815584165. Epub
2015 May 13.

Beneficial Effect of Flavone Derivatives on Aß-Induced Memory Deficit Is Mediated
by Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor <U+03B3> Coactivator 1a: A Comparative
Study.

Arsalandeh F(1), Ahmadian S(1), Foolad F(2), Khodagholi F(2), Farimani MM(3),
Shaerzadeh F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran. 
(2)NeuroBiology Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran. (3)Department of Phytochemistry, Medicinal Plants and Drugs
Research Institute, Shahid Beheshti University, G. C., Evin, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Neurophysiology Research
Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
fatima.shaerzadeh@gmail.com.

In the present study, the neuroprotective effect of
5-hydroxy-6,7,4'-trimethoxyflavone (flavone 1), a natural flavone, was
investigated in comparison with another flavone, 5,7,4'-trihydroxyflavone
(flavone 2) on the hippocampus of amyloid beta (Aß)-injected rats. Rats were
treated with the 2 flavones (1 mg/kg/d) for 1 week before Aß injection. Seven
days after Aß administration, memory function of rats was assessed in a passive
avoidance test (PAT). Changes in the levels of mitochondrial transcription factor
A (TFAM), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator 1 a (PGC-1a), 
phospho-adenosine monophosphate (AMP)-activated protein kinase (pAMPK), AMPK,
phospho-cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB), CREB, and nuclear
respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1) proteins were determined by Western blot analysis.
Our results showed an improvement in memory in rats pretreated with flavonoids.
At the molecular level, phosphorylation of CREB, known as the master modulator of
memory processes, increased. On the other hand, the level of mitochondrial
biogenesis factors, PGC-1a and its downstream molecules NRF-1 and TFAM
significantly increased by dietary administration of 2 flavones. In addition,
flavone 1 and flavone 2 prevented mitochondrial swelling and mitochondrial
membrane potential reduction. Our results provided evidence that flavone 1 is
more effective than flavone 2 presumably due to its O-methylated groups. In
conclusion, it seems that in addition to classical antioxidant effect, flavones
exert part of their protective effects through mitochondrial biogenesis.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25972379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Oncotarget. 2015 Jun 20;6(17):15628-38.

Ccdc6 knock-in mice develop thyroid hyperplasia associated to an enhanced CREB1
activity.

Leone V(1), Langella C(1), Esposito F(1), Arra C(2), Palma G(2), Rea D(2),
Paciello O(3), Merolla F(1), De Biase D(3), Papparella S(3), Celetti A(1), Fusco 
A(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto per l'Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR e/o
Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università degli
Studi di Napoli "Federico II", Naples, Italy. (2)Istituto Nazionale per lo Studio
e la Cura dei Tumori "Fondazione Giovanni Pascale", IRCCS, Naples, Italy.
(3)Department of Pathology and Animal Health, University of Naples "Federico II",
Naples, Italy. (4)Instituto Nacional de Câncer - INCA, Rua André Cavalcanti, Rio 
de Janeiro, CEP RJ, Brazil.

CCDC6 was originally identified upon rearrangement with RET in human thyroid
papillary carcinomas generating the RET/PTC1 oncogene. We have previously
reported that CCDC6 interacts with CREB1 and represses its transcriptional
activity. Since the function of at least one allele of CCDC6 is lost following
RET/PTC1 rearrangements, we aimed at the generation of mice, carrying a CCDC6
mutant gene. Previous studies suggested that the coiled-coil domain of CCDC6,
mainly encoded by human exon 2, is required for the protein function. Therefore, 
we engineered a murine Ccdc6 construct, carrying a deletion of the exon 2, that
was able to exert only a mild repression on CREB1 transcriptional activity, with 
respect to the wild type Ccdc6. Subsequently, we generated Ccdc6-ex2 knock-in
mice. These mice developed thyroid hyperplasia associated with an enhanced CREB1 
activity and an increased expression of the CREB-1 regulated genes. These results
strongly support a CCDC6 promoting role, ascribed to its functional impairment,
in the development of thyroid papillary carcinomas harboring the RET/PTC1
oncogene.

PMCID: PMC4558175
PMID: 25970781  [PubMed - in process]


73. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2015 Jun 1;20:1047-55.

Expression of AQP3 protein in hAECs is regulated by Camp-PKA-CREB signalling
pathway.

Hua Y, Ding S(1), Zhang W, Zhou Q, Ye W, Chen M, Zhu X(2).

Author information: 
(1)fbs. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the Second Affiliated
Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, 325027, China,
zjwzzxq@yeah.net.

Previous studies by others and our group have demonstrated the expression of AQP3
protein in human chorioamniotic membranes. Here, we investigated whether cyclic
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) up-regulation of aquaporin 3 (AQP3) protein
expression in human amniotic epithelial cells (hAECs) is mediated by protein
kinase A (PKA) dependent or independent pathway. Cells were treated with various 
concentrations of Forskolin, SP-cAMP, H-89 at various time intervals or optimal
concentration of Forskolin in combination with H-89 in the blocking experiments. 
Forskolin significantly increased cAMP levels and the expression of PKA, p-CREB
and AQP3. SP-cAMP had similar effects. H-89 inhibited PKA, p-CREB and AQP3
protein expression, and attenuated the stimulatory effect of Forskolin. These
results show that the AQP3 protein expression in hAECs was regulated by
cAMP-PKA-CREB signal pathway. A relatively short biological half life of AQP3
renders its rapid responsiveness to regulation.

PMID: 25961543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 20;6(11):9220-39.

The cAMP responsive element binding protein 1 transactivates epithelial membrane 
protein 2, a potential tumor suppressor in the urinary bladder urothelial
carcinoma.

Li CF(1,)(2,)(3), Wu WJ(4,)(5,)(6,)(7), Wu WR(8), Liao YJ(9), Chen LR(3,)(9),
Huang CN(6,)(7,)(8), Li CC(6,)(7,)(10), Li WM(4,)(5,)(7,)(11), Huang HY(12), Chen
YL(8), Liang SS(8,)(13), Chow NH(14,)(15), Shiue YL(8,)(16,)(17).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Chi Mei Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan. (2)National
Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes, Tainan,
Taiwan. (3)Department of Biotechnology, Southern Taiwan University of Science and
Technology, Tainan, Taiwan. (4)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of
Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (5)Department of
Urology, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (6)Department of Urology, Kaohsiung Medical University
Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (7)Department of Urology, Kaohsiung Municipal
Hsiao-Kang Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (8)Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (9)Division of Physiology,
Livestock Research Institute, Tainan, Taiwan. (10)Department of Urology,
Kaohsiung Municipal Ta-Tung Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (11)Department of
Urology, Ministry of Health and Welfare Pingtung Hospital, Pingtung, Taiwan.
(12)Department of Pathology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical
Center, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(13)Department of Biotechnology, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(14)Department of Pathology, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, Tainan,
Taiwan. (15)Institute of Basic Medical Science, College of Medicine, National
Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. (16)Department of Biological Sciences,
National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (17)Doctoral Degree Program
in Marine Biotechnology, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

In this study, we report that EMP2 plays a tumor suppressor role by inducing G2/M
cell cycle arrest, suppressing cell viability, proliferation, colony
formation/anchorage-independent cell growth via regulation of G2/M checkpoints in
distinct urinary bladder urothelial carcinoma (UBUC)-derived cell lines.
Genistein treatment or exogenous expression of the cAMP responsive element
binding protein 1 (CREB1) gene in different UBUC-derived cell lines induced EMP2 
transcription and subsequent translation. Mutagenesis on either or both
cAMP-responsive element(s) dramatically decreased the EMP2 promoter activity
with, without genistein treatment or exogenous CREB1 expression, respectively.
Significantly correlation between the EMP2 immunointensity and primary tumor,
nodal status, histological grade, vascular invasion and mitotic activity was
identified. Multivariate analysis further demonstrated that low EMP2
immunoexpression is an independent prognostic factor for poor disease-specific
survival. Genistein treatments, knockdown of EMP2 gene and double knockdown of
CREB1 and EMP2 genes significantly inhibited tumor growth and notably
downregulated CREB1 and EMP2 protein levels in the mice xenograft models.
Therefore, genistein induced CREB1 transcription, translation and upregulated
pCREB1(S133) protein level. Afterward, pCREB1(S133) transactivated the tumor
suppressor gene, EMP2, in vitro and in vivo. Our study identified a novel
transcriptional target, which plays a tumor suppressor role, of CREB1.

PMCID: PMC4496213
PMID: 25940704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Jul;64:239-51. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2015.04.006.
Epub 2015 Apr 30.

An essential role of cAMP response element-binding protein in epidermal growth
factor-mediated induction of sodium/glucose cotransporter 1 gene expression and
intestinal glucose uptake.

Wang CW(1), Chang WL(2), Huang YC(3), Chou FC(4), Chan FN(4), Su SC(4), Huang
SF(4), Ko HH(5), Ko YL(5), Lin HC(2), Chang TC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan, ROC. (2)School of Pharmacy, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei,
Taiwan, ROC. (3)Institute of Preventive Medicine, National Defense Medical
Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. (4)Department of Biochemistry, National Defense
Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. (5)School of Medicine, National Defense
Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. (6)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences,
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC; Department of Biochemistry,
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC; Graduate Institute of Basic
Medical Science, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC. Electronic
address: tcchang@ndmctsgh.edu.tw.

The sodium/glucose cotransporter 1 (SGLT1) is responsible for glucose uptake in
intestinal epithelial cells. Its expression is decreased in individuals with
intestinal inflammatory disorders and is correlated with the pathogenesis of
disease. The aim of this study was to understand the regulatory mechanism of the 
SGLT1 gene. Using the trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid-induced mouse models of
intestinal inflammation, we observed decreased SGLT1 expression in the inflamed
intestine was positively correlated with the mucosal level of epidermal growth
factor (EGF) and activated CREB. Overexpression of EGF demonstrated that the
effect of EGF on intestinal glucose uptake was primarily due to the increased
level of SGLT1. We identified an essential cAMP binding element (CRE) confers EGF
inducibility in the human SGLT1 gene promoter. ChIP assay further demonstrated
the increased binding of CREB and CBP to the SGLT1 gene promoter in EGF-treated
cells. In addition, the EGFR- and PI3K-dependent CREB phosphorylations are
involved in the EGF-mediated SGLT1 expression. This is the first report to
demonstrate that CREB is involved in EGF-mediated transcription regulation of
SGLT1 gene in the normal and inflamed intestine, which can provide potential
therapeutic applications for intestinal inflammatory disorders.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25936754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2015 May;139(5):674-82. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2014-0234-RA.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma: the current status of pathology and genetics.

Thway K(1), Fisher C.

Author information: 
(1)From the Sarcoma Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, England.

CONTEXT: Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is a rare soft tissue neoplasm of
intermediate biologic potential and uncertain differentiation, most often arising
in the superficial extremities of children and young adults. While it has
characteristic histologic features of nodular distributions of ovoid and spindle 
cells with blood-filled cystic cavities and a surrounding dense lymphoplasmacytic
infiltrate, there is a significant morphologic spectrum, which coupled with its
rarity and lack of specific immunoprofile can make diagnosis challenging.
Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma is associated with 3 characteristic gene
fusions, EWSR1-CREB1 and EWSR1-ATF1, which are also described in other neoplasms,
and rarely FUS-ATF1. Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma is now recognized at an
increasing number of sites and is known to display a variety of unusual
histologic features.
OBJECTIVE: To review the current status of AFH, discussing putative etiology,
histopathology with variant morphology and differential diagnosis, and current
genetics, including overlap with other tumors harboring EWSR1-CREB1 and
EWSR1-ATF1 fusions.
DATA SOURCES: Review of published literature, including case series, case
reports, and review articles, in online medical databases.
CONCLUSIONS: The occurrence of AFH at several unusual anatomic sites and its
spectrum of morphologic patterns can result in significant diagnostic difficulty,
and correct diagnosis is particularly important because of its small risk of
metastasis and death. This highlights the importance of diagnostic recognition,
ancillary molecular genetic confirmation, and close clinical follow-up of
patients with AFH. Further insight into the genetic and epigenetic changes
arising secondary to the characteristic gene fusions of AFH will be integral to
understanding its tumorigenic mechanisms.

PMID: 25927151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. BMC Res Notes. 2015 Apr 30;8:177. doi: 10.1186/s13104-015-1136-6.

Transcriptional profiling of PRKG2-null growth plate identifies putative
down-stream targets of PRKG2.

Koltes JE(1), Kumar D(2,)(3), Kataria RS(4), Cooper V(5), Reecy JM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, 2255 Kildee Hall, Ames,
IA, 50011, USA. jekoltes@iastate.edu. (2)National Bureau of Animal Genetic
Resources, Karnal, 132001, Haryana, India. dineshkumarbhu@gmail.com. (3)Current
address: Centre for Agricultural Bioinformatics, Indian Agricultural Statistics
Research Institute, Library Avenue, PUSA, New Delhi, 110012, India.
dineshkumarbhu@gmail.com. (4)National Bureau of Animal Genetic Resources, Karnal,
132001, Haryana, India. katariaranji@yahoo.co.in. (5)Veterinary Diagnostics and
Production Animal Medicine, Iowa State University College of Veterinary Medicine,
Ames, IA, 50011-3150, USA. vcooper@iastate.edu. (6)Department of Animal Science, 
Iowa State University, 2255 Kildee Hall, Ames, IA, 50011, USA.
jreecy@iastate.edu.

BACKGROUND: Kinase activity of cGMP-dependent, type II, protein kinase (PRKG2) is
required for the proliferative to hypertrophic transition of growth plate
chondrocytes during endochondral ossification. Loss of PRKG2 function in rodent
and bovine models results in dwarfism. The objective of this study was to
identify pathways regulated or impacted by PRKG2 loss of function that may be
responsible for disproportionate dwarfism at the molecular level.
METHODS: Microarray technology was used to compare growth plate cartilage gene
expression in dwarf versus unaffected Angus cattle to identify putative
downstream targets of PRGK2.
RESULTS: Pathway enrichment of 1284 transcripts (nominal p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) was used to
identify candidate pathways consistent with the molecular phenotype of
disproportionate dwarfism. Analysis with the DAVID pathway suite identified
differentially expressed genes that clustered in the MHC, cytochrome B, WNT, and 
Muc1 pathways. A second analysis with pathway studio software identified
differentially expressed genes in a host of pathways (e.g. CREB1, P21, CTNNB1,
EGFR, EP300, JUN, P53, RHOA, and SRC). As a proof of concept, we validated the
differential expression of five genes regulated by P53, including CEBPA, BRCA1,
BUB1, CD58, and VDR by real-time PCR (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Known and novel targets of PRKG2 were identified as enriched
pathways in this study. This study indicates that loss of PRKG2 function results 
in differential expression of P53 regulated genes as well as additional pathways 
consistent with increased proliferation and apoptosis in the growth plate due to 
achondroplastic dwarfism.

PMCID: PMC4419418
PMID: 25924610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Nat Cell Biol. 2015 May;17(5):665-77. doi: 10.1038/ncb3158. Epub 2015 Apr 27.

The ITIM-containing receptor LAIR1 is essential for acute myeloid leukaemia
development.

Kang X(1), Lu Z(1), Cui C(2), Deng M(1), Fan Y(1), Dong B(3), Han X(4), Xie F(5),
Tyner JW(6), Coligan JE(7), Collins RH(8), Xiao X(5), You MJ(9), Zhang CC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Physiology and Developmental Biology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA. (2)1] Departments of
Physiology and Developmental Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA [2] School of Life Science and Medicine, Dalian 
University of Technology, Panjin, Liaoning 124221, China. (3)Department of
Hematopathology, Division of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030-4009, USA. (4)Department of
Laboratory Medicine, Division of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030-4009, USA. (5)Department of
Physiology and Pharmacology, Oregon Health and Science University Knight Cancer
Institute, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA. (6)Cell and Developmental Biology,
Oregon Health and Science University Knight Cancer Institute, Portland, Oregon
97239, USA. (7)Receptor Cell Biology Section, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, NIH, Rockville, Maryland 20852, USA. (8)Internal Medicine,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA. (9)1] 
Department of Hematopathology, Division of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030-4009, USA [2]
The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences at Houston,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Conventional strategies are not particularly successful in the treatment of
leukaemia, and identification of signalling pathways crucial to the activity of
leukaemia stem cells will provide targets for the development of new therapies.
Here we report that certain receptors containing the immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based inhibition motif (ITIM) are crucial for the development of acute
myeloid leukaemia (AML). Inhibition of expression of the ITIM-containing receptor
LAIR1 does not affect normal haematopoiesis but abolishes leukaemia development. 
LAIR1 induces activation of SHP-1, which acts as a phosphatase-independent
signalling adaptor to recruit CAMK1 for activation of downstream CREB in AML
cells. The LAIR1-SHP-1-CAMK1-CREB pathway sustains the survival and self-renewal 
of AML stem cells. Intervention in the signalling initiated by ITIM-containing
receptors such as LAIR1 may result in successful treatment of AML.

PMCID: PMC4417000
PMID: 25915125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2015 Apr 22;12(4):4406-21. doi:
10.3390/ijerph120404406.

Early exposure to intermediate-frequency magnetic fields alters brain biomarkers 
without histopathological changes in adult mice.

Win-Shwe TT(1), Ohtani S(2), Ushiyama A(3), Kunugita N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Health Sciences, National Institute for Environmental
Studies, 16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8506, Japan.
tin.tin.win.shwe@nies.go.jp. (2)Department of Environmental Health, National
Institute of Public Health, 2-3-6 Minami, Wako City, Saitama 351-0197, Japan.
ohtani@niph.go.jp. (3)Department of Environmental Health, National Institute of
Public Health, 2-3-6 Minami, Wako City, Saitama 351-0197, Japan.
ushiyama@niph.go.jp. (4)Department of Environmental Health, National Institute of
Public Health, 2-3-6 Minami, Wako City, Saitama 351-0197, Japan.
kunugita@niph.go.jp.

Recently we have reported that intermediate-frequency magnetic field (IF-MF)
exposure transiently altered the mRNA expression levels of memory
function-related genes in the hippocampi of adult male mice. However, the effects
of IF-MF exposure during brain development on neurological biomarkers have not
yet been clarified. In the present study, we investigated the effect of IF-MF
exposure during development on neurological and immunological markers in the
mouse hippocampus in 3- and 7-week-old male mice. Pregnant C57BL/6J mice were
exposed to IF-MF (21 kHz, 3.8 mT) for one hour per day from organogenesis period 
day 7 to 17. At adolescence, some IF-MF-exposed mice were further divided into
exposure, recovery, and sham-exposure groups. The adolescent-exposure groups were
exposed again to IF-MF from postnatal day 27 to 48. The expression of mRNA in the
hippocampi was examined using a real-time RT-PCR method, and microglia activation
was examined by immunohistochemical analysis. The expression levels of NR1 and
NR2B as well as transcription factors (CaMKIV, CREB1), inflammatory mediators
(COX2, IL-1 b,TNF-a), and the oxidative stress marker heme-oxygenase (HO)-1 were 
significantly increased in the IF-MF-exposed mice, compared with the control
group, in the 7-week-old mice, but not in the 3-week-old mice. Microglia
activation was not different between the control and other groups. This study
provides the first evidence that early exposure to IF-MF reversibly affects the
NMDA receptor, its related signaling pathways, and inflammatory mediators in the 
hippocampus of young adult mice; these changes are transient and recover after
termination of exposure without histopathological changes.

PMCID: PMC4410255
PMID: 25913185  [PubMed - in process]


80. Cell Signal. 2015 Aug;27(8):1609-29. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.04.006. Epub
2015 Apr 21.

Trazodone treatment protects neuronal-like cells from inflammatory insult by
inhibiting NF-<U+03BA>B, p38 and JNK.

Daniele S(1), Da Pozzo E(1), Zappelli E(1), Martini C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, University of Pisa, Italy. (2)Department of Pharmacy, 
University of Pisa, Italy. Electronic address: claudia.martini@unipi.it.

Growing evidence suggests that alterations of the inflammatory/immune system
contribute to the pathogenesis of major depression and that inflammatory
processes may influence the antidepressant treatment response. Depressed patients
exhibit increased levels of inflammatory markers in both the periphery and brain,
and high co-morbidity exists between depression and diseases associated with
inflammatory alterations. Trazodone (TDZ) is a triazolopyridine derivative that
belongs to the class of serotonin receptor antagonists and reuptake inhibitors.
Although the trophic and protective properties of classic antidepressants have
extensively been exploited, the effects of TDZ remain to be fully elucidated. In 
this study, the pharmacological activities of TDZ on human neuronal-like cells
were investigated under both physiological and inflammatory conditions. An in
vitro inflammatory model was established using lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and
tumour necrosis factor-a (TNF-a), which efficiently mimic the stress-related
changes in neurotrophic and pro-inflammatory genes. Our results showed that TDZ
significantly increased the mRNA expression of both brain-derived nerve factor
(BDNF) and cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) and decreased the
cellular release of the pro-inflammatory cytokine interferon gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>) in
neuronal-like cells. In contrast, neuronal cell treatment with LPS and TNF-a
decreased the expression of CREB and BDNF and increased the expression of nuclear
factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B), a primary transcription factor that functions in
inflammatory response initiation. Moreover, the two agents induced the release of
pro-inflammatory cytokines (i.e., interleukin-6 and IFN-<U+03B3>) and decreased the
production of the anti-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-10. TDZ pre-treatment
completely reversed the decrease in cell viability and counteracted the decrease 
in BDNF and CREB expression mediated by LPS-TNF-a. In addition, the production of
inflammatory mediators was inhibited, and the release of interleukin-10 was
restored to control levels. Furthermore, the intracellular signalling mechanism
regulating TDZ-elicited effects was specifically investigated. TDZ induced
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) phosphorylation and inhibited
constitutive p38 activation. Moreover, TDZ counteracted the activation of p38 and
c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) elicited by LPS-TNF-a, suggesting that the
neuro-protective role of TDZ could be mediated by p38 and JNK. Overall, our
results demonstrated that the protective effects of TDZ under inflammation in
neuronal-like cells function by decreasing pro-inflammatory signalling and by
enhancing anti-inflammatory signalling.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25911310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Apr 20;16(4):8772-88. doi: 10.3390/ijms16048772.

Melanogenesis-inducing effect of cirsimaritin through increases in
microphthalmia-associated transcription factor and tyrosinase expression.

Kim HJ(1), Kim IS(2), Dong Y(3), Lee IS(4), Kim JS(5), Kim JS(6), Woo JT(7,)(8), 
Cha BY(9).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Biological Functions, Chubu University, 1200 Matsumoto,
Kasugai, Aichi 487-8501, Japan. indersee@gmail.com. (2)KM Convergence Research
Division, Korea Institute of Oriental Medicine, Daejeon 305-811, Korea.
kisfriend@kiom.re.kr. (3)Research Institute for Biological Functions, Chubu
University, 1200 Matsumoto, Kasugai, Aichi 487-8501, Japan.
dongyinsoul@gmail.com. (4)KM Convergence Research Division, Korea Institute of
Oriental Medicine, Daejeon 305-811, Korea. knifer48@kiom.re.kr. (5)KM Convergence
Research Division, Korea Institute of Oriental Medicine, Daejeon 305-811, Korea. 
jskim@kiom.re.kr. (6)School of Food Science and Biotechnology, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu 702-701, Korea. vision@knu.ac.kr. (7)Research Institute for
Biological Functions, Chubu University, 1200 Matsumoto, Kasugai, Aichi 487-8501, 
Japan. jwoo@erina.co.jp. (8)Department of Research and Development, Erina Co.,
Inc., 1-9-2 Hagashi-Shinbashi, Minato-ku, Tokyo 105-0021, Japan.
jwoo@erina.co.jp. (9)Research Institute for Biological Functions, Chubu
University, 1200 Matsumoto, Kasugai, Aichi 487-8501, Japan.
bycha@isc.chubu.ac.jp.

The melanin-inducing properties of cirsimaritin were investigated in murine
B16F10 cells. Cirsimaritin is an active flavone with methoxy groups, which is
isolated from the branches of Lithocarpus dealbatus. Tyrosinase activity and
melanin content in murine B16F10 melanoma cells were increased by cirsimaritin in
a dose-dependent manner. Western blot analysis revealed that tyrosinase,
tyrosinase-related protein (TRP) 1, TRP2 protein levels were enhanced after
treatment with cirsimaritin for 48 h. Cirsimaritin also upregulated the
expression of microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) after 24 h of
treatment. Furthermore, cirsimaritin induced phosphorylation of cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP) response element-binding protein (CREB) in a dose-dependent 
manner after treatment for 15 min. The cirsimaritin-mediated increase of
tyrosinase activity was significantly attenuated by H89, a cAMP-dependent protein
kinase A inhibitor. These findings indicate that cirsimaritin stimulates
melanogenesis in B16F10 cells by activation of CREB as well as upregulation of
MITF and tyrosinase expression, which was activated by cAMP signaling. Finally,
the melanogenic effect of cirsimaritin was confirmed in human epidermal
melanocytes. These results support the putative application of cirsimaritin in
ultraviolet photoprotection and hair coloration treatments.

PMCID: PMC4425108
PMID: 25903150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Sep;167A(9):2213-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37119. Epub 2015
Apr 21.

Autistic and Rett-like features associated with 2q33.3-q34 interstitial deletion.

Jang DH(1), Chae H(2,)(3), Kim M(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation, Incheon St. Mary's Hospital, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, College 
of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea. (3)Catholic
Laboratory Development and Evaluation Center, College of Medicine, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.

We describe the fourth reported case of a de novo 2q33.3-q34 interstitial
deletion and review the literature in attempt to identify relevant candidate
genes. A 15-month-old female patient presented for evaluation with poor eye
contact and developmental delay. She had microcephaly and mild dysmorphic
features, such as downslanting palpebral fissures, high forehead, small mouth,
high palate, and general hypotonia. At 30 months of age, she was referred to the 
genetic clinic for an evaluation of persistent developmental delay, autistic
traits, and Rett-like features, including bruxism and repetitive movement of the 
left hand. Chromosome analysis revealed 46,XX at the 550 band level. No
abnormalities were found on analysis of MECP2 gene for Rett syndrome and a DNA
methylation test for Prader-Willi syndrome. An array comparative genomic
hybridization analysis revealed a de novo 2q33.3-q34 heterozygous deletion
(206,048,173-211,980,867). The deletion was estimated to be 5.9<U+2009>Mb in size and
contained 34 known genes. Candidate genes were identified as NRP2, ADAM23, KLF7, 
CREB1, MAP2, UNC80, and LANCL1 for the 2q33.3-q34 interstitial deletion.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25899208  [PubMed - in process]


83. Physiol Behav. 2015 Aug 1;147:102-16. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2015.04.029. Epub
2015 Apr 18.

Sex differences in motivational responses to dietary fat in Syrian hamsters.

Shannonhouse JL(1), Grater DM(2), York D(2), Wellman PJ(3), Morgan C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Neuroscience, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843,
United States. (2)Department of Psychiatry, Weill Cornell Medical College, New
York, NY 10021, United States. (3)Department of Psychology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843, United States. (4)Institute for Neuroscience, Texas
A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, United States; Department of
Psychiatry, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10021, United States;
Department of Nutrition & Food Science, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX
77843, United States; Intercollegiate Faculty of Nutrition, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843, United States. Electronic address: camorgan@tamu.edu.

Women are more likely than men to exhibit motivational disorders (e.g., anhedonia
and anxiety) with limited treatment options, and to overconsume high-fat "comfort
foods" to improve motivational disruptions. Unfortunately, neurobiological
underpinnings for sex differences in motivational disruptions and their responses
to dietary fat are poorly understood. To help bridge these fundamental knowledge 
gaps, we assessed behavioral and neurobiological responses to dietary fat in a
hamster model of female-biased motivational lability. Relative to social housing,
social separation reduced hedonic drive in a new behavioral assay, the reward
investigational preference (RIP) test. Fluoxetine or desipramine treatment for
21, but not 7, days improved RIP test performance. Pharmacologic specificity in
this test was shown by non-responsiveness to diazepam, tracazolate, propranolol, 
or naltrexone. In the anxiety-related feeding/exploration conflict (AFEC) test,
social separation worsened latency to eat highly palatable food under anxiogenic 
conditions, but not in home cages. Social separation also reduced weight gain,
food intake, and adiposity while elevating energy expenditure, assessed by
caloric efficiency and indirect calorimetry. Furthermore, chronic high-fat
feeding improved anhedonic and anxious responses to separation, particularly in
females. In the motivation-influencing nucleus accumbens, females, but not males,
exhibited a separation-induced anxiety-related decrease in Creb1 mRNA levels and 
an anhedonia-related decrease in <U+0394>Fosb mRNA levels. Consistent with its
antidepressant- and anxiolytic-like effects on behavior, high-fat feeding
elevated accumbal Creb1 and <U+0394>Fosb mRNA levels in females only. Another accumbal
reward marker, Tlr4 mRNA, was elevated in females by high-fat feeding. These
results show that social separation of hamsters provides a novel model of
sex-dependent comorbid anhedonia, anxiety, and anorexia, and implicate accumbal
CREB, <U+0394>FosB, and TLR4. Moreover, the results validate a new assay for chronic
antidepressant efficacy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4456274 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25896879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Odontology. 2015 Apr 21. [Epub ahead of print]

Insulin-like growth factor-II regulates bone sialoprotein gene transcription.

Choe J(1), Sasaki Y, Zhou L, Takai H, Nakayama Y, Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Chiba, 271-8587, Japan.

Insulin-like growth factor-I and -II (IGF-I and IGF-II) have been found in bone
extracts of several different species, and IGF-II is the most abundant growth
factor stored in bone. Bone sialoprotein (BSP) is a noncollagenous extracellular 
matrix glycoprotein associated with mineralized connective tissues. In this
study, we have investigated the regulation of BSP transcription by IGF-II in rat 
osteoblast-like ROS17/2.8 cells. IGF-II (50 ng/ml) increased BSP mRNA and protein
levels after 6-h stimulation, and enhanced luciferase activities of the
constructs pLUC3 (-116 to +60), pLUC4 (-425 to +60), pLUC5 (-801 to +60) and
pLUC6 (-938 to +60). Effects of IGF-II were inhibited by tyrosine kinase,
extracellular signal-regulated kinase1/2 and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
inhibitors, and abrogated by 2-bp mutations in cAMP response element (CRE), FGF2 
response element (FRE) and homeodomain protein-binding site (HOX). The results of
gel shift assays showed that nuclear proteins binding to CRE, FRE and HOX sites
were increased by IGF-II (50 ng/ml) at 3 and 6 h. CREB1, phospho-CREB1, c-Fos and
c-Jun antibodies disrupted the formation of the CRE-protein complexes. Dlx5 and
Runx2 antibodies disrupted the FRE- and HOX-protein complex formations. These
studies therefore demonstrated that IGF-II increased BSP transcription by
targeting CRE, FRE and HOX elements in the proximal promoter of the rat BSP gene.
Moreover, phospho-CREB1, c-Fos, c-Jun, Dlx5 and Runx2 transcription factors
appear to be key regulators of IGF-II effects on BSP transcription.

PMID: 25895664  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


85. Parasit Vectors. 2015 Apr 1;8:196. doi: 10.1186/s13071-015-0806-5.

Altered levels of circulating miRNAs are associated Schistosoma japonicum
infection in mice.

Zhu L(1), Dao J(2), Du X(3), Li H(4), Lu K(5), Liu J(6), Cheng G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences; Key Laboratory of Animal Parasitology, Ministry of Agriculture, 518
Ziyue Road, Shanghai, China. zhulihui@shvri.ac.cn. (2)Shanghai Veterinary
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences; Key Laboratory of
Animal Parasitology, Ministry of Agriculture, 518 Ziyue Road, Shanghai, China.
khunfa1905@hotmail.com. (3)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences; Key Laboratory of Animal Parasitology, Ministry
of Agriculture, 518 Ziyue Road, Shanghai, China. du_xiaoli_2008@163.com.
(4)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences; Key Laboratory of Animal Parasitology, Ministry of Agriculture, 518
Ziyue Road, Shanghai, China. lihao@shvri.ac.cn. (5)Shanghai Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences; Key Laboratory of Animal
Parasitology, Ministry of Agriculture, 518 Ziyue Road, Shanghai, China.
luke@shvri.ac.cn. (6)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences; Key Laboratory of Animal Parasitology, Ministry of
Agriculture, 518 Ziyue Road, Shanghai, China. jimyliu@shvri.ac.cn. (7)Shanghai
Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences; Key
Laboratory of Animal Parasitology, Ministry of Agriculture, 518 Ziyue Road,
Shanghai, China. cheng_guofeng@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Dioecious flatworms of the genus Schistosoma causes schistosomiasis, 
which is a major public health problem in developing countries. Acquiring
detailed knowledge of schistosome-host interactions may aid in the development of
novel strategies for schistosomiasis control. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are involved in 
processes such as development, cell proliferation, metabolism, and signal
transduction. Circulating miRNAs not only serve as a novel class of biomarkers of
many diseases but also regulate target gene expression in recipient cells, which 
are similar to hormones.
METHODS: In the present study, we used miRNA microarrays to determine the profile
of circulating miRNAs associated with S. japonicum infection of mice. The
biological functions of the altered levels of miRNAs and their target genes were 
predicted using bioinformatics. Expression levels of selected miRNAs and their
target genes were further analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Our study identified 294 and 189 miRNAs in infected mice that were
expressed in two independent experiments at levels<U+2009>=<U+2009>2-fold higher or<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.5-fold 
lower, respectively, compared with uninfected mice. Thirty-six of the same miRNAs
were detected in these analyses. Moreover, pathway analyses indicated that most
of these miRNAs are putatively involved in signaling pathways associated with
pathogenesis, such as Wnt and MAPK signaling. Further, we show an inverse
correlation between the circulating levels of these miRNAs and their target
genes, suggesting that changes in miRNA expression may cause aberrant expression 
of genes such as Creb1 and Caspase-3 in mice infected with S. japonicum.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study shows significant differences in the levels of circulating
miRNAs between S. japonicum infected mice and uninfected mice. In particular, the
altered levels of miR-706 and miR-134-5p were associated with altered levels of
expression of the Caspase-3 and Creb1 genes, respectively, suggesting that
circulating miRNAs may serve as important mediators of the pathology of hepatic
schistosomiasis. Additionally, our results are expected to provide new insights
for further understanding the mechanisms of schistosome-host interaction that may
facilitate in the development of novel interventions for alleviating the symptom 
of S. japonicum infection as well as for preventing and treating schistosomiasis.

PMCID: PMC4391475
PMID: 25885182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Cardiovasc Res. 2015 Jun 1;106(3):509-19. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvv131. Epub 2015 Apr 
16.

PKCe-CREB-Nrf2 signalling induces HO-1 in the vascular endothelium and enhances
resistance to inflammation and apoptosis.

Mylroie H(1), Dumont O(1), Bauer A(1), Thornton CC(1), Mackey J(1), Calay D(1),
Hamdulay SS(1), Choo JR(1), Boyle JJ(1), Samarel AM(2), Randi AM(1), Evans PC(3),
Mason JC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Sciences, Imperial Centre for Translational and Experimental
Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, Hammersmith
Hospital, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK. (2)The Cardiovascular Institute,
Loyola University Chicago Stritch School of Medicine, Maywood, IL, USA.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(4)Vascular Sciences, Imperial Centre for Translational and Experimental
Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, Hammersmith
Hospital, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK justin.mason@imperial.ac.uk.

AIMS: Vascular injury leading to endothelial dysfunction is a characteristic
feature of chronic renal disease, diabetes mellitus, and systemic inflammatory
conditions, and predisposes to apoptosis and atherogenesis. Thus, endothelial
dysfunction represents a potential therapeutic target for atherosclerosis
prevention. The observation that activity of either protein kinase C epsilon
(PKCe) or haem oxygenase-1 (HO-1) enhances endothelial cell (EC) resistance to
inflammation and apoptosis led us to test the hypothesis that HO-1 is a
downstream target of PKCe.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Expression of constitutively active PKCe in human EC
significantly increased HO-1 mRNA and protein, whereas conversely aortas or
cardiac EC from PKCe-deficient mice exhibited reduced HO-1 when compared with
wild-type littermates. Angiotensin II activated PKCe and induced HO-1 via a
PKCe-dependent pathway. PKCe activation significantly attenuated TNFa-induced
intercellular adhesion molecule-1, and increased resistance to serum
starvation-induced apoptosis. These responses were reversed by the HO antagonist 
zinc protoporphyrin IX. Phosphokinase antibody array analysis identified
CREB1((Ser133)) phosphorylation as a PKCe signalling intermediary, and cAMP
response element-binding protein 1 (CREB1) siRNA abrogated PKCe-induced HO-1
up-regulation. Likewise, nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (Nrf2) was
identified as a PKCe target using nuclear translocation and DNA-binding assays,
and Nrf2 siRNA prevented PKCe-mediated HO-1 induction. Moreover, depletion of
CREB1 inhibited PKCe-induced Nrf2 DNA binding, suggestive of transcriptional
co-operation between CREB1 and Nrf2.
CONCLUSIONS: PKCe activity in the vascular endothelium regulates HO-1 via a
pathway requiring CREB1 and Nrf2. Given the potent protective actions of HO-1, we
propose that this mechanism is an important contributor to the emerging role of
PKCe in the maintenance of endothelial homeostasis and resistance to injury.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Cardiology.

PMCID: PMC4431664
PMID: 25883219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. EMBO Mol Med. 2015 Apr 16;7(7):904-17. doi: 10.15252/emmm.201404697.

Lack of kinase-independent activity of PI3K<U+03B3> in locus coeruleus induces ADHD
symptoms through increased CREB signaling.

D'Andrea I(1), Fardella V(1), Fardella S(1), Pallante F(1), Ghigo A(2), Iacobucci
R(1), Maffei A(1), Hirsch E(2), Lembo G(3), Carnevale D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Angiocardioneurology and Translational Medicine, IRCCS Neuromed,
Pozzilli (IS), Italy. (2)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health
Sciences, Molecular Biotechnology Center, University of Torino, Torino, Italy.
(3)Department of Angiocardioneurology and Translational Medicine, IRCCS Neuromed,
Pozzilli (IS), Italy Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of
Rome, Rome, Italy lembo@neuromed.it daniela.carnevale@neuromed.it.

Comment in
    EMBO Mol Med. 2015 Jul;7(7):859-61.

Although PI3K<U+03B3> has been extensively investigated in inflammatory and
cardiovascular diseases, the exploration of its functions in the brain is just at
dawning. It is known that PI3K<U+03B3> is present in neurons and that the lack of PI3K<U+03B3> 
in mice leads to impaired synaptic plasticity, suggestive of a role in behavioral
flexibility. Several neuropsychiatric disorders, such as
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), involve an impairment of
behavioral flexibility. Here, we found a previously unreported expression of
PI3K<U+03B3> throughout the noradrenergic neurons of the locus coeruleus (LC) in the
brainstem, serving as a mechanism that regulates its activity of control on
attention, locomotion and sociality. In particular, we show an unprecedented
phenotype of PI3K<U+03B3> KO mice resembling ADHD symptoms. PI3K<U+03B3> KO mice exhibit
deficits in the attentive and mnemonic domains, typical hyperactivity, as well as
social dysfunctions. Moreover, we demonstrate that the ADHD phenotype depends on 
a dysregulation of CREB signaling exerted by a kinase-independent PI3K<U+03B3>-PDE4D
interaction in the noradrenergic neurons of the locus coeruleus, thus uncovering 
new tools for mechanistic and therapeutic research in ADHD.

© 2015 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4520656
PMID: 25882071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. BMC Genomics. 2015 Apr 3;16:262. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1431-6.

Pervasive and opposing effects of Unpredictable Chronic Mild Stress (UCMS) on
hippocampal gene expression in BALB/cJ and C57BL/6J mouse strains.

Malki K(1), Mineur YS(2,)(3), Tosto MG(4,)(5), Campbell J(6), Karia P(7),
Jumabhoy I(8), Sluyter F(9), Crusio WE(10,)(11), Schalkwyk LC(12).

Author information: 
(1)MRC SGDP Centre, King's College London at the Institute of Psychiatry, PO80,
DeCrespigny Park, London, UK. karim.malki@kcl.ac.uk. (2)Present address:
Department of Psychiatry, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, USA.
yann.mineur@yale.edu. (3)Brudnick Neuropsychiatric Research Institute, University
of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01604, USA, USA.
yann.mineur@yale.edu. (4)MRC SGDP Centre, King's College London at the Institute 
of Psychiatry, PO80, DeCrespigny Park, London, UK. maria.tosto@kcl.ac.uk.
(5)Department of Psychology, Tomsk State University, Tomsk, Russia.
maria.tosto@kcl.ac.uk. (6)The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK.
james.campbell@icr.ac.uk. (7)MRC SGDP Centre, King's College London at the
Institute of Psychiatry, PO80, DeCrespigny Park, London, UK.
karia.priya@kcl.ac.uk. (8)MRC SGDP Centre, King's College London at the Institute
of Psychiatry, PO80, DeCrespigny Park, London, UK. irfan.bin_anwar_ali@kcl.ac.uk.
(9)MRC SGDP Centre, King's College London at the Institute of Psychiatry, PO80,
DeCrespigny Park, London, UK. frans.sluyter@googlemail.com. (10)Present address: 
University of Bordeaux, Institute for Cognitive and Integrative Neuroscience
(INCIA), Bordeaux, France. wim_crusio@yahoo.com. (11)Brudnick Neuropsychiatric
Research Institute, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA
01604, USA, USA. wim_crusio@yahoo.com. (12)School of Biological Sciences,
University of Essex, Colchester, UK. lschal@essex.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: BALB/cJ is a strain susceptible to stress and extremely susceptible
to a defective hedonic impact in response to chronic stressors. The strain offers
much promise as an animal model for the study of stress related disorders. We
present a comparative hippocampal gene expression study on the effects of
unpredictable chronic mild stress on BALB/cJ and C57BL/6J mice. Affymetrix MOE
430 was used to measure hippocampal gene expression from 16 animals of two
different strains (BALB/cJ and C57BL/6J) of both sexes and subjected to either
unpredictable chronic mild stress (UCMS) or no stress. Differences were
statistically evaluated through supervised and unsupervised linear modelling and 
using Weighted Gene Coexpression Network Analysis (WGCNA). In order to gain
further understanding into mechanisms related to stress response, we
cross-validated our results with a parallel study from the GENDEP project using
WGCNA in a meta-analysis design.
RESULTS: The effects of UCMS are visible through Principal Component Analysis
which highlights the stress sensitivity of the BALB/cJ strain. A number of genes 
and gene networks related to stress response were uncovered including the Creb1
gene. WGCNA and pathway analysis revealed a gene network centered on Nfkb1.
Results from the meta-analysis revealed a highly significant gene pathway centred
on the Ubiquitin C (Ubc) gene. All pathways uncovered are associated with
inflammation and immune response.
CONCLUSIONS: The study investigated the molecular mechanisms underlying the
response to adverse environment in an animal model using a GxE design.
Stress-related differences were visible at the genomic level through PCA analysis
highlighting the high sensitivity of BALB/cJ animals to environmental stressors. 
Several candidate genes and gene networks reported are associated with
inflammation and neurogenesis and could serve to inform candidate gene selection 
in human studies and provide additional insight into the pathology of Major
Depressive Disorder.

PMCID: PMC4412144
PMID: 25879669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Aug;12(2):1941-50. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3609. Epub 2015 Apr
14.

Regulation of connexin 43 and microRNA expression via ß2-adrenoceptor signaling
in 1321N1 astrocytoma cells.

Khaksarian M(1), Mostafavi H(2), Soleimani M(2), Karimian SM(3), Ghahremani
MH(4), Joghataee MT(5), Khorashadizadeh M(6), Aligholi H(7), Attari F(7),
Hassanzadeh G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Lorestan University of Medical
Sciences, Khorramabad 6814993165, Iran. (2)Department of Molecular Biology and
Genetic Engineering, Stem Cell Technology Research Center, Tehran 1997775555,
Iran. (3)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran 1417613151, Iran. (4)Department of Molecular Medicine,
School of Advanced Medical Technologies, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran 1417743371, Iran. (5)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, Iran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran 1417755469, Iran. (6)Department of Medical
Biotechnologies, School of Advanced Medical Technologies, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran 1417743371, Iran. (7)Department of Neuroscience, School 
of Advanced Medical Technologies, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran
1417743371, Iran.

Connexin 43 (Cx43) is the main gap junction protein in astrocytes and exerts the 
same effects on growth inhibition in astrocytoma and glioma as microRNA-146a
(miR-146a) in glioma. ß2-adrenergic receptor (AR) signaling modulates Cx43
expression in myocytes via components downstream of protein kinase A (PKA) and
exchange protein directly activated by cAMP (Epac). However, it remains to be
elucidated how expression of Cx43 is modulated in astrocytes. In the present
study, 1321N1 astrocytoma cells were treated with ß2-AR signaling agents in order
to evaluate the expression of Cx43 and miRNAs. RNA and protein were extracted
from the cells for use in reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain
reaction and western blot analysis, respectively. The results revealed that
clenbuterol increased miR-146a level and upregulated Cx43 expression via cAMP/PKA
at the mRNA and protein level. Pre-inhibition of adenyl cyclase decreased
expression of Cx43 and miR-146a. PKA activation and overexpression of miR-146a in
A-1321N1 cells increased the expression of Cx43. ß2-AR stimulation and 6Bnz, a
PKA activator, suppressed oncomiRs miR-155 and miR-27a, while
8-(4-chlorophenylthio)-2'-O-methyladenosine-3',5'-cyclic monophosphate, an Epac
activator, increased their levels. The current findings demonstrated that ß2-AR
signaling has growth inhibitory effects via modulation of the cAMP/PKA pathway in
A-1321N1 cells through increasing the expression level of Cx43 and miR-146a as
well as decreasing miR-155 and miR-27a levels. Thus, stimulation of the ß2-AR and
PKA signaling pathway may be a useful approach for astrocytoma therapy.

PMID: 25873300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Exp Med. 2015 May 4;212(5):633-48. doi: 10.1084/jem.20141514. Epub 2015 Apr 13.

Flow-induced protein kinase A-CREB pathway acts via BMP signaling to promote HSC 
emergence.

Kim PG(1), Nakano H(2), Das PP(3), Chen MJ(1), Rowe RG(1), Chou SS(1), Ross
SJ(1), Sakamoto KM(4), Zon LI(1), Schlaeger TM(1), Orkin SH(3), Nakano A(2),
Daley GQ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Dana
Farber Cancer Institute; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Stem Cell
Institute; Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Division of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer Institute;
and Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology,
Boston Children's Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer Institute; Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute; Stem Cell Transplantation
Program, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital
and Dana Farber Cancer Institute; and Department of Biological Chemistry and
Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 Division of
Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer 
Institute; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute; Stem
Cell Transplantation Program, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Boston
Children's Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer Institute; and Department of
Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02115. (2)Department of Molecular Cell and Developmental Biology, Eli and
Edythe Broad Center of Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, Jonsson
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Molecular Biology Institute, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095. (3)Division of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer Institute;
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute; Stem Cell
Transplantation Program, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Boston
Children's Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer Institute; and Department of
Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02115. (4)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Lucile Packard Children's
Hospital, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305. (5)Division
of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Dana Farber
Cancer Institute; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute;
Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology,
Boston Children's Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer Institute; and Department of
Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02115 Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital
and Dana Farber Cancer Institute; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Stem
Cell Institute; Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Division of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer Institute;
and Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology,
Boston Children's Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer Institute; Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute; Stem Cell Transplantation
Program, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital
and Dana Farber Cancer Institute; and Department of Biological Chemistry and
Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115
george.daley@childrens.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2015 May 4;212(5):600.

Fluid shear stress promotes the emergence of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in
the aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) of the developing mouse embryo. We determined
that the AGM is enriched for expression of targets of protein kinase A (PKA)-cAMP
response element-binding protein (CREB), a pathway activated by fluid shear
stress. By analyzing CREB genomic occupancy from chromatin-immunoprecipitation
sequencing (ChIP-seq) data, we identified the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)
pathway as a potential regulator of CREB. By chemical modulation of the PKA-CREB 
and BMP pathways in isolated AGM VE-cadherin(+) cells from mid-gestation embryos,
we demonstrate that PKA-CREB regulates hematopoietic engraftment and
clonogenicity of hematopoietic progenitors, and is dependent on secreted BMP
ligands through the type I BMP receptor. Finally, we observed blunting of this
signaling axis using Ncx1-null embryos, which lack a heartbeat and intravascular 
flow. Collectively, we have identified a novel PKA-CREB-BMP signaling pathway
downstream of shear stress that regulates HSC emergence in the AGM via the
endothelial-to-hematopoietic transition.

© 2015 Kim et al.

PMCID: PMC4419355
PMID: 25870201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Exp Med. 2015 May 4;212(5):665-80. doi: 10.1084/jem.20142235. Epub 2015 Apr 13.

Biomechanical forces promote blood development through prostaglandin E2 and the
cAMP-PKA signaling axis.

Diaz MF(1), Li N(1), Lee HJ(1), Adamo L(2), Evans SM(1), Willey HE(3), Arora
N(4), Torisawa YS(5), Vickers DA(6), Morris SA(4), Naveiras O(4), Murthy SK(6),
Ingber DE(5), Daley GQ(7), García-Cardeña G(8), Wenzel PL(9).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Children's Regenerative Medicine, Department of Pediatric Surgery, 
Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, The Brown Foundation Institute of
Molecular Medicine, and Immunology Program, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030
Program in Children's Regenerative Medicine, Department of Pediatric Surgery,
Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, The Brown Foundation Institute of
Molecular Medicine, and Immunology Program, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030
Program in Children's Regenerative Medicine, Department of Pediatric Surgery,
Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, The Brown Foundation Institute of
Molecular Medicine, and Immunology Program, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX
77030. (2)Center for Excellence in Vascular Biology, Department of Pathology,
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, TX 77030. (4)Stem Cell
Transplantation Program, Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Manton
Center for Orphan Disease Research, and Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Children's Hospital Boston and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115
Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology,
Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, and Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Children's Hospital Boston and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115
Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology,
Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, and Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Children's Hospital Boston and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115
Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology,
Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, and Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Children's Hospital Boston and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115
Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115 Harvard Stem Cell Institute and School of Engineering
and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138. (5)Harvard Stem
Cell Institute and School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA 02138 Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired
Engineering at Harvard University and Vascular Biology Program, Boston Children's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 Wyss Institute for
Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University and Vascular Biology
Program, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.
(6)Barnett Institute of Chemical and Biological Analysis, Northeastern
University, Boston, MA 02115. (7)Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Division of
Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, and
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Children's Hospital Boston and Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115 Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Division of
Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, and
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Children's Hospital Boston and Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115 Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Division of
Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, and
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Children's Hospital Boston and Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115 Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Division of
Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, and
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Children's Hospital Boston and Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115 Department of Biological Chemistry and
Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 Harvard Stem
Cell Institute and School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA 02138 guillermo_garcia-cardena@hms.harvard.edu
george.daley@childrens.harvard.edu pamela.l.wenzel@uth.tmc.edu. (8)Center for
Excellence in Vascular Biology, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 Harvard Stem Cell Institute
and School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
02138 guillermo_garcia-cardena@hms.harvard.edu george.daley@childrens.harvard.edu
pamela.l.wenzel@uth.tmc.edu. (9)Program in Children's Regenerative Medicine,
Department of Pediatric Surgery, Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, 
The Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular Medicine, and Immunology Program,
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Texas Health Science Center
at Houston, Houston, TX 77030 Program in Children's Regenerative Medicine,
Department of Pediatric Surgery, Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, 
The Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular Medicine, and Immunology Program,
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Texas Health Science Center
at Houston, Houston, TX 77030 Program in Children's Regenerative Medicine,
Department of Pediatric Surgery, Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, 
The Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular Medicine, and Immunology Program,
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Texas Health Science Center
at Houston, Houston, TX 77030 guillermo_garcia-cardena@hms.harvard.edu
george.daley@childrens.harvard.edu pamela.l.wenzel@uth.tmc.edu.

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2015 May 4;212(5):600.

Blood flow promotes emergence of definitive hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in
the developing embryo, yet the signals generated by hemodynamic forces that
influence hematopoietic potential remain poorly defined. Here we show that fluid 
shear stress endows long-term multilineage engraftment potential upon early
hematopoietic tissues at embryonic day 9.5, an embryonic stage not previously
described to harbor HSCs. Effects on hematopoiesis are mediated in part by a
cascade downstream of wall shear stress that involves calcium efflux and
stimulation of the prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)-cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP)-protein kinase A (PKA) signaling axis. Blockade of the PGE2-cAMP-PKA
pathway in the aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) abolished enhancement in
hematopoietic activity. Furthermore, Ncx1 heartbeat mutants, as well as static
cultures of AGM, exhibit lower levels of expression of prostaglandin synthases
and reduced phosphorylation of the cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB). 
Similar to flow-exposed cultures, transient treatment of AGM with the synthetic
analogue 16,16-dimethyl-PGE2 stimulates more robust engraftment of adult
recipients and greater lymphoid reconstitution. These data provide one mechanism 
by which biomechanical forces induced by blood flow modulate hematopoietic
potential.

© 2015 Diaz et al.

PMCID: PMC4419354
PMID: 25870199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Jul 5;409:59-72. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.04.005. Epub
2015 Apr 11.

c-Src/Pyk2/EGFR/PI3K/Akt/CREB-activated pathway contributes to human
cardiomyocyte hypertrophy: Role of COX-2 induction.

Chien PT(1), Lin CC(2), Hsiao LD(2), Yang CM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Health Ageing Research Center,
College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan;
Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Health Ageing Research Center, College
of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan. (2)Department of 
Anesthetics, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Lin-Kou and College of Medicine,
Chang Gung University, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan. (3)Graduate Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, Health Ageing Research Center, College of Medicine, Chang
Gung University, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan; Department of Physiology and
Pharmacology, Health Ageing Research Center, College of Medicine, Chang Gung
University, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan. Electronic address:
chuenmao@mail.cgu.edu.tw.

Thrombin and COX-2 regulating cardiac hypertrophy are via various signaling
cascades. Several transcriptional factors including CREB involve in COX-2
expression. However, the interplay among thrombin, CREB, and COX-2 in primary
human neonatal ventricular cardiomyocytes remains unclear. In this study,
thrombin-induced COX-2 promoter activity, mRNA and protein expression, and PGE2
synthesis were attenuated by pretreatment with the inhibitors of c-Src (PP1),
Pyk2 (PF431396), EGFR (AG1478), PI3K/Akt (LY294002/SH-5), and p300 (GR343), or
transfection with siRNAs of c-Src, Pyk2, EGFR, p110, Akt, CREB, and p300.
Moreover, thrombin-stimulated phosphorylation of c-Src, Pyk2, EGFR, Akt, CREB and
p300 was attenuated by their respective inhibitors. These results indicate that
thrombin-induced COX-2 expression is mediated through
PAR-1/c-Src/Pyk2/EGFR/PI3K/Akt linking to CREB and p300 cascades. Functionally,
thrombin-induced hypertrophy and ANF/BNP release were, at least in part, mediated
through a PAR-1/COX-2-dependent pathway. We uncover the importance of COX-2
regarding human cardiomyocyte hypertrophy that will provide a therapeutic
intervention in cardiovascular diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25869400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Anesth Analg. 2015 Jun;120(6):1394-404. doi: 10.1213/ANE.0000000000000729.

Gene Transfer of Glutamic Acid Decarboxylase 67 by Herpes Simplex Virus Vectors
Suppresses Neuropathic Pain Induced by Human Immunodeficiency Virus gp120
Combined with ddC in Rats.

Kanao M(1), Kanda H, Huang W, Liu S, Yi H, Candiotti KA, Lubarsky DA, Levitt RC, 
Hao S.

Author information: 
(1)From the *Department of Anesthesiology, University of Miami Miller School of
Medicine, Miami, Florida; Department of Anesthesiology, Asahikawa Medical
University, Asahikawa, Japan; Hussman Institute of Human Genomics, University of
Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida; and §Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Miami, Florida.

BACKGROUND: Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-related painful sensory
neuropathies primarily consist of the HIV infection-related distal sensory
polyneuropathy and antiretroviral toxic neuropathies. Pharmacotherapy provides
only partial relief of pain in patients with HIV/acquired immune deficiency
syndrome because little is known about the exact neuropathological mechanisms for
HIV-associated neuropathic pain (NP). Hypofunction of <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid (GABA) 
GABAergic inhibitory mechanisms has been reported after peripheral nerve injury. 
In this study, we tested the hypothesis that HIV gp120 combined with
antiretroviral therapy reduces spinal GABAergic inhibitory tone and that
restoration of GABAergic inhibitory tone will reduce HIV-related NP in a rat
model.
METHODS: The application of recombinant HIV-1 envelope protein gp120 into the
sciatic nerve plus systemic ddC (one antiretroviral drug) induced mechanical
allodynia. The hind paws of rats were inoculated with replication-defective
herpes simplex virus (HSV) vectors genetically encoding gad1 gene to express
glutamic acid decarboxylase 67 (GAD67), an enzyme that catalyzes the
decarboxylation of glutamate to GABA. Mechanical threshold was tested using von
Frey filaments before and after treatments with the vectors. The expression of
GAD67 in both the lumbar spinal cord and the L4-5 dorsal root ganglia was
examined using western blots. The expression of mitochondrial superoxide in the
spinal dorsal horn was examined using MitoSox imaging. The immunoreactivity of
spinal GABA, pCREB, and pC/EBPß was tested using immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: In the gp120 with ddC-induced neuropathic pain model, GAD67 expression
mediated by the HSV vector caused an elevation of mechanical threshold that was
apparent on day 3 after vector inoculation. The antiallodynic effect of the
single HSV vector inoculation expressing GAD67 lasted >28 days. The area under
the time-effect curves in the HSV vector expressing GAD67 was increased compared 
with that in the control vectors (P = 0.0005). Intrathecal GABA-A/B agonists
elevated mechanical threshold in the pain model. The HSV vectors expressing GAD67
reversed the lowered GABA immunoreactivity in the spinal dorsal horn in the
neuropathic rats. HSV vectors expressing GAD67 in the neuropathic rats reversed
the increased signals of mitochondrial superoxide in the spinal dorsal horn. The 
vectors expressing GAD67 reversed the upregulated immunoreactivity expression of 
pCREB and pC/EBPß in the spinal dorsal horn in rats exhibiting NP.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on our results, we suggest that GAD67 mediated by HSV vectors 
acting through the suppression of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species and
transcriptional factors in the spinal cord decreases pain in the HIV-related
neuropathic pain model, providing preclinical evidence for gene therapy
applications in patients with HIV-related pain states.

PMID: 25851180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Stem Cells. 2015 Jun;33(6):1915-26. doi: 10.1002/stem.2019.

Crif1 Promotes Adipogenic Differentiation of Bone Marrow Mesenchymal Stem Cells
After Irradiation by Modulating the PKA/CREB Signaling Pathway.

Zhang X(1), Xiang L(2), Ran Q(2), Liu Y(1), Xiang Y(2), Xiao Y(2), Chen L(2), Li 
F(2), Zhong JF(3), Li Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing, China. (2)Department of Blood Transfusion, The
Second Affiliated Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China. 
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Southern California, Keck School of
Medicine, California, USA.

Dysfunction of the hematopoietic microenvironment is the main obstacle
encountered during hematopoiesis reconstruction in patients with acute
hematopoietic radiation syndrome. Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs)
play a crucial supporting role in hematopoiesis by maintaining the balance
between adipogenic and osteogenic differentiation. In this study, we found that
irradiation decreased the colony-forming efficiency of BM-MSCs and impaired the
balance between adipogenic and osteogenic differentiation. Following irradiation,
BM-MCSs became strongly predisposed to adipogenesis, as evidenced by increased
oil red O staining and elevated mRNA and protein levels of the adipogenic markers
and transcription factors PPAR<U+03B3> and AP2. Overexpression of the essential
adipogenesis regulator Crif1 in BM-MSCs promoted adipogenesis after irradiation
exposure by upregulating adipogenesis-related genes, including C/EBPß, PPAR<U+03B3>, and
AP2. We found that Crif1 promoted the phosphorylation of cAMP response element
binding protein (CREB) through direct interaction with protein kinase A (PKA)-a. 
Phosphorylation of CREB was inhibited in Crif1-knockdown BM-MSCs even in the
presence of a PKA agonist (db-cAMP) and could be suppressed in
Crif1-overexpressing BM-MSCs by a PKAa inhibitor (H-89). These results suggest
that Crif1 is an indispensable regulator of PKAa cat that modulates the PKA/CREB 
signaling pathway to promote adipogenic differentiation of BM-MSCs after
irradiation.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 25847389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Biol Pharm Bull. 2015;38(4):514-21. doi: 10.1248/bpb.b14-00612.

Hypoxia decreases glucagon-like peptide-1 secretion from the GLUTag cell line.

Kihira Y(1), Burentogtokh A, Itoh M, Izawa-Ishizawa Y, Ishizawa K, Ikeda Y,
Tsuchiya K, Tamaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University of
Tokushima Graduate School.

Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), an incretin hormone, is secreted from L cells
located in the intestinal epithelium. It is known that intestinal oxygen tension 
is decreased postprandially. In addition, we found that the expression of
hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a), which accumulates in cells under hypoxic
conditions, was significantly increased in the colons of mice with food intake,
indicating that the oxygen concentration is likely reduced in the colon after
eating. Therefore, we hypothesized that GLP-1 secretion is affected by oxygen
tension. We found that forskolin-stimulated GLP-1 secretion from GLUTag cells, a 
model of intestinal L cells, is suppressed in hypoxia (1% O2).
Forskolin-stimulated elevations of preproglucagon (ppGCG) and proprotein
convertase 1/3 (PC1/3) mRNA expression were decreased under hypoxic conditions.
The finding that H89, a protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor, inhibited the
forskolin-stimulated increase of ppGCG and PC1/3 indicated that the cAMP-PKA
pathway is involved in the hypoxia-induced suppression of the genes. Hypoxia
decreased hexokinase 2 mRNA and protein expression and increased lactate
dehydrogenase A mRNA and protein expression. Concomitantly, lactate production
was increased and ATP production was decreased. Together, the results indicate
that hypoxia decreases glucose utilization for ATP production, which probably
causes a decrease in cAMP production and in subsequent GLP-1 production. Our
findings suggest that the postprandial decrease in oxygen tension in the
intestine attenuates GLP-1 secretion.

PMID: 25832631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Biol Chem. 2015 May 15;290(20):12547-57. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.561324. Epub
2015 Mar 31.

Nuclear localization and functional characteristics of voltage-gated potassium
channel Kv1.3.

Jang SH(1), Byun JK(2), Jeon WI(2), Choi SY(2), Park J(3), Lee BH(2), Yang JE(2),
Park JB(4), O'Grady SM(5), Kim DY(6), Ryu PD(2), Joo SW(3), Lee SY(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the Laboratories of Veterinary Pharmacology and the Biomedical Research
Center, School of Biological Sciences, University of Ulsan, Ulsan 680-749, Korea.
(2)From the Laboratories of Veterinary Pharmacology and. (3)the Department of
Chemistry, Soongsil University, Seoul 156-743, Korea. (4)the Department of
Physiology, School of Medicine, Chungnam National University, Daejeon 305-764,
Korea, and. (5)the Department of Animal Science and Integrative Biology and
Physiology, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, Minnesota 55455. (6)Veterinary
Pathology, College of Veterinary Medicine and Research Institute for Veterinary
Science, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea. (7)From the
Laboratories of Veterinary Pharmacology and leeso@snu.ac.kr.

It is widely known that ion channels are expressed in the plasma membrane.
However, a few studies have suggested that several ion channels including
voltage-gated K(+) (Kv) channels also exist in intracellular organelles where
they are involved in the biochemical events associated with cell signaling. In
the present study, Western blot analysis using fractionated protein clearly
indicates that Kv1.3 channels are expressed in the nuclei of MCF7, A549, and
SNU-484 cancer cells and human brain tissues. In addition, Kv1.3 is located in
the plasma membrane and the nucleus of Jurkat T cells. Nuclear membrane
hyperpolarization after treatment with margatoxin (MgTX), a specific blocker of
Kv1.3 channels, provides evidence for functional channels at the nuclear membrane
of A549 cells. MgTX-induced hyperpolarization is abolished in the nuclei of Kv1.3
silenced cells, and the effects of MgTX are dependent on the magnitude of the
K(+) gradient across the nuclear membrane. Selective Kv1.3 blockers induce the
phosphorylation of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) and c-Fos
activation. Moreover, Kv1.3 is shown to form a complex with the upstream binding 
factor 1 in the nucleus. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay reveals that Sp1
transcription factor is directly bound to the promoter region of the Kv1.3 gene, 
and the Sp1 regulates Kv1.3 expression in the nucleus of A549 cells. These
results demonstrate that Kv1.3 channels are primarily localized in the nucleus of
several types of cancer cells and human brain tissues where they are capable of
regulating nuclear membrane potential and activation of transcription factors,
such as phosphorylated CREB and c-Fos.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4432276 [Available on 2016-05-15]
PMID: 25829491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 30;6(12):10646-57.

High expression of cAMP-responsive element-binding protein 1 (CREB1) is
associated with metastasis, tumor stage and poor outcome in gastric cancer.

Wang YW(1), Chen X(1), Gao JW(1), Zhang H(1), Ma RR(1), Gao ZH(1,)(2), Gao P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, P.R. 
China. (2)Department of Pathology, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

cAMP responsive element binding protein 1 (CREB1) has been reported to be
implicated in tumor development and progression of human cancers. However, the
clinical significance and regulatory mechanisms of CREB1 expression in gastric
cancer remain largely unknown. In the present study, immunohistochemistry was
performed to detect the expression of CREB1 protein in 185 primary gastric cancer
tissues, 50 secondary lymph node metastatic foci and 50 nontumorous gastric
tissues. A prognostic model combining CREB1 expression with TNM tumor stage was
constructed by logistic regression analysis. Regulation of CREB1 by miRNAs was
investigated by luciferase reporter assay and Western blot. It was shown that
CREB1 was highly expressed and correlated with lymph node metastasis, distant
metastasis and tumor stage and poor outcome in gastric cancer. The prognostic
model was proven to be an independent prognosis predictor and performed better
than CREB1 or tumor stage alone. CREB1 was identified as a direct target of
miR-27b and miR-200b, and down-regulated by miR-27b/miR-200b. We conclude that
CREB1 is a promising biomarker to predict tumor metastasis and patient outcome in
gastric cancer, and the miR-27b/miR-200b-CREB1 pathway may serve as a potential
molecular target for the treatment of gastric cancer.

PMCID: PMC4496382
PMID: 25825983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Retrovirology. 2015 Feb 27;12:23. doi: 10.1186/s12977-015-0140-1.

Myocyte enhancer factor (MEF)-2 plays essential roles in T-cell transformation
associated with HTLV-1 infection by stabilizing complex between Tax and CREB.

Jain P, Lavorgna A, Sehgal M, Gao L, Ginwala R, Sagar D, Harhaj EW, Khan ZK.

BACKGROUND: The exact molecular mechanisms regarding HTLV-1 Tax-mediated viral
gene expression and CD4 T-cell transformation have yet to be fully delineated.
Herein, utilizing virus-infected primary CD4+ T cells and the virus-producing
cell line, MT-2, we describe the involvement and regulation of Myocyte enhancer
factor-2 (specifically MEF-2A) during the course of HTLV-1 infection and
associated disease syndrome.
RESULTS: Inhibition of MEF-2 expression by shRNA and its activity by HDAC9 led to
reduced viral replication and T-cell transformation in correlation with a
heightened expression of MEF-2 in ATL patients. Mechanistically, MEF-2 was
recruited to the viral promoter (LTR, long terminal repeat) in the context of
chromatin, and constituted Tax/CREB transcriptional complex via direct binding to
the HTLV-1 LTR. Furthermore, an increase in MEF-2 expression was observed upon
infection in an extent similar to CREB (known Tax-interacting transcription
factor), and HATs (p300, CBP, and p/CAF). Confocal imaging confirmed MEF-2
co-localization with Tax and these proteins were also shown to interact by
co-immunoprecipitation. MEF-2 stabilization of Tax/CREB complex was confirmed by 
a novel promoter-binding assay that highlighted the involvement of NFAT (nuclear 
factor of activated T cells) in this process via Tax-mediated activation of
calcineurin (a calcium-dependent serine-threonine phosphatase). MEF-2-integrated 
signaling pathways (PI3K/Akt, NF-<U+03BA>B, MAPK, JAK/STAT, and TGF-ß) were also
activated during HTLV-1 infection of primary CD4+ T cells, possibly regulating
MEF-2 activity.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate the involvement of MEF-2 in Tax-mediated LTR
activation, viral replication, and T-cell transformation in correlation with its 
heightened expression in ATL patients through direct binding to DNA within the
HTLV-1 LTR.

PMCID: PMC4374383
PMID: 25809782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. FASEB J. 2015 Jul;29(7):2883-93. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-265603. Epub 2015 Mar 24.

Ca2+ channel subunit a 1D promotes proliferation and migration of endometrial
cancer cells mediated by 17ß-estradiol via the G protein-coupled estrogen
receptor.

Hao J(1), Bao X(1), Jin B(1), Wang X(1), Mao Z(1), Li X(1), Wei L(1), Shen D(1), 
Wang JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology and Department of Pathology, Peking 
University People's Hospital, Beijing, China; and Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, Peking University, Beijing, China. (2)*Department of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology and Department of Pathology, Peking University
People's Hospital, Beijing, China; and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Peking University, Beijing, China wangjianliu@pkuph.edu.cn.

Calcium and calcium channels are closely related to the estrogen-induced
nongenomic effect of endometrial carcinoma, but the specific role of calcium
channels is unknown. This study aimed to explore the expression and the biologic 
effect of the L-type calcium channel in endometrial carcinoma cells and to
clarify the molecular mechanism of the relationship between L-type calcium
channels and estrogen. The immunohistochemical results showed that Ca(2+) channel
subunit a 1D (Cav1.3) expression was high in atypical hyperplasia (1.90 ± 0.35)
and endometrial carcinoma tissues (2.05 ± 0.82) but weak (0.80 ± 0.15) in benign 
endometrial tissues (P < 0.05). Treatment with 17ß-estradiol rapidly increased
Cav1.3 expression in a dose- and time-dependent manner, and 100 nM
cell-impermeable ß-estradiol-6-(O-carboxymethyl)oxime:bovine serum albumin also
promoted Cav1.3 expression. Transfection with small interfering RNA against G
protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER) suppressed estrogen-induced
up-regulation of Cav1.3 compared with control cells and markedly reduced the
estrogen-induced phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and CREB. Knocking down the Cav1.3
significantly suppressed estrogen-stimulated Ca(2+) influx, cell proliferation,
and migration in endometrial cancer cells. Taken together, Cav1.3 was
overexpressed in atypical hyperplasia and endometrial carcinoma, and the
estrogen-induced phosphorylation of downstream molecular ERK1/2 and CREB is the
result of activation of the GPER pathway. L-type channel Cav1.3 is required for
estrogen-stimulated Ca(2+) influx and contributes broadly to the development of
endometrial cancer. The Cav1.3 channel may be a new target for endometrial
carcinoma treatment.

© FASEB.

PMID: 25805831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2015 Jun;19(3):137-42. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2015.03.004. 
Epub 2015 Mar 14.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma: comparison of fluorescence in situ
hybridization and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction as adjunct
diagnostic modalities.

Thway K(1), Gonzalez D(2), Wren D(2), Dainton M(3), Swansbury J(3), Fisher C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Sarcoma Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK. Electronic address:
khin.thway@rmh.nhs.uk. (2)Molecular Diagnostics, Royal Marsden Hospital, Sutton, 
Surrey, UK. (3)Clinical Cytogenetics, Royal Marsden Hospital, Sutton, Surrey, UK.
(4)Sarcoma Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is a rare soft tissue neoplasm of
intermediate biologic potential and uncertain differentiation, most often arising
in the extremities of children and young adults. Although it has characteristic
histologic features of a lymphoid cuff surrounding nodules of ovoid cells with
blood-filled cystic cavities, diagnosis is often difficult due to its morphologic
heterogeneity and lack of specific immunoprofile. Angiomatoid fibrous
histiocytoma is associated with recurrent chromosomal translocations, leading to 
characteristic EWSR1-CREB1, EWSR1-ATF1, and, rarely, FUS-ATF1 gene fusions;
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), detecting EWSR1 or FUS rearrangements,
and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for EWSR1-CREB1 and 
EWSR1-ATF1 fusion transcripts have become routine ancillary tools. We present a
large comparative series of FISH and RT-PCR for AFH. Seventeen neoplasms (from 16
patients) histologically diagnosed as AFH were assessed for EWSR1 rearrangements 
or EWSR1-CREB1 and EWSR1-ATF1 fusion transcripts. All 17 were positive for either
FISH or RT-PCR or both. Of 16, 14 (87.5%) had detectable EWSR1-CREB1 or
EWSR1-ATF1 fusion transcripts by RT-PCR, whereas 13 (76.5%) of 17 had positive
EWSR1 rearrangement with FISH. All 13 of 13 non-AFH control neoplasms failed to
show EWSR1-CREB1 or EWSR1-ATF1 fusion transcripts, whereas EWSR1 rearrangement
was present in 2 of these 13 cases (which were histopathologically myoepithelial 
neoplasms). This study shows that EWSR1-CREB1 or EWSR1-ATF1 fusions predominate
in AFH (supporting previous reports that FUS rearrangement is rare in AFH) and
that RT-PCR has a comparable detection rate to FISH for AFH. Importantly, cases
of AFH can be missed if RT-PCR is not performed in conjunction with FISH, and
RT-PCR has the added advantage of specificity, which is crucial, as EWSR1
rearrangements are present in a variety of neoplasms in the histologic
differential diagnosis of AFH, that differ in behavior and treatment.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25804255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Exp Gerontol. 2015 May;65:69-78. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2015.03.010. Epub 2015 Mar 
20.

Hypercholesterolemia and neurodegeneration. Comparison of hippocampal phenotypes 
in LDLr knockout and APPswe/PS1dE9 mice.

Ettcheto M(1), Petrov D(1), Pedrós I(2), de Lemos L(1), Pallàs M(1), Alegret
M(3), Laguna JC(3), Folch J(2), Camins A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Farmacologia i Farmacognòsia Facultat de Farmàcia, Institut de
Biomedicina (IBUB), Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Biomedical
Research Networking Center in Neurodegenerative Diseases (CIBERNED), Madrid,
Spain. (2)Unitat de Bioquímica, Facultat de Medicina i Ciències de la Salut,
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas
(CIBERNED), Universitat Rovira i Virgili, C./St. Llorenç 21, 43201 Reus,
Tarragona, Spain; Biomedical Research Networking Center in Neurodegenerative
Diseases (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain. (3)Unitat de Farmacologia i Farmacognòsia
Facultat de Farmàcia, Institut de Biomedicina (IBUB), Universitat de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de la Fisiopatología
de la Obesidad y Nutrición, Spain. (4)Unitat de Farmacologia i Farmacognòsia
Facultat de Farmàcia, Institut de Biomedicina (IBUB), Universitat de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain; Biomedical Research Networking Center in Neurodegenerative
Diseases (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain; Centro de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional
de Loja, Av. Pío Jaramillo Alvarado y Reinaldo Espinosa, La Argelia, Loja,
Ecuador. Electronic address: camins@ub.edu.

Previous studies suggest that Alzheimer's disease (AD) neurobiology could not be 
explained solely by an increase in ß-amyloid levels. Recently, it has been
proposed that alterations in brain cholesterol metabolism may contribute to the
pathogenesis of AD. In the present work, we focus on early changes in the
hippocampal phenotypes of two mouse models in which cognitive impairments were
previously described: a) the hypercholesterolemic LDL receptor knockout (LDLr
-/-) and b) the APPswe/PS1dE9 (APP/PS1) transgenic model of familial AD. Our
initial analysis, subsequent validation and additional experiments at the mRNA
and protein levels demonstrate some parallels between the hippocampal phenotypes 
of these 2 mouse models, however our data suggest that the molecular mechanisms
leading to cognitive decline are distinct in LDLr -/- and APP/PS1 animals. Genes 
related to cytokine signaling were significantly down-regulated in LDLr -/- mice 
when compared to both the wild-type and APP/PS1 mice, and these include
prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthases 1 and 2 (ptgs1 and 2) and nerve grow factor 
(ngf). We have also detected reduced expression of genes related to lipid
metabolism in LDLr -/- mice: peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma
(pparg), pro-opiomelanocortin-alpha (pomc) and of protein kinase, AMP-activated, 
alpha 1 catalytic subunit of AMPK (prkaa1). Our array data also indicate that
transcriptional activity of early genes involved in memory process, such as FBJ
osteosarcoma oncogene (Fos) and the activity regulated cytoskeletal-associated
protein (Arc) gene, are increased in the hippocampus of LDLr -/- mice. Several
proteins like insulin degrading enzyme (IDE), PGC-1a, OXPHOS 1, NMDAR1 and cyclic
AMP response element binding protein (CREB) are up-regulated in the LDLr -/-
mice, while in the APP/PS1 mouse model only OXPHOS complexes 2, 3 and 5 are
slightly downregulated. Further studies are necessary to understand the molecular
pathways involved in memory loss in hypercholesterolemic LDLr -/- mice.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25797218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Neurosci Lett. 2015 Apr 23;593:7-12. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.03.016. Epub 2015
Mar 11.

Discovery of novel anti-parkinsonian effect of schisantherin A in in vitro and in
vivo.

Sa F(1), Zhang LQ(1), Chong CM(1), Guo BJ(2), Li S(2), Zhang ZJ(3), Zheng Y(1),
Hoi PM(1), Lee SM(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research of Chinese Medicine and Institute of 
Chinese Medical Sciences, University of Macau, Taipa, Macao, China. (2)Institute 
of New Drug Research, Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Pharmacodynamic,
Constituents of Traditional Chinese Medicine & New Drug Research, College of
Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangdong, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Quality 
Research of Chinese Medicine and Institute of Chinese Medical Sciences,
University of Macau, Taipa, Macao, China; Institute of New Drug Research,
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Pharmacodynamic, Constituents of Traditional
Chinese Medicine & New Drug Research, College of Pharmacy, Jinan University,
Guangdong, China. Electronic address: zaijunzhang@163.com. (4)State Key
Laboratory of Quality Research of Chinese Medicine and Institute of Chinese
Medical Sciences, University of Macau, Taipa, Macao, China. Electronic address:
simonlee@umac.mo.

Dibenzocyclooctadiene lignans represent a unique group of natural chemical
structures, are considered as protectants against neuronal cell death and
cognitive impairment in neurological disorders. Among the family of
dibenzocyclooctadiene lignan analogs from the fruit of Schisandra chinensis
(Turcz.) Baill, neuroprotective potential of schisantherin A (StA) has not yet
been characterized. In this study, 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium ion
(MPP(+))-incubated SH-SY5Y cells and 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine
(MPTP)-treated mice were used to study the neuroprotection of StA. Pretreatment
with StA significantly inhibited MPP(+)-induced cytotoxicity in SH-SY5Y cells.
Moreover, StA conferred significant protection against MPTP-induced loss of
TH-positive dopaminergic neurons in a Parkinson's disease (PD) mice model.
Structure activity relationship analysis suggested that methylenedioxy,
benzoyloxy and methoxyl groups, in the dibenzocyclooctadiene lignan of StA, were 
probably functionally important to its neuroprotective activity. In addition,
Western blotting analysis demonstrated that StA exhibited neuroprotection against
MPP(+) through the regulation of two distinct pathways including increasing
CREB-mediated Bcl-2 expression and activating PI3K/Akt survival signaling
suggesting that StA might be a promising neuroprotective agent for the prevention
of PD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25770828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2015 Aug;35(8):1272-9. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2015.33. Epub
2015 Mar 11.

Combined ampakine and BDNF treatments enhance poststroke functional recovery in
aged mice via AKT-CREB signaling.

Clarkson AN(1), Parker K(2), Nilsson M(3), Walker FR(3), Gowing EK(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Anatomy, Brain Health Research Centre, University of Otago,
Dunedin, New Zealand [2] Department of Psychology, University of Otago, Dunedin, 
New Zealand [3] Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Parkville,
Melbourne, Australia. (2)Department of Anatomy, Brain Health Research Centre,
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand. (3)School of Biomedical Sciences and
Pharmacy, The University of Newcastle, Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia.

Cerebral ischemia results in damage to neuronal circuits and lasting impairment
in function. We have previously reported that stimulation of
a-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptors with the ampakine,
CX1837, increases brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) levels and affords
significant motor recovery after stroke in young mice. Here, we investigated
whether administration of CX1837 in aged (24 months old) mice was equally
effective. In a model of focal ischemia, administration of CX1837 from 5 days
after stroke resulted in a small gain of motor function by week 6 after stroke.
Mice that received a local delivery of BDNF via hydrogel implanted into the
stroke cavity also showed a small gain of function from 4 to 6 weeks after
stroke. Combining both treatments, however, resulted in a marked improvement in
motor function from 2 weeks after insult. Assessment of peri-infarct tissue 2
weeks after stroke revealed a significant increase in p-AKT and p-CREB after the 
combined drug treatment. Using the pan-AKT inhibitor, GSK-690693, or deletion of 
CREB from forebrain neurons using the CREB-flox/CAMKii-cre mice, we were able to 
block the recovery of motor function. These data suggest that combined CX1837 and
local delivery of BDNF are required to achieve maximal functional recovery after 
stroke in aged mice, and is occurring via the AKT-GSK3-CREB signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC4528000 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25757752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Jan 1;8(1):906-13. eCollection 2015.

CREB1 gene polymorphisms combined with environmental risk factors increase
susceptibility to major depressive disorder (MDD).

Wang P(1), Yang Y(1), Yang X(1), Qiu X(1), Qiao Z(1), Wang L(1), Zhu X(2), Sui
H(1), Ma J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Public Health Institute, Harbin Medical University
157 Baojian Road, Nangang, Harbin 150081, China. (2)Medical Psychological
Institute, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University Changsha, Hunan,
China.

Major depressive disorder (MDD) is one of the most severe psychiatric disorders. 
The objective of this study was to explore the effects of CREB1 gene
polymorphisms on risk of developing MDD and the joint effects of gene-environment
interactions. Genotyping was performed by Taqman allelic discrimination assay
among 586 patients and 586 healthy controls. A significant impact on rs6740584
genotype distribution was found for childhood trauma (P = 0.015). We did not find
an association of CREB1 polymorphisms with MDD susceptibility. However, we found 
a significantly increased risk associated with the interactions of CREB1
polymorphisms and drinking (OR = 11.67, 95% CI = 2.52-54.18; OR = 11.52, 95% CI =
2.55-51.95 for rs11904814; OR = 4.18, 95% CI = 1.87-9.38; OR = 5.02, 95% CI =
2.27-11.14 for rs6740584; OR = 7.58, 95% CI = 2.05-27.98; OR = 7.59, 95% CI =
2.12-27.14 for rs2553206; OR = 8.37, 95% CI = 3.02-23.23; OR = 7.84, 95% CI =
2.93-20.98 for rs2551941). We also noted that CREB polymorphisms combined with
family harmony and childhood trauma conferred increased susceptibility for MDD.
In conclusion, polymorphisms in the CREB gene may not be independently associated
with MDD risk, but they are likely to confer increased susceptibility by
interacting with environmental risk factors in the Chinese population.

PMCID: PMC4348828
PMID: 25755794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2015 Feb;19(4):647-57.

The gender difference in effect of sevoflurane exposure on cognitive function and
hippocampus neuronal apoptosis in rats.

Xie H(1), She GM, Wang C, Zhang LY, Liu CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, The Second Affiliate Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, China. chenwangcn@yeah.net.

OBJECTIVE: Anesthesia and surgery can induce postoperative cognitive dysfunction.
Ser-133 phosphorylation sites of cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB) is 
a key gene that mediate a variety of downstream transcription initiation factors,
regulate neuronal survival and promote the expression of a large number of genes.
Thus, CREB may play a role in this impairment. We hypothesize that and
sevoflurane-induced cognitive impairment possibly via inhibiting the expression
of CREB downstream genes and proteins.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To test this hypothesis, adult Sprague-Dawley rats were
subjected to sevoflurane exposure and were tested with a series of behavioral
experiments (open field, passive avoidance test and Morris water maze test) at
different time (1 d to 95 d). Besides, blood gas changes and expiratory
sevoflurane concentrations were examined at 2 h; the levels of phosphorylated
CREB 1, the protein Bcl-2, Caspase-8 and Caspase-3 were assessed at 1 week and 3 
months after anesthesia. We also conducted a comparison in sevoflurane-induced
cognitive impairment between male and female rats.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Here, we found that sevoflurane anesthesia can impair
short-term cognitive function, which may be via down-regulating p-CREB1 and Bcl-2
expression and up-regulating Caspase-8 expression to reduce hippocampus neuronal 
apoptosis, and male rats suffered a more severe cognitive dysfunction than female
rats. In addition, sevoflurane can produce a reversible long-term cognitive
dysfunction in rats.

PMID: 25753883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Biol Chem. 2015 Apr 17;290(16):10447-59. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.609230. Epub
2015 Mar 9.

Membrane and integrative nuclear fibroblastic growth factor receptor (FGFR)
regulation of FGF-23.

Han X(1), Xiao Z(1), Quarles LD(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medicine, University of Tennessee Health Science
Center, Memphis, Tennessee 38163. (2)From the Department of Medicine, University 
of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee 38163 dquarles@uthsc.edu.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 14;290(33):20101.

Fibroblastic growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) signaling pathways are implicated
in the regulation of FGF-23 gene transcription, but the molecular pathways remain
poorly defined. We used low molecular weight (LMW, 18 kDa) FGF-2 and high
molecular weight (HMW) FGF-2 isoforms, which, respectively, activate cell surface
FGF receptors and intranuclear FGFR1, to determine the roles of membrane FGFRs
and integrative nuclear FGFR1 signaling (INFS) in the regulation of FGF-23 gene
transcription in osteoblasts. We found that LMW-FGF-2 induced NFAT and Ets1
binding to conserved cis-elements in the proximal FGF-23 promoter and stimulated 
FGF-23 promoter activity through PLC<U+03B3>/calcineurin/NFAT and MAPK pathways in
SaOS-2 and MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts. In contrast, HMW-FGF-2 stimulated FGF-23
promoter activity in osteoblasts through a cAMP-dependent binding of FGFR1 and
cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) to a conserved cAMP response element
(CRE) contiguous with the NFAT binding site in the FGF-23 promoter. Mutagenesis
of the NFAT and CRE binding sites, respectively, inhibited the effects of
LMW-FGF-2 and HMW-FGF-23 to stimulate FGF-23 promoter activity. FGF-2 activation 
of both membrane FGFRs and INFS-dependent FGFR1 pathways may provide a means to
integrate systemic and local regulation of FGF-23 transcription under diverse
physiological and pathological conditions.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4400353 [Available on 2016-04-17]
PMID: 25752607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Sci Signal. 2015 Mar 3;8(366):ra23. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2005673.

Ca2+ signals regulate mitochondrial metabolism by stimulating CREB-mediated
expression of the mitochondrial Ca2+ uniporter gene MCU.

Shanmughapriya S(1), Rajan S(1), Hoffman NE(1), Zhang X(2), Guo S(1), Kolesar
JE(3), Hines KJ(1), Ragheb J(1), Jog NR(4), Caricchio R(4), Baba Y(5), Zhou Y(6),
Kaufman BA(3), Cheung JY(2), Kurosaki T(5), Gill DL(7), Madesh M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.
Center for Translational Medicine, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19140,
USA. (2)Center for Translational Medicine, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA
19140, USA. (3)Department of Animal Biology, University of Pennsylvania School of
Veterinary Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (4)Department of Medicine,
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA. (5)Laboratory of Lymphocyte
Differentiation, World Premiere International Immunology Frontier Research
Center, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (6)Department of Cellular and
Molecular Physiology, Penn State University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA
17033, USA. (7)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Penn State
University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA. madeshm@temple.edu
dongill@psu.edu. (8)Department of Biochemistry, Temple University, Philadelphia, 
PA 19140, USA. Center for Translational Medicine, Temple University,
Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA. madeshm@temple.edu dongill@psu.edu.

Cytosolic Ca2+ signals, generated through the coordinated translocation of Ca2+
across the plasma membrane (PM) and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane, mediate 
diverse cellular responses. Mitochondrial Ca2+ is important for mitochondrial
function, and when cytosolic Ca2+ concentration becomes too high, mitochondria
function as cellular Ca2+ sinks. By measuring mitochondrial Ca2+ currents, we
found that mitochondrial Ca2+ uptake was reduced in chicken DT40 B lymphocytes
lacking either the ER-localized inositol trisphosphate receptor (IP3R), which
releases Ca2+ from the ER, or Orai1 or STIM1, components of the PM-localized Ca2+
-permeable channel complex that mediates store-operated calcium entry (SOCE) in
response to depletion of ER Ca2+ stores. The abundance of MCU, the pore-forming
subunit of the mitochondrial Ca2+ uniporter, was reduced in cells deficient in
IP3R, STIM1, or Orai1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and promoter reporter
analyses revealed that the Ca2+ -regulated transcription factor CREB (cyclic
adenosine monophosphate response element-binding protein) directly bound the MCU 
promoter and stimulated expression. Lymphocytes deficient in IP3R, STIM1, or
Orai1 exhibited altered mitochondrial metabolism, indicating that Ca2+ released
from the ER and SOCE-mediated signals modulates mitochondrial function. Thus, our
results showed that a transcriptional regulatory circuit involving Ca2+
-dependent activation of CREB controls the Ca2+ uptake capability of mitochondria
and hence regulates mitochondrial metabolism.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4722812
PMID: 25737585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2015 Sep;292(3):635-40. doi: 10.1007/s00404-015-3649-6. Epub
2015 Mar 4.

Identification of biological processes and genes for gestational diabetes
mellitus.

Su Y(1), Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and gynecology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan
University, No.169, Donghu Road, Wuchang District, Wuhan, 430071, China.

AIM: Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is one of the most usual complications
of pregnancy, while the correlations between genes and their known biological
processes need to be further elucidated.
METHODS: In the current study, microarray data GSE2956 containing a list of 435
significantly modified genes (differentially expressed genes, DEGs) were used.
Genes that correspond to official gene symbols were chosen and were functional
annotated for Gene Ontology (GO) and pathway analyses (p = 0.05). Then, the
protein-protein interaction (PPI) network and the sub network were constructed
and analyzed (combined score =0.4).
RESULTS: A total of 405 DEGs including 239 up-regulated and 166 down-regulated
genes were screened, and they were found mainly related to adhesion and motion,
stimulus-response, and wound healing, etc. Besides, a PPI network containing 217 
nodes and 644 lines was obtained. Hub genes including fibronectin 1 (FN1) and
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) were down-regulated, and leptin (LEP) and
calmodulin 1 (CALM1) were up-regulated. Three modules in the PPI network were
mined and similar functional terms enriched by DEGs of these modules were
obtained.
CONCLUSION: GO terms relevant to translation and metabolic process and their
related genes CREB1, ribosomal proteins and LEP, still the inflammation-related
proteins (e.g., IGF1 and CALM1) and cell adhesion-related protein FN1 may work
together and be essential for GDM. This study provides insight into the
cooperative interactions of metabolism and immune responses and the pathogenesis 
of GDM.

PMID: 25736406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Biol Pharm Bull. 2015;38(4):552-8. doi: 10.1248/bpb.b14-00700. Epub 2015 Jan 24.

Sinensetin enhances adipogenesis and lipolysis by increasing cyclic adenosine
monophosphate levels in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Kang SI(1), Shin HS, Kim SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Jeju National University.

Sinensetin is a rare polymethoxylated flavone (PMF) found in certain citrus
fruits. In this study, we investigated the effects of sinensetin on lipid
metabolism in 3T3-L1 cells. Sinensetin promoted adipogenesis in 3T3-L1
preadipocytes growing in incomplete differentiation medium, which did not contain
3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine. Sinensetin up-regulated expression of the adipogenic
transcription factors peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>,
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) a, and sterol regulatory element-binding
protein 1c. It also potentiated expression of C/EBPß and activation of
cAMP-responsive element-binding protein. Sinensetin enhanced activation of
protein kinase A and increased intracellular cAMP levels in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes.
In mature 3T3-L1 adipocytes, sinensetin stimulated lipolysis via a cAMP pathway. 
Taken together, these results suggest that sinensetin enhances adipogenesis and
lipolysis by increasing cAMP levels in adipocytes.

PMID: 25735898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 3;112(9):2699-704. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1424641112. Epub 2015 Feb 17.

ATF3 mediates inhibitory effects of ethanol on hepatic gluconeogenesis.

Tsai WW(1), Matsumura S(1), Liu W(1), Phillips NG(1), Sonntag T(1), Hao E(1), Lee
S(2), Hai T(3), Montminy M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology and. (2)Laboratory of
Neuronal Structure and Function, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, CA 92037; and. (3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Ohio 
State University, Columbus, OH 43210. (4)Clayton Foundation Laboratories for
Peptide Biology and montminy@salk.edu.

Increases in circulating glucagon during fasting maintain glucose balance by
stimulating hepatic gluconeogenesis. Acute ethanol intoxication promotes fasting 
hypoglycemia through an increase in hepatic NADH, which inhibits hepatic
gluconeogenesis by reducing the conversion of lactate to pyruvate. Here we show
that acute ethanol exposure also lowers fasting blood glucose concentrations by
inhibiting the CREB-mediated activation of the gluconeogenic program in response 
to glucagon. Ethanol exposure blocked the recruitment of CREB and its coactivator
CRTC2 to gluconeogenic promoters by up-regulating ATF3, a transcriptional
repressor that also binds to cAMP-responsive elements and thereby down-regulates 
gluconeogenic genes. Targeted disruption of ATF3 decreased the effects of ethanol
in fasted mice and in cultured hepatocytes. These results illustrate how the
induction of transcription factors with overlapping specificity can lead to
cross-coupling between stress and hormone-sensitive pathways.

PMCID: PMC4352786
PMID: 25730876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2015 Mar;139(3):407-12. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2013-0547-RS.

Clear cell sarcoma-like tumor of the gastrointestinal tract: an evolving entity.

Wang J(1), Thway K.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Histopathology, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust,
London, United Kingdom.

Clear cell sarcoma-like tumor of the gastrointestinal tract (CCSLGT) is a rare
malignant neoplasm that occurs in the wall of the small bowel, stomach, or large 
bowel, predominantly in young adults. It is an aggressive neoplasm that
frequently presents with metastatic disease and has a high mortality rate.
Histologically, it is usually composed of medium-sized primitive ovoid or
epithelioid cells with pale or clear cytoplasm that are arranged in sheets or in 
papillary or alveolar architectures. Clear cell sarcoma-like tumor of the
gastrointestinal tract is positive for S100 protein, invariably negative for
melanocyte-specific markers and is often also positive for neuroendocrine
markers. The etiology of CCSLGT is unknown, but many studies have shown
associations with EWSR1-CREB1 gene fusions and, less frequently, with EWSR1-ATF1 
fusions. Here, we discuss the current status of CCSLGT, including histologic,
immunophenotypic, and molecular findings.

PMID: 25724038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2015 May 1;308(9):C750-7. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00381.2014. Epub 2015 Feb 25.

Regulation of basal promoter activity of the human thiamine pyrophosphate
transporter SLC44A4 in human intestinal epithelial cells.

Nabokina SM(1), Ramos MB(1), Valle JE(1), Said HM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Physiology/Biophysics, University of California,
Irvine, California; and Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Long
Beach, California. (2)Departments of Medicine and Physiology/Biophysics,
University of California, Irvine, California; and Department of Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center, Long Beach, California hmsaid@uci.edu.

Microbiota of the large intestine synthesize considerable amount of vitamin B1 in
the form of thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP). There is a specific high-affinity
regulated carrier-mediated uptake system for TPP in human colonocytes (product of
the SLC44A4 gene). The mechanisms of regulation of SLC44A4 gene expression are
currently unknown. In this study, we characterized the SLC44A4 minimal promoter
region and identified transcription factors important for basal promoter activity
in colonic epithelial cells. The 5'-regulatory region of the SLC44A4 gene (1,022 
bp) was cloned and showed promoter activity upon transient transfection into
human colonic epithelial NCM460 cells. With the use of a series of 5'- and
3'-deletion luciferase reporter constructs, the minimal genomic region that
required basal transcription of the SLC44A4 gene expression was mapped between
nucleotides -178 and +88 (using the distal transcriptional start site as +1).
Mutational analysis performed on putative cis-regulatory elements established the
involvement of ETS/ELF3 [E26 transformation-specific sequence (ETS) proteins],
cAMP-responsive element (CRE), and SP1/GC-box sequence motifs in basal SLC44A4
promoter activity. By means of EMSA, binding of ELF3 and CRE-binding protein-1
(CREB-1) transcription factors to the SLC44A4 minimal promoter was shown.
Contribution of CREB into SLC44A4 promoter activity was confirmed using NCM460
cells overexpressing CREB. We also found high expression of ELF3 and CREB-1 in
colonic (NCM460) compared with noncolonic (ARPE19) cells, suggesting their
possible contribution to colon-specific pattern of SLC44A4 expression. This study
represents the first characterization of the SLC44A4 promoter and reports the
importance of both ELF3 and CREB-1 transcription factors in the maintenance of
basal promoter activity in colonic epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC4420793 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25715703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Cell Rep. 2015 Feb 24;10(7):1149-57. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.01.046. Epub 2015
Feb 19.

Feedback inhibition of CREB signaling promotes beta cell dysfunction in insulin
resistance.

Blanchet E(1), Van de Velde S(1), Matsumura S(1), Hao E(1), LeLay J(2), Kaestner 
K(2), Montminy M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Peptide Biology Laboratories, Salk Institute, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road,
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (2)Peptide Biology Laboratories, Salk Institute, 10010
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Department of Genetics,
Institute for Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism, University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, 3400 Civic Center Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104-5156, USA.
(3)Peptide Biology Laboratories, Salk Institute, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road,
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. Electronic address: montminy@salk.edu.

Although persistent elevations in circulating glucose concentrations promote
compensatory increases in pancreatic islet mass, unremitting insulin resistance
causes deterioration in beta cell function that leads to the progression to
diabetes. Here, we show that mice with a knockout of the CREB coactivator CRTC2
in beta cells have impaired oral glucose tolerance due to decreases in
circulating insulin concentrations. CRTC2 was found to promote beta cell function
in part by stimulating the expression of the transcription factor MafA. Chronic
hyperglycemia disrupted cAMP signaling in pancreatic islets by activating the
hypoxia inducible factor (HIF1)-dependent induction of the protein kinase A
inhibitor beta (PKIB), a potent inhibitor of PKA catalytic activity. Indeed,
disruption of the PKIB gene improved islet function in the setting of obesity.
These results demonstrate how crosstalk between nutrient and hormonal pathways
contributes to loss of pancreatic islet function.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25704817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Biol Chem. 2015 Apr 10;290(15):9614-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.614628. Epub 2015
Feb 18.

The transcription factor Mesp1 interacts with cAMP-responsive element binding
protein 1 (Creb1) and coactivates Ets variant 2 (Etv2) gene expression.

Shi X(1), Zirbes KM(1), Rasmussen TL(1), Ferdous A(2), Garry MG(1),
Koyano-Nakagawa N(1), Garry DJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Lillehei Heart Institute, Medical School, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455 and. (2)the Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390. (3)From the
Lillehei Heart Institute, Medical School, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota 55455 and garry@umn.edu.

Mesoderm posterior 1 (Mesp1) is well recognized for its role in cardiac
development, although it is expressed broadly in mesodermal lineages. We have
previously demonstrated important roles for Mesp1 and Ets variant 2 (Etv2) during
lineage specification, but their relationship has not been defined. This study
reveals that Mesp1 binds to the proximal promoter and transactivates Etv2 gene
expression via the CRE motif. We also demonstrate the protein-protein interaction
between Mesp1 and cAMP-responsive element binding protein 1 (Creb1) in vitro and 
in vivo. Utilizing transgenesis, lineage tracing, flow cytometry, and
immunostaining technologies, we define the lineage relationship between Mesp1-
and Etv2-expressing cell populations. We observe that the majority of
Etv2-EYFP(+) cells are derived from Mesp1-Cre(+) cells in both the embryo and
yolk sac. Furthermore, we observe that the conditional deletion of Etv2, using a 
Mesp1-Cre transgenic strategy, results in vascular and hematopoietic defects
similar to those observed in the global deletion of Etv2 and that it has
embryonic lethality by embryonic day 9.5. In summary, our study supports the
hypothesis that Mesp1 is a direct upstream transactivator of Etv2 during
embryogenesis and that Creb1 is an important cofactor of Mesp1 in the
transcriptional regulation of Etv2 gene expression.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4392264 [Available on 2016-04-10]
PMID: 25694434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Nat Cell Biol. 2015 Mar;17(3):311-21. doi: 10.1038/ncb3110. Epub 2015 Feb 16.

Reduced adenosine-to-inosine miR-455-5p editing promotes melanoma growth and
metastasis.

Shoshan E(1), Mobley AK(1), Braeuer RR(1), Kamiya T(1), Huang L(1), Vasquez
ME(1), Salameh A(2), Lee HJ(1), Kim SJ(1), Ivan C(3), Velazquez-Torres G(1), Nip 
KM(4), Zhu K(4), Brooks D(4), Jones SJ(4), Birol I(4), Mosqueda M(5), Wen YY(5), 
Eterovic AK(5), Sood AK(6), Hwu P(7), Gershenwald JE(8), Robertson AG(4), Calin
GA(9), Markel G(10), Fidler IJ(1), Bar-Eli M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Unit 0173, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (2)The University 
of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, 1825 Pressler Street, Houston, Texas
77030, USA. (3)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Unit 1362, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, Texas 77030, USA. 
(4)Canada's Michael Smith Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 4S6,
Canada. (5)Institute of Personalized Cancer Therapy, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (6)1]
Department of Cancer Biology, Unit 0173, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Department of
Gynecologic Oncology, Unit 1362, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (7)Department of Melanoma
Medical Oncology, Unit 0430, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (8)Department of Surgical
Oncology, Unit 1484, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515
Holcombe Blvd., Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (9)Department of Experimental
Therapeutics, Unit 1950, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 
Holcombe Blvd., Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (10)1] Ella Institute of Melanoma,
Sheba Medical Center, Ramat-Gan 52621, Israel [2] Clinical Microbiology and
Immunology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv 69978,
Israel.

Although recent studies have shown that adenosine-to-inosine (A-to-I) RNA editing
occurs in microRNAs (miRNAs), its effects on tumour growth and metastasis are not
well understood. We present evidence of CREB-mediated low expression of ADAR1 in 
metastatic melanoma cell lines and tumour specimens. Re-expression of ADAR1
resulted in the suppression of melanoma growth and metastasis in vivo.
Consequently, we identified three miRNAs undergoing A-to-I editing in the weakly 
metastatic melanoma but not in strongly metastatic cell lines. One of these
miRNAs, miR-455-5p, has two A-to-I RNA-editing sites. The biological function of 
edited miR-455-5p is different from that of the unedited form, as it recognizes a
different set of genes. Indeed, wild-type miR-455-5p promotes melanoma metastasis
through inhibition of the tumour suppressor gene CPEB1. Moreover, wild-type
miR-455 enhances melanoma growth and metastasis in vivo, whereas the edited form 
inhibits these features. These results demonstrate a previously unrecognized role
for RNA editing in melanoma progression.

PMCID: PMC4344852
PMID: 25686251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Mol Immunol. 2015 May;65(1):168-76. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2015.01.022. Epub 2015 
Feb 6.

Bacterial flagellin induces IL-6 expression in human basophils.

Jeon JH(1), Ahn KB(2), Kim SK(2), Im J(2), Yun CH(3), Han SH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Microbiology and Immunology, DRI, and BK21 Plus Program,
School of Dentistry, Seoul National University, Seoul 110-749, Republic of Korea;
Division of High-risk Pathogen Research, Center for Infectious Diseases, Korean
National Institute of Health, Cheongju-si, Chungcheongbuk-do 361-709, Republic of
Korea. (2)Department of Oral Microbiology and Immunology, DRI, and BK21 Plus
Program, School of Dentistry, Seoul National University, Seoul 110-749, Republic 
of Korea. (3)Department of Agricultural Biotechnology and Research Institute for 
Agriculture and Life Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-921, Republic
of Korea. (4)Department of Oral Microbiology and Immunology, DRI, and BK21 Plus
Program, School of Dentistry, Seoul National University, Seoul 110-749, Republic 
of Korea. Electronic address: shhan-mi@snu.ac.kr.

Binding of allergen to IgE on basophils positively affects allergic inflammation 
by releasing inflammatory mediators. Recently, basophils were shown to express
pattern-recognition receptors, such as toll-like receptors (TLRs), for
recognizing microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) that are independent of
allergen-IgE binding. In this study, we investigated whether MAMP alone can
induce IL-6 production in a human basophil cell line, KU812. Stimulation with
flagellin in the absence of allergen-IgE association induced IL-6 expression in
KU812 cells, while stimulation with lipoteichoic acid, peptidoglycan, or poly I:C
did not under the same condition. Flagellin-induced IL-6 expression was also
observed in human primary basophils. Flow cytometric analysis showed that KU812
cells expressed flagellin-recognizing TLR5 both on the cell surface and in the
cytoplasm while TLR2 and TLR3 were observed only in the cytoplasm. We further
demonstrated that although flagellin augmented the phosphorylation of
mitogen-activated protein kinases including p38 kinase, ERK, and JNK,
flagellin-induced IL-6 production was attenuated by inhibitors for p38 kinase and
ERK, but not by JNK inhibitors. In addition, flagellin enhanced phosphorylation
of signaling molecules including CREB, PKCd, and AKT. The inhibitors for PKA and 
PKC also showed inhibitory effects. Interestingly, flagellin-induced IL-6
production was further enhanced by pretreatment with inhibitors for PI3K,
implying that PI3K negatively affects the flagellin-induced IL-6 production.
Furthermore, DNA binding activities of NF-<U+03BA>B, AP-1, and CREB, which play pivotal 
roles in the induction of IL-6 gene expression, were increased by flagellin.
These results suggest that flagellin alone is sufficient to induce IL-6 gene
expression via TLR5 signaling pathways in human basophils.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25660969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2015 May 15;285(1):1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2015.01.019.
Epub 2015 Feb 2.

Data integration reveals key homeostatic mechanisms following low dose radiation 
exposure.

Tilton SC(1), Matzke MM(1), Sowa MB(2), Stenoien DL(2), Weber TJ(2), Morgan
WF(3), Waters KM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory, Richland, WA 99338, USA. (2)Health Impacts and Exposure Science,
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA 99338, USA. (3)Biological
Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA 99338,
USA. (4)Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory,
Richland, WA 99338, USA. Electronic address: katrina.waters@pnnl.gov.

The goal of this study was to define pathways regulated by low dose radiation to 
understand how biological systems respond to subtle perturbations in their
environment and prioritize pathways for human health assessment. Using an in
vitro 3-D human full thickness skin model, we have examined the temporal response
of dermal and epidermal layers to 10 cGy X-ray using transcriptomic, proteomic,
phosphoproteomic and metabolomic platforms. Bioinformatics analysis of each
dataset independently revealed potential signaling mechanisms affected by low
dose radiation, and integrating data shed additional insight into the mechanisms 
regulating low dose responses in human tissue. We examined direct interactions
among datasets (top down approach) and defined several hubs as significant
regulators, including transcription factors (YY1, MYC and CREB1), kinases (CDK2, 
PLK1) and a protease (MMP2). These data indicate a shift in response across time 
- with an increase in DNA repair, tissue remodeling and repression of cell
proliferation acutely (24-72h). Pathway-based integration (bottom up approach)
identified common molecular and pathway responses to low dose radiation,
including oxidative stress, nitric oxide signaling and transcriptional regulation
through the SP1 factor that would not have been identified by the individual data
sets. Significant regulation of key downstream metabolites of nitrative stress
was measured within these pathways. Among the features identified in our study,
the regulation of MMP2 and SP1 was experimentally validated. Our results
demonstrate the advantage of data integration to broadly define the pathways and 
networks that represent the mechanisms by which complex biological systems
respond to perturbation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25655199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mol Cell Biochem. 2015 May;403(1-2):33-41. doi: 10.1007/s11010-015-2334-1. Epub
2015 Feb 4.

MiR-1224-5p acts as a tumor suppressor by targeting CREB1 in malignant gliomas.

Qian J(1), Li R, Wang YY, Shi Y, Luan WK, Tao T, Zhang JX, Xu YC, You YP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, 300 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, 210029, China.

The dysregulation of miR-1224-5p has been reported in several human cancers.
However, the expression and function of miR-1224-5p in glioma remains unknown.
The aim of our study was to investigate the effect of miR-1224-5p on glioma cells
and to determine its functional signaling mediators. Using 198 glioma samples
within the Chinese Glioma Genome Atlas expression dataset, we demonstrated that
miR-1224-5p expression is decreased in high-grade gliomas when compared with
low-grade gliomas. Differential miR-1224-5p expression in 50 randomly selected
samples was verified by in situ hybridization. The expression of miR-1224-5p was 
shown to positively correlate with overall survival in 82 glioblastoma patients. 
Exogenous expression of miR-1224-5p in glioma cells suppressed proliferation and 
invasion and promoted apoptosis. Target prediction algorithms identified a
consensus miR-1224-5p recognition site in the 3'UTR of the cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB1) gene, and this sequence was shown to directly
confer miR-1224-5p repression in luciferase reporter assays. Furthermore,
exogenous miR-1224-5p expression was shown to down-regulate CREB1, as well as its
downstream target genes matrix metalloproteinase-9 and B-cell lymphoma-2.
Conversely, over-expression of CREB1 reversed the effect of miR-1224-5p on the
proliferation, invasion, and apoptosis of glioma cells. These data indicate that 
miR-1224-5p may inhibit tumor-associated activity in malignant gliomas by
targeting CREB1.

PMID: 25648114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Neuroscience. 2015 Apr 2;290:636-48. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.01.032.
Epub 2015 Jan 28.

Sphingosine kinase 2 and sphingosine-1-phosphate promotes mitochondrial function 
in dopaminergic neurons of mouse model of Parkinson's disease and in MPP+
-treated MN9D cells in vitro.

Sivasubramanian M(1), Kanagaraj N(1), Dheen ST(1), Tay SS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
Health System, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117594, Singapore.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
Health System, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117594, Singapore.
Electronic address: anttaysw@nus.edu.sg.

Dysregulation of sphingolipid metabolism has been shown to trigger the
pathophysiology of many neurodegenerative disorders. The present study focuses on
the role of one of the two sphingosine kinases, Sphk2 and its metabolite
sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) signaling in Parkinson's disease (PD). Our study
indicated a marked down regulation of Sphk2 expression in the substantia nigra
region of the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-induced PD
mouse model and in the cellular PD model. Localization studies indicated that
Sphk2 was predominantly present in mitochondria, proposing for its potential role
in mitochondrial functions. Since mitochondrial dysfunction has been described to
be the major pathological event in PD, the present study focused on the role of
Sphk2/S1P signaling in promoting mitochondrial functions in the MPTP-induced
mouse model of PD and in 1-methyl-4 phenylpyridinium (MPP(+))-treated MN9D cells.
Our study demonstrated that inhibition of Sphk2 decreased the expression of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator-1a (PGC-1a) and its
downstream targets nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1) and mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM) which are the key genes regulating mitochondrial
function. In addition, there was also a significant reduction in the total
cellular adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD 2) with an 
associated increase in levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the absence of 
Sphk2. Interestingly, it was found that treating the cells with exogenous S1P
along with MPP(+) exerted a neuroprotective effect by activation of p-CREB,
PGC-1a and NRF-1 in the MN9D cells. Moreover, the level of ATP was unaffected in 
the MPP(+)-treated cells in the presence of S1P. It was also observed that levels
of ROS were significantly decreased in the MPP(+)-treated cells in the presence
of exogenous S1P. Our study also demonstrated that S1P exerted its protective
effect through the S1P1 receptor. Taken together, these results show that
Sphk2/S1P has an important role to play in the survival of the dopaminergic
neurons, in the pathogenesis of PD.

Copyright © 2015 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25637806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Neurosci. 2015 Jan 28;35(4):1617-26. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3330-14.2015.

Rescue of impaired long-term facilitation at sensorimotor synapses of Aplysia
following siRNA knockdown of CREB1.

Zhou L(1), Zhang Y(1), Liu RY(1), Smolen P(1), Cleary LJ(1), Byrne JH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, The University of Texas Medical School
at Houston, Houston, Texas 77030. (2)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, The 
University of Texas Medical School at Houston, Houston, Texas 77030
John.H.Byrne@uth.tmc.edu.

Memory impairment is often associated with disrupted regulation of gene
induction. For example, deficits in cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) 
binding protein (CBP; an essential cofactor for activation of transcription by
CREB) impair long-term synaptic plasticity and memory. Previously, we showed that
small interfering RNA (siRNA)-induced knockdown of CBP in individual sensory
neurons significantly reduced levels of CBP and impaired 5-HT-induced long-term
facilitation (LTF) in sensorimotor cocultures from Aplysia. Moreover,
computational simulations of the biochemical cascades underlying LTF successfully
predicted training protocols that restored LTF following CBP knockdown. We
examined whether simulations could also predict a training protocol that restores
LTF impaired by siRNA-induced knockdown of the transcription factor CREB1.
Simulations based on a previously described model predicted rescue protocols that
were specific to CREB1 knockdown. Empirical studies demonstrated that one of
these rescue protocols partially restored impaired LTF. In addition, the
effectiveness of the rescue protocol was enhanced by pretreatment with rolipram, 
a selective cAMP phosphodiesterase inhibitor. These results provide further
evidence that computational methods can help rescue disruptions in signaling
cascades underlying memory formation. Moreover, the study demonstrates that the
effectiveness of computationally designed training protocols can be enhanced with
complementary pharmacological approaches.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/351617-10$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4308605
PMID: 25632137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2015 Jul;122:19-27. doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2015.01.002. Epub
2015 Jan 24.

Experience-dependent upregulation of multiple plasticity factors in the
hippocampus during early REM sleep.

Calais JB(1), Ojopi EB(2), Morya E(3), Sameshima K(4), Ribeiro S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Neurociências (LIM/27), Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de
Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo (USP), Departamento e Instituto de
Psiquiatria, São Paulo, Brazil; Laboratório Cesar Timo-Iaria, Instituto de Ensino
e Pesquisa, Hospital Sírio-Libanês, São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Laboratório de
Neurociências (LIM/27), Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade de São Paulo (USP), Departamento e Instituto de Psiquiatria, São
Paulo, Brazil. (3)Laboratório Cesar Timo-Iaria, Instituto de Ensino e Pesquisa,
Hospital Sírio-Libanês, São Paulo, Brazil; Edmond and Lily Safra International
Institute of Neuroscience of Natal (ELS-IINN), Natal, Brazil. (4)Laboratório
Cesar Timo-Iaria, Instituto de Ensino e Pesquisa, Hospital Sírio-Libanês, São
Paulo, Brazil; Departamento de Radiologia e Oncologia, Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade de São Paulo (USP), São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address:
ksameshi@usp.br. (5)Instituto do Cérebro, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do
Norte (UFRN), Natal, Brazil. Electronic address: sidartaribeiro@neuro.ufrn.br.

Sleep is beneficial to learning, but the underlying mechanisms remain
controversial. The synaptic homeostasis hypothesis (SHY) proposes that the
cognitive function of sleep is related to a generalized rescaling of synaptic
weights to intermediate levels, due to a passive downregulation of plasticity
mechanisms. A competing hypothesis proposes that the active upscaling and
downscaling of synaptic weights during sleep embosses memories in circuits
respectively activated or deactivated during prior waking experience, leading to 
memory changes beyond rescaling. Both theories have empirical support but the
experimental designs underlying the conflicting studies are not congruent,
therefore a consensus is yet to be reached. To advance this issue, we used
real-time PCR and electrophysiological recordings to assess gene expression
related to synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus and primary somatosensory
cortex of rats exposed to novel objects, then kept awake (WK) for 60 min and
finally killed after a 30 min period rich in WK, slow-wave sleep (SWS) or
rapid-eye-movement sleep (REM). Animals similarly treated but not exposed to
novel objects were used as controls. We found that the mRNA levels of Arc, Egr1, 
Fos, Ppp2ca and Ppp2r2d were significantly increased in the hippocampus of
exposed animals allowed to enter REM, in comparison with control animals.
Experience-dependent changes during sleep were not significant in the hippocampus
for Bdnf, Camk4, Creb1, and Nr4a1, and no differences were detected between
exposed and control SWS groups for any of the genes tested. No significant
changes in gene expression were detected in the primary somatosensory cortex
during sleep, in contrast with previous studies using longer post-stimulation
intervals (>180 min). The experience-dependent induction of multiple
plasticity-related genes in the hippocampus during early REM adds experimental
support to the synaptic embossing theory.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25626078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Cancer Sci. 2015 Apr;106(4):461-5. doi: 10.1111/cas.12618. Epub 2015 Mar 16.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 Tax oncoprotein represses the expression of
the BCL11B tumor suppressor in T-cells.

Takachi T(1), Takahashi M, Takahashi-Yoshita M, Higuchi M, Obata M, Mishima Y,
Okuda S, Tanaka Y, Matsuoka M, Saitoh A, Green PL, Fujii M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Niigata, Japan; Division of Pediatrics, Niigata University Graduate
School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is the etiological agent of adult T
cell leukemia (ATL), which is an aggressive form of T-cell malignancy. HTLV-1
oncoproteins, Tax and HBZ, play crucial roles in the immortalization of T-cells
and/or leukemogenesis by dysregulating the cellular functions in the host. Recent
studies show that HTLV-1-infected T-cells have reduced expression of the BCL11B
tumor suppressor protein. In the present study, we explored whether Tax and/or
HBZ play a role in downregulating BCL11B in HTLV-1-infected T-cells. Lentiviral
transduction of Tax in a human T-cell line repressed the expression of BCL11B at 
both the protein and mRNA levels, whereas the transduction of HBZ had little
effect on the expression. Tax mutants with a decreased activity for the NF-<U+03BA>B,
CREB or PDZ protein pathways still showed a reduced expression of the BCL11B
protein, thereby implicating a different function of Tax in BCL11B
downregulation. In addition, the HTLV-2 Tax2 protein reduced the BCL11B protein
expression in T-cells. Seven HTLV-1-infected T-cell lines, including three
ATL-derived cell lines, showed reduced BCL11B mRNA and protein expression
relative to an uninfected T-cell line, and the greatest reductions were in the
cells expressing Tax. Collectively, these results indicate that Tax is
responsible for suppressing BCL11B protein expression in HTLV-1-infected T-cells;
Tax-mediated repression of BCL11B is another mechanism that Tax uses to promote
oncogenesis of HTLV-1-infected T-cells.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4409891
PMID: 25613934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Oncol Rep. 2015 Mar;33(3):1505-11. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.3740. Epub 2015 Jan 20.

PKA/CREB regulates the constitutive promoter activity of the USP22 gene.

Xiong J(1), Zhou X(1), Gong Z(1), Wang T(1), Zhang C(2), Xu X(1), Liu J(3), Li
W(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Basic Medical Science, Jiujiang University, Jiujiang, Jiangxi
332000, P.R. China. (2)The Maternal and Child Health Hospital of Jiujiang City,
Jiujiang, Jiangxi 332000, P.R. China. (3)Key Laboratory of Jiangxi Province for
the Systems Bio-Medicine, Jiujiang University, Jiujiang, Jiangxi 332000, P.R.
China.

The human ubiquitin-specific processing enzyme 22 (USP22) plays a crucial role in
regulating cell cycle processes and its overexpression has been linked to tumor
progression. However, the mechanisms leading to USP22 transcriptional activation 
in human cancer cells are still unclear. Previously, we characterized the
5'-flanking sequence of the human USP22 gene and found a potential CREB/ATF
binding site within the basic promoter region. The present study found that this 
site was required for constitutive USP22 transcriptional activity in HeLa and
HepG2 cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay confirmed that CREB interacted
with this site. siRNA knockdown of CREB decreased USP22 transcriptional
activation and endogenous expression, whereas CREB overexpression did not affect 
transcriptional levels. Furthermore, USP22 promoter activity and expression were 
decreased by inhibiting PKA with H-89, but were not responsive to forskolin
induction. All of these results demonstrate that PKA/CREB is involved in the
regulation of constitutive promoter activity of the USP22 gene.

PMID: 25607216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Learn Mem. 2015 Jan 15;22(2):109-15. doi: 10.1101/lm.037044.114. Print 2015 Feb.

Serine 133 phosphorylation is not required for hippocampal CREB-mediated
transcription and behavior.

Briand LA(1), Lee BG(2), Lelay J(3), Kaestner KH(3), Blendy JA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122,
USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. (3)Department of Genetics,
University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA. (4)Department of Pharmacology, University of
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA
blendy@mail.med.upenn.edu.

The cAMP response element (CRE)-binding protein, CREB, is a transcription factor 
whose activity in the brain is critical for long-term memory formation.
Phosphorylation of Ser133 in the kinase-inducible domain (KID), that in turn
leads to the recruitment of the transcriptional coactivator CREB-binding protein 
(CBP), is thought to mediate the activation of CREB. However, the importance of
phosphorylation for CREB binding to DNA and subsequent gene transcription in vivo
is controversial. To definitively address the role of CREB phosphorylation in
gene transcription and learning and memory, we derived mutant mice lacking the
Ser133 phosphorylation site. These mice exhibit normal CREB-mediated gene
transcription for a number of genes implicated in learning and memory processes. 
Furthermore these mice have no deficits in hippocampus- or striatum-dependent
learning. Strikingly, our findings show that CREB phosphorylation at Ser133 is
not necessary for CREB binding to CRE sites, CREB-mediated transcription, or
CREB-mediated behavioral phenotypes associated with learning and memory.

© 2015 Briand et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4341363
PMID: 25593297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Mult Scler. 2015 Oct;21(11):1431-42. doi: 10.1177/1352458514564590. Epub 2015 Jan
12.

Analysis of genes, pathways and networks involved in disease severity and age at 
onset in primary-progressive multiple sclerosis.

Giacalone G(1), Clarelli F(2), Osiceanu AM(2), Guaschino C(1), Brambilla P(2),
Sorosina M(2), Liberatore G(1), Zauli A(2), Esposito F(1), Rodegher M(3), Ghezzi 
A(4), Galimberti D(5), Patti F(6), Barizzone N(7), Guerini F(8), Martinelli V(3),
Leone M(9), Comi G(1), D'Alfonso S(9), Martinelli Boneschi F(10).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics of Neurological Complex Disorders, Institute of
Experimental Neurology (INSPE), Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific
Institute, Italy/ Department of Neurology, Institute of Experimental Neurology
(INSPE), Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Genetics of Neurological Complex Disorders, Institute of
Experimental Neurology (INSPE), Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific
Institute, Italy. (3)Department of Neurology, Institute of Experimental Neurology
(INSPE), Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Italy.
(4)Department of Neurology, S. Antonio Abate Hospital, Gallarate, Italy.
(5)Neurology Unit, Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University 
of Milan, Fondazione Cà Granda, IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(6)Department DANA, G.F. Ingrassia, Neurosciences Section, Multiple Sclerosis
Center, PO "G. Rodolico," Catania, Italy. (7)Department of Health Sciences, "A.
Avogadro" University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy. (8)Don C. Gnocchi
Foundation ONLUS, IRCCS, 20100 Milan, Italy. (9)Department of Health Sciences,
"A. Avogadro" University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy/ SCDU Neurologia, "A.
Avogadro" University of Eastern Piedmont and AOU "Maggiore della Carità", Novara,
Italy; IRCAD (Interdisciplinary Research Center of Autoimmune Diseases), "A.
Avogadro" University of Piemonte Orientale, Novara, Italy. (10)Laboratory of
Genetics of Neurological Complex Disorders, Institute of Experimental Neurology
(INSPE), Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Italy/
Department of Neurology, Institute of Experimental Neurology (INSPE), Division of
Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Italy martinelli.filippo@hsr.it.

BACKGROUND: The role of genetic factors in influencing the clinical expression of
multiple sclerosis (MS) is unclear.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this paper is to identify genes, pathways and
networks implicated in age at onset (AAO) and severity, measured using the
Multiple Sclerosis Severity Score (MSSS), of primary-progressive MS (PPMS).
METHODS: We conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 470 PPMS patients
of Italian origin:. Allelic association of 296,589 SNPs with AAO and MSSS was
calculated. Pathway and network analyses were also conducted using different
tools.
RESULTS: No single association signal exceeded genome-wide significance in AAO
and MSSS analyses. Nominally associated genes to AAO and MSSS were enriched in
both traits for 10 pathways, including: "oxidative phosphorylation"
(FDRAAO=9*10(-4); FDRMSSS=3.0*10(-2)), "citrate (TCA) cycle" (FDRAAO=1.6*10(-2); 
FDRMSSS=3.2*10(-3)), and "B cell receptor signaling" (FDRAAO=3.1*10(-2);
FDRMSSS=2.2*10(-3)). In addition, an enrichment of "chemokine signaling pathway" 
(FDR=9*10(-4)) for AAO and of "leukocyte transendothelial migration"
(FDR=2.4*10(-3)) for MSSS trait was observed, among others. Network analysis
revealed that p53 and CREB1 were central hubs for AAO and MSSS traits,
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the fact that no major effect signals emerged in the present
GWAS, our data suggest that genetic variants acting in the context of oxidative
stress and immune dysfunction could modulate the onset and severity of PPMS.

© The Author(s), 2015.

PMID: 25583839  [PubMed - in process]


126. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2014 Oct 31;18(4). pii: pyu029. doi:
10.1093/ijnp/pyu029.

Chronic fluoxetine increases extra-hippocampal neurogenesis in adult mice.

Sachs BD(1), Caron MG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC (Drs
Sachs and Caron); Department of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC (Dr Caron). (2)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, NC (Drs Sachs and Caron); Department of Neurobiology, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC (Dr Caron). m.caron@cellbio.duke.edu.

BACKGROUND: Chronic treatment with antidepressants has been shown to enhance
neurogenesis in the adult mammalian brain. Although this effect was initially
reported to be restricted to the hippocampus, recent work has suggested that
fluoxetine, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, also promotes neurogenesis 
in the cortex. However, whether antidepressants target neural progenitor cells in
other brain regions has not been examined.
METHODS: Here, we used BrdU labeling and immunohistochemistry with a transgenic
mouse line in which nestin+ neural progenitor cells can be inducibly labeled with
the fluorescent protein, Tomato, following tamoxifen administration. We
investigated the effects of chronic fluoxetine on cell proliferation and nestin+ 
progenitor cells in periventricular areas in the medial hypothalamus and medial
habenula, two brain areas involved in stress and anxiety responses.
RESULTS: Our data provide the first in vivo evidence that fluoxetine promotes
cell proliferation and neurogenesis and increases the mRNA levels of BDNF in the 
hypothalamus and habenula.
CONCLUSIONS: By identifying novel cellular targets of fluoxetine, our results may
provide new insight into the mechanisms underlying antidepressant responses.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of CINP.

PMCID: PMC4360216
PMID: 25583694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jan 27;112(4):1202-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1417423112. Epub 2015 Jan 12.

STEP61 is a substrate of the E3 ligase parkin and is upregulated in Parkinson's
disease.

Kurup PK(1), Xu J(1), Videira RA(2), Ononenyi C(1), Baltazar G(2), Lombroso
PJ(3), Nairn AC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Child Study Center and. (2)Health Science Research Center, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Universidade da Beira Interior, 6200-506 Covilhã, Portugal. (3)Child
Study Center and Departments of Psychiatry and Neurobiology, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520; and. (4)Departments of Psychiatry and
angus.nairn@yale.edu.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by the degeneration of dopaminergic
neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc). The loss of SNc dopaminergic
neurons affects the plasticity of striatal neurons and leads to significant motor
and cognitive disabilities during the progression of the disease. PARK2 encodes
for the E3 ubiquitin ligase parkin and is implicated in genetic and sporadic PD. 
Mutations in PARK2 are a major contributing factor in the early onset of
autosomal-recessive juvenile parkinsonism (AR-JP), although the mechanisms by
which a disruption in parkin function contributes to the pathophysiology of PD
remain unclear. Here we demonstrate that parkin is an E3 ligase for STEP61
(striatal-enriched protein tyrosine phosphatase), a protein tyrosine phosphatase 
implicated in several neuropsychiatric disorders. In cellular models, parkin
ubiquitinates STEP61 and thereby regulates its level through the proteasome
system, whereas clinically relevant parkin mutants fail to do so. STEP61 protein 
levels are elevated on acute down-regulation of parkin or in PARK2 KO rat
striatum. Relevant to PD, STEP61 accumulates in the striatum of human sporadic PD
and in 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-lesioned mice. The
increase in STEP61 is associated with a decrease in the phosphorylation of its
substrate ERK1/2 and the downstream target of ERK1/2, pCREB [phospho-CREB (cAMP
response element-binding protein)]. These results indicate that STEP61 is a novel
substrate of parkin, although further studies are necessary to determine whether 
elevated STEP61 levels directly contribute to the pathophysiology of PD.

PMCID: PMC4313846
PMID: 25583483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Neurosci. 2015 Jan 7;35(1):386-95. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3284-14.2015.

cJun and CREB2 in the postsynaptic neuron contribute to persistent long-term
facilitation at a behaviorally relevant synapse.

Hu JY(1), Levine A(2), Sung YJ(3), Schacher S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, New York 10032 and
jh2004@columbia.edu. (2)Department of Neuroscience, Columbia University College
of Physicians and Surgeons, New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, New
York 10032 and. (3)The Commonwealth Medical College, Department of Basic
Sciences, Scranton, Pennsylvania 18509.

Comment in
    J Neurosci. 2015 May 27;35(21):8039-41.

Basic region leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factors regulate gene expression
critical for long-term synaptic plasticity or neuronal excitability contributing 
to learning and memory. At sensorimotor synapses of Aplysia, changes in
activation or expression of CREB1 and CREB2 in sensory neurons are required for
long-term synaptic plasticity. However, it is unknown whether concomitant
stimulus-induced changes in expression and activation of bZIP transcription
factors in the postsynaptic motor neuron also contribute to persistent long-term 
facilitation (P-LTF). We overexpressed various forms of CREB1, CREB2, or cJun in 
the postsynaptic motor neuron L7 in cell culture to examine whether these factors
contribute to P-LTF. P-LTF is evoked by 2 consecutive days of 5-HT applications
(2 5-HT), while a transient form of LTF is produced by 1 day of 5-HT applications
(1 5-HT). Significant increases in the expression of both cJun and CREB2 mRNA in 
L7 accompany P-LTF. Overexpressing each bZIP factor in L7 did not alter basal
synapse strength, while coexpressing cJun and CREB2 in L7 evoked persistent
increases in basal synapse strength. In contrast, overexpressing cJun and CREB2
in sensory neurons evoked persistent decreases in basal synapse strength.
Overexpressing wild-type cJun or CREB2, but not CREB1, in L7 can replace the
second day of 5-HT applications in producing P-LTF. Reducing cJun activity in L7 
blocked P-LTF evoked by 2 5-HT. These results suggest that expression and
activation of different bZIP factors in both presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons
contribute to persistent change in synapse strength including stimulus-dependent 
long-term synaptic plasticity.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/350386-10$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4287154
PMID: 25568130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Neurooncol. 2015 Mar;122(1):87-95. doi: 10.1007/s11060-014-1706-9. Epub 2015
Jan 7.

p-CREB expression in human meningiomas: correlation with angiogenesis and
recurrence risk.

Barresi V(1), Branca G, Caffo M, Tuccari G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology "Gaetano Barresi", AOU Polyclinic G. Martino,
Pad D, Via Consolare Valeria, 98125, Messina, Italy, vbarresi@unime.it.

Despite total surgical resection, a percentage of meningiomas do unexpectedly
recur. At present the prediction of recurrence risk and the management of
recurrent tumours represent major issues in the patients affected by meningiomas.
The present study aims at investigating the prognostic value of the expression of
the phosphorylated transcription factor cyclic AMP responsive element binding
protein (p-CREB) in a series of meningiomas of different histotype and grade.
While no p-CREB expression was found in specimens of normal leptomeninges, 71 %
of meningiomas in our cohort expressed p-CREB. In addition, nuclear expression of
p-CREB was present in the endothelia of tumor vessels in all of the meningiomas, 
but not in the vessels of the non-neoplastic meninges. High expression of p-CREB 
was significantly more frequent in meningiomas showing atypical, chordoid or
microcystic histotype (P = 0.0003), high histological grade (P < 0.0001), high
Ki-67 labeling index (P = 0.0001), high microvessel density counts (P < 0.0001)
and high vascular endothelial growth factor expression (P = 0.0113). In addition,
high p-CREB expression was significantly associated with the development of
recurrences (P = 0.0031) and it was a significant negative, albeit not
independent, prognostic factor for disease free survival in patients with
meningiomas submitted to complete surgical removal (P = 0.0019). In conclusion,
we showed that p-CREB is expressed in human meningiomas and that it represents a 
significant predictor of recurrence risk in these tumors. Due to its high
expression in more aggressive tumors and in the tumor vessels, it may represent a
novel therapeutic target in meningiomas.

PMID: 25563814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Cell Signal. 2015 Mar;27(3):532-44. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.12.018. Epub 2015
Jan 3.

Signaling pathway for adiponectin expression in adipocytes by osteocalcin.

Otani T(1), Mizokami A(2), Hayashi Y(3), Gao J(2), Mori Y(4), Nakamura S(5),
Takeuchi H(6), Hirata M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Faculty of Dental Science, 
Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan; Section
of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University, 
3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. (2)Laboratory of Molecular
and Cellular Biochemistry, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University, 3-1-1
Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. (3)Laboratory of Molecular and
Cellular Biochemistry, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University, 3-1-1
Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan; Section of Oral and Maxillofacial 
Oncology, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi,
Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. (4)Section of Oral and Maxillofacial
Surgery, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi,
Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. (5)Section of Oral and Maxillofacial
Oncology, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi,
Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. (6)Division of Applied Pharmacology, Kyushu 
Dental University, 2-6-1 Manazuru, Kokurakita-ku, Kitakyushu 803-8580, Japan.
Electronic address: r12takeuchi@fa.kyu-dent.ac.jp. (7)Laboratory of Molecular and
Cellular Biochemistry, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University, 3-1-1
Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. Electronic address:
hirata1@dent.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

In addition to providing skeletal support, the bone is an endocrine organ that
produces osteocalcin, whose uncarboxylated form (GluOC) increases insulin
secretion either directly or indirectly by promoting incretin secretion. We have 
now investigated the signaling pathway by which GluOC increases expression of
adiponectin in adipocytes. Activation of its putative receptor GPRC6A by GluOC
induced the intracellular accumulation of cAMP and consequent activation of
protein kinase A (PKA) in differentiated 3T3-L1 adipocytes. It also induced
phosphorylation of CREB (cAMP response element binding protein), but this effect 
appeared to be mediated indirectly by extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
rather than directly by PKA, given that it was attenuated by the ERK signaling
inhibitor U0126. Activated PKA also induced activation of the tyrosine kinase
Src, the small GTPase Rap1, an upstream of ERK and CREB phosphorylation.
Activated CREB up-regulated the expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>), which in turn led to induction of adiponectin expression.
Finally, intermittent oral administration of GluOC in mice reduced the size of
gonadal white adipocytes as well as increased the expression of PPAR<U+03B3> and
adiponectin in these cells. Our results have thus revealed the signaling pathway 
by which GluOC induces adiponectin expression in adipocytes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25562427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Mol Cancer Res. 2015 Apr;13(4):620-35. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0182-T. Epub
2014 Dec 29.

Salt-inducible kinase 2 regulates mitotic progression and transcription in
prostate cancer.

Bon H(1), Wadhwa K(1), Schreiner A(2), Osborne M(3), Carroll T(4), Ramos-Montoya 
A(1), Ross-Adams H(1), Visser M(5), Hoffmann R(6), Ahmed AA(7), Neal DE(8), Mills
IG(9).

Author information: 
(1)Uro-Oncology Research Group, Cambridge Research Institute, Cambridge, United
Kingdom. (2)Microscopy and Imaging Core, Cambridge Research Institute, Cambridge,
United Kingdom. (3)Genomics Core, Cambridge Research Institute, Cambridge, United
Kingdom. (4)Bioinformatics Core, Cambridge Research Institute, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom. (5)Health Care Innovation, Philips Research, Eidhoven, the Netherlands. 
(6)Molecular Diagnostics, Philips Research, Eindhoven, the Netherlands.
(7)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom. Nuffield Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (8)Uro-Oncology Research Group, Cambridge
Research Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Department of Urology,
Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Department of Oncology,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (9)Uro-Oncology Research
Group, Cambridge Research Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Department of
Urology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. Department of Cancer Prevention,
Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. Prostate Cancer Research Group, Centre
for Molecular Medicine Norway, University of Oslo and Oslo University Hospital,
Oslo, Norway. ian.mills@ncmm.uio.no.

Salt-inducible kinase 2 (SIK2) is a multifunctional kinase of the AMPK family
that plays a role in CREB1-mediated gene transcription and was recently reported 
to have therapeutic potential in ovarian cancer. The expression of this kinase
was investigated in prostate cancer clinical specimens. Interestingly,
auto-antibodies against SIK2 were increased in the plasma of patients with
aggressive disease. Examination of SIK2 in prostate cancer cells found that it
functions both as a positive regulator of cell-cycle progression and a negative
regulator of CREB1 activity. Knockdown of SIK2 inhibited cell growth, delayed
cell-cycle progression, induced cell death, and enhanced CREB1 activity.
Expression of a kinase-dead mutant of SIK2 also inhibited cell growth, induced
cell death, and enhanced CREB1 activity. Treatment with a small-molecule SIK2
inhibitor (ARN-3236), currently in preclinical development, also led to enhanced 
CREB1 activity in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Because CREB1 is a
transcription factor and proto-oncogene, it was posited that the effects of SIK2 
on cell proliferation and viability might be mediated by changes in gene
expression. To test this, gene expression array profiling was performed and while
SIK2 knockdown or overexpression of the kinase-dead mutant affected established
CREB1 target genes; the overlap with transcripts regulated by forskolin (FSK),
the adenylate cyclase/CREB1 pathway activator, was incomplete.IMPLICATIONS: This 
study demonstrates that targeting SIK2 genetically or therapeutically will have
pleiotropic effects on cell-cycle progression and transcription factor
activation, which should be accounted for when characterizing SIK2 inhibitors.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4383640
PMID: 25548099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Leukemia. 2015 Jun;29(6):1379-89. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.350. Epub 2014 Dec 26.

Replication factor C3 is a CREB target gene that regulates cell cycle progression
through the modulation of chromatin loading of PCNA.

Chae HD(1), Mitton B(1), Lacayo NJ(1), Sakamoto KM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.

CREB (cyclic AMP response element-binding protein) is a transcription factor
overexpressed in normal and neoplastic myelopoiesis and regulates cell cycle
progression, although its oncogenic mechanism has not been well characterized.
Replication factor C3 (RFC3) is required for chromatin loading of proliferating
cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) which is a sliding clamp platform for recruiting
numerous proteins in the DNA metabolism. CREB1 expression, which was activated by
E2F, was coupled with RFC3 expression during the G1/S progression in the KG-1
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell line. There was also a direct correlation
between the expression of RFC3 and CREB1 in human AML cell lines as well as in
the AML cells from the patients. CREB interacted directly with the CRE site in
RFC3 promoter region. CREB-knockdown inhibited primarily G1/S cell cycle
transition by decreasing the expression of RFC3 as well as PCNA loading onto the 
chromatin. Exogenous expression of RFC3 was sufficient to rescue the impaired
G1/S progression and PCNA chromatin loading caused by CREB knockdown. These
studies suggest that RFC3 may have a role in neoplastic myelopoiesis by promoting
the G1/S progression and its expression is regulated by CREB.

PMCID: PMC4456282
PMID: 25541153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Mol Genet Metab. 2015 Mar;114(3):397-402. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.11.017. Epub 
2014 Dec 5.

Targeting novel signaling pathways for resistant acute myeloid leukemia.

Sakamoto KM(1), Grant S(2), Saleiro D(3), Crispino JD(3), Hijiya N(4), Giles
F(3), Platanias L(5), Eklund EA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. (2)Division of Hematology/Oncology and
Palliative Care, Department of Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University School 
of Medicine, Richmond, VA, USA. (3)Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center
and Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern
University Medical School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. (4)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. (5)Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer
Center and Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern 
University Medical School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA; Division of
Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Chicago, IL, USA.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a hematologic malignancy that is the most common 
type of acute leukemia diagnosed in adults and the second most common type in
children. The overall survival is poor and treatment is associated with
significant complications and even death. In addition, a significant number of
patients will not respond to therapy or relapse. In this review, several new
signaling proteins aberrantly regulated in AML are described, including CREB,
Triad1, Bcl-2 family members, Stat3, and mTOR/MEK. Identifying more effective and
less toxic agents will provide novel approaches to treat AML.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4355162
PMID: 25533111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. BMC Cancer. 2014 Dec 11;14:935. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-935.

Inhibition of GPR30 by estriol prevents growth stimulation of triple-negative
breast cancer cells by 17ß-estradiol.

Girgert R(1), Emons G, Gründker C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Medicine Göttingen,
Robert-Koch-Strasse 40, D-37075 Göttingen, Germany.
rainer.girgert@med.uni-goettingen.de.

BACKGROUND: Due to the lack of ERa, triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs) are
not susceptible to endocrine therapy using antiestrogens. However, the majority
of TNBCs express the membrane bound estrogen receptor GPR30. We have recently
shown that knock-down of GPR30 expression prevented growth stimulation of TNBC
cell lines by 17ß-estradiol. Now we analyzed whether specific inhibition of GPR30
represents a new option for therapy of TNBC.
METHODS: Growth of TNBC cells was assessed using Alamar-blue colorimetric assay. 
Activation of c-Src and EGF-receptor was assessed using Western blots. Expression
of c-fos, cyclin D1 and aromatase was quantified by RT-PCR. Ga-specific signaling
of GPR30 was analyzed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay.
RESULTS: HCC1806 cells showed the highest GPR30 expression, in HCC70 cells it was
clearly lower, in MDA-MB-231 cells it was lowest. 10-8 M 17ß-estradiol
significantly increased proliferation of HCC1806 cells to 134 ± 12% of control (p
< 0.01). Proliferation of HCC70 cells was slightly increased to 116 ± 8% of
control. Estriol significantly reduced cell number of HCC1806 cells to 16 ± 12%
(p < 0.01). Cell number of HCC70 cells and of MDA-MB-231 cells was reduced to 68 
± 25% and to 61 ± 10%, respectively.Activity of Src kinase increased to 150 ± 10%
(p < 0.05) by 10-8 M 17ß-estradiol treatment in HCC1806 and to 220 ± 20% in HCC70
cells (p < 0.01). Estriol treatment completely inhibited 17ß-estradiol-induced
p-src activation. Transactivation of EGF-receptor increased by estradiol
treatment to 350% in HCC1806 and to 280% in HCC70 cells. Estriol completely
suppressed EGF-receptor transactivation. c-fos expression increased to 260% and
to 190%, respectively. Estriol reduced this induction to 160% (HCC1806) and below
control in HCC70 cells. Cyclin D1 was induced to 290% (HCC1806) and 170% (HCC70) 
and completely inhibited by estriol. 17ß-estradiol increased CREB-phosphorylation
to 400%. Binding of phospho-CREB to a CRE of cyclin D1 was enhanced to 320%.
CONCLUSION: Specific pharmacological inhibition of GPR30 might become a promising
targeted therapy for TNBC in future.

PMCID: PMC4364648
PMID: 25496649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Photochem Photobiol. 2015 Mar-Apr;91(2):379-86. doi: 10.1111/php.12400. Epub 2015
Jan 12.

Nobiletin, a polymethoxy flavonoid, reduced endothelin-1 plus SCF-induced
pigmentation in human melanocytes.

Kim HJ(1), Yonezawa T, Teruya T, Woo JT, Cha BY.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Biological Functions, Chubu University, Kasugai, Aichi,
Japan.

Nobiletin is a unique flavonoid having polymethoxy groups and has exhibited
anti-inflammatory and antiobesity effects. Here, we examined the inhibition of
nobiletin on melanogenesis induced by endothelin-1 (ET) and stem cell factor
(SCF) in normal human melanocytes. Nobiletin dose dependently reduced ET plus
SCF-stimulated tyrosinase activity without causing cytotoxicity. Nobiletin
reduced cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation and
microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) expression, which is a key 
transcription factor for tyrosinase expression in pigmentation induced by ET plus
SCF stimulation. Nobiletin treatment effectively decreased ET plus SCF-induced
Raf-1, MEK and ERK1/2 phosphorylation and also downregulated the
forskolin-induced phosphorylation of CREB. Furthermore, nobiletin inhibited ET
plus SCF-triggered production of melanin and expression of MITF/tyrosinase in a
three-dimensional human epidermal model. In accordance with protein expression,
the expression of genes related to the pigmentation was also increased in the
cells stimulated with ET plus SCF and the cotreatment with nobiletin decreased
obviously the ET plus SCF-triggered gene expressions of tyrosinase, PMEL, TRP1
and MITF. Nobiletin contributes to hypopigmentation by downregulating MITF and
tyrosinase expression through reduced Raf-1 phosphorylation. Our findings
implicate nobiletin as a potential new whitening agent.

© 2014 The American Society of Photobiology.

PMID: 25488359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Chembiochem. 2015 Jan 19;16(2):312-9. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201402526. Epub 2014 Dec 
8.

Inhibition of CREB phosphorylation by conjugates of adenosine analogues and
arginine-rich peptides, inhibitors of PKA catalytic subunit.

Kriisa M(1), Sinijärv H, Vaasa A, Enkvist E, Kostenko S, Moens U, Uri A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemistry, University of Tartu, 14<U+2009>A Ravila Street, 50411, Tartu 
(Estonia).

Bisubstrate inhibitors of protein kinases associate simultaneously with two
substrate-binding sites of the kinase and thus potentially possess better
inhibitory potency and selectivity than inhibitors binding to only the conserved 
ATP-site of the kinase. We have previously used conjugates of adenosine analogues
and arginine-rich peptides (ARCs) to develop proteolytically stable cell plasma
membrane-permeable bisubstrate inhibitors whose biochemical affinities towards
several basophilic protein kinases of the AGC group are in the picomolar range.
The potency of bisubstrate inhibitors to affect the phosphorylation of proteins
in living cells has been described in a limited number of publications. In this
study, the effect of ARCs on the protein kinase A (PKA)-catalysed cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation pathway was studied in living
mammalian cells. Our results demonstrate that at low micromolar extracellular
concentration N-myristoylated ARCs are capable of reducing the activity of
transcription factor CREB through inhibition of PKA.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25487811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Infect Immun. 2015 Feb;83(2):832-45. doi: 10.1128/IAI.03012-14. Epub 2014 Dec 8.

Transcriptomic and proteomic analyses reveal key innate immune signatures in the 
host response to the gastrointestinal pathogen Campylobacter concisus.

Kaakoush NO(1), Deshpande NP(2), Man SM(3), Burgos-Portugal JA(4), Khattak FA(4),
Raftery MJ(5), Wilkins MR(6), Mitchell HM(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, The University of New South
Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia n.kaakoush@unsw.edu.au. (2)Systems
Biology Initiative, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, The
University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. (3)Department 
of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(4)School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, The University of New South
Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. (5)Biological Mass Spectrometry
Facility, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. 
(6)School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, The University of New South
Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia Systems Biology Initiative, School of
Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, The University of New South Wales,
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia Ramaciotti Centre for Gene Function Analysis, 
The University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

Pathogenic species within the genus Campylobacter are responsible for a
considerable burden on global health. Campylobacter concisus is an emergent
pathogen that plays a role in acute and chronic gastrointestinal disease. Despite
ongoing research on Campylobacter virulence mechanisms, little is known regarding
the immunological profile of the host response to Campylobacter infection. In
this study, we describe a comprehensive global profile of innate immune responses
to C. concisus infection in differentiated THP-1 macrophages infected with an
adherent and invasive strain of C. concisus. Using RNA sequencing (RNA-seq),
quantitative PCR (qPCR), mass spectrometry, and confocal microscopy, we observed 
differential expression of pattern recognition receptors and robust upregulation 
of DNA- and RNA-sensing molecules. In particular, we observed IFI16 inflammasome 
assembly in C. concisus-infected macrophages. Global profiling of the
transcriptome revealed the significant regulation of a total of 8,343 transcripts
upon infection with C. concisus, which included the activation of key
inflammatory pathways involving CREB1, NF-<U+03BA>B, STAT, and interferon regulatory
factor signaling. Thirteen microRNAs and 333 noncoding RNAs were significantly
regulated upon infection, including MIR221, which has been associated with
colorectal carcinogenesis. This study represents a major advance in our
understanding of host recognition and innate immune responses to infection by C. 
concisus.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4294260
PMID: 25486993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 8;9(12):e114481. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114481.
eCollection 2014.

Immediate and persistent transcriptional correlates of long-term sensitization
training at different CNS loci in Aplysia californica.

Herdegen S(1), Conte C(1), Kamal S(1), Calin-Jageman RJ(1), Calin-Jageman IE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Program, Dominican University, River Forest, Illinois, United
States of America.

Repeated noxious stimulation produces long-term sensitization of defensive
withdrawal reflexes in Aplysia californica, a form of long-term memory that
requires changes in both transcription and translation. Previous work has
identified 10 transcripts which are rapidly up-regulated after long-term
sensitization training in the pleural ganglia. Here we use quantitative PCR to
begin examining how these transcriptional changes are expressed in different CNS 
loci related to defensive withdrawal reflexes at 1 and 24 hours after long-term
sensitization training. Specifically, we sample from a) the sensory wedge of the 
pleural ganglia, which exclusively contains the VC nociceptor cell bodies that
help mediate input to defensive withdrawal circuits, b) the remaining pleural
ganglia, which contain withdrawal interneurons, and c) the pedal ganglia, which
contain many motor neurons. Results from the VC cluster show different temporal
patterns of regulation: 1) rapid but transient up-regulation of Aplysia homologs 
of C/EBP, C/EBP<U+03B3>, and CREB1, 2) delayed but sustained up-regulation of BiP,
Tolloid/BMP-1, and sensorin, 3) rapid and sustained up-regulation of Egr, GlyT2, 
VPS36, and an uncharacterized protein (LOC101862095), and 4) an unexpected lack
of regulation of Aplysia homologs of calmodulin (CaM) and reductase-related
protein (RRP). Changes in the remaining pleural ganglia mirror those found in the
VC cluster at 1 hour but with an attenuated level of regulation. Because these
samples had almost no expression of the VC-specific transcript sensorin, our data
suggests that sensitization training likely induces transcriptional changes in
either defensive withdrawal interneurons or neurons unrelated to defensive
withdrawal. In the pedal ganglia, we observed only a rapid but transient increase
in Egr expression, indicating that long-term sensitization training is likely to 
induce transcriptional changes in motor neurons but raising the possibility of
different transcriptional endpoints in this cell type.

PMCID: PMC4259342
PMID: 25486125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2015 Jan;40(1):243. doi: 10.1038/npp.2014.234.

Memory allocation.

Frankland PW(1), Josselyn SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Program in Neurosciences & Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, ON, Canada [2] Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON, Canada [3] Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada [4] Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

PMCID: PMC4262914
PMID: 25482172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Behav Brain Res. 2015 Mar 1;280:128-40. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2014.11.039. Epub 2014
Dec 2.

Antidepressant-like effects of alarin produced by activation of TrkB receptor
signaling pathways in chronic stress mice.

Wang M(1), Zhou W(2), Zhou X(2), Zhuang F(2), Chen Q(2), Li M(2), Ma T(2), Gu
S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of New Drug Research and Clinical Pharmacy, Department 
of Pharmacology, Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou 221004, China; Department of
Pharmacy, The People's Hospital of Xinyi, Xuzhou 221004, China. (2)Jiangsu Key
Laboratory of New Drug Research and Clinical Pharmacy, Department of
Pharmacology, Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou 221004, China. (3)Jiangsu Key
Laboratory of New Drug Research and Clinical Pharmacy, Department of
Pharmacology, Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou 221004, China. Electronic address:
gushling@aliyun.com.

Alarin is a newly identified member of the galanin family of neuropeptides. Until
now, research on alarin is limited compared with other members of the galanin
family. Unearthing the new biological effects of alarin and its unidentified
receptor(s) interests us. We previously showed that alarin has an effect on
depression-like behaviors, although the underlying mechanisms are not fully
clarified. The present study verified the antidepressant-like effects of alarin
using the unpredictable chronic mild stresses (UCMS) paradigm, and explored the
mechanism that underlies antidepressant-like effects of alarin in mice. Previous 
research has shown that TrkB receptor-mediated ERK and AKT signaling pathways
participate in depression pathophysiology. Therefore, we aimed to explore whether
alarin improved depression-like behaviors by increasing activity of ERK and AKT
pathways mediated by TrkB. Results showed that alarin significantly reduced
immobility time in the forced swim test and latency to feed in the novelty
suppressed feeding test. In addition, decreased p-ERK/ERK and p-AKT/AKT levels in
the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, olfactory bulb, and hypothalamus induced by
UCMS were reversed by intracerebroventricular injection of alarin. Results
suggested that alarin increased p-ERK/ERK and p-AKT/AKT levels by acting on the
TrkB receptor. To verify this hypothesis, mice were pretreated with the TrkB
inhibitor K252a (or 0.1% dimethyl sulfoxide, intraperitoneally, 3 days), followed
by intracerebroventricular injection of alarin. This resulted in an absence of
antidepressant-like effects, as well as no activation of ERK and AKT signaling
pathways. Results demonstrate that alarin may exert antidepressant-like effects
by targeting TrkB receptor-mediated ERK and AKT signal systems, which could help 
to identify the alarin receptor.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25476565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Hum Pathol. 2015 Feb;46(2):231-8. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.10.011. Epub 2014
Nov 4.

p-CREB expression in human gliomas: potential use in the differential diagnosis
between astrocytoma and oligodendroglioma.

Barresi V(1), Mondello S(2), Branca G(3), Rajan TS(4), Vitarelli E(5), Tuccari
G(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology "Gaetano Barresi," AOU G. Martino, Pad D, Via
Consolare Valeria, 98125 Messina, Italy. Electronic address: vbarresi@unime.it.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, AOU G. Martino, Pad D, Via Consolare Valeria,
98125 Messina, Italy. Electronic address: smondello@unime.it. (3)Department of
Human Pathology "Gaetano Barresi," AOU G. Martino, Pad D, Via Consolare Valeria, 
98125 Messina, Italy. Electronic address: Gianni_branca@alice.it. (4)Department
of Neurosciences, AOU G. Martino, Pad D, Via Consolare Valeria, 98125 Messina,
Italy. (5)Department of Human Pathology "Gaetano Barresi," AOU G. Martino, Pad D,
Via Consolare Valeria, 98125 Messina, Italy. Electronic address:
evitarelli@unime.it. (6)Department of Human Pathology "Gaetano Barresi," AOU G.
Martino, Pad D, Via Consolare Valeria, 98125 Messina, Italy. Electronic address: 
tuccari@unime.it.

Phosphorylated cyclic-AMP responsive element binding protein (p-CREB) is a
transcription factor that is involved in gliomagenesis. For this reason, it was
recently proposed as a potential therapeutic target in gliomas; however, gliomas 
comprise tumors with different biomolecular profile, clinical behavior, and
response to chemotherapy. In the present study, we aimed to investigate whether
p-CREB expression varies in the 2 main types of gliomas, astrocytomas and
oligodendrogliomas. Thus, we analyzed the expression of p-CREB in a series of
astrocytomas and oligodendrogliomas of different histologic grades by
immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis. p53 overexpression and the Ki-67 
labeling index were also assessed in all the tumors. p-CREB immunohistochemical
expression was present in 100% of the astrocytic tumors, but in only 46% of
oligodendrogliomas (P = .0033 for grade II; P = .0041 for grade III tumors).
Absence of p-CREB immunohistochemical expression was significantly associated
with 1p/19q codeletion (P < .0001) and identified 1p/19q codeleted tumors, with
70% sensitivity and 100% specificity (area under the curve = 0.85; P < .0001). In
addition, p-CREB expression correlated with higher Ki-67 labeling index (P =
.049) and p53 overexpression (P < .0001) as well as with the histologic grade of 
astrocytomas (P = .044). Immunohistochemical results were further confirmed by
Western blot analysis. Our findings demonstrate that astrocytomas and
oligodendrogliomas are characterized by distinctive patterns of p-CREB
expression. These distinct expression patterns might provide insight into the
mechanism of tumorigenesis of glial tumors and represent a useful tool for the
differential diagnosis of astrocytoma and oligodendroglioma.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25476123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2015;846:189-200. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-12114-7_8.

Prolactin-induced protein in breast cancer.

Naderi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Iowa, 3202 MERF, 375 Newton 
Road, 52242, Iowa City, IA, USA, ali-naderi@uiowa.edu.

Prolactin-induced protein (PIP) is a 17-kDa single polypeptide chain that is
secreted by a number of normal apocrine cells, such as milk, saliva, and seminal 
fluid. PIP is widely expressed in breast cancer and is commonly used as a
diagnostic biomarker for the histopathological diagnosis of this disease.
Expression of PIP in breast cancer is regulated by androgen and prolactin through
a number of transcription factors and signaling cross-talks, including STAT5,
Runx2, and CREB1. Notably, PIP is induced by a positive feedback loop between
androgen receptor (AR) and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK). The
available data indicate that PIP has an aspartyl protease activity that can
degrade fibronectin. Importantly, PIP is necessary for outside-in activation of
integrin-ß1 signaling pathway and regulation of key downstream signaling targets 
of this pathway such as interaction of integrin-ß1 with integrin-linked kinase 1 
(ILK1) and ErbB2. Furthermore, the importance of PIP in cell proliferation has
been demonstrated by the fact that purified PIP promotes growth of breast cancer 
cells and PIP expression is necessary for the proliferation of T-47D and
MDA-MB-453 cell lines. In addition to cell proliferation, PIP mediates invasion
of breast cancer cells in a process that partially depends on the degradation of 
fibronectin by this protein. Therefore, PIP is a breast cancer-related protein
that is expressed in a majority of breast tumors and has a significant function
in the biology of this disease.

PMID: 25472539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol. 2015 Jan;179:149-56.

Fatmass and obesity associated (FTO) gene regulates gluconeogenesis in chicken
embryo fibroblast cells.

Guo F, Zhang Y, Zhang C, Wang S, Ni Y, Zhao R.

Fat mass and obesity-associated (FTO) gene was found to be associated with energy
homeostasis in mammals, yet the function of chicken FTO is less clear. In this
study, chicken embryo fibroblast cells (DF-1) were transiently transfected to
over-express (FTO(+)) or to knockdown (FTO-) the chicken FTO gene and were used
for the functional analysis. FTO expression was significantly augmented in FTO(+)
cells while depressed in FTO(-) cells (P < 0.05). FTO(+) cells had significantly 
lower glucose yet higher lactic acid (LD) concentrations (P < 0.05) in the
culture media, which was associated with significantly up-regulated (P < 0.05)
mRNA expression of the rate-limiting gluconeogenic enzymes, glucose-6-phosphatase
(G6PC) and the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase-mitochondrial (PEPCK-m). The
protein content and enzyme activity of G6PC were also significantly higher (P <
0.05) in FTO(+) cells. Moreover, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-beta (C/EBP-beta)
and cAMP responsive element binding protein 1 (CREB1), which were found to
transcriptionally regulate the expression of G6PC, were increased at the level of
both mRNA (P < 0.05) and protein (P < 0.05) in FTO(+)cells. ChIP analysis
revealed significantly higher (P < 0.05) binding of C/EBP-beta and phospho-CREB1 
to G6PC gene promoter in FTO(+) cells. In addition, the interaction of FTO and
C/EBP-beta was significantly enhanced (P < 0.05) in FTO+ cells. Opposite changes 
in G6PC expression and regulation were observed in FTO(-) cells. Our results
indicate that chicken FTO regulates gluconeogenesis in DF-1 cells through
enhanced transcriptional regulation of G6PC gene by C/EBP-beta and phospho-CREB1.

PMID: 25465531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Bone. 2015 Mar;72:81-91. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2014.11.010. Epub 2014 Nov 22.

The parathyroid hormone-regulated transcriptome in osteocytes: parallel actions
with 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 to oppose gene expression changes during
differentiation and to promote mature cell function.

St John HC(1), Meyer MB(1), Benkusky NA(1), Carlson AH(1), Prideaux M(2),
Bonewald LF(2), Pike JW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706, USA. (2)Department of Oral Biology, School of Dentistry, University of
Missouri, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA. (3)Department of Biochemistry, University
of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA. Electronic address:
pike@biochem.wisc.edu.

Although localized to the mineralized matrix of bone, osteocytes are able to
respond to systemic factors such as the calciotropic hormones 1,25(OH)2D3 and
PTH. In the present studies, we examined the transcriptomic response to PTH in an
osteocyte cell model and found that this hormone regulated an extensive panel of 
genes. Surprisingly, PTH uniquely modulated two cohorts of genes, one that was
expressed and associated with the osteoblast to osteocyte transition and the
other a cohort that was expressed only in the mature osteocyte. Interestingly,
PTH's effects were largely to oppose the expression of differentiation-related
genes in the former cohort, while potentiating the expression of
osteocyte-specific genes in the latter cohort. A comparison of the
transcriptional effects of PTH with those obtained previously with 1,25(OH)2D3
revealed a subset of genes that was strongly overlapping. While 1,25(OH)2D3
potentiated the expression of osteocyte-specific genes similar to that seen with 
PTH, the overlap between the two hormones was more limited. Additional
experiments identified the PKA-activated phospho-CREB (pCREB) cistrome, revealing
that while many of the differentiation-related PTH regulated genes were apparent 
targets of a PKA-mediated signaling pathway, a reduction in pCREB binding at
sites associated with osteocyte-specific PTH targets appeared to involve
alternative PTH activation pathways. That pCREB binding activities positioned
near important hormone-regulated gene cohorts were localized to control regions
of genes was reinforced by the presence of epigenetic enhancer signatures
exemplified by unique modifications at histones H3 and H4. These studies suggest 
that both PTH and 1,25(OH)2D3 may play important and perhaps cooperative roles in
limiting osteocyte differentiation from its precursors while simultaneously
exerting distinct roles in regulating mature osteocyte function. Our results
provide new insight into transcription factor-associated mechanisms through which
PTH and 1,25(OH)2D3 regulate a plethora of genes important to the
osteoblast/osteocyte lineage.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4285334
PMID: 25460572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Curr Biol. 2014 Dec 1;24(23):2833-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.10.018. Epub 2014
Nov 13.

CREB regulates memory allocation in the insular cortex.

Sano Y(1), Shobe JL(1), Zhou M(1), Huang S(1), Shuman T(2), Cai DJ(1), Golshani
P(2), Kamata M(3), Silva AJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurobiology, Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences,
Psychology, Integrative Center for Learning and Memory and Brain Research
Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology at David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (3)Department of Hematology 
and Oncology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 
(4)Departments of Neurobiology, Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences,
Psychology, Integrative Center for Learning and Memory and Brain Research
Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
Electronic address: silvaa@mednet.ucla.edu.

The molecular and cellular mechanisms of memory storage have attracted a great
deal of attention. By comparison, little is known about memory allocation, the
process that determines which specific neurons in a neural network will store a
given memory. Previous studies demonstrated that memory allocation is not random 
in the amygdala; these studies showed that amygdala neurons with higher levels of
the cyclic-AMP-response-element-binding protein (CREB) are more likely to be
recruited into encoding and storing fear memory. To determine whether specific
mechanisms also regulate memory allocation in other brain regions and whether
CREB also has a role in this process, we studied insular cortical memory
representations for conditioned taste aversion (CTA). In this task, an animal
learns to associate a taste (conditioned stimulus [CS]) with the experience of
malaise (such as that induced by LiCl; unconditioned stimulus [US]). The insular 
cortex is required for CTA memory formation and retrieval. CTA learning activates
a subpopulation of neurons in this structure, and the insular cortex and the
basolateral amygdala (BLA) interact during CTA formation. Here, we used a
combination of approaches, including viral vector transfections of insular
cortex, arc fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and designer receptors
exclusively activated by designer drugs (DREADD) system, to show that CREB levels
determine which insular cortical neurons go on to encode a given conditioned
taste memory.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4743759
PMID: 25454591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Neuroscience. 2015 Jan 22;284:546-54. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.10.025.
Epub 2014 Oct 22.

PKA is required for the modulation of spinal nociceptive information related to
ephrinB-EphB signaling in mice.

Zhou XL(1), Wang Y(2), Zhang CJ(3), Yu LN(1), Cao JL(2), Yan M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310000, China. (2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory 
of Anesthesiology, Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou 221000, China. (3)Department of
Gastroenterology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310000, China. (4)Department of Anesthesiology, The Second
Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310000,
China; Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Anesthesiology, Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou
221000, China. Electronic address: yanminnina@126.com.

EphB receptors and their ephrinB ligands are implicated in modulating of spinal
nociceptive information processing. Here, we investigated whether protein kinase 
A (PKA), acts as a downstream effector, participates in the modulation spinal
nociceptive information related to ephrinB-EphB signaling. Intrathecal injection 
of ephrinB2-Fc caused thermal hyperalgesia and mechanical allodynia, which were
accompanied by increased expression of spinal PKA catalytic subunit (PKAca) and
phosphorylated cAMP-response element-binding protein (p-CREB). Pre-treatment with
H89, a PKA inhibitor, prevented the activation of CREB by ephrinB2-Fc. Inhibition
of spinal PKA signaling prevented and reversed pain behaviors induced by the
intrathecal injection of ephrinB2-Fc. Furthermore, blockade of the EphB receptors
by intrathecal injection of EphB2-Fc reduced formalin-induced inflammatory,
chronic constrictive injury (CCI)-induced neuropathic, and tibia bone cavity
tumor cell implantation (TCI)-induced bone cancer pain behaviors, which were
accompanied by decreased expression of spinal PKAca and p-CREB. Overall, these
results confirmed the important involvement of PKA in the modulation of spinal
nociceptive information related to ephrinBs-EphBs signaling. This finding may
have important implications for exploring the roles and mechanisms of
ephrinB-EphB signaling in physiologic and pathologic pain.

Copyright © 2014 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25453775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Neuroscience. 2015 Jan 22;284:962-71. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.10.064.
Epub 2014 Nov 5.

Lithium chloride stimulates PLP and MBP expression in oligodendrocytes via
Wnt/ß-catenin and Akt/CREB pathways.

Meffre D(1), Massaad C(2), Grenier J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Paris Descartes University, INSERM UMR-S 1124, 45 rue des Saints-Pères, 75270 
Paris Cedex 06, France. Electronic address: delphine.meffre@parisdescartes.fr.
(2)Paris Descartes University, INSERM UMR-S 1124, 45 rue des Saints-Pères, 75270 
Paris Cedex 06, France.

Deciphering the molecular pathways involved in myelin gene expression is a major 
point of interest to better understand re/myelination processes. In this study,
we investigated the role of Lithium Chloride (LiCl), a drug largely used for the 
treatment of neurological disorders, on the two major central myelin gene
expression (PLP and MBP) in mouse oligodendrocytes. We show that LiCl enhances
the expression of both PLP and MBP, by increasing mRNA amount and promoter
activities. We investigated whether Wnt/ß-catenin and/or Akt/CREB pathways are
modulated by LiCl to regulate myelin gene expression. We showed that ß-catenin is
required both for PLP and MBP basal promoter activities and for LiCl-induced
myelin gene stimulation. Furthermore, while CREB functionality does not influence
PLP expression, MBP promoter activity depends on Akt/CREB activation. Finally, we
show that LiCl can stimulate oligodendrocyte morphological maturation, and
promote remyelination after lysolecithin-induced demyelination of organotypic
cerebellar slice cultures. Our data provide mechanistic evidences that Akt/CREB
together with ß-catenin participate in the transcriptional control of PLP and MBP
exerted by LiCl. Therefore, the use of LiCl to balance between ß-catenin and CREB
effectors could be considered as an efficient remyelinating strategy.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 25451297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Daru. 2014 Nov 28;22:77. doi: 10.1186/s40199-014-0077-2.

Alteration in brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) after treatment of mice
with herbal mixture containing Euphoria longana, Houttuynia cordata and Dioscorea
japonica.

Jeon S(1), Lee CH(2), Liu QF(3), Kim GW(4), Koo BS(5), Pak SC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Dongguk University Research Institute of Biotechnology, Seoul, 100-715,
Republic of Korea. jsong0304@dongguk.edu. (2)Department of Neuropsychiatry,
Graduate School of Oriental Medicine, Dongguk University, Gyeongju, Republic of
Korea. lch810515@naver.com. (3)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Graduate School of 
Oriental Medicine, Dongguk University, Gyeongju, Republic of Korea.
liuquanfeng@naver.com. (4)Department of Korean Neuropsychiatry, Dongguk
University Bundang Oriental Hospital, Sungnam, Republic of Korea.
kgwoo86@hanmail.net. (5)Department of Korean Neuropsychiatry, Dongguk University 
Ilsan Oriental Hospital, Goyang, Republic of Korea. koobs@dongguk.ac.kr.
(6)School of Biomedical Sciences, Charles Sturt University, Bathurst, NSW, 2795, 
Australia. spak@csu.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Literature data indicate that brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF), cyclic-AMP response element-binding protein (CREB) and phospho-CREB
(pCREB) may have a place in depression. BDNF belongs to the neurotrophin family
that plays an important role in proliferation, survival and differentiation of
different cell populations in the mammalian nervous system. The herbal mixture
used in the present study consists of Euphoria longana, Houttuynia cordata and
Dioscorea japonica. The purpose of the present study was to determine the
neuroprotective effect of herbal mixture. We also tested the hypothesis that
administration of herbs reverses memory deficits and promotes the protein
expression of BDNF in the mouse brain.
METHODS: Mice were randomized into four different treatment groups
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>10/group). Normal and stress groups received regular lab chow without stress
and under stress conditions, respectively, for 3 weeks. The animals in the stress
group were immobilized for 4 hours a day for 2 weeks. Different doses of herbal
mixture (206 and 618 mg/kg) were administered for 3 weeks to those mice under
stress conditions. Mice were analyzed by behavioral tests and immunoblotting
examination in the hippocampus and cortex. An additional in vitro investigation
was performed to examine whether herbs induce neurotoxicity in a human
neuroblastoma cell line, SH-SY5Y cells.
RESULTS: No significant toxicity of herbs on human neuroblastoma cells was
observed. These herbs demonstrated an inductive effect on the expression of BDNF,
pCREB and pAkt. For spatial working memory test, herbal mixture fed mice
exhibited an increased level of spontaneous alternation (p < 0.01) compared to
those in stress conditions. Moreover, herbal mixture produced highly significant 
(p < 0.01) reduction in the immobility time in the tail suspension test. Mice in 
the herbal mixture groups demonstrated lower serum corticosterone concentration
than mice in the stress group (p < 0.05). Effects of the oral administration of
herbal mixture on protein levels of BDNF in the hippocampi and cortices were
significant.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study showed that herbal mixture administration has
antidepressant effects in mice. It is proposed that adverse events such as stress
and depression can modulate the expression of molecular players of cellular
plasticity in the brain.

PMCID: PMC4268823
PMID: 25431319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Neoplasia. 2014 Nov 20;16(11):883-99. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2014.09.006. eCollection
2014.

Klf5 deletion promotes Pten deletion-initiated luminal-type mouse prostate tumors
through multiple oncogenic signaling pathways.

Xing C(1), Ci X(1), Sun X(2), Fu X(3), Zhang Z(2), Dong EN(2), Hao ZZ(4), Dong
JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, College of Life Sciences, Nankai
University, Tianjin, China ; Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology,
Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA. 
(2)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA. (3)Department of Hematology and 
Medical Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University School of Medicine, 
Atlanta, GA, USA ; Department of Pathology, Tianjin University of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, China. (4)Department of Biology, University of
Oklahoma, Norman, OK, USA.

Krüppel-like factor 5 (KLF5) regulates multiple biologic processes. Its function 
in tumorigenesis appears contradictory though, showing both tumor suppressor and 
tumor promoting activities. In this study, we examined whether and how Klf5
functions in prostatic tumorigenesis using mice with prostate-specific deletion
of Klf5 and phosphatase and tensin homolog (Pten), both of which are frequently
inactivated in human prostate cancer. Histologic analysis demonstrated that when 
one Pten allele was deleted, which causes mouse prostatic intraepithelial
neoplasia (mPIN), Klf5 deletion accelerated the emergence and progression of
mPIN. When both Pten alleles were deleted, which causes prostate cancer, Klf5
deletion promoted tumor growth, increased cell proliferation, and caused more
severe morphologic and molecular alterations. Homozygous deletion of Klf5 was
more effective than hemizygous deletion. Unexpectedly, while Pten deletion alone 
expanded basal cell population in a tumor as reported, Klf5 deletion in the
Pten-null background clearly reduced basal cell population while expanding
luminal cell population. Global gene expression profiling, pathway analysis, and 
experimental validation indicate that multiple mechanisms could mediate the
tumor-promoting effect of Klf5 deletion, including the up-regulation of epidermal
growth factor and its downstream signaling molecules AKT and ERK and the
inactivation of the p15 cell cycle inhibitor. KLF5 also appears to cooperate with
several transcription factors, including CREB1, Sp1, Myc, ER and AR, to regulate 
gene expression. These findings validate the tumor suppressor function of KLF5.
They also yield a mouse model that shares two common genetic alterations with
human prostate cancer-mutation/deletion of Pten and deletion of Klf5.

PMCID: PMC4240924
PMID: 25425963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Front Behav Neurosci. 2014 Nov 5;8:388. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00388.
eCollection 2014.

Addiction and reward-related genes show altered expression in the postpartum
nucleus accumbens.

Zhao C(1), Eisinger BE(1), Driessen TM(1), Gammie SC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Wisconsin-Madison Madison, WI, USA.
(2)Department of Zoology, University of Wisconsin-Madison Madison, WI, USA ;
Neuroscience Training Program, University of Wisconsin-Madison Madison, WI, USA.

Motherhood involves a switch in natural rewards, whereby offspring become highly 
rewarding. Nucleus accumbens (NAC) is a key CNS region for natural rewards and
addictions, but to date no study has evaluated on a large scale the events in NAC
that underlie the maternal change in natural rewards. In this study we utilized
microarray and bioinformatics approaches to evaluate postpartum NAC gene
expression changes in mice. Modular Single-set Enrichment Test (MSET) indicated
that postpartum (relative to virgin) NAC gene expression profile was
significantly enriched for genes related to addiction and reward in five of five 
independently curated databases (e.g., Malacards, Phenopedia). Over 100
addiction/reward related genes were identified and these included: Per1, Per2,
Arc, Homer2, Creb1, Grm3, Fosb, Gabrb3, Adra2a, Ntrk2, Cry1, Penk, Cartpt, Adcy1,
Npy1r, Htr1a, Drd1a, Gria1, and Pdyn. ToppCluster analysis found maternal NAC
expression profile to be significantly enriched for genes related to the drug
action of nicotine, ketamine, and dronabinol. Pathway analysis indicated
postpartum NAC as enriched for RNA processing, CNS development/differentiation,
and transcriptional regulation. Weighted Gene Coexpression Network Analysis
(WGCNA) identified possible networks for transcription factors, including Nr1d1, 
Per2, Fosb, Egr1, and Nr4a1. The postpartum state involves increased risk for
mental health disorders and MSET analysis indicated postpartum NAC to be enriched
for genes related to depression, bipolar disorder (BPD), and schizophrenia.
Mental health related genes included: Fabp7, Grm3, Penk, and Nr1d1. We confirmed 
via quantitative PCR Nr1d1, Per2, Grm3, Penk, Drd1a, and Pdyn. This study
indicates for the first time that postpartum NAC involves large scale gene
expression alterations linked to addiction and reward. Because the postpartum
state also involves decreased response to drugs, the findings could provide
insights into how to mitigate addictions.

PMCID: PMC4220701
PMID: 25414651  [PubMed]


151. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 17;9(11):e113108. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113108.
eCollection 2014.

The C2238/aANP variant is a negative modulator of both viability and function of 
coronary artery smooth muscle cells.

Rubattu S(1), Marchitti S(2), Bianchi F(2), Di Castro S(2), Stanzione R(2),
Cotugno M(2), Bozzao C(3), Sciarretta S(2), Volpe M(1).

Author information: 
(1)IRCCS Neuromed, Pozzilli (Isernia), Italy; Department of Clinical and
Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine and Psychology, University Sapienza of
Rome, Ospedale S. Andrea, Rome, Italy. (2)IRCCS Neuromed, Pozzilli (Isernia),
Italy. (3)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine and
Psychology, University Sapienza of Rome, Ospedale S. Andrea, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Abnormalities of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) contribute to
development of vascular disease. Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) exerts
important effects on VSMCs. A common ANP molecular variant (T2238C/aANP) has
recently emerged as a novel vascular risk factor.
OBJECTIVES: We aimed at identifying effects of CC2238/aANP on viability,
migration and motility in coronary artery SMCs, and the underlying signaling
pathways.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Cells were exposed to either TT2238/aANP or CC2238/aANP. At 
the end of treatment, cell viability, migration and motility were evaluated,
along with changes in oxidative stress pathway (ROS levels, NADPH and eNOS
expression), on Akt phosphorylation and miR21 expression levels. CC2238/aANP
reduced cell vitality, increased apoptosis and necrosis, increased oxidative
stress levels, suppressed miR21 expression along with consistent changes of its
molecular targets (PDCD4, PTEN, Bcl2) and of phosphorylated Akt levels. As a
result of increased oxidative stress, CC2238/aANP markedly stimulated cell
migration and increased cell contraction. NPR-C gene silencing with specific
siRNAs restored cell viability, miR21 expression, and reduced oxidative stress
induced by CC2238/aANP. The cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway, driven by NPR-C activation,
significantly contributed to both miR21 and phosphoAkt reduction upon
CC2238/aANP. miR21 overexpression by mimic-hsa-miR21 rescued the cellular damage 
dependent on CC2238/aANP.
CONCLUSIONS: CC2238/aANP negatively modulates viability through
NPR-C/cAMP/PKA/CREB/miR21 signaling pathway, and it augments oxidative stress
leading to increased migratory and vasoconstrictor effects in coronary artery
SMCs. These novel findings further support a damaging role of this common aANP
variant on vessel wall and its potential contribution to acute coronary events.

PMCID: PMC4234641
PMID: 25401746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Blood. 2015 Jan 15;125(3):483-91. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-05-577130. Epub 2014
Nov 13.

RNA interference screening identifies lenalidomide sensitizers in multiple
myeloma, including RSK2.

Zhu YX(1), Yin H(2), Bruins LA(1), Shi CX(1), Jedlowski P(1), Aziz M(2), Sereduk 
C(2), Kortuem KM(1), Schmidt JE(1), Champion M(1), Braggio E(1), Keith Stewart
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ; and.
(2)Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ.

To identify molecular targets that modify sensitivity to lenalidomide, we
measured proliferation in multiple myeloma (MM) cells transfected with 27<U+2009>968
small interfering RNAs in the presence of increasing concentrations of drug and
identified 63 genes that enhance activity of lenalidomide upon silencing.
Ribosomal protein S6 kinase (RPS6KA3 or RSK2) was the most potent sensitizer.
Other notable gene targets included 5 RAB family members, 3 potassium channel
proteins, and 2 peroxisome family members. Single genes of interest included
I-<U+03BA>-B kinase-a (CHUK), and a phosphorylation dependent transcription factor
(CREB1), which associate with RSK2 to regulate several signaling pathways. RSK2
knockdown induced cytotoxicity across a panel of MM cell lines and consistently
increased sensitivity to lenalidomide. Accordingly, 3 small molecular inhibitors 
of RSK2 demonstrated synergy with lenalidomide cytotoxicity in MM cells even in
the presence of stromal contact. Both RSK2 knockdown and small molecule
inhibition downregulate interferon regulatory factor 4 and MYC, and provides an
explanation for the synergy between lenalidomide and RSK2 inhibition.
Interestingly, RSK2 inhibition also sensitized MM cells to bortezomib, melphalan,
and dexamethasone, but did not downregulate Ikaros or influence
lenalidomide-mediated downregulation of tumor necrosis factor-a or increase
lenalidomide-induced IL-2 upregulation. In summary, inhibition of RSK2 may prove 
a broadly useful adjunct to MM therapy.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4296009
PMID: 25395420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Neurochem Res. 2015 Jan;40(1):130-8. doi: 10.1007/s11064-014-1476-y. Epub 2014
Nov 13.

Elevation of BDNF exon I-specific transcripts in the frontal cortex and midbrain 
of rat during spontaneous morphine withdrawal is accompanied by enhanced pCreb1
occupancy at the corresponding promoter.

Peregud DI(1), Panchenko LF, Gulyaeva NV.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Centre on Addictions, Ministry of Health and Social
Development of the Russian Federation, Moscow, 119002, Russia.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is believed to play a crucial role in
the mechanisms underlying opiate dependence; however, little is known about
specific features and mechanisms regulating its expression in the brain under
these conditions. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of acute
morphine intoxication and withdrawal from chronic intoxication on expression of
BDNF exon I-, II-, IV-, VI- and IX-containing transcripts in the rat frontal
cortex and midbrain. We also have studied whether alterations of BDNF
exon-specific transcripts are accompanied by changes in association of well-known
transcriptional regulators of BDNF gene-phosphorylated (active form) cAMP
response element binding protein (pCreb1) and methyl-CpG binding protein 2
(MeCP2) with corresponding regulatory regions of the BDNF gene. Acute morphine
intoxication did not affect levels of BDNF exons in brain regions, while
spontaneous morphine withdrawal in dependent rats was accompanied by an elevation
of the BDNF exon I-containing mRNAs both in the frontal cortex and midbrain.
During spontaneous morphine withdrawal, increased associations of pCreb1 were
found with promoter of exon I in the frontal cortex and promoters of exon I, IV
and VI in the midbrain. The association of MeCP2 with BDNF promoters during
spontaneous morphine withdrawal did not change. Thus, BDNF exon-specific
transcripts are differentially expressed in brain regions during spontaneous
morphine withdrawal in dependent rats and pCreb1 may be at least partially
responsible for these alterations.

PMID: 25392083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 9;290(2):950-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.589325. Epub 2014 Nov
11.

Relaxin activates peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) through a 
pathway involving PPAR<U+03B3> coactivator 1a (PGC1a).

Singh S(1), Simpson RL(1), Bennett RG(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Medical Research Service, The Department of Veterans Affairs,
Nebraska-Western Iowa Health Care System, Omaha, Nebraska 68105 and the
Departments of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Internal Medicine and
Pharmacology & Experimental Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, Nebraska 68198. (2)From the Medical Research Service, The Department of
Veterans Affairs, Nebraska-Western Iowa Health Care System, Omaha, Nebraska 68105
and the Departments of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Internal Medicine and
Pharmacology & Experimental Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, Nebraska 68198 rgbennet@unmc.edu.

Relaxin activation of its receptor RXFP1 triggers multiple signaling pathways.
Previously, we have shown that relaxin activates PPAR<U+03B3> transcriptional activity
in a ligand-independent manner, but the mechanism for this effect was unknown. In
this study, we examined the signaling pathways of downstream of RXFP1 leading to 
PPAR<U+03B3> activation. Using cells stably expressing RXFP1, we found that relaxin
regulation of PPAR<U+03B3> activity requires accumulation of cAMP and subsequent
activation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). The activated PKA subsequently
phosphorylated cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) at Ser-133 to
activate it directly, as well as indirectly through mitogen activated protein
kinase p38 MAPK. Activated CREB was required for relaxin stimulation of PPAR<U+03B3>
activity, while there was no evidence for a role of the nitric oxide or ERK MAPK 
pathways. Relaxin increased the mRNA and protein levels of the coactivator
protein PGC1a, and this effect was dependent on PKA, and was completely abrogated
by a dominant-negative form of CREB. This mechanism was confirmed in a hepatic
stellate cell line stably that endogenously expresses RXFP1. Reduction of PGC1a
levels using siRNA diminished the regulation of PPAR<U+03B3> by relaxin. These results
suggest that relaxin activates the cAMP/PKA and p38 MAPK pathways to
phosphorylate CREB, resulting in increased PGC1a levels. This provides a
mechanism for the ligand-independent activation of PPAR<U+03B3> in response to relaxin.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4294522
PMID: 25389293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2015 Mar;298(3):501-12. doi: 10.1002/ar.23089. Epub 2014 Nov 
28.

Transcription factor CREB is involved in CaSR-mediated cytoskeleton gene
expression.

Huang S(1), Ren Y, Wang P, Li Y, Wang X, Zhuang H, Fang R, Wang Y, Liu N, Hehir
M, Zhou JX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical School, Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315211, China;
Department of the Center for Translational Medicine, The Affiliated Hospital,
Ningbo University School of Medicine, Ningbo, 315020, China.

Our previous studies illustrated that a steady increase of intracellular calcium 
concentration ([Ca2+]i) was important for maintaining microtubules (MTs)
rearrangement in apoptotic cells. However, little is known about the effect of
calcium sensing receptor (CaSR)-mediated increase in [Ca2+]i on cytoskeleton gene
expression. We examined the impact of taxol or CaSR agonist/antagonist on the
regulation of [Ca2+]i concentration, cytoskeleton arrangement, phosphorylated
CREB and cytoskeleton gene expressions in HeLa cells with dominant negative
plasmid of CREB (PM). This study demonstrated that Gdcl3 (a specific CaSR
agonist) evoked a rapid increase of [Ca2+]i, formed a rigid bundle of MTs which
surrounded the nucleus and decreased the cytoskeleton gene expressions in HeLa
cells. These effects were rescued by addition of NPS2390 (a specific CaSR
antagonist). Moreover, CaSR activity affected cytoskeleton gene expression
through transcription factor CREB. Histoscores of pCREB immunoreactivity in
tissues of cervical adenocarcinoma, renal clear cell carcinoma, and diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma were markedly increased compared with non malignant tissue. These
data demonstrate, for the first time, that CaSR-mediated increase in [Ca2+]i
probably modulate cytoskeleton organization and gene expression via transcription
factor.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25382680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Sci Rep. 2014 Nov 6;4:6930. doi: 10.1038/srep06930.

Profiling status epilepticus-induced changes in hippocampal RNA expression using 
high-throughput RNA sequencing.

Hansen KF(1), Sakamoto K(1), Pelz C(2), Impey S(2), Obrietan K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Ohio State University, 4030 Graves Hall, 333 W
10th Ave, Columbus, OH, 43210 USA. (2)Oregon Health and Science University,
Biomedical research Building Room 707, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Rd., Portland,
OR, USA.

Status epilepticus (SE) is a life-threatening condition that can give rise to a
number of neurological disorders, including learning deficits, depression, and
epilepsy. Many of the effects of SE appear to be mediated by alterations in gene 
expression. To gain deeper insight into how SE affects the transcriptome, we
employed the pilocarpine SE model in mice and Illumina-based high-throughput
sequencing to characterize alterations in gene expression from the induction of
SE, to the development of spontaneous seizure activity. While some genes were
upregulated over the entire course of the pathological progression, each of the
three sequenced time points (12-hour, 10-days and 6-weeks post-SE) had a largely 
unique transcriptional profile. Hence, genes that regulate synaptic physiology
and transcription were most prominently altered at 12-hours post-SE; at 10-days
post-SE, marked changes in metabolic and homeostatic gene expression were
detected; at 6-weeks, substantial changes in the expression of cell excitability 
and morphogenesis genes were detected. At the level of cell signaling, KEGG
analysis revealed dynamic changes within the MAPK pathways, as well as in
CREB-associated gene expression. Notably, the inducible expression of several
noncoding transcripts was also detected. These findings offer potential new
insights into the cellular events that shape SE-evoked pathology.

PMID: 25373493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Genome Biol. 2014;15(10):494.

Genomic mapping of the MHC transactivator CIITA using an integrated ChIP-seq and 
genetical genomics approach.

Wong D(1), Lee W, Humburg P, Makino S, Lau E, Naranbhai V, Fairfax BP, Chan K,
Plant K, Knight JC.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt,
Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.

BACKGROUND: The master transactivator CIITA is essential to the regulation of
Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC)class II genes and an effective immune
response. CIITA is known to modulate a small number of non-MHC genes involved in 
antigen presentation such as CD74 and B2M but its broader genome-wide function
and relationship with underlying genetic diversity has not been resolved.
RESULTS: We report the first genome-wide ChIP-seq map for CIITA and complement
this by mapping inter-individual variation in CIITA expression as a quantitative 
trait. We analyse CIITA recruitment for pathophysiologically relevant primary
human B cells and monocytes, resting and treated with interferon-gamma, in the
context of the epigenomic regulatory landscape and DNA-binding proteins
associated with the CIITA enhanceosome including RFX, CREB1/ATF1 and NFY. We
confirm recruitment to proximal promoter sequences in MHC class II genes and more
distally involving the canonical CIITA enhanceosome. Overall, we map 843 CIITA
binding intervals involving 442 genes and find 95% of intervals are located
outside the MHC and 60% not associated with RFX5 binding. Binding intervals are
enriched for genes involved in immune function n and infectious disease with
novel loci including major histone gene clusters. Were solve differentially
expressed genes associated in trans with a CIITA intronic sequence variant,
integrate with CIITA recruitment and show how this is mediated by allele-specific
recruitment of NF-kB.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate a broader role for CIITA beyond the MHC
involving immune-related genes.We provide new insights into allele-specific
regulation of CIITA informative for understanding gene function and disease.

PMCID: PMC4243378
PMID: 25366989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. BMC Neurosci. 2014 Oct 31;15:116. doi: 10.1186/s12868-014-0116-4.

Physical exercise ameliorates the reduction of neural stem cell, cell
proliferation and neuroblast differentiation in senescent mice induced by
D-galactose.

Nam SM(1), Kim JW(2), Yoo DY(3), Yim HS(4), Kim DW(5), Choi JH(6), Kim W(7), Jung
HY(8), Won MH(9), Hwang IK(10), Seong JK(11), Yoon YS(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Veterinary Medicine, and
Research Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University, Seoul,
151-742, South Korea. lovingvet@snu.ac.kr. (2)Department of Anatomy and Cell
Biology, College of Veterinary Medicine, and Research Institute for Veterinary
Science, Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-742, South Korea.
kimjongwhi@snu.ac.kr. (3)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of
Veterinary Medicine, and Research Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul
National University, Seoul, 151-742, South Korea. yo4419@snu.ac.kr. (4)Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Research Institute of Oral Sciences,
College of Dentistry, Gangneung-Wonju National University, Gangneung, South
Korea. heesun@gwnu.ac.kr. (5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Research Institute of Oral Sciences, College of Dentistry, Gangneung-Wonju
National University, Gangneung, South Korea. kimdw@gwnu.ac.kr. (6)Department of
Anatomy, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, 
South Korea. jhchoi@kangwon.ac.kr. (7)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
College of Veterinary Medicine, and Research Institute for Veterinary Science,
Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-742, South Korea. tank3430@snu.ac.kr.
(8)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Veterinary Medicine, and
Research Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University, Seoul,
151-742, South Korea. hyoyoung@snu.ac.kr. (9)Department of Neurobiology, School
of Medicine, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, South Korea.
mhwon@kangwon.ac.kr. (10)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of
Veterinary Medicine, and Research Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul
National University, Seoul, 151-742, South Korea. vetmed2@snu.ac.kr.
(11)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Veterinary Medicine, and
Research Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University, Seoul,
151-742, South Korea. snumouse@snu.ac.kr. (12)Department of Anatomy and Cell
Biology, College of Veterinary Medicine, and Research Institute for Veterinary
Science, Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-742, South Korea.
ysyoon@snu.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Aging negatively affects adult hippocampal neurogenesis, and exercise
attenuates the age-related reduction in adult hippocampal neurogenesis. In the
present study, we used senescent mice induced by D-galactose to examine neural
stem cells, cell proliferation, and neuronal differentiation with or without
exercise treatment. D-galactose (100 mg/kg) was injected to six-week-old
C57BL/6 J mice for 6 weeks to induce the senescent model. During these periods,
the animals were placed on a treadmill and acclimated to exercise for 1 week.
Then treadmill running was conducted for 1 h/day for 5 consecutive days at
10-12 m/min for 5 weeks.
RESULTS: Body weight and food intake did not change significantly after
D-galactose administration with/without treadmill exercise, although body weight 
and food intake was highest after treadmill exercise in adult animals and lowest 
after treadmill exercise in D-galactose-induced senescent model animals.
D-galactose treatment significantly decreased the number of nestin (a neural stem
cell marker), Ki67 (a cell proliferation marker), and doublecortin (DCX, a
differentiating neuroblast marker) positive cells compared to those in the
control group. In contrast, treadmill exercise significantly increased Ki67- and 
DCX-positive cell numbers in both the vehicle- and D-galactose treated groups. In
addition, phosphorylated cAMP-response element binding protein (pCREB) and brain 
derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) was significantly decreased in the D-galactose
treated group, whereas exercise increased their expression in the subgranular
zone of the dentate gyrus in both the vehicle- and D-galactose-treated groups.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that treadmill exercise attenuates the
D-galactose-induced reduction in neural stem cells, cell proliferation, and
neuronal differentiation by enhancing the expression of pCREB and BDNF in the
dentate gyrus of the hippocampus.

PMCID: PMC4219098
PMID: 25359614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Biochem J. 2015 Jan 15;465(2):271-9. doi: 10.1042/BJ20141165.

The clinically approved drugs dasatinib and bosutinib induce anti-inflammatory
macrophages by inhibiting the salt-inducible kinases.

Ozanne J(1), Prescott AR(2), Clark K(1).

Author information: 
(1)*MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, College of Life
Sciences, Sir James Black Centre, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland,
U.K. (2)Cell Signaling and Immunology, College of Life Sciences, Sir James Black
Centre, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, U.K.

Macrophages switch to an anti-inflammatory, 'regulatory'-like phenotype
characterized by the production of high levels of interleukin (IL)-10 and low
levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines to promote the resolution of inflammation. A
potential therapeutic strategy for the treatment of chronic inflammatory diseases
would be to administer drugs that could induce the formation of 'regulatory'-like
macrophages at sites of inflammation. In the present study, we demonstrate that
the clinically approved cancer drugs bosutinib and dasatinib induce several
hallmark features of 'regulatory'-like macrophages. Treatment of macrophages with
bosutinib or dasatinib elevates the production of IL-10 while suppressing the
production of IL-6, IL-12p40 and tumour necrosis factor a (TNFa) in response to
Toll-like receptor (TLR) stimulation. Moreover, macrophages treated with
bosutinib or dasatinib express higher levels of markers of 'regulatory'-like
macrophages including LIGHT, SPHK1 and arginase 1. Bosutinib and dasatinib were
originally developed as inhibitors of the protein tyrosine kinases Bcr-Abl and
Src but we show that, surprisingly, the effects of bosutinib and dasatinib on
macrophage polarization are the result of the inhibition of the salt-inducible
kinases. Consistent with the present finding, bosutinib and dasatinib induce the 
dephosphorylation of CREB-regulated transcription co-activator 3 (CRTC3) and its 
nuclear translocation where it induces a cAMP-response-element-binding protein
(CREB)-dependent gene transcription programme including that of IL-10.
Importantly, these effects of bosutinib and dasatinib on IL-10 gene expression
are lost in macrophages expressing a drug-resistant mutant of salt-inducible
kinase 2 (SIK2). In conclusion, our study identifies the salt-inducible kinases
as major targets of bosutinib and dasatinib that mediate the effects of these
drugs on the innate immune system and provides novel mechanistic insights into
the anti-inflammatory properties of these drugs.

PMCID: PMC4286194
PMID: 25351958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 23;9(10):e111009. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111009.
eCollection 2014.

Grin1 receptor deletion within CRF neurons enhances fear memory.

Gafford G(1), Jasnow AM(2), Ressler KJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Yerkes National Primate
Research Center, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, United
States of America. (2)Department of Psychological Sciences, Kent State
University, Kent, Ohio, United States of America.

Corticotropin releasing factor (CRF) dysregulation is implicated in mood and
anxiety disorders such as posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). CRF is expressed 
in areas engaged in fear and anxiety processing including the central amygdala
(CeA). Complicating our ability to study the contribution of CRF-containing
neurons to fear and anxiety behavior is the wide variety of cell types in which
CRF is expressed. To manipulate specific subpopulations of CRF containing
neurons, our lab has developed a mouse with a Cre recombinase gene driven by a
CRF promoter (CRFp3.0Cre) (Martin et al., 2010). In these studies, mice that have
the gene that encodes NR1 (Grin1) flanked by loxP sites (floxed) were crossed
with our previously developed CRFp3.0Cre mouse to selectively disrupt Grin1
within CRF containing neurons (Cre+/fGrin1+). We find that disruption of Grin1 in
CRF neurons did not affect baseline levels of anxiety, locomotion, pain
sensitivity or exploration of a novel object. However, baseline expression of
Grin1 was decreased in Cre+/fGrin1+ mice as measured by RTPCR. Cre+/fGrin1+ mice 
showed enhanced auditory fear acquisition and retention without showing any
significant effect on fear extinction. We measured Gria1, the gene that encodes
AMPAR1 and the CREB activator Creb1 in the amygdala of Cre+/fGrin1+ mice after
fear conditioning. Both Gria1 and Creb1 were enhanced in the amygdala after
training. To determine if the Grin1-expressing CRF neurons within the CeA are
responsible for the enhancement of fear memory in adults, we infused a lentivirus
with Cre driven by a CRF promoter (LV pCRF-Cre/fGrin1+) into the CeA of floxed
Grin1 mice. Cre driven deletion of Grin1 specifically within CRF expressing cells
in the CeA also resulted in enhanced fear memory acquisition and retention.
Altogether, these findings suggest that selective disruption of Grin1 within CeA 
CRF neurons strongly enhances fear memory.

PMCID: PMC4207780
PMID: 25340785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Biol Reprod. 2014 Dec;91(6):139. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.121186. Epub 2014
Oct 22.

Expression and regulation of regulator of G-protein signaling protein-2 (RGS2) in
equine and bovine follicles prior to ovulation: molecular characterization of
RGS2 transactivation in bovine granulosa cells.

Sayasith K(1), Sirois J(2), Lussier JG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en reproduction animale and the Département de biomédecine
vétérinaire, Faculté de médecine vétérinaire, Université de Montréal,
Saint-Hyacinthe, Québec, Canada k.sayasith@umontreal.ca. (2)Centre de recherche
en reproduction animale and the Département de biomédecine vétérinaire, Faculté
de médecine vétérinaire, Université de Montréal, Saint-Hyacinthe, Québec, Canada.

The luteinizing hormone preovulatory surge stimulates several signal pathways
essential for ovulation, and the regulator of G-protein signaling protein-2
(RGS2) is thought to be involved in this process. The objectives of this study
were to characterize the regulation of RGS2 transcripts in equine and bovine
follicles prior to ovulation and to determine its transcriptional control in
bovine granulosa cells. To assess the regulation of equine RGS2 prior to
ovulation, RT-PCR was performed using total RNA extracted from equine follicles
collected at various times after human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) injection.
Results showed that RGS2 mRNA levels were very low at 0 h but markedly increased 
12-39 h post-hCG (P < 0.05). In the bovine species, results revealed that RGS2
mRNA levels were low in small and dominant follicles and in ovulatory follicles
obtained at 0 h, but markedly increased in ovulatory follicles 6-24 h post-hCG (P
< 0.05). To study the molecular control of RGS2 expression, primary cultures of
bovine granulosa cells were used. Stimulation with forskolin induced an
up-regulation of RGS2 mRNA in vitro. Studies using 5'-deletion mutants identified
a minimal region containing full-length basal and forskolin-inducible RGS2
promoter activities. Site-directed mutagenesis indicated that these activities
were dependent on CRE and ETS1 cis-elements. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays confirmed the involvement of these elements and revealed their
interactions with CREB1 and ETS1 proteins. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
confirmed endogenous interactions of these proteins with the RGS2 promoter in
granulosa cells. Forskolin-inducible RGS2 promoter activity and mRNA expression
were markedly decreased by PKA and ERK1/2 inhibitors, and treatment with an
antagonist of PGR (RU486) and inhibitors of PTGS2 (NS398) and EGFR (PD153035)
blocked the forskolin-dependent RGS2 transcript expression, suggesting the
importance of RGS2 in ovulation. Collectively, this study reports for the first
time the gonadotropin-dependent up-regulation of RGS2 in equine and bovine
preovulatory follicles and presents some of the regulatory controls involved in
RGS2 gene expression in granulosa cells.

© 2014 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 25339105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Biosci Rep. 2014 Dec 12;34(6):e00159. doi: 10.1042/BSR20140130.

Role of the prostaglandin E2/E-prostanoid 2 receptor signalling pathway in
TGFß-induced mice mesangial cell damage.

Li NN(1), Xu YY(1), Chen XL(1), Fan YP(1), Wu JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Nephrology, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University, Nantong,
Jiangsu, China.

The prostaglandin E2 receptor, EP2 (E-prostanoid 2), plays an important role in
mice glomerular MCs (mesangial cells) damage induced by TGFß1 (transforming
growth factor-ß1); however, the molecular mechanisms for this remain unknown. The
present study examined the role of the EP2 signalling pathway in TGFß1-induced
MCs proliferation, ECM (extracellular matrix) accumulation and expression of PGES
(prostaglandin E2 synthase). We generated primary mice MCs. Results showed MCs
proliferation promoted by TGFß1 were increased; however, the production of cAMP
and PGE2 (prostaglandin E2) was decreased. EP2 deficiency in these MCs augmented 
FN (fibronectin), Col I (collagen type I), COX2 (cyclooxygenase-2), mPGES-1
(membrane-associated prostaglandin E1), CTGF (connective tissue growth factor)
and CyclinD1 expression stimulated by TGFß1. Silencing of EP2 also strengthened
TGFß1-induced p38MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase), ERK1/2
(extracellular-signal-regulated kinase 1/2) and CREB1 (cAMP responsive
element-binding protein 1) phosphorylation. In contrast, Adenovirus-mediated EP2 
overexpression reversed the effects of EP2-siRNA (small interfering RNA).
Collectively, the investigation indicates that EP2 may block p38MAPK, ERK1/2 and 
CREB1 phosphorylation via activation of cAMP production and stimulation of PGE2
through EP2 receptors which prevent TGFß1-induced MCs damage. Our findings also
suggest that pharmacological targeting of EP2 receptors may provide new inroads
to antagonize the damage induced by TGFß1.

PMCID: PMC4266927
PMID: 25327961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Neurosci. 2014 Oct 15;34(42):14115-27. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3327-14.2014.

Manipulating a "cocaine engram" in mice.

Hsiang HL(1), Epp JR(1), van den Oever MC(1), Yan C(1), Rashid AJ(1), Insel N(1),
Ye L(2), Niibori Y(1), Deisseroth K(2), Frankland PW(1), Josselyn SA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neurosciences and Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, ON, M5G 1X8, Canada, Institute of Medical Sciences, and Department of
Psychology, Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, M5G 1X8, Canada, and.
(2)Department of Bioengineering and Psychiatry, Stanford University, Stanford,
California 94305. (3)Program in Neurosciences and Mental Health, Hospital for
Sick Children, Toronto, ON, M5G 1X8, Canada, Institute of Medical Sciences, and
Department of Psychology, Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, M5G
1X8, Canada, and sheena.josselyn@sickkids.ca.

Experience with drugs of abuse (such as cocaine) produces powerful, long-lasting 
memories that may be important in the development and persistence of drug
addiction. The neural mechanisms that mediate how and where these cocaine
memories are encoded, consolidated and stored are unknown. Here we used
conditioned place preference in mice to examine the precise neural circuits that 
support the memory of a cocaine-cue association (the "cocaine memory trace" or
"cocaine engram"). We found that a small population of neurons (~10%) in the
lateral nucleus of amygdala (LA) were recruited at the time of
cocaine-conditioning to become part of this cocaine engram. Neurons with
increased levels of the transcription factor CREB were preferentially recruited
or allocated to the cocaine engram. Ablating or silencing neurons overexpressing 
CREB (but not a similar number of random LA neurons) before testing disrupted the
expression of a previously acquired cocaine memory, suggesting that neurons
overexpressing CREB become a critical hub in what is likely a larger cocaine
memory engram. Consistent with theories that coordinated postencoding
reactivation of neurons within an engram or cell assembly is crucial for memory
consolidation (Marr, 1971; Buzsáki, 1989; Wilson and McNaughton, 1994; McClelland
et al., 1995; Girardeau et al., 2009; Dupret et al., 2010; Carr et al., 2011), we
also found that post-training suppression, or nondiscriminate activation, of CREB
overexpressing neurons impaired consolidation of the cocaine memory. These
findings reveal mechanisms underlying how and where drug memories are encoded and
stored in the brain and may also inform the development of treatments for drug
addiction.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/3414115-13$15.00/0.

PMID: 25319707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Dec;44(12):3708-16. doi: 10.1002/eji.201444553. Epub 2014 Nov
10.

Neuroimmunological communication via CGRP promotes the development of a
regulatory phenotype in TLR4-stimulated macrophages.

Baliu-Piqué M(1), Jusek G, Holzmann B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.

Environmental signals shape the phenotype and function of activated macrophages. 
Here, we show that the neuropeptide calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), which
is released from sensory nerves, modulates the phenotype of TLR4-activated murine
macrophages by enhancing expression of the regulatory macrophage markers IL-10,
sphingosine kinase 1 (SPHK1), and LIGHT (lymphotoxin-like, exhibits inducible
expression and competes with HSV glycoprotein D for herpesvirus entry mediator, a
receptor expressed by T lymphocytes). In contrast, CGRP inhibits production of
cytokines characteristic of inflammatory macrophages and does not affect
expression of wound-healing macrophage markers upon TLR4 engagement. In
IL-4-stimulated macrophages, CGRP increased LIGHT expression, but failed to
induce IL-10 and SPHK1. The stimulatory effect of CGRP on IL-10 production
required activation of protein kinase A and was linked to prolonged
phosphorylation of CREB and sustained nuclear accumulation of CRTC2 and CRTC3
(where CRTC is CREB-regulated transcriptional cofactor). CGRP enhanced expression
of regulatory macrophage markers during the early, but not late, phase of
LPS-stimulation and this effect was independent of autocrine type-I IFN activity.
In contrast, autocrine type-I IFN activity and treatment of macrophages with
IFN-ß promoted late-phase IL-10 production, but had only minor influence on LIGHT
and SPHK1 expression. Together, the results identify neuroimmunological
communication through CGRP as a novel costimulatory pathway promoting the
development of a regulatory phenotype of TLR4-stimulated macrophages. CGRP
appears to act through a mechanism that involves sustained activation of
CREB-dependent gene transcription.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25316186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Phys Chem B. 2014 Nov 6;118(44):12621-9. doi: 10.1021/jp508046y. Epub 2014 Oct 
23.

Macromolecular crowding effects on coupled folding and binding.

Kim YC(1), Bhattacharya A, Mittal J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Computational Materials Science, Naval Research Laboratory ,
Washington, D.C. 20375, United States.

Replica exchange molecular dynamics simulations are performed on the protein
complex pKID-KIX to understand the effects of macromolecular crowding on coupled 
folding and binding events. A structure-based protein model at the residue level 
is adopted for the two proteins to include intramolecular conformational
flexibility, while crowding macromolecules are represented as spherical
particles. The interactions between crowders and protein residues can be either
purely repulsive or a combination of short-range repulsion and intermediate-range
attraction. Consistent with previous studies on rigid-body protein binding in the
presence of spherical crowders, we find that the complex formation is stabilized 
by repulsive protein-crowder interactions and destabilized by sufficiently strong
attractive protein-crowder interactions. Competition between stabilizing
repulsive and destabilizing attractive interactions is quantitatively captured by
a previous theoretical model developed for describing the change in the binding
free energy of rigid proteins in a crowded environment. We find that protein
flexibility has little effect on the thermodynamics of the pKID-KIX binding (with
respect to bulk) for repulsive and weakly attractive protein-crowder
interactions. For strong protein-crowder attractive interactions, the
destabilizing effect due to crowding is attenuated by protein flexibility.
Interestingly, the mechanism of coupled folding and binding observed in bulk
remains unchanged under highly crowded conditions over a broad range of
protein-crowder interaction strengths. Also, strong protein-crowder attractive
interactions can significantly stabilize intermediate states involving partial
contact between pKID and KIX domains.

PMID: 25302571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 Jan;67(1):302-14. doi: 10.1002/art.38912.

Enhanced chondrogenesis of induced pluripotent stem cells from patients with
neonatal-onset multisystem inflammatory disease occurs via the caspase
1-independent cAMP/protein kinase A/CREB pathway.

Yokoyama K(1), Ikeya M, Umeda K, Oda H, Nodomi S, Nasu A, Matsumoto Y, Izawa K,
Horigome K, Kusaka T, Tanaka T, Saito MK, Yasumi T, Nishikomori R, Ohara O,
Nakayama N, Nakahata T, Heike T, Toguchida J.

Author information: 
(1)Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Neonatal-onset multisystem inflammatory disease (NOMID) is a
dominantly inherited autoinflammatory disease caused by NLRP3 mutations. NOMID
pathophysiology is explained by the NLRP3 inflammasome, which produces
interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß). However, epiphyseal overgrowth in NOMID is resistant to
anti-IL-1 therapy and may therefore occur independently of the NLRP3
inflammasome. This study was undertaken to investigate the effect of mutated
NLRP3 on chondrocytes using induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from patients 
with NOMID.
METHODS: We established isogenic iPSCs with wild-type or mutant NLRP3 from 2
NOMID patients with NLRP3 somatic mosaicism. The iPSCs were differentiated into
chondrocytes in vitro and in vivo. The phenotypes of chondrocytes with wild-type 
and mutant NLRP3 were compared, particularly the size of the chondrocyte tissue
produced.
RESULTS: Mutant iPSCs produced larger chondrocyte masses than wild-type iPSCs
owing to glycosaminoglycan overproduction, which correlated with increased
expression of the chondrocyte master regulator SOX9. In addition, in vivo
transplantation of mutant cartilaginous pellets into immunodeficient mice caused 
disorganized endochondral ossification. Enhanced chondrogenesis was independent
of caspase 1 and IL-1, and thus the NLRP3 inflammasome. Investigation of the
human SOX9 promoter in chondroprogenitor cells revealed that the CREB/ATF-binding
site was critical for SOX9 overexpression caused by mutated NLRP3. This was
supported by increased levels of cAMP and phosphorylated CREB in mutant
chondroprogenitor cells.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that the intrinsic hyperplastic capacity of
NOMID chondrocytes is dependent on the cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway, independent of the 
NLRP3 inflammasome.

Copyright © 2015 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 25302486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 9;9(10):e109523. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109523.
eCollection 2014.

Protein kinase A activation enhances ß-catenin transcriptional activity through
nuclear localization to PML bodies.

Zhang M(1), Mahoney E(1), Zuo T(1), Manchanda PK(1), Davuluri RV(1), Kirschner
LS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Virology, Immunology, and Medical Genetics, The Ohio 
State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America. (2)Department of
Molecular, Virology, Immunology, and Medical Genetics, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio, United States of America; Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and
Metabolism, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.

The Protein Kinase A (PKA) and Wnt signaling cascades are fundamental pathways
involved in cellular development and maintenance. In the osteoblast lineage,
these pathways have been demonstrated functionally to be essential for the
production of mineralized bone. Evidence for PKA-Wnt crosstalk has been reported 
both during tumorigenesis and during organogenesis, and the nature of the
interaction is thought to rely on tissue and cell context. In this manuscript, we
analyzed bone tumors arising from mice with activated PKA caused by mutation of
the PKA regulatory subunit Prkar1a. In primary cells from these tumors, we
observed relocalization of ß-catenin to intranuclear punctuate structures, which 
were identified as PML bodies. Cellular redistribution of ß-catenin could be
recapitulated by pharmacologic activation of PKA. Using 3T3-E1 pre-osteoblasts as
a model system, we found that PKA phosphorylation sites on ß-catenin were
required for nuclear re-localization. Further, ß-catenin's transport to the
nucleus was accompanied by an increase in canonical Wnt-dependent transcription, 
which also required the PKA sites. PKA-Wnt crosstalk in the cells was
bi-directional, including enhanced interactions between ß-catenin and the
cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) and transcriptional crosstalk
between the Wnt and PKA signaling pathways. Increases in canonical Wnt/ß-catenin 
signaling were associated with a decrease in the activity of the non-canonical
Wnt/Ror2 pathway, which has been shown to antagonize canonical Wnt signaling.
Taken together, this study provides a new understanding of the complex regulation
of the subcellular distribution of ß-catenin and its differential protein-protein
interaction that can be modulated by PKA signaling.

PMCID: PMC4192022
PMID: 25299576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Hum Genet. 2015 Jan;134(1):77-87. doi: 10.1007/s00439-014-1494-5. Epub 2014 Oct
7.

Refinement of schizophrenia GWAS loci using methylome-wide association data.

Kumar G(1), Clark SL, McClay JL, Shabalin AA, Adkins DE, Xie L, Chan R, Nerella
S, Kim Y, Sullivan PF, Hultman CM, Magnusson PK, Aberg KA, van den Oord EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biomarker Research and Personalized Medicine, School of Pharmacy,
Virginia Commonwealth University, McGuire Hall, Room 219, P. O. Box 980533,
Richmond, VA, 23298-0581, USA, gkumar@vcu.edu.

Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have made substantial progress in
identifying disease loci. The next logical step is to design functional
experiments to identify disease mechanisms. This step, however, is often hampered
by the large size of loci identified in GWAS that is caused by linkage
disequilibrium between SNPs. In this study, we demonstrate how integrating
methylome-wide association study (MWAS) results with GWAS findings can narrow
down the location for a subset of the putative casual sites. We use the disease
schizophrenia as an example. To handle "data analytic" variation, we first
combined our MWAS results with two GWAS meta-analyses (N = 32,143 and 21,953),
that had largely overlapping samples but different data analysis pipelines,
separately. Permutation tests showed significant overlapping association signals 
between GWAS and MWAS findings. This significant overlap justified prioritizing
loci based on the concordance principle. To further ensure that the methylation
signal was not driven by chance, we successfully replicated the top three
methylation findings near genes SDCCAG8, CREB1 and ATXN7 in an independent sample
using targeted pyrosequencing. In contrast to the SNPs in the selected region,
the methylation sites were largely uncorrelated explaining why the methylation
signals implicated much smaller regions (median size 78 bp). The refined loci
showed considerable enrichment of genomic elements of possible functional
importance and suggested specific hypotheses about schizophrenia etiology.
Several hypotheses involved possible variation in transcription factor-binding
efficiencies.

PMCID: PMC4282961
PMID: 25284466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Vet Comp Oncol. 2014 Oct 3. doi: 10.1111/vco.12118. [Epub ahead of print]

Analysis of microRNA-203 function in CREB/MITF/RAB27a pathway: comparison between
canine and human melanoma cells.

Noguchi S(1), Kumazaki M, Mori T, Baba K, Okuda M, Mizuno T, Akao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Diagnostic and Therapeutics, Joint faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, Yamaguchi University, Yamaguchi, Japan.

MicroRNA (miR)-203 is downregulated and acts as an anti-oncomir in melanoma
cells. Here, using human and canine melanoma cells, we elucidated the effects of 
miR-203 on cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element binding protein
(CREB)/microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF)/RAB27a pathway,
which is known to be important for the development and progression of human
melanoma. In this study, we showed that miR-203 directly targeted CREB1 and
regulated its downstream targets, MITF and RAB27a. miR-203 significantly
suppressed the growth of human and canine melanoma cells and inhibited melanosome
transport through the suppression of the signalling pathway. In conclusion,
miR-203 was shown to be a common tumour-suppressive miRNA in human and canine
melanoma and thus to play a crucial role in the biological mechanisms of melanoma
development.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25280339  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


170. Neuron. 2014 Oct 1;84(1):92-106. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.08.049.

Region-specific activation of CRTC1-CREB signaling mediates long-term fear
memory.

Nonaka M(1), Kim R(1), Fukushima H(2), Sasaki K(3), Suzuki K(1), Okamura M(4),
Ishii Y(1), Kawashima T(4), Kamijo S(1), Takemoto-Kimura S(5), Okuno H(1), Kida
S(6), Bito H(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurochemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan; CREST-JST, Chiyoda-ku,
Tokyo 102-0076, Japan. (2)Department of Bioscience, Faculty of Applied
Bioscience, Tokyo University of Agriculture, 1-1-1 Sakuragaoka, Setagaya-ku,
Tokyo 156-8502, Japan. (3)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, National Cerebral
and Cardiovascular Center Research Institute, Suita, Osaka 565-8565, Japan.
(4)Department of Neurochemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. (5)Department of
Neurochemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan; PRESTO-JST, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012,
Japan. (6)Department of Bioscience, Faculty of Applied Bioscience, Tokyo
University of Agriculture, 1-1-1 Sakuragaoka, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 156-8502, Japan;
CREST-JST, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0076, Japan. (7)Department of Neurochemistry,
Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo 113-0033, Japan; CREST-JST, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0076, Japan. Electronic
address: hbito@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

CREB is a pivotal mediator of activity-regulated gene transcription that
underlies memory formation and allocation. The contribution of a key CREB
cofactor, CREB-regulated transcription coactivator 1 (CRTC1), has, however,
remained elusive. Here we show that several constitutive kinase pathways and an
activity-regulated phosphatase, calcineurin, converge to determine the
nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of CRTC1. This, in turn, triggered an
activity-dependent association of CRTC1 with CREB-dependent regulatory elements
found on IEG promoters. Forced expression of nuclear CRTC1 in hippocampal neurons
activated CREB-dependent transcription, and was sufficient to enhance contextual 
fear memory. Surprisingly, during contextual fear conditioning, we found evidence
of nuclear recruitment of endogenous CRTC1 only in the basolateral amygdala, and 
not in the hippocampus. Consistently, CRTC1 knockdown in the amygdala, but not in
the hippocampus, significantly attenuated fear memory. Thus, CRTC1 has a wide
impact on CREB-dependent memory processes, but fine-tunes CREB output in a
region-specific manner.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25277455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Nat Commun. 2014 Oct 3;5:5092. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6092.

Calcium-dependent FAK/CREB/TNNC1 signalling mediates the effect of stromal MFAP5 
on ovarian cancer metastatic potential.

Leung CS(1), Yeung TL(2), Yip KP(3), Pradeep S(2), Balasubramanian L(3), Liu
J(4), Wong KK(1), Mangala LS(5), Armaiz-Pena GN(2), Lopez-Berestein G(6), Sood
AK(7), Birrer MJ(8), Mok SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Reproductive Medicine, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] The 
University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences at Houston, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA. (2)Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Reproductive
Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
77030, USA. (3)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, University of
South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA. (4)Department of Pathology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (5)1]
Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Reproductive Medicine, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] The Center for RNA
Interference and Non-Coding RNAs, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (6)1] The Center for RNA Interference and
Non-Coding RNAs, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA [2] Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [3] Department of Experimental 
Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
77030, USA. (7)1] Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Reproductive Medicine,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] 
The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences at Houston,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA [3] The Center for RNA Interference and Non-Coding
RNAs, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA [4] Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (8)Department of Medicine, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2014;13(24):3783-4.

Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynaecologic malignancy in the United States,
and advanced serous ovarian adenocarcinoma is responsible for most ovarian cancer
deaths. However, the stroma-derived molecular determinants that modulate patient 
survival are yet to be characterized. Here we identify a stromal gene signature
for advanced high-grade serous ovarian cancer using microdissected stromal
ovarian tumour samples and find that stromal microfibrillar-associated protein 5 
(MFAP5) is a prognostic marker for poor survival. Further functional studies
reveal that FAK/CREB/TNNC1 signalling pathways mediate the effect of MFAP5 on
ovarian cancer cell motility and invasion potential. Targeting stromal MFAP5
using MFAP5-specific siRNA encapsulated in chitosan nanoparticles significantly
decreases ovarian tumour growth and metastasis in vivo, suggesting that it may be
a new modality of ovarian cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC4185407
PMID: 25277212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Oncotarget. 2014 Sep 15;5(17):7458-70.

High mobility group Box-1 inhibits cancer cell motility and metastasis by
suppressing activation of transcription factor CREB and nWASP expression.

Zuo Z(1), Che X(2), Wang Y(3), Li B(4), Li J(3), Dai W(3), Lin CP(5), Huang C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Nelson Institute of Environmental Medicine, New York University School of
Medicine, Tuxedo, NY. State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of 
Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.+ Contributed equally to this
work. (2)Nelson Institute of Environmental Medicine, New York University School
of Medicine, Tuxedo, NY. Contributed equally to this work. (3)Nelson Institute of
Environmental Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, Tuxedo, NY.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. (5)Mouse Cancer Genetics Program, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute-Frederick, Frederick, MD, USA.

The ability to metastasize is a hallmark of malignant tumors, and metastasis is
the principal cause of death of cancer patients. The High Mobility Group Box-1
(HMGB1) is a multifunction protein that serves as both a chromatin protein and an
extracellular signaling molecule. Our current study demonstrated a novel
mechanism of HMGB1 in the regulation of cancer cell actin polymerization, cell
skeleton formation, cancer cell motility and metastasis. We found that knockdown 
of HMGB1 in human lung cancer A549 cells significantly increased cell ß-actin
polymerization, cell skeleton formation, cancer cell migration and invasion in
vitro, as well as metastasis in vivo. And this increase could be inhibited by
treatment of HMGB1 knockdown cells with recombinant human HMGB1. Further studies 
discovered that HMGB1 suppressed phosphorylation, nuclear translocation, and
activation of CREB, by inhibiting nuclear translocation of PKA catalytic subunit.
This reduces nWASP mRNA transcription and expression, further impairing cancer
cell motility. Our findings on the novel mechanism underlying the HMGB1
anti-metastatic effect on cancer provides significant insight into the
understanding of the nature of HMGB1 in cancer invasion and metastasis, further
serving as key information for utilization of HMGB1 and its regulated downstream 
components as new targets for cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC4202136
PMID: 25277185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Cancer Discov. 2014 Oct;4(10):1123-5. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-14-0861.

A CREB1-TGFß2 self-sustaining loop in glioblastoma.

Wotton D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia. Center for Cell Signaling, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia. dw2p@virginia.edu.

Comment on
    Cancer Discov. 2014 Oct;4(10):1230-41.

A subset of glioblastomas (GBM) has high levels of TGFß signaling, and anti-TGFß 
therapies are being pursued as treatments for GBM. The work presented here
identifies CREB1 as a potential biomarker for TGFß-dependent GBM. CREB1
integrates signaling from TGFß and the PI3K pathway and nucleates a
self-sustaining signaling loop that maintains TGFß2 expression in GBM with high
CREB1 levels.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25274684  [PubMed - in process]


174. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Sep 30;111(39):14289-94. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1407640111. Epub 2014 Sep 15.

Role of forkhead box protein A3 in age-associated metabolic decline.

Ma X(1), Xu L(1), Gavrilova O(2), Mueller E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Genetic of Development and Disease Branch and. (2)Mouse Metabolism Core,
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892. (3)Genetic of Development and Disease
Branch and elisabettam@niddk.nih.gov.

Aging is associated with increased adiposity and diminished thermogenesis, but
the critical transcription factors influencing these metabolic changes late in
life are poorly understood. We recently demonstrated that the winged helix factor
forkhead box protein A3 (Foxa3) regulates the expansion of visceral adipose
tissue in high-fat diet regimens; however, whether Foxa3 also contributes to the 
increase in adiposity and the decrease in brown fat activity observed during the 
normal aging process is currently unknown. Here we report that during aging,
levels of Foxa3 are significantly and selectively up-regulated in brown and
inguinal white fat depots, and that midage Foxa3-null mice have increased white
fat browning and thermogenic capacity, decreased adipose tissue expansion,
improved insulin sensitivity, and increased longevity. Foxa3 gain-of-function and
loss-of-function studies in inguinal adipose depots demonstrated a
cell-autonomous function for Foxa3 in white fat tissue browning. Furthermore, our
analysis revealed that the mechanisms of Foxa3 modulation of brown fat gene
programs involve the suppression of peroxisome proliferator activated receptor <U+03B3> 
coactivtor 1 a (PGC1a) levels through interference with cAMP responsive element
binding protein 1-mediated transcriptional regulation of the PGC1a promoter.
Overall, our data demonstrate a role for Foxa3 in energy expenditure and in
age-associated metabolic disorders.

PMCID: PMC4191794
PMID: 25225406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Biochimie. 2014 Dec;107 Pt B:235-46. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2014.09.004. Epub 2014
Sep 16.

TLR mediated GSK3ß activation suppresses CREB mediated IL-10 production to induce
a protective immune response against murine visceral leishmaniasis.

Paul J(1), Naskar K(1), Chowdhury S(1), Chakraborti T(2), De T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Disease and Immunology, Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, 4 Raja S. C. Mullick
Road, Kolkata 700032, India. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics,
University of Kalyani, Kalyani 741235, West Bengal, India. (3)Division of
Infectious Disease and Immunology, Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, 4 Raja S. C. Mullick Road, Kolkata
700032, India; Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Kalyani, 
Kalyani 741235, West Bengal, India. Electronic address: tripti.de@hotmail.com.

During Leishmania donovani (LD) infection Interleukin (IL)-10 favors parasite
replication and plays a central role as a target for immune-based therapy.
Glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3)ß differentially regulates TLR-mediated cytokine
production. CREB, an important transcription factor that induces IL-10 production
is negatively regulated by GSK3ß. However, down regulation of IL-10 via CREB
suppression has not been well explored in controlling LD infection. Here we
demonstrate that, the TLR4 agonist 29 KDa ß 1,4-galactose terminal glycoprotein
(GP29) of LD activated GSK3ß through TLR4 to induce IL-12-mediated Nitric oxide
(NO) production that resulted in effective parasite clearance from macrophages.
GSK3ß activation abrogated both CREB phosphorylation and IL-10 production. Two
subcutaneous injections of GP29 at fortnightly intervals in a 4-week infected
mouse model of LD resulted in a dominant IL-12-mediated NO production and 100%
animals were protected against a subsequent challenge with virulent LD parasites.
Complete absence of GP29 mediated protection with down regulated NO and IL-12
production and dominant IL-10 production in presence of the GSK3ß inhibitor,
Lithium chloride reiterated the role of GSK3ß in disease resolution in the murine
model of visceral leishmaniasis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. and Société française de biochimie et biologie
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

PMID: 25223889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Transl Neurodegener. 2014 Aug 18;3:17. doi: 10.1186/2047-9158-3-17. eCollection
2014.

In silico analysis of regulatory networks underlines the role of miR-10b-5p and
its target BDNF in huntington's disease.

Müller S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular BioSciences, University of Frankfurt, Marie-Curie-Str.9, 60439
Frankfurt a.M., Germany.

Non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) play various roles during central nervous system
development. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of ncRNAs that exert their function
together with argonaute proteins by post-transcriptional gene silencing of
messenger RNAs (mRNAs). Several studies provide evidence for alterations in miRNA
expression in patients with neurodegenerative diseases. Among these is
huntington's disease (HD), a dominantly inherited fatal disorder characterized by
deregulation of neuronal-specific mRNAs as well as miRNAs. Recently,
next-generation sequencing (NGS) miRNA profiles from human HD and neurologically 
normal control brain tissues were reported. Five consistently upregulated miRNAs 
affect the expression of genes involved in neuronal differentiation, neurite
outgrowth, cell death and survival. We re-analyzed the NGS data publicly
available in array express and detected nineteen additional differentially
expressed miRNAs. Subsequently, we connected these miRNAs to genes implicated in 
HD development and network analysis pointed to miRNA-mediated downregulation of
twenty-two genes with roles in the pathogenesis as well as treatment of the
disease. In silico prediction and reporter systems prove that levels of BDNF, a
central node in the miRNA-mRNA regulatory network, can be post-transcriptionally 
controlled by upregulated miR-10b-5p and miR-30a-5p. Reduced BDNF expression is
associated with neuronal dysfunction and death in HD. Moreover, the 3'UTR of
CREB1 harbors a predicted binding site for these two miRNAs. CREB1 is similarly
downregulated in HD and overexpression decreased susceptibility to
3-nitropropionic-induced toxicity in a cell model. In contradiction to these
observations, it is presumed that miR-10b-5p upregulation in HD exerts a
neuroprotective role in response to the mutation in the huntingtin gene.
Therefore, the function of miR-10b-5p and especially its effect on BDNF
expression in HD requires further academic research.

PMCID: PMC4160136
PMID: 25210621  [PubMed]


177. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 10;9(9):e106773. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106773.
eCollection 2014.

The peritoneum is both a source and target of TGF-ß in women with endometriosis.

Young VJ(1), Brown JK(1), Saunders PT(1), Duncan WC(1), Horne AW(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Reproductive Health, The University of Edinburgh, Queen's
Medical Research Institute, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

Transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) is believed to play a major role in the
aetiology of peritoneal endometriosis. We aimed to determine if the peritoneum is
a source of TGF-ß and if peritoneal TGF-ß expression, reception or target genes
are altered in women with endometriosis. Peritoneal fluid, peritoneal bushings
and peritoneal biopsies were collected from women with and without endometriosis.
TGF-ß1, 2 and 3 protein concentrations were measured in the peritoneal fluid.
TGF-ß1 was measured in mesothelial cell conditioned media. Control peritoneum and
peritoneum prone to endometriosis (within Pouch of Douglas) from women without
disease (n = 16) and peritoneum distal and adjacent to endometriosis lesions in
women with endometriosis (n = 15) and were analysed for TGF-ß expression,
reception and signalling by immunohistochemistry, qRT-PCR and a TGF-ß signalling 
PCR array. TGF-ß1 was increased in the peritoneal fluid of women with
endometriosis compared to those without disease (P<0.05) and peritoneal
mesothelial cells secrete TGF-ß1 in-vitro. In women with endometriosis,
peritoneum from sites adjacent to endometriosis lesions expressed higher levels
of TGFB1 mRNA when compared to distal sites (P<0.05). The TGF-ß-stimulated Smad
2/3 signalling pathway was active in the peritoneum and there were significant
increases (P<0.05) in expression of genes associated with tumorigenesis (MAPK8,
CDC6), epithelial-mesenchymal transition (NOTCH1), angiogenesis (ID1, ID3) and
neurogenesis (CREB1) in the peritoneum of women with endometriosis. In
conclusion, the peritoneum, and in particular, the peritoneal mesothelium, is a
source of TGF-ß1 and this is enhanced around endometriosis lesions. The
expression of TGF-ß-regulated genes is altered in the peritoneum of women with
endometriosis and this may promote an environment favorable to lesion formation.

PMCID: PMC4160207
PMID: 25207642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Reproduction. 2014 Dec;148(6):559-68. doi: 10.1530/REP-14-0386. Epub 2014 Sep 3.

Regulation of miR-101/miR-199a-3p by the epithelial sodium channel during embryo 
implantation: involvement of CREB phosphorylation.

Sun X(1), Ruan YC(1), Guo J(1), Chen H(1), Tsang LL(1), Zhang X(1), Jiang X(1),
Chan HC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Epithelial Cell Biology Research CenterKey Laboratory for Regenerative
Medicine of Ministry of Education of China, Faculty of Medicine, School of
Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong.
(2)Epithelial Cell Biology Research CenterKey Laboratory for Regenerative
Medicine of Ministry of Education of China, Faculty of Medicine, School of
Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong
hsiaocchan@cuhk.edu.hk.

In our previous study, we have demonstrated that the epithelial sodium channel
(ENaC) mediates the embryo-derived signals leading to the activation of CREB and 
upregulation of cyclooxygenase type 2 (COX2) required for embryo implantation.
This study aims to investigate whether microRNAs (miRNAs) are involved in the
ENaC-induced upregulation of COX2 during embryo implantation. The results show
that the levels of miR-101 and miR-199a-3p, two COX2 targeting miRNAs, are
reduced by ENaC activation, and increased by ENaC inhibition or knock-down of
ENaC subunit (ENaCa) in human endometrial surface epithelial (HES) cells or in
mouse uteri during implantation. Phosphorylation of CREB is induced by the
activation of ENaC, and blocked by ENaC inhibition or knockdown in HES cells.
Knockdown of ENaCa or CREB in HES cells or in mouse uterus in vivo results in
increases in miR-101 and miR-199a-3p, accompanied with decreases in COX2 protein 
levels and reduction in implantation rate. The downregulation of COX2 caused by
knockdown of ENaC or CREB can be recovered by the inhibitors of miR-101 or
miR-199a-3p in HES cells. These results reveal a novel molecular mechanism
modulating COX2 expression during embryo implantation via ENaC-dependent CREB
activation and COX2-targeting miRNAs.

© 2014 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 25187622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Mar;230(3):667-79. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24790.

The cooperation of CREB and NFAT is required for PTHrP-induced RANKL expression
in mouse osteoblastic cells.

Park HJ(1), Baek K, Baek JH, Kim HR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, School of Dentistry and Dental Research
Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) is known to induce the expression of 
receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B ligand (RANKL) in stromal cells/osteoblasts. However,
the signaling pathways involved remain controversial. In the present study, we
investigated the role of cAMP/protein kinase A (PKA) and calcineurin/NFAT
pathways in PTHrP-induced RANKL expression in C2C12 and primary cultured mouse
calvarial cells. PTHrP-mediated induction of RANKL expression was significantly
inhibited by H89 and FK506, an inhibitor of PKA and calcineurin, respectively.
PTHrP upregulated CREB phosphorylation and the transcriptional activity of NFAT. 
Knockdown of CREB or NFATc1 blocked PTHrP-induced RANKL expression. PTHrP
increased the activity of the RANKL promoter reporter that contains approximately
2<U+2009>kb mouse RANKL promoter DNA sequences. Insertions of mutations in CRE-like
element or in NFAT-binding element abrogated PTHrP-induced RANKL promoter
activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that PTHrP increased the
binding of CREB and NFATc1/NFATc3 to their cognate binding elements in the RANKL 
promoter. Inhibition of cAMP/PKA and its downstream ERK activity suppressed
PTHrP-induced expression and transcriptional activity of NFATc1. CREB knockdown
prevented PTHrP induction of NFATc1 expression. Furthermore, NFATc1 and CREB were
co-immunoprecipitated. Mutations in CRE-like element completely blocked
NFATc1-induced transactivation of the RANKL promoter reporter; however, mutations
in NFAT-binding element partially suppressed CREB-induced RANKL promoter
activity. Overexpression of CREB increased NFATc1 binding to the RANKL promoter
and vice versa. These results suggest that PTHrP-induced RANKL expression depends
on the activation of both cAMP/PKA and calcineurin/NFAT pathways, and
subsequently, CREB and NFAT cooperate to transactivate the mouse RANKL gene.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc., A Wiley Company.

PMID: 25187507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Virol J. 2014 Sep 2;11:160. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-11-160.

Activation of pro-survival CaMK4ß/CREB and pro-death MST1 signaling at early and 
late times during a mouse model of prion disease.

Shott RH, Majer A, Frost KL, Booth SA, Schang LM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Centre for Prions and Protein Folding Diseases 
(CPPFD), University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. luis.schang@ualberta.ca.

BACKGROUND: The signaling pathways most critical to prion disease pathogenesis
are as yet incompletely characterized. We have developed a kinomics approach to
identify signaling pathways that are dysregulated during prion pathogenesis. The 
approach is sensitive and specific enough to detect signaling pathways
dysregulated in a simple in vitro model of prion pathogenesis. Here, we used this
approach to identify signaling pathways dysregulated during prion pathogenesis in
vivo.
METHODS: Mice intraperitoneally infected with scrapie (strain RML) were
euthanized at 70, 90, 110, 130 days post-infection (dpi) or at terminal stages of
disease (155-190 dpi). The levels of 139 protein kinases in brainstem-cerebellum 
homogenates were analyzed by multiplex Western blots, followed by hierarchical
clustering and analyses of activation states.
RESULTS: Hierarchical and functional clustering identified CaMK4ß and MST1
signaling pathways as potentially dysregulated. Targeted analyses revealed that
CaMK4ß and its downstream substrate CREB, which promotes neuronal survival, were 
activated at 70 and 90 dpi in cortical, subcortical and brainstem-cerebellum
homogenates from scrapie-infected mice. The activation levels of CaMK4ß/CREB
signaling returned to those in mock-infected mice at 110 dpi, whereas MST1, which
promotes neuronal death, became activated at 130 dpi.
CONCLUSION: Pro-survival CaMK4ß/CREB signaling is activated in mouse scrapie at
earlier times and later inhibited, whereas pro-death MST1 signaling is activated 
at these later times.

PMCID: PMC4168054
PMID: 25183307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Cell Sci. 2014 Nov 1;127(Pt 21):4589-601. doi: 10.1242/jcs.143164. Epub 2014
Sep 1.

Synemin acts as a regulator of signalling molecules during skeletal muscle
hypertrophy.

Li Z(1), Parlakian A(2), Coletti D(2), Alonso-Martin S(3), Hourdé C(2), Joanne
P(2), Gao-Li J(2), Blanc J(2), Ferry A(3), Paulin D(2), Xue Z(2), Agbulut O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR CNRS 8256/INSERM ERL U1164,
Biological Adaptation and Ageing, Institut de Biologie Paris-Seine, Paris,
F-75005 France zhenlin.li@upmc.fr onnik.agbulut@upmc.fr. (2)Sorbonne Universités,
UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR CNRS 8256/INSERM ERL U1164, Biological Adaptation and
Ageing, Institut de Biologie Paris-Seine, Paris, F-75005 France. (3)Sorbonne
Universités, UPMC Univ-Paris 06, INSERM U974, CNRS UMR7215, Institut de Myologie,
Paris-France.

Synemin, a type IV intermediate filament (IF) protein, forms a bridge between IFs
and cellular membranes. As an A-kinase-anchoring protein, it also provides
temporal and spatial targeting of protein kinase A (PKA). However, little is
known about its functional roles in either process. To better understand its
functions in muscle tissue, we generated synemin-deficient (Synm(-) (/-)) mice.
Synm(-) (/-) mice displayed normal development and fertility but showed a mild
degeneration and regeneration phenotype in myofibres and defects in sarcolemma
membranes. Following mechanical overload, Synm(-) (/-) mice muscles showed a
higher hypertrophic capacity with increased maximal force and fatigue resistance 
compared with control mice. At the molecular level, increased remodelling
capacity was accompanied by decreased myostatin (also known as GDF8) and atrogin 
(also known as FBXO32) expression, and increased follistatin expression.
Furthermore, the activity of muscle-mass control molecules (the PKA RIIa subunit,
p70S6K and CREB1) was increased in mutant mice. Finally, analysis of muscle
satellite cell behaviour suggested that the absence of synemin could affect the
balance between self-renewal and differentiation of these cells. Taken together, 
our results show that synemin is necessary to maintain membrane integrity and
regulates signalling molecules during muscle hypertrophy.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25179606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Placenta. 2014 Nov;35(11):907-18. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2014.07.017. Epub 2014 
Aug 7.

The cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) transcription factor regulates
furin expression during human trophoblast syncytialization.

Zhou Z(1), Wang R(1), Yang X(2), Lu XY(1), Zhang Q(3), Wang YL(4), Wang H(4), Zhu
C(4), Lin HY(5), Wang H(6).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, PR China; Graduate School of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100039, PR China. (2)Department of Human
Reproductive Medicine, Beijing Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Capital
Medical University, Beijing 100006, PR China. (3)State Key Laboratory of
Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, PR China; Laboratory Animal Center, Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing 400016, PR China. (4)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology,
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, PR China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, PR China. Electronic address:
linhy@ioz.ac.cn. (6)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, PR China. Electronic
address: wanghm@ioz.ac.cn.

INTRODUCTION: The multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast is formed and maintained by 
cytotrophoblast cell fusion and serves multiple functions to ensure a successful 
pregnancy. We have previously reported that the proprotein convertase furin is
required for trophoblast syncytialization by processing type 1 insulin-like
growth factor receptor (IGF1R).
METHODS: Utilizing trophoblast cell fusion models including induced fusion of
choriocarcinoma BeWo cells and spontaneous fusion of primary cultured term
cytotrophoblast cells, the expression of furin was evaluated by quantitative
real-time PCR, Western blotting and immunofluorescence. The key transcription
factor regulating the FUR gene promoter and critical responsive elements were
identified by luciferase reporter assays, truncated mutants analysis,
site-directed mutagenesis and ChIP.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that the levels of FUR mRNA were significantly
stimulated by cAMP/PKA signaling pathway during spontaneous fusion of
cytotrophoblast cells and forskolin-induced fusion of BeWo cells. cAMP-responsive
element binding protein (CREB) was proven to be the key transcription factor
which regulated the FUR P1 promoter during forskolin-induced BeWo cell fusion,
and two critical cAMP-responsive elements (CREs) in the P1 promoter were further 
identified. Finally, we showed that CREB mediated endogenous furin activation and
that CREB siRNA attenuated forskolin-induced furin expression and cell fusion in 
BeWo cells.
DISCUSSION: This provides the first evidence of the upstream regulator of furin
during trophoblast cell fusion.
CONCLUSIONS: The above results suggest that the FUR transcription is activated by
CREB-dependent stimulation of the FUR P1 promoter during human trophoblast
syncytialization.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25175744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Dec;35(12):2881.e7-2881.e10. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.06.024. Epub 2014 Jun 28.

Genetic variants in a 'cAMP element binding protein' (CREB)-dependent histone
acetylation pathway influence memory performance in cognitively healthy elderly
individuals.

Barral S(1), Reitz C(1), Small SA(1), Mayeux R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY,
USA; Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain,
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. (2)Department of Neurology, Columbia
University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA; Taub Institute for Research on
Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. 
Electronic address: rpm2@cumc.columbia.edu.

The molecular pathways underlying age-related memory changes remain unclear.
There is a substantial genetic contribution to memory performance through life
span. A recent study has implicated RbAp48, which mediates its effect on
age-related memory decline by interacting with cyclic adenosine monophosphate
responsive element binding protein (CREB)1 binding protein and influencing this
histone acetylation pathway. To validate these findings, we tested whether
genetic variants in RbAp48, CREB1, and CREBBP are associated with memory
performance in 3 independent data sets consisting of 2674 cognitively healthy
elderly individuals. Genetic variant rs2526690 in the CREBBP gene was
significantly associated with episodic memory performance (pmeta = 3.7 × 10(-4)) 
in a multivariate model adjusted for age, sex, and apolipoprotein E status.
Identifying genetic variants that modulate mechanisms of cognitive aging will
allow identifying valid targets for therapeutic intervention.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4253058
PMID: 25150575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Virchows Arch. 2014 Oct;465(4):453-61. doi: 10.1007/s00428-014-1645-z. Epub 2014 
Aug 19.

Primary pulmonary myxoid sarcomas with EWSR1-CREB1 translocation might originate 
from primitive peribronchial mesenchymal cells undergoing (myo)fibroblastic
differentiation.

Jeon YK(1), Moon KC, Park SH, Chung DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Primary pulmonary myxoid sarcoma (PPMS) is a very rare lung tumor that has
recently been shown to harbor an EWSR1-CREB1 translocation. However, the
histogenesis and biological behavior of PPMS remains unclear. To provide insight 
into the histogenesis of PPMS, we studied surgical resection specimens of four
patients, two females and two males with an age range of 26 to 65 years, all
non-smokers with mild anemia. The tumors, three of which are endobronchial,
measured between 4 and 13 cm. One patient developed metastasis to the
contra-lateral lung 7 months after resection. Other patients remained alive
without tumor for 1.5, 10, and 13 years. Fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) analysis with a gene break apart probe showed an EWSR1 translocation in
all cases. The EWSR1-CREB1 fusion transcript was detected in all cases by
reverse-transcription PCR. Immunohistochemical staining showed diffuse positive
staining of the tumor cells only for vimentin. Tumor cells expressed no other
myoid, epithelial, endothelial, melanocytic, myoepithelial, or neuroendocrine
markers, except for smooth muscle actin and epithelial membrane antigen, which
were only focally positive in individual cases. Ultrastructural analyses revealed
the presence in the tumor cells of intermediate filaments with focal densities
along the sub-cytoplasmic membrane as well as dense plaques. These results
suggest that PPMS exhibits myofibroblastic differentiation. We conclude that PPMS
is an intermediate grade malignant lung tumor harboring EWSR1 translocations,
which may originate from mesenchymal cells that undergo fibroblastic or
myofibroblastic differentiation.

PMID: 25134518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Orthop Res. 2014 Nov;32(11):1479-86. doi: 10.1002/jor.22703. Epub 2014 Aug 11.

Role of Rho small GTPases in meniscus cells.

Kanazawa T(1), Furumatsu T, Matsumoto-Ogawa E, Maehara A, Ozaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Science of Functional Recovery and
Reconstruction, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikatacho, Kitaku, Okayama, 700-8558, Japan.

We previously reported that mechanical stretch regulates Sry-type HMG box (SOX)
9-dependent a1(II) collagen (COL2A1) expression in inner meniscus cells. This
study examined the role of the small Rho guanosine 5' triphosphatase Rac1 and
Rho-associated kinase (ROCK) in the regulation of stretch-induced SOX9 gene
expression in cultured human inner meniscus cells. COL2A1 and SOX9 gene
expression was assessed by real-time PCR after application of uni-axial cyclic
tensile strain (CTS) in the presence or absence of ROCK and Rac1 inhibitors. The 
subcellular localization of SOX9 and the Rac1 effector cyclic AMP response
element-binding protein (CREB), the phosphorylation state of SOX9, Rac1
activation, and the binding of CREB to the SOX9 promoter were assessed. CTS
increased the expression of COL2A1 and SOX9, which was suppressed by inhibition
of Rac1. ROCK inhibition enhanced COL2A1 and SOX9 gene expression in the absence 
of CTS. CTS stimulated the nuclear translocation and phosphorylation of SOX9, and
increased Rac1 activation. CTS also increased the binding of CREB to the SOX9
promoter. The results suggest that mechanical stretch-dependent upregulation of
SOX9 by CREB in inner meniscus cells depends on the antagonistic activities of
ROCK and Rac1.

© 2014 Orthopaedic Research Society. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25130858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2015 Jan;122(1):43-58. doi: 10.1007/s00702-014-1290-3. 
Epub 2014 Aug 17.

Genetics of psychotropic medication induced side effects in two independent
samples of bipolar patients.

Fabbri C(1), Souery D, Calati R, Crisafulli C, Chierchia A, Albani D, Forloni G, 
Chiesa A, Martines R, Sentissi O, Mendlewicz J, De Girolamo G, Serretti A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and NeuroMotor Sciences, University of Bologna, Viale
Carlo Pepoli 5, 40123, Bologna, Italy.

The treatment of bipolar disorder (BD) usually requires combination therapies,
with the critical issue of the emergence of adverse drug reactions (ADRs) and the
possibility of low treatment adherence. Genetic polymorphisms are hypothesized to
modulate the pharmacodynamics of psychotropic drugs, representing potential
biological markers of ADRs. This study investigated genes involved in the
regulation of neuroplasticity (BDNF, ST8SIA2), second messenger cascades (GSK3B, 
MAPK1, and CREB1), circadian rhythms (RORA), transcription (SP4, ZNF804A), and
monoaminergic system (HTR2A and COMT) in the risk of neurological, psychic,
autonomic, and other ADRs. Two independent samples of BD patients
naturalistically treated were included (COPE-BD n = 147; STEP-BD n = 659). In the
COPE-BD 34 SNPs were genotyped, while in the STEP-BD polymorphisms in the
selected genes were extracted from the genome-wide dataset. Each ADRs group was
categorized as absent-mild or moderate-severe and logistic regression with
appropriate covariates was applied to identify possible risk genotypes/alleles.
58.5 and 93.5 % of patients were treated with mood stabilizers, 44.2 and 50.7 %
were treated with antipsychotics, and 69.4 and 46.1 % were treated with
antidepressants in the COPE-BD and STEP-BD, respectively. Our findings suggested 
that ST8SIA2 may be associated with psychic ADRs, as shown in the COPE-BD
(rs4777989 p = 0.0017) and STEP-BD (rs56027313, rs13379489 and rs10852173). A
cluster of RORA SNPs around rs2083074 showed an effect on psychic ADRs in the
STEP-BD. Trends supporting the association between HTR2A and autonomic ADRs were 
found in both samples. Confirmations are needed particularly for ST8SIA2 and RORA
since the few available data regarding their role in relation to psychotropic
ADRs.

PMID: 25129258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Brain Res. 2014 Nov 7;1588:127-34. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.08.005. Epub 2014
Aug 13.

NR2B overexpression leads to the enhancement of specific protein phosphorylation 
in the brain.

Li C(1), Zhang N(1), Hu Y(2), Wang H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Brain Functional Genomics, MOE and STCSM, Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, School of Psychology and Cognitive Science, East China
Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Brain Functional 
Genomics, MOE and STCSM, Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, School of
Psychology and Cognitive Science, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, 
China; Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Molecular Therapeutics and New
Drug Development, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China.
Electronic address: yhu@brain.ecnu.edu.cn. (3)Key Laboratory of Brain Functional 
Genomics, MOE and STCSM, Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, School of
Psychology and Cognitive Science, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, 
China. Electronic address: hmwang@nbic.ecnu.edu.cn.

n-methyl-d-aspartate receptors (NMDARs) are highly expressed in the central
nervous system (CNS) including the cerebral cortex, and it has been found that
they contribute significantly to the processes of learning and memory.
Dysfunctions of NMDARs are implicated in many neurological disorders. To further 
investigate the specific role of the NR2B subunit of NMDARs in brain functions,
we have examined differences in gene expression in the cerebral cortex between
NR2B transgenic mice and their wild-type littermates using the DNA microarray.
Total of 179 differentially expressed genes were identified, including genes
involved in ion channel activity and/or neurotransmission, signal transduction,
structure/cytoskeleton, transcription, and hormone/growth factor activity. Signal
pathway analysis has indicated that multiple pathways were involved in this
process, especially the Mitogen-activated protein kinases/Extracellular
signal-regulated kinases (MAPK/ERK) pathway. The phosphorylation levels of ERK
and cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB), and the mRNA levels of CREB
target genes (C-Fos and Nr4a1) were significantly upregulated in the cerebral
cortices of NR2B transgenic mice compared to their wild-type littermates. Our
study suggested that a chronic increase of NMDARs activation by NR2B
overexpression in the forebrain may enhance the protein serine/threonine
phosphorylation levels of MAPK/ERK-CREB and thereby regulated their signaling
pathway.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25128602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Cancer Lett. 2014 Nov 1;354(1):189-99. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.08.009. Epub
2014 Aug 12.

The p38 MAPK-regulated PKD1/CREB/Bcl-2 pathway contributes to selenite-induced
colorectal cancer cell apoptosis in vitro and in vivo.

Hui K(1), Yang Y(1), Shi K(1), Luo H(1), Duan J(1), An J(1), Wu P(1), Ci Y(1),
Shi L(1), Xu C(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences and School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences, NO. 5 Dong Dan San Tiao, Beijing 100005, China.
(2)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences and School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences, NO. 5 Dong Dan San Tiao, Beijing 100005, China.
Electronic address: cmxu@ibms.pumc.edu.cn.

Supranutritional selenite has anti-cancer therapeutic effects in vivo; however,
the detailed mechanisms underlying these effects are not clearly understood.
Further studies would broaden our understanding of the anti-cancer effects of
this compound and provide a theoretical basis for its clinical application. In
this study, we primarily found that selenite exposure inhibited phosphorylation
of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-response element binding protein (CREB),
leading to suppression of Bcl-2 in HCT116 and SW480 colorectal cancer (CRC)
cells. Moreover, the selenite-induced inhibitory effect on PKD1 activation was
involved in suppression of the CREB signalling pathway. Additionally, we
discovered that selenite treatment can upregulate p38 MAPK phosphorylation, which
results in inhibition of the PKD1/CREB/Bcl-2 survival pathway and triggers
apoptosis. Finally, we established a colorectal cancer xenograft model and found 
that selenite treatment markedly inhibits tumour growth through the
MAPK/PKD1/CREB/Bcl-2 pathway in vivo. Our results demonstrated that a
supranutritional dose of selenite induced CRC cell apoptosis through inhibition
of the PKD1/CREB/Bcl-2 axis both in vitro and in vivo.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 25128071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 15;9(8):e104888. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104888.
eCollection 2014.

Metformin protects cardiomyocyte from doxorubicin induced cytotoxicity through an
AMP-activated protein kinase dependent signaling pathway: an in vitro study.

Kobashigawa LC(1), Xu YC(1), Padbury JF(1), Tseng YT(1), Yano N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Women & Infants Hospital, The Warren Alpert Medical 
School of Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, United States of America.

Doxorubicin (Dox) is one of the most widely used antitumor drugs, but its
cumulative cardiotoxicity have been major concerns in cancer therapeutic practice
for decades. Recent studies established that metformin (Met), an oral
anti-diabetic drug, provides protective effects in Dox-induced cardiotoxicity.
Met has been shown to increase fatty acid oxidation, an effect mediated by AMP
activated protein kinase (AMPK). Here we delineate the intracellular signaling
factors involved in Met mediated protection against Dox-induced cardiotoxicity in
the H9c2 cardiomyoblast cell line. Treatment with low dose Met (0.1 mM) increased
cell viabilities and Ki-67 expressions while decreasing LDH leakages, ROS
generations and [Ca2+]i. The protective effect was reversed by a co-treatment
with compound-C, an AMPK specific inhibitor, or by an over expression of a
dominant-negative AMPKa cDNA. Inhibition of PKA with H89 or a suppression of Src 
kinase by a small hairpin siRNA also abrogated the protective effect of the low
dose Met. Whereas, with a higher dose of Met (1.0 mM), the protective effects
were abolished regardless of the enhanced AMPK, PKA/CREB1 and Src kinase
activity. In high dose Met treated cells, expression of platelet-derived growth
factor receptor (PDGFR) was significantly suppressed. Furthermore, the protective
effect of low dose Met was totally reversed by co-treatment with AG1296, a PDGFR 
specific antagonist. These data provide in vitro evidence supporting a signaling 
cascade by which low dose Met exerts protective effects against Dox via
sequential involvement of AMPK, PKA/CREB1, Src and PDGFR. Whereas high dose Met
reverses the effect by suppressing PDGFR expression.

PMCID: PMC4134245
PMID: 25127116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Hum Pathol. 2014 Oct;45(10):2173-8. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.05.006. Epub 2014
Jun 2.

Sclerosing epithelioid fibrosarcoma presenting as intraabdominal sarcomatosis
with a novel EWSR1-CREB3L1 gene fusion.

Stockman DL(1), Ali SM(2), He J(2), Ross JS(3), Meis JM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
1515 Holcombe Blvd Unit 085, Houston, TX 77030. (2)Foundation Medicine, 150
Second St, Cambridge, MA 02141. (3)Foundation Medicine, 150 Second St, Cambridge,
MA 02141; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Albany Medical
College, 47 New Scotland Ave, Albany, NY 12208. (4)Departments of Pathology, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd Unit 085,
Houston, TX 77030. Electronic address: jmmeis@mdanderson.org.

We report a case of intraabdominal sclerosing epithelioid fibrosarcoma (SEF) with
a t (11;22)(p11.2;q12.2) Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1-cAMP-responsive
element-binding protein 3-like 1 translocation. A 43-year old man presented with 
massive ascites and shortness of breath. Imaging studies revealed a large
mesenteric-based mass with extensive omental/peritoneal disease. After resection 
and cytoreductive surgery, the tumor recurred with metastasis to the lungs; the
patient is still alive with disease. Histologically, there was a uniform
population of epithelioid cells arranged in cords and nests, embedded in a dense 
collagenous matrix; no areas of low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma were identified.
All immunohistochemical markers were nonreactive. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization studies showed rearrangement of Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1. 
Genomic profiling by clinical grade next-generation sequencing revealed a fusion 
gene between intron 11 of Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 (22q12.2) and intron 
5 of cAMP-responsive element-binding protein 3-like 1 (11p11.2). This is the
first report of "pure" or true SEF presenting as intraabdominal sarcomatosis with
confirmation of the recently described unique Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region
1-cAMP-responsive element-binding protein 3-like 1 gene fusion in SEF without
areas of low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25123073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Dev Cell. 2014 Aug 11;30(3):280-94. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.06.018.

Control systems of membrane transport at the interface between the endoplasmic
reticulum and the Golgi.

Cancino J(1), Capalbo A(2), Di Campli A(3), Giannotta M(4), Rizzo R(2), Jung
JE(5), Di Martino R(3), Persico M(5), Heinklein P(6), Sallese M(4), Luini A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Biochimica delle Proteine, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Via
Pietro Castellino 111, 80131 Napoli, Italy; Telethon Institute of Genetics and
Medicine, Via Pietro Castellino 111, 80131 Napoli, Italy; Departamento de
Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Andrés Bello,
Quillota 980, Viña del Mar 2520000, Chile. Electronic address:
jorge.cancino@unab.cl. (2)Istituto di Biochimica delle Proteine, Consiglio
Nazionale delle Ricerche, Via Pietro Castellino 111, 80131 Napoli, Italy;
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Via Pietro Castellino 111, 80131
Napoli, Italy. (3)Istituto di Biochimica delle Proteine, Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche, Via Pietro Castellino 111, 80131 Napoli, Italy. (4)Consorzio
Mario Negri Sud, Via Nazionale 8/A, 66030 Santa Maria Imbaro (Chieti), Italy.
(5)Istituto di Biochimica delle Proteine, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Via
Pietro Castellino 111, 80131 Napoli, Italy; Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a
Carattere Scientifico, Istituto di Ricerca Diagnostica e Nucleare (SDN), 80143
Napoli, Italy. (6)Institut für Biochemie Charité, Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
CrossOver Charitéplatz 1/Sitz, Virchowweg 6, 10117 Berlin, Germany. (7)Istituto
di Biochimica delle Proteine, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Via Pietro
Castellino 111, 80131 Napoli, Italy; Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine,
Via Pietro Castellino 111, 80131 Napoli, Italy. Electronic address:
a.luini@ibp.cnr.it.

A fundamental property of cellular processes is to maintain homeostasis despite
varying internal and external conditions. Within the membrane transport
apparatus, variations in membrane fluxes from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to
the Golgi complex are balanced by opposite fluxes from the Golgi to the ER to
maintain homeostasis between the two organelles. Here we describe a molecular
device that balances transport fluxes by integrating transduction cascades with
the transport machinery. Specifically, ER-to-Golgi transport activates the KDEL
receptor at the Golgi, which triggers a cascade that involves Gs and adenylyl
cyclase and phosphodiesterase isoforms and then PKA activation and results in the
phosphorylation of transport machinery proteins. This induces retrograde traffic 
to the ER and balances transport fluxes between the ER and Golgi. Moreover, the
KDEL receptor activates CREB1 and other transcription factors that upregulate
transport-related genes. Thus, a Golgi-based control system maintains transport
homeostasis through both signaling and transcriptional networks.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25117681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Aug 26;111(34):12468-73. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1412308111. Epub 2014 Aug 11.

Small-molecule screening identifies inhibition of salt-inducible kinases as a
therapeutic strategy to enhance immunoregulatory functions of dendritic cells.

Sundberg TB(1), Choi HG(2), Song JH(3), Russell CN(4), Hussain MM(5), Graham
DB(6), Khor B(7), Gagnon J(6), O'Connell DJ(6), Narayan K(3), Dancík V(1), Perez 
JR(1), Reinecker HC(3), Gray NS(2), Schreiber SL(8), Xavier RJ(9), Shamji AF(10).

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Science of Therapeutics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142; 
(2)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115; Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA 02115; (3)Gastrointestinal Unit and Center for the Study of
Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114;
(4)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115; 
(5)Center for the Science of Therapeutics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142; 
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
02138; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142; (6)Program in
Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142; and.
(7)Center for Computational and Integrative Biology, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA 02114. (8)Center for the Science of Therapeutics, Broad
Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142; Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138; Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Cambridge, MA 02142; stuart_schreiber@harvard.edu xavier@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu
ashamji@broadinstitute.org. (9)Gastrointestinal Unit and Center for the Study of 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114;
Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142;
and Center for Computational and Integrative Biology, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA 02114 stuart_schreiber@harvard.edu
xavier@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu ashamji@broadinstitute.org. (10)Center for the
Science of Therapeutics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142;
stuart_schreiber@harvard.edu xavier@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu
ashamji@broadinstitute.org.

Genetic alterations that reduce the function of the immunoregulatory cytokine
IL-10 contribute to colitis in mouse and man. Myeloid cells such as macrophages
(MFs) and dendritic cells (DCs) play an essential role in determining the
relative abundance of IL-10 versus inflammatory cytokines in the gut. As such,
using small molecules to boost IL-10 production by DCs-MFs represents a promising
approach to increase levels of this cytokine specifically in gut tissues. Toward 
this end, we screened a library of well-annotated kinase inhibitors for compounds
that enhance production of IL-10 by murine bone-marrow-derived DCs stimulated
with the yeast cell wall preparation zymosan. This approach identified a number
of kinase inhibitors that robustly up-regulate IL-10 production including the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved drugs dasatinib, bosutinib, and
saracatinib that target ABL, SRC-family, and numerous other kinases. Correlating 
the kinase selectivity profiles of the active compounds with their effect on
IL-10 production suggests that inhibition of salt-inducible kinases (SIKs)
mediates the observed IL-10 increase. This was confirmed using the SIK-targeting 
inhibitor HG-9-91-01 and a series of structural analogs. The stimulatory effect
of SIK inhibition on IL-10 is also associated with decreased production of the
proinflammatory cytokines IL-1ß, IL-6, IL-12, and TNF-a, and these coordinated
effects are observed in human DCs-MFs and anti-inflammatory CD11c(+) CX3CR1(hi)
cells isolated from murine gut tissue. Collectively, these studies demonstrate
that SIK inhibition promotes an anti-inflammatory phenotype in activated myeloid 
cells marked by robust IL-10 production and establish these effects as a
previously unidentified activity associated with several FDA-approved multikinase
inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC4151730
PMID: 25114223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Oncol Rep. 2014 Oct;32(4):1521-30. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3393. Epub 2014 Aug 7.

Prostaglandin E2 promotes the cell growth and invasive ability of hepatocellular 
carcinoma cells by upregulating c-Myc expression via EP4 receptor and the PKA
signaling pathway.

Xia S(1), Ma J(1), Bai X(1), Zhang H(1), Cheng S(1), Zhang M(1), Zhang L(1), Du
M(1), Wang Y(1), Li H(1), Rong R(1), Shi F(1), Yang Q(1), Leng J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Department of Pathology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu 210029, P.R. China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) represents a major health problem worldwide.
Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), the predominant product of cyclooxygenase-2, has been
implicated in hepatocarcinogenesis. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms 
remain to be further elucidated. c-myc, a cellular proto-oncogene, is activated
or overexpressed in many types of human cancer, including HCC. The present study 
was designed to investigate the internal relationship and molecular mechanisms
between PGE2 and c-Myc in HCC, and to define its role in HCC cell growth and
invasion. Our results showed that PGE2 significantly upregulated c-Myc expression
at both the mRNA and protein levels, and knockdown of c-Myc blocked PGE2-induced 
HCC cell growth and invasive ability in human HCC Huh-7 cells. The effect of PGE2
on c-Myc expression was mainly through the EP4 receptor, and EP4
receptor-mediated c-Myc protein upregulation largely depended on de novo
biosynthesis of c-Myc mRNA and its protein. EP4 receptor signaling activated
GS/AC and increased the intracellular cAMP level in Huh-7 cells. The adenylate
cyclase (AC) activator forskolin mimicked the effects of the EP4 receptor agonist
on c-Myc expression, while the AC inhibitor SQ22536 reduced EP4 receptor-mediated
c-Myc upregulation. These data confirm the involvement of the GS/AC/cAMP pathway 
in EP4 receptor-mediated c-Myc upregulation. Moreover, the phosphorylation levels
of CREB protein were markedly elevated by EP4 receptor signaling, and by using
specific inhibitor and siRNA interference, we demonstrated that PKA/CREB was also
involved in the EP4 receptor-mediated c-Myc upregulation. In summary, the present
study revealed that PGE2 significantly upregulates c-Myc expression at both mRNA 
and protein levels through the EP4R/GS/AC/cAMP/PKA/CREB signaling pathway, thus
promoting cell growth and invasion in HCC cells. Targeting of the PGE2/EP4R/c-Myc
pathway may be a new therapeutic strategy to prevent and cure human HCC.

PMID: 25109834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014 Oct 1;91(3):400-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2014.07.026. Epub
2014 Aug 12.

Extracellular matrix composition is modified by ß2-agonists through cAMP in COPD.

Lambers C(1), Qi Y(2), Eleni P(3), Costa L(2), Zhong J(2), Tamm M(2), Block
LH(4), Roth M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine II, Medical 
University of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria. Electronic address:
christopher.lambers@meduniwien.ac.at. (2)Pulmonary Cell Research, Dept
Biomedicine and Pneumology, Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital 
and University of Basel CH-4031 Basel, Switzerland. (3)Pharmacology, School of
Medicine, University of Thessaloniki, GR-54621 Thessaloniki, Greece. (4)Division 
of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine II, Medical University
of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

Long acting ß2-agonists (LABA) have been reported to modify the extracellular
matrix (ECM) composition in the airway wall. Based on our earlier studies we here
investigated the mechanism underlying the control of ECM modification by LABA in 
primary human airway smooth muscle cells. Cells were treated with formoterol or
salmeterol (30 min) before TGF-ß1 stimulation (2-3 days) Using RT-PCT,
immuno-blotting and ELISA the de novo synthesis and deposition of collagen
type-I, -III, -IV and fibronectin were determined. Matrix metalloproteinases
(MMP)-2 and -9 were analyzed by zymography. Both LABA activated cAMP and its
corresponding transcription factor CREB within 60 min and thus partly reduced
TGF-ß1-induced gene transcription of collagen type-I, -III, fibronectin and
connective tissue growth factor (CTGF). The inhibitory effect of both LABA on
collagen type-I and -III deposition involved a cAMP dependent mechanism, while
the inhibitory effect of the two drugs on TGF-ß1-induced fibronectin deposition
and on CTGF secretion was independent of cAMP. Interestingly, none of the two
LABA reduced CTGF-induced synthesis of collagen type-I or type-III deposition. In
addition, none of the two LABA modified collagen type-IV deposition or the
expression and activity of MMP-2 or MMP-9. Our results show that LABA can prevent
de novo deposition of specific ECM components through cAMP dependent and
independent signaling. However, they do not reduce all ECM components by the same
mechanism and they do not reduce existing collagen deposits. This might explain
some of the controversial reports on the anti-remodeling effect of LABA in
chronic inflammatory lung diseases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25107701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 6;9(8):e104247. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104247. eCollection
2014.

Ethanol suppresses PGC-1a expression by interfering with the cAMP-CREB pathway in
neuronal cells.

Liu Z(1), Liu Y(2), Gao R(2), Li H(3), Dunn T(4), Wu P(4), Smith RG(2), Sarkar
PS(5), Fang X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas,
United States of America; Department of Forensic Medicine, Tongji Medical College
of Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. (2)Department of 
Neurology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, United States of
America. (3)Department of Internal Medicine/Gastroenterology, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, United States of America. (4)Department of
Neuroscience & Cell Biology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston,
Texas, United States of America. (5)Department of Neurology, University of Texas 
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, United States of America; Department of
Neuroscience & Cell Biology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston,
Texas, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(9):e108118.

Alcohol intoxication results in neuronal apoptosis, neurodegeneration and
manifest with impaired balance, loss of muscle coordination and behavioral
changes. One of the early events of alcohol intoxication is mitochondrial (Mt)
dysfunction and disruption of intracellular redox homeostasis. The mechanisms by 
which alcohol causes Mt dysfunction, disrupts cellular redox homeostasis and
triggers neurodegeneration remains to be further investigated.
Proliferator-activated receptor gamma co-activator 1-alpha (PGC-1a) plays
critical roles in regulating Mt biogenesis and respiration, cellular antioxidant 
defense mechanism, and maintenance of neuronal integrity and function. In this
study, we sought to investigate whether alcohol causes Mt dysfunction and
triggers neurodegeneration by suppressing PGC-1a expression. We report that
ethanol suppresses PGC-1a expression, and impairs mitochondrial function and
enhances cellular toxicity in cultured neuronal cell line and also in human fetal
brain neural stem cell-derived primary neurons. Moreover, we report that cells
over-expressing exogenous PGC-1a or treated with Rolipram, a selective
phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitor, ameliorate alcohol-induced cellular toxicity.
Further analysis show that ethanol decreases steady-state intracellular cAMP
levels, and thus depletes phosphorylation of cAMP-response element binding
protein (p-CREB), the key transcription factor that regulates transcription of
PGC-1a gene. Accordingly, we found PGC-1a promoter activity and transcription was
dramatically repressed in neuronal cells when exposed to ethanol, suggesting that
ethanol blunts cAMP<U+2192>CREB signaling pathway to interfere with the transcription of
PGC-1a. Ethanol-mediated decrease in PGC-1a activity results in the disruption of
Mt respiration and function and higher cellular toxicity. This study might lead
to potential therapeutic intervention to ameliorate alcohol-induced apoptosis
and/or neurodegeneration by targeting PGC-1a.

PMCID: PMC4123904
PMID: 25099937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Eur J Cancer. 2014 Oct;50(15):2714-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2014.07.005. Epub 2014
Jul 30.

The metabolite 5'-methylthioadenosine signals through the adenosine receptor A2B 
in melanoma.

Limm K(1), Wallner S(1), Milenkovic VM(2), Wetzel CH(2), Bosserhoff AK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg, Germany. (2)Molecular
Neurosciences, Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. (3)Institute of Pathology, University of
Regensburg, Germany. Electronic address:
anja.bosserhoff@klinik.uni-regensburg.de.

Several recent studies have shown evidence supporting the general knowledge that 
tumour cells exhibit changes in metabolism. It is becoming increasingly important
to understand how these metabolic changes in tumour cells promote carcinogenesis 
and disease progression. We recently discovered a lack of methylthioadenosine
phosphorylase (MTAP) expression in melanoma, which resulted in an accumulation of
the metabolite 5'-methylthioadenosine (MTA) in melanoma cells and in the
extracellular environment. MTA was shown to affect cell proliferation of
surrounding stroma cells and cell invasiveness and the activation of the
transcription factor activator protein-1 (AP-1) in melanoma cells. In this study,
we addressed the regulation of cellular signalling by extracellular MTA
accumulation. By focusing on putative receptors that could modulate MTA
signalling, we identified the adenosine receptor ADORA2B as an important
candidate. Knockdown experiments and the use of specific agonists and antagonists
confirmed a link between MTA and AP-1 signalling through the ADORA2B receptor.
Interestingly, stimulation of the cells with MTA did not result in activation of 
the classical cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) signalling cascades or in
Ca(2+)-dependent signalling. We instead showed protein kinase C (PKC) signalling 
to be involved in MTA-mediated AP-1 activation. In summary, we identified ADORA2B
to be the specific receptor and signalling pathway for the metabolite MTA. These 
findings may influence the use of MTA in a therapeutic manner.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25087184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Cancer Discov. 2014 Oct;4(10):1230-41. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-14-0275. Epub
2014 Aug 1.

Active CREB1 promotes a malignant TGFß2 autocrine loop in glioblastoma.

Rodón L(1), Gonzàlez-Juncà A(1), Inda Mdel M(1), Sala-Hojman A(1), Martínez-Sáez 
E(2), Seoane J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Vall d Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Barcelona, Spain. (2)Vall d'Hebron
Institut de Recerca (VHIR), Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain. 
(3)Vall d Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Barcelona, Spain. Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Barcelona, Spain. Institució
Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain.
jseoane@vhio.net.

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2014 Oct;4(10):1123-5.

In advanced cancer, including glioblastoma, the TGFß pathway acts as an oncogenic
factor. Some tumors exhibit aberrantly high TGFß activity, and the mechanisms
underlying this phenomenon are not well understood. We have observed that TGFß
can induce TGFß2, generating an autocrine loop leading to aberrantly high levels 
of TGFß2. We identified cAMP-responsive element-binding protein 1 (CREB1) as the 
critical mediator of the induction of TGFß2 by TGFß. CREB1 binds to the TGFB2
gene promoter in cooperation with SMAD3 and is required for TGFß to activate
transcription. Moreover, the PI3K-AKT and RSK pathways regulate the TGFß2
autocrine loop through CREB1. The levels of CREB1 and active phosphorylated CREB1
correlate with TGFß2 in glioblastoma. In addition, using patient-derived in vivo 
models of glioblastoma, we found that CREB1 levels determine the expression of
TGFß2. Our results show that CREB1 can be considered a biomarker to stratify
patients for anti-TGFß treatments and a therapeutic target in
glioblastoma.SIGNIFICANCE: TGFß is considered a promising therapeutic target, and
several clinical trials using TGFß inhibitors are generating encouraging results.
Here, we discerned the molecular mechanisms responsible for the aberrantly high
levels of TGFß2 found in certain tumors, and we propose biomarkers to predict the
clinical response to anti-TGFß therapies.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25084773  [PubMed - in process]


198. J Psychiatry Neurosci. 2014 Sep;39(5):348-59.

BDNF-ERK-CREB signalling mediates the role of miR-132 in the regulation of the
effects of oleanolic acid in male mice.

Yi LT(1), Li J(1), Liu BB(1), Luo L(1), Liu Q(1), Geng D(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Engineering, College of Chemical
Engineering, Huaqiao University, Xiamen, Fujian Province, China.

BACKGROUND: Although previous study has demonstrated that brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is involved in the antidepressant-like effect of
oleanolic acid, there is little information regarding the details of the
molecular mechanism involved in this effect.
METHODS: We used a chronic unpredictable mild stress (CUMS) model to test the
antidepressant-like effect of oleanolic acid on depressant-like behaviour,
miR-132 expression and synaptic protein expression in the male mouse hippocampus.
Furthermore, we explored the possible signalling pathways associated with miR-132
expression that mediate the effect of oleanolic acid on neuronal proliferation.
RESULTS: The results demonstrated that a 3-week treatment with oleanolic acid
ameliorated CUMS-induced anhedonic and anxiogenic behaviours. Furthermore, we
found that oleanolic acid led to the BDNF-related phosphorylation and activation 
of extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK) and cyclic adenosine
monophosphate response element binding protein (CREB), which was associated with 
the upregulation of miR-132 and hippocampal neuronal proliferation. Moreover,
experiments with an miR-132 antagomir revealed that targeting miR-132 led to
inhibition of neuronal proliferation and the postsynaptic density protein 95, but
did not affect presynaptic protein synapsin I.
LIMITATIONS: Several other stimuli can also induce CREB phosphorylation in the
hippocampus. Thus, regulation of miR-132 may not be restricted to neurotrophic
signalling.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that oleanolic acid induces the upregulation of
miR-132, which serves as an important regulator of neurotrophic actions, mainly
through the activation of the hippocampal BDNF-ERK-CREB signalling pathways.

PMCID: PMC4160364
PMID: 25079084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Aug 19;111(33):12264-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1410622111. Epub 2014 Jul 28.

Epigenetic coordination of embryonic heart transcription by dynamically regulated
long noncoding RNAs.

Matkovich SJ(1), Edwards JR(2), Grossenheider TC(2), de Guzman Strong C(2), Dorn 
GW 2nd(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Pharmacogenomics, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110 smatkovi@dom.wustl.edu
gdorn@dom.wustl.edu. (2)Center for Pharmacogenomics, Department of Internal
Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110.

The vast majority of mammalian DNA does not encode for proteins but instead is
transcribed into noncoding (nc)RNAs having diverse regulatory functions. The
poorly characterized subclass of long ncRNAs (lncRNAs) can epigenetically
regulate protein-coding genes by interacting locally in cis or distally in trans.
A few reports have implicated specific lncRNAs in cardiac development or failure,
but precise details of lncRNAs expressed in hearts and how their expression may
be altered during embryonic heart development or by adult heart disease is
unknown. Using comprehensive quantitative RNA sequencing data from mouse hearts, 
livers, and skin cells, we identified 321 lncRNAs present in the heart, 117 of
which exhibit a cardiac-enriched pattern of expression. By comparing lncRNA
profiles of normal embryonic (~E14), normal adult, and hypertrophied adult
hearts, we defined a distinct fetal lncRNA abundance signature that includes 157 
lncRNAs differentially expressed compared with adults (fold-change = 50%, false
discovery rate = 0.02) and that was only poorly recapitulated in hypertrophied
hearts (17 differentially expressed lncRNAs; 13 of these observed in embryonic
hearts). Analysis of protein-coding mRNAs from the same samples identified 22
concordantly and 11 reciprocally regulated mRNAs within 10 kb of dynamically
expressed lncRNAs, and reciprocal relationships of lncRNA and mRNA levels were
validated for the Mccc1 and Relb genes using in vitro lncRNA knockdown in C2C12
cells. Network analysis suggested a central role for lncRNAs in modulating NF<U+03BA>B- 
and CREB1-regulated genes during embryonic heart growth and identified multiple
mRNAs within these pathways that are also regulated, but independently of
lncRNAs.

PMCID: PMC4143054
PMID: 25071214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Aug 12;111(32):E3260-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1319176111. Epub 2014 Jul 28.

CRTC1/MAML2 gain-of-function interactions with MYC create a gene signature
predictive of cancers with CREB-MYC involvement.

Amelio AL(1), Fallahi M(2), Schaub FX(1), Zhang M(3), Lawani MB(1), Alperstein
AS(1), Southern MR(4), Young BM(5), Wu L(6), Zajac-Kaye M(7), Kaye FJ(3),
Cleveland JL(1), Conkright MD(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology. (2)IT Informatics. (3)Departments of Medicine.
(4)Translational Research Institute and Department of Molecular Therapeutics,
and. (5)Genomics Core, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, FL 33458; and.
(6)Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, and. (7)Departments of Medicine,Anatomy
and Cell Biology, Shands Cancer Center, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL
32610. (8)Department of Cancer Biology,Translational Research Institute and
Department of Molecular Therapeutics, and conkright@scripps.edu.

Chimeric oncoproteins created by chromosomal translocations are among the most
common genetic mutations associated with tumorigenesis. Malignant mucoepidermoid 
salivary gland tumors, as well as a growing number of solid epithelial-derived
tumors, can arise from a recurrent t (11, 19)(q21;p13.1) translocation that
generates an unusual chimeric cAMP response element binding protein
(CREB)-regulated transcriptional coactivator 1 (CRTC1)/mastermind-like 2 (MAML2) 
(C1/M2) oncoprotein comprised of two transcriptional coactivators, the CRTC1 and 
the NOTCH/RBPJ coactivator MAML2. Accordingly, the C1/M2 oncoprotein induces
aberrant expression of CREB and NOTCH target genes. Surprisingly, here we report 
a gain-of-function activity of the C1/M2 oncoprotein that directs its
interactions with myelocytomatosis oncogene (MYC) proteins and the activation of 
MYC transcription targets, including those involved in cell growth and
metabolism, survival, and tumorigenesis. These results were validated in human
mucoepidermoid tumor cells that harbor the t (11, 19)(q21;p13.1) translocation
and express the C1/M2 oncoprotein. Notably, the C1/M2-MYC interaction is
necessary for C1/M2-driven cell transformation, and the C1/M2 transcriptional
signature predicts other human malignancies having combined involvement of MYC
and CREB. These findings suggest that such gain-of-function properties may also
be manifest in other oncoprotein fusions found in human cancer and that agents
targeting the C1/M2-MYC interface represent an attractive strategy for the
development of effective and safe anticancer therapeutics in tumors harboring the
t (11, 19) translocation.

PMCID: PMC4136562
PMID: 25071166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 19;289(38):26492-504. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.564138. Epub
2014 Jul 25.

Lgr4 protein deficiency induces ataxia-like phenotype in mice and impairs long
term depression at cerebellar parallel fiber-Purkinje cell synapses.

Guan X(1), Duan Y(2), Zeng Q(2), Pan H(1), Qian Y(1), Li D(3), Cao X(4), Liu
M(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of
Biomedical Sciences and School of Life Sciences, and. (2)Key Laboratory of Brain 
Functional Genomics, Ministry of Education, East China Normal University,
Shanghai 200241, China, and. (3)From the Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory
Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences and School of Life Sciences, and
dlli@bio.ecnu.edu.cn. (4)Key Laboratory of Brain Functional Genomics, Ministry of
Education, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China, and
xhcao@brain.ecnu.edu.cn. (5)From the Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory
Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences and School of Life Sciences, and the
Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University Health Science
Center, Houston, Texas 77030 myliu@bio.ecnu.edu.cn.

Cerebellar dysfunction causes ataxia characterized by loss of balance and
coordination. Until now, the molecular and neuronal mechanisms of several types
of inherited cerebellar ataxia have not been completely clarified. Here, we
report that leucine-rich G protein-coupled receptor 4 (Lgr4/Gpr48) is highly
expressed in Purkinje cells (PCs) in the cerebellum. Deficiency of Lgr4 leads to 
an ataxia-like phenotype in mice. Histologically, no obvious morphological
changes were observed in the cerebellum of Lgr4 mutant mice. However, the number 
of PCs was slightly but significantly reduced in Lgr4(-/-) mice. In addition, in 
vitro electrophysiological analysis showed an impaired long term depression (LTD)
at parallel fiber-PC (PF-PC) synapses in Lgr4(-/-) mice. Consistently,
immunostaining experiments showed that the level of phosphorylated
cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (Creb) was significantly decreased in
Lgr4(-/-) PCs. Furthermore, treatment with forskolin, an adenylyl cyclase
agonist, rescued phospho-Creb in PCs and reversed the impairment in PF-PC LTD in 
Lgr4(-/-) cerebellar slices, indicating that Lgr4 is an upstream regulator of
Creb signaling, which is underlying PF-PC LTD. Together, our findings demonstrate
for first time an important role for Lgr4 in motor coordination and cerebellar
synaptic plasticity and provide a potential therapeutic target for certain types 
of inherited cerebellar ataxia.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4176234
PMID: 25063812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2014 Sep 15;307(6):G602-10. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00177.2014. Epub 2014 Jul 24.

Novel mechanisms and signaling pathways of esophageal ulcer healing: the role of 
prostaglandin EP2 receptors, cAMP, and pCREB.

Ahluwalia A(1), Baatar D(1), Jones MK(1), Tarnawski AS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical and Research Services, Veterans Affairs Long Beach Healthcare System
(VALBHS), Long Beach, California, and the Department of
Medicine/Gastroenterology, University of California, Irvine, California.
(2)Medical and Research Services, Veterans Affairs Long Beach Healthcare System
(VALBHS), Long Beach, California, and the Department of
Medicine/Gastroenterology, University of California, Irvine, California
andrzej.tarnawski@va.gov.

Clinical studies indicate that prostaglandins of E class (PGEs) may promote
healing of tissue injury e.g., gastroduodenal and dermal ulcers. However, the
precise roles of PGEs, their E-prostanoid (EP) receptors, signaling pathways
including cAMP and cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB), and their
relation to VEGF and angiogenesis in the tissue injury healing process remain
unknown, forming the rationale for this study. Using an esophageal ulcer model in
rats, we demonstrated that esophageal mucosa expresses predominantly EP2
receptors and that esophageal ulceration triggers an increase in expression of
the EP2 receptor, activation of CREB (the downstream target of the cAMP
signaling), and enhanced VEGF gene expression. Treatment of rats with
misoprostol, a PGE1 analog capable of activating EP receptors, enhanced
phosphorylation of CREB, stimulated VEGF expression and angiogenesis, and
accelerated esophageal ulcer healing. In cultured human esophageal epithelial
(HET-1A) cells, misoprostol increased intracellular cAMP levels (by 163-fold),
induced phosphorylation of CREB, and stimulated VEGF expression. A cAMP analog
(Sp-cAMP) mimicked, whereas an inhibitor of cAMP-dependent protein kinase A
(Rp-cAMP) blocked, these effects of misoprostol. These results indicate that the 
EP2/cAMP/protein kinase A pathway mediates the stimulatory effect of PGEs on
angiogenesis essential for tissue injury healing via the induction of CREB
activity and VEGF expression.

PMCID: PMC4166721
PMID: 25059824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Med Chem. 2014;11(1):50-9.

Synthesis of new thiazolo[4,5-d]pyrimidines as Corticotropin releasing factor
modulators.

Kuppast B, Spyridaki K, Lynch C, Hu Y, Liapakis G, Davies GE, Fahmy H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, South Dakota State
University, Brookings, SD 57007, USA. Hesham.Fahmy@sdstate.edu.

Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) is a neurohormone that plays a crucial role 
in integrating the body's overall response to stress. It appears necessary and
sufficient for the organism to mount functional, physiological and endocrine
responses to stressors. CRF is released in response to various triggers such as
chronic stress. The role of CRF and its involvement in these neurological
disorders suggest that new drugs that can target the CRF function or bind to its 
receptors may represent a new development of neuropsychiatric medicines to treat 
various stress-related disorders including depression, anxiety and addictive
disorders. Based on pharmacophore of the CRF1 receptor antagonists, a new series 
of thiazolo[4,5-d] pyrimidines were synthesized as Corticotropin-releasing factor
(CRF) receptor modulators and the prepared compounds carry groups shown to
produce optimum binding affinity to CRF receptors. Twenty two compounds were
evaluated for their CRF1 receptor binding affinity in HEK 293 cell lines and two 
compounds 5o and 5s showed approximately 25% binding affinity to CRF1 receptors. 
Selected compounds (5c and 5f) were also evaluated for their effect on expression
of genes associated with depression and anxiety disorders such as CRF1, CREB1,
MAO-A, SERT, NPY, DatSLC6a3, and DBH and significant upregulation of CRF1 mRNA
has been observed with compound 5c.

PMCID: PMC4462850
PMID: 25059547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Amino Acids. 2014 Nov;46(11):2477-88. doi: 10.1007/s00726-014-1803-2. Epub 2014
Jul 25.

A novel fibroblast growth factor receptor family member promotes neuronal
outgrowth and synaptic plasticity in aplysia.

Pollak DD(1), Minh BQ, Cicvaric A, Monje FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurophysiology and Neuropharmacology, Medical University of
Vienna, Center for Physiology and Pharmacology, Schwarzspanierstrasse 17, 1090,
Vienna, Austria.

Fibroblast Growth Factor (FGF) Receptors (FGFRs) regulate essential biological
processes, including embryogenesis, angiogenesis, cellular growth and
memory-related long-term synaptic plasticity. Whereas canonical FGFRs depend
exclusively on extracellular Immunoglobulin (Ig)-like domains for ligand binding,
other receptor types, including members of the tropomyosin-receptor-kinase (Trk) 
family, use either Ig-like or Leucine-Rich Repeat (LRR) motifs, or both. Little
is known, however, about the evolutionary events leading to the differential
incorporation of LRR domains into Ig-containing tyrosine kinase receptors.
Moreover, although FGFRs have been identified in many vertebrate species, few
reports describe their existence in invertebrates. Information about the
biological relevance of invertebrate FGFRs and evolutionary divergences between
them and their vertebrate counterparts is therefore limited. Here, we
characterized ApLRRTK, a neuronal cell-surface protein recently identified in
Aplysia. We unveiled ApLRRTK as the first member of the FGFRs family deprived of 
Ig-like domains that instead contains extracellular LRR domains. We describe that
ApLRRTK exhibits properties typical of canonical vertebrate FGFRs, including
promotion of FGF activity, enhancement of neuritic outgrowth and signaling via
MAPK and the transcription factor CREB. ApLRRTK also enhanced the synaptic
efficiency of neurons known to mediate in vivo memory-related defensive
behaviors. These data reveal a novel molecular regulator of neuronal function in 
invertebrates, provide the first evolutionary linkage between LRR proteins and
FGFRs and unveil an unprecedented mechanism of FGFR gene diversification in
primeval central nervous systems.

PMCID: PMC4200351
PMID: 25059541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2014 Sep;165B(6):457-66. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32257. Epub 2014 Jul 25.

Differential hippocampal gene expression and pathway analysis in an
etiology-based mouse model of major depressive disorder.

Zubenko GS(1), Hughes HB 3rd, Jordan RM, Lyons-Weiler J, Cohen BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania.

Erratum in
    Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2015 Jun;168B(4):316.

We have recently reported the creation and initial characterization of an
etiology-based recombinant mouse model of a severe and inherited form of Major
Depressive Disorder (MDD). This was achieved by replacing the corresponding mouse
DNA sequence with a 6-base DNA sequence from the human CREB1 promoter that is
associated with MDD in individuals from families with recurrent, early-onset MDD 
(RE-MDD). In the current study, we explored the effect of the pathogenic Creb1
allele on gene expression in the mouse hippocampus, a brain region that is
altered in structure and function in MDD. Mouse whole-genome profiling was
performed using the Illumina MouseWG-6 v2.0 Expression BeadChip microarray.
Univariate analysis identified 269 differentially-expressed genes in the
hippocampus of the mutant mouse. Pathway analyses highlighted 11 KEGG pathways:
the phosphatidylinositol signaling system, which has been widely implicated in
MDD, Bipolar Disorder, and the action of mood stabilizers; gap junction and
long-term potentiation, which mediate cognition and memory functions often
impaired in MDD; cardiac muscle contraction, insulin signaling pathway, and three
neurodegenerative brain disorders (Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and Huntington's
Diseases) that are associated with MDD; ribosome and proteasome pathways
affecting protein synthesis/degradation; and the oxidative phosphorylation
pathway that is key to energy production. These findings illustrate the merit of 
this congenic C57BL/6 recombinant mouse as a model of RE-MDD, and demonstrate its
potential for highlighting molecular and cellular pathways that contribute to the
biology of MDD. The results also inform our understanding of the mechanisms that 
underlie the comorbidity of MDD with other disorders.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4431889
PMID: 25059218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Cell Biochem. 2014 Dec;115(12):2133-45. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24890.

Molecular mechanisms associated with PTHrP-induced proliferation of colon cancer 
cells.

Martín MJ(1), Calvo N, de Boland AR, Gentili C.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento Biología Bioquímica y Farmacia, Universidad Nacional del Sur,
Bahía Blanca, Argentina.

Parathyroid Hormone-related Protein (PTHrP) is normally produced in many tissues 
and is recognized for its endocrine, paracrine, autocrine and intracrine modes of
action. PTHrP is also implicated in different types of cancer and its expression 
correlates with the severity of colon carcinoma. Using the human colon cell line 
Caco-2 we recently obtained evidence that PTHrP, through a paracrine pathway,
exerts a protective effect under apoptotic conditions. However, if exogenous
PTHrP is able or not to induce the proliferation of these intestinal tumor cells 
is not known. We found that PTHrP treatment increases the number of live Caco-2
cells. The hormone induces the phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of ERK
1/2, a p38 MAPK, and Akt, without affecting JNK phosphorylation. In addition,
PTHrP-dependent ERK phosphorylation is reverted when PI3K activity was inhibited.
Following MAPKs nuclear translocation, the transcription factors ATF-1 and CREB
were activated in a biphasic manner. In addition PTHrP induces the translocation 
into the nucleus of ß-catenin, protein that plays key role in maintaining the
growth and proliferation of colorectal cancer, and increases the amount of both
positive cell cycle regulators c-Myc and Cyclin D. Studies with ERK1/2, a p38
MAPK, and PI3K specific inhibitors showed that PTHrP regulates Caco-2 cell
proliferation via these signaling pathways. In conclusion, the results obtained
in this work expand our knowledge on the role of exogenous PTHrP in intestinal
tumor cells and identify the signaling pathways that are involved in the
mitogenic effect of the hormone on Caco-2 cells.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25053227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Tissue Eng Regen Med. 2014 Jul 6. doi: 10.1002/term.1927. [Epub ahead of print]

Differentiation of P19 embryonal carcinoma stem cells into insulin-producing
cells promoted by pancreas-conditioned medium.

Mansouri A(1), Esmaeili F, Nejatpour A, Houshmand F, Shabani L, Ebrahimie E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Shahrekord University, Iran.

The ability of embryonal carcinoma )EC (stem cells to generate insulin-producing 
cells (IPCs) is still unknown. We examined the trophic effects of
pancreas-conditioned medium (PCM) on in vitro production of IPCs. Initially, P19 
EC cells were characterized by the expression of stem cell markers, Oct3/4, Sox-2
and Nanog. To direct differentiation, P19-derived embryoid bodies (EBs) were
induced by selection of nestin-positive cells and treatment with different
concentrations of PCM. Morphological studies documented the presence of
islet-like cell IPCs clusters. The differentiated cells were immunoreactive for ß
cell-specific proteins, including insulin, proinsulin, C-peptide and insulin
receptor-ß. The expression of genes related to pancreatic ß cell development and 
function (PDX-1, INS1, INS2, EP300 and CREB1) was confirmed by qPCR. During
differentiation, the expression of EP300 and CREB1 increased by 2.5 and 3.1
times, respectively. In contrast, a sharp decrease in the expression of Oct3/4,
Sox-2 and Nanog by 4, 1.5 and 1.5 times, respectively, was observed. The
differentiated cells were functionally active, synthesizing and secreting insulin
in a glucose-regulated manner. Network prediction highlighted crosstalk between
PDX-1 transcription factor and INS2 ligand in IPC generation and revealed
positive regulatory effects of EP300, CREB1, PPARA, EGR, KIT, GLP1R, and PKT2 on 
activation of PDX-1 and INS2. This is the first report of the induction of IPC
differentiation from EC cells by using neonate mouse PCM. Since P19 EC cells are 
widely available, easily cultured without feeders and do not require special
growth conditions, they would provide a valuable tool for studying pancreatic ß
cell differentiation and development. Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25044225  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


208. J Psychiatr Res. 2014 Oct;57:84-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2014.06.008. Epub
2014 Jun 24.

Molecular evolution in the CREB1 signal pathway and a rare haplotype in CREB1
with genetic predisposition to schizophrenia.

Ma L(1), Wu DD(2), Ma SL(3), Tan L(4), Chen X(4), Tang NL(5), Yao YG(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences & Yunnan Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Kunming,
Yunnan 650223, China; Kunming College of Life Science, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan 650201, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of
Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan 650223, China. (3)Department of Psychiatry, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (4)Institute of Mental Health, The
Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, China.
(5)KIZ/CUHK Joint Laboratory of Bioresources and Molecular Research in Common
Diseases, Kunming, Yunnan, China; Department of Chemical Pathology and Laboratory
of Genetics of Disease Susceptibility, Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, 
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; Functional Genomics and
Biostatistical Computing Laboratory, Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China. Electronic address:
nelsontang@cuhk.edu.hk. (6)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease
Mechanisms of the Chinese Academy of Sciences & Yunnan Province, Kunming
Institute of Zoology, Kunming, Yunnan 650223, China; Kunming College of Life
Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan 650201,
China; KIZ/CUHK Joint Laboratory of Bioresources and Molecular Research in Common
Diseases, Kunming, Yunnan, China. Electronic address: yaoyg@mail.kiz.ac.cn.

CREB1 is a cAMP responsive transcriptional factor which plays a key role in
neural development. CREB1 signal pathway (CSP) has been implicated repeatedly in 
studies of predisposition for schizophrenia. We speculated that CSP has undergone
positive selection during evolution of modern human and some genes that have
undergone natural selection in the past may predispose to schizophrenia (SCZ) in 
modern time. Positive selection and association analysis were employed to explore
the molecular evolution of CSP and association with schizophrenia. Our results
showed a pan-ethnic selection event on NRG1 and CREB1, as confirmed in all 14
ethnic populations studied, which also suggested a selection process occurred
before the "Out of Africa" scenario. Analysis of 62 SNPs covering 6 CSP genes in 
2019 Han Chinese (976 SCZ patients and 1043 healthy individuals) showed an
association of two SNPs (rs4379857, P = 0.009, OR [95% CI]: 1.200 [1.379-1.046]; 
rs2238751, P = 0.023, OR [95% CI]: 1.253 [1.522-1.032]) with SCZ. However, none
of these significances survived after multiple testing corrections. Nonetheless, 
we observed an association of a rare CREB1 haplotype CCGGC (Bonferroni corrected 
P = 1.74 × 10(-5)) with SCZ. Our study showed that there was substantial
population heterogeneity in genetic predisposition to SCZ, and different genes in
the CSP pathway may predispose to SCZ in different populations.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25043418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Eur J Neurosci. 2014 Jul;40(1):2205. doi: 10.1111/ejn.12649.

CREB signalling in bipolar disease (commentary on Gaspar et al.): commentary on
Gaspar et al. 2014.

Jagannath A(1), Foster RG.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Laboratory of Ophthalmology, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of
Oxford, Levels 5-6, West Wing, Headley Way, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK.

Comment on
    Eur J Neurosci. 2014 Jul;40(1):2206-15.

PMCID: PMC4140541
PMID: 25040051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2014 Sep 15;307(6):G664-71. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00064.2014. Epub 2014 Jul 17.

Differential cell growth/apoptosis behavior of 13-hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid
enantiomers in a colorectal cancer cell line.

Cabral M(1), Martín-Venegas R(1), Moreno JJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Fisiologia, Facultat de Farmàcia, Universitat de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain. (2)Departament de Fisiologia, Facultat de Farmàcia, Universitat
de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain jjmoreno@ub.edu.

Cyclooxygenases (COXs) and lipoxygenases (LOXs) are important enzymes that
metabolize arachidonic and linoleic acids. Various metabolites generated by the
arachidonic acid cascade regulate cell proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation,
and senescence. Hydroxyoctadecadienoic acids (HODEs) are synthesized from
linoleic acid, giving two enantiomeric forms for each metabolite. The aim was to 
investigate the effect of 13-HODE enantiomers on nondifferentiated Caco-2 cell
growth/apoptosis. Our results indicate that 13(S)-HODE decreases cell growth and 
DNA synthesis of nondifferentiated Caco-2 cells cultured with 10% fetal bovine
serum (FBS). Moreover, 13(S)-HODE showed an apoptotic effect that was reduced in 
the presence of a specific peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>)
antagonist. In addition, we observed that 13(S)-HODE but not 13(R)-HODE is a
ligand to PPAR<U+03B3>, confirming the implication of this nuclear receptor in
13(S)-HODE actions. In contrast, 13(R)-HODE increases cell growth and DNA
synthesis in the absence of FBS. 13(R)-HODE interaction with BLT receptors
activates ERK and CREB signaling pathways, as well as PGE2 synthesis. These
results suggest that the proliferative effect of 13(R)-HODE could be due, at
least in part, to COX pathway activation. Thus both enantiomers use different
receptors and have contrary effects. We also found these differential effects of 
9-HODE enantiomers on cell growth/apoptosis. Therefore, the balance between
(R)-HODEs and (S)-HODEs in the intestinal epithelium could be important to its
cell growth/apoptosis homeostasis.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 25035111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Hum Pathol. 2014 Oct;45(10):2154-61. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.01.025. Epub
2014 May 8.

Prognostic value of coexistence of abnormal expression of micro-RNA-200b and
cyclic adenosine monophosphate-responsive element-binding protein 1 in human
astrocytoma.

Zhang JQ(1), Yao QH(2), Kuang YQ(3), Ma Y(3), Yang LB(3), Huang HD(3), Cheng
JM(3), Yang T(3), Liu EY(3), Liang L(3), Fan KX(3), Zhao K(3), Xia X(3), Gu
JW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, the 264th Hospital of PLA, Taiyuan, 030001, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Baoji Central Hospital, Baoji, 721008, China.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Chengdu Military General Hospital, Chengdu,
Sichuan Province, 610083, China. (4)Department of Neurosurgery, Chengdu Military 
General Hospital, Chengdu, Sichuan Province, 610083, China. Electronic address:
gujwcd@126.com.

Our aim was to investigate the expression of micro-RNA-200b (miR-200b) and
cAMP-responsive element-binding protein 1 (CREB-1) in astrocytoma and its
efficacy for predicting outcome. Both miR-200b and CREB-1 messenger RNA
expression was measured in 122 astrocytomas and 30 nonneoplastic brain specimens 
by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. Expression of miR-200b was
significantly lower in astrocytoma than in nonneoplastic brain (P < .001),
whereas CREB-1 messenger RNA expression was significantly elevated in the tumors 
(P < .001). Both miR-200b down-regulation and CREB-1 up-regulation were
significantly associated with advanced pathologic grade (P = .002 and P = .006,
respectively). Low miR-200b expression correlated negatively with Karnofsky
performance score (P = .03), and high CREB-1 expression correlated positively
with mean tumor diameter (P = .03). By Kaplan-Meier analysis, low miR-200b, high 
CREB-1, and coexistence of abnormal miR-200b and CREB-1 expression (low
miR-200b/high CREB-1) were predictive of shorter progression-free survival and
overall survival in both grade III and grade IV astrocytoma. By multivariate
analysis, only low miR-200b/high CREB-1 expression was an independent prognostic 
factor for poor prognosis in astrocytoma of advanced grade. Both miR-200b and
CREB-1 may play important cooperative roles in the progression of human
astrocytoma. The efficacy of miR-200b and CREB-1 together as a predictor of
prognosis in astrocytoma patients is shown for the first time.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25033730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Neurosci. 2014 Jul 16;34(29):9574-89. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4302-13.2014.

CREB SUMOylation by the E3 ligase PIAS1 enhances spatial memory.

Chen YC(1), Hsu WL(2), Ma YL(2), Tai DJ(2), Lee EH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, and.
(2)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan,
Republic of China. (3)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense
Medical Center, and Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei
115, Taiwan, Republic of China eminy@gate.sinica.edu.tw.

cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation and signaling
plays an important role in long-term memory formation, but other
posttranslational modifications of CREB are less known. Here, we found that
CREB1<U+0394>, the short isoform of CREB, could be sumoylated by the small
ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) E3 ligase protein inhibitor of activated STAT1
(PIAS1) at Lys271 and Lys290 and PIAS1 SUMOylation of CREB1<U+0394> increased the
expression level of CREB1<U+0394>. CREB1<U+0394> could also be sumoylated by other PIAS family 
proteins, but not by the E3 ligases RanBP2 and Pc2 or by the E2 ligase Ubc9.
Furthermore, water maze training increased the level of endogenous CREB
SUMOylation in rat CA1 neurons determined by in vitro SUMOylation assay, but this
effect was not observed in other brain areas. Moreover, transduction of
Lenti-CREBWT to rat CA1 area facilitated, whereas transduction of Lenti-CREB
double sumo-mutant (CREBK271RK290R) impaired, spatial learning and memory
performance. Transduction of Lenti-CREBWT-SUMO1 fusion vector to rat CA1 area
showed a more significant effect in enhancing spatial learning and memory and
CREB SUMOylation. Lenti-CREBWT transduction increased, whereas
Lenti-CREBK271RK290R transduction decreased, CREB DNA binding to the
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (bdnf) promoter and decreased bdnf mRNA
expression. Knock-down of PIAS1 expression in CA1 area by PIAS1 siRNA
transfection impaired spatial learning and memory and decreased endogenous CREB
SUMOylation. In addition, CREB SUMOylation was CREB phosphorylation dependent and
lasted longer. Therefore, CREB phosphorylation may be responsible for signal
transduction during the early phase of long-term memory formation, whereas CREB
SUMOylation sustains long-term memory.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/349574-16$15.00/0.

PMID: 25031400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Learn Mem. 2014 Jul 16;21(8):394-405. doi: 10.1101/lm.036087.114. Print 2014 Aug.

Prefrontal consolidation supports the attainment of fear memory accuracy.

Vieira PA(1), Lovelace JW(1), Corches A(2), Rashid AJ(3), Josselyn SA(3), Korzus 
E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience Program, University of California
Riverside, California 92521, USA. (2)Biomedical Sciences Program, University of
California Riverside, California 92521, USA. (3)Program in Neurosciences and
Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.
(4)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience Program, University of California
Riverside, California 92521, USA Biomedical Sciences Program, University of
California Riverside, California 92521, USA.

The neural mechanisms underlying the attainment of fear memory accuracy for
appropriate discriminative responses to aversive and nonaversive stimuli are
unclear. Considerable evidence indicates that coactivator of transcription and
histone acetyltransferase cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) binding
protein (CBP) is critically required for normal neural function. CBP hypofunction
leads to severe psychopathological symptoms in human and cognitive abnormalities 
in genetic mutant mice with severity dependent on the neural locus and
developmental time of the gene inactivation. Here, we showed that an acute
hypofunction of CBP in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) results in a
disruption of fear memory accuracy in mice. In addition, interruption of CREB
function in the mPFC also leads to a deficit in auditory discrimination of
fearful stimuli. While mice with deficient CBP/CREB signaling in the mPFC
maintain normal responses to aversive stimuli, they exhibit abnormal responses to
similar but nonrelevant stimuli when compared to control animals. These data
indicate that improvement of fear memory accuracy involves mPFC-dependent
suppression of fear responses to nonrelevant stimuli. Evidence from a context
discriminatory task and a newly developed task that depends on the ability to
distinguish discrete auditory cues indicated that CBP-dependent neural signaling 
within the mPFC circuitry is an important component of the mechanism for
disambiguating the meaning of fear signals with two opposing values: aversive and
nonaversive.

© 2014 Vieira et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4105719
PMID: 25031365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2014 May;43(5):313-7.

[Expression profiling of metastasis-related microRNAs in early esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Lu J(1), Xue L, Jin M, Lyu N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100020, China. 
(2)Cancer Institute and Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing
100021, China. E-mail:nlu03@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study the difference of microRNA (miRNA) expression between two
groups of early stage (pT1N0) esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) patients 
who had different outcome and the prognostic significance of different miRNA in
metastatic of early ESCC, and to identify useful prognostic markers in the
selection of appropriate treatment for early ESCC patients.
METHODS: TaqMan human miRNA arrays and bioinformatics were used to detect and
analyze the expression profiles of miRNAs in the two groups, and RT-PCR was used 
to verify the differences in miRNA expression.
RESULTS: The miRNA arrays revealed a total of 41 markedly changed miRNAs in the
survival group compared with the death group. Bioinformatics analysis, prediction
and significant function analyses of targeted genes and pathway analysis
identified that miR-27a, miR-143 and miR-886-5p levels were increased or
decreased by seven-folds or more. The enriched target genes were GRB2, SOS1,
MAPK1, EGFR, CBL, SPRY2, RPS6KA5, IGF1R, NGFR, MAPK14 and CREB1. These genes were
significantly related to the following signaling pathways, i.e.Sprouty regulation
of tyrosine kinase signals pathway, Erk1/Erk2 Mapk signaling pathway and
transcription factor CREB and its extracellular signals.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-27a, miR-886-5p, and miR-143 may be potential prognostic markers
of metastasis for early ESCC. The detection of these miRNAs plays a directive
role for the treatment options of early ESCC. The regulation of targeted genes
and mechanism remain to be further studied.

PMID: 25030863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 11;9(7):e102073. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102073.
eCollection 2014.

The melatonin agonist ramelteon induces duration-dependent clock gene expression 
through cAMP signaling in pancreatic INS-1 ß-cells.

Nishiyama K(1), Hirai K(1).

Author information: 
(1)CNS Drug Discovery Unit, Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda
Pharmaceutical Company Ltd., Fujisawa, Kanagawa, Japan.

Prolonged exposure to melatonin improves glycemic control in animals. Although
glucose metabolism is controlled by circadian clock genes, little is known about 
the role of melatonin signaling and its duration in the regulation of clock gene 
expression in pancreatic ß-cells. Activation of MT1 and MT2 melatonin receptors
inhibits cAMP signaling, which mediates clock gene expression. Therefore, this
study investigated exposure duration-dependent alterations in cAMP
element-binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation and clock gene expression that
occur during and after exposure to ramelteon, a selective melatonin agonist used 
to treat insomnia. In rat INS-1 cells, a pancreatic ß-cell line endogenously
expressing melatonin receptors, ramelteon persistently decreased CREB
phosphorylation during the treatment period (2-14 h), whereas the subsequent
washout induced an enhancement of forskolin-stimulated CREB phosphorylation in a 
duration- and concentration-dependent manner. This augmentation was blocked by
forskolin or the melatonin receptor antagonist luzindole. Similarly, gene
expression analyses of 7 clock genes revealed the duration dependency of the
effects of ramelteon on Rev-erba and Bmal1 expression through melatonin
receptor-mediated cAMP signaling; longer exposure times (14 h) resulted in
greater increases in the expression and signaling of Rev-erba, which is related
to ß-cell functions. Interestingly, this led to amplified oscillatory Rev-erba
and Bmal1 expression after agonist washout and forskolin stimulation. These
results provide new insights into the duration-dependent effects of ramelteon on 
clock gene expression in INS-1 cells and may improve the understanding of its
effect in vivo. The applicability of these results to pancreatic islets awaits
further investigation.

PMCID: PMC4094524
PMID: 25013953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Sci Rep. 2014 Jul 3;4:5546. doi: 10.1038/srep05546.

Growth arrest and forced differentiation of human primary glioblastoma multiforme
by a novel small molecule.

Kang TW(1), Choi SW(1), Yang SR(2), Shin TH(3), Kim HS(4), Yu KR(4), Hong IS(5), 
Ro S(6), Cho JM(6), Kang KS(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Adult Stem Cell Research Center, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea [2] BK21 PLUS Program for Creative 
Veterinary Science Research, Research Institute for Veterinary Science and
College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National University [3]. (2)1] Department
of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Kangwon National University Hospital,
School of Medicine, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Republic of Korea
[2]. (3)1] Adult Stem Cell Research Center, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea [2] BK21 PLUS Program for Creative 
Veterinary Science Research, Research Institute for Veterinary Science and
College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National University. (4)Adult Stem Cell
Research Center, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. (5)1] Department of Molecular Medicine, Gachon
University, Incheon, Republic of Korea [2] Lee Gil Ya Cancer and Diabetes
Institute, Gachon University, Incheon, Republic of Korea. (6)CrystalGenomics,
Inc., Korea Bio Park, 700 Daewangpangyo-ro, Bundang-gu, Seongnam, Republic of
Korea.

Glioblastoma multiforme is the most common malignant brain tumor in adults, with 
an average survival of less than one year due to its resistance to therapy.
Recent studies reported that GBM initiates from CD133-expressing cancer stem
cells (CSC). However, the efficacy of CSC targeting is limited. A newly developed
approach in cancer treatment is the forced differentiation of cancer cells. Here,
we show that the treatment of the novel small molecule, CG500354, into
CD133-expressing human primary GBM cells induces growth arrest by cell cycle
regulators, p53, p21, p27 and phase-specific cyclins, and neural differentiation,
as confirmed by neural progenitor/precursor markers, nestin, GFAP and Tuj1. When 
GBM-derived cells caused the tumors in NOD/SCID mice, CG500354 induced
GBM-derived cells differentiation into Tuj1 and GFAP expressing cells. We next
demonstrated that CG500354 plays a tumor-suppressive role via cAMP/CREB signaling
pathway. CG500354 increases not only the extracellular cAMP level but also the
protein level of PKA and CREB. Additionally, both mimetic substances, Forskolin
and Rolipram, revealed comparable results with CG500354. Our findings indicate
that induction of growth arrest and neural differentiation via cAMP/CREB
signaling pathway by CG500354 treatment suggests the novel targeting of PDE4D in 
the development of new drugs for brain tumor therapy.

PMCID: PMC4080225
PMID: 24989033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Neurochem Res. 2014 Sep;39(9):1759-66. doi: 10.1007/s11064-014-1371-6. Epub 2014 
Jul 1.

The neuroprotective effects of a-iso-cubebene on dopaminergic cell death:
involvement of CREB/Nrf2 signaling.

Park SY(1), Son BG, Park YH, Kim CM, Park G, Choi YW.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-IT Fusion Technology Research Institute, Pusan National University, Busan,
609-735, Korea.

As a part of ongoing studies to elucidate pharmacologically active components of 
Schisandra chinensis, we isolated and studied a-iso-cubebene. The neuroprotective
mechanisms of a-iso-cubebene in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells were
investigated. a-Iso-cubebene significantly inhibited cytotoxicity and apoptosis
due to 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA)-induced neurotoxicity in dopaminergic SH-SY5Y
cells. Pretreatment of cells with a-iso-cubebene reduced intracellular
accumulation of ROS and calcium in response to 6-OHDA. The neuroprotective
effects of a-iso-cubebene were found to result from protecting the mitochondrial 
membrane potential. Notably, a-iso-cubebene inhibited the release of
apoptosis-inducing factor from the mitochondria into the cytosol and nucleus
after 6-OHDA treatment. a-Iso-cubebene also induced the activation of
PKA/PKB/CREB/Nrf2 and suppressed 6-OHDA-induced neurotoxicity. a-Iso-cubebene was
found to induce phosphorylation of PKA and PKB and activate Nrf2 and CREB
signaling pathways in a dose-dependent manner. Additionally, a-iso-cubebene
stimulated the expression of the antioxidant response genes NQO1 and HO-1.
Finally, a-iso-cubebene-mediated neuroprotective effects were found to be
reversible after transfection with CREB and Nrf2 small interfering RNAs.

PMID: 24980143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Toxicol Lett. 2014 Aug 17;229(1):273-83. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2014.06.037. Epub 
2014 Jun 25.

Hepatic transcriptional analysis in rats treated with Cassia occidentalis seed:
involvement of oxidative stress and impairment in xenobiotic metabolism as a
putative mechanism of toxicity.

Panigrahi GK(1), Yadav A(2), Yadav A(3), Ansari KM(2), Chaturvedi RK(3),
Vashistha VM(4), Raisuddin S(5), Das M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Food, Drug and Chemical Toxicology Division, Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research (CSIR-IITR),
Lucknow,Uttar Pradesh, India; Department of Medical Elementology and Toxicology, 
Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi, India. (2)Food, Drug and Chemical Toxicology Division, 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research-Indian Institute of Toxicology
Research (CSIR-IITR), Lucknow,Uttar Pradesh, India. (3)Developmental Toxicology
Division, CSIR-IITR, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India. (4)Mangla Hospital and
Research Centre, Bijnor, Uttar Pradesh, India. (5)Department of Medical
Elementology and Toxicology, Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi, India. (6)Food, Drug and
Chemical Toxicology Division, Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research (CSIR-IITR), Lucknow,Uttar
Pradesh, India. Electronic address: mditrc@rediffmail.com.

The present study was undertaken to investigate the effect of Cassia occidentalis
(CO) seeds on the transcriptional expression patterns of mRNAs in rat liver by
microarray analysis. The results indicated that exposure of CO (0.5%) seeds in
diet to rats differentially regulated 60 transcripts belonging to various
metabolic pathways including, oxidative stress, xenobiotic metabolism,
carbohydrate metabolism, cell cycle, apoptosis etc. The expression of AKT1, CAT, 
SOD1, CYP1A1, CYP2B1, TGF-ß, BAX, CREB1, JNK1 and IL-6 were validated by the
qRT-PCR. In addition, involvement of oxidative stress was observed due to marked 
depletion of glutathione, increase in lipid peroxidation and modulation of
antioxidant enzymes in hepatic tissue of rats treated with 0.5-2.0% CO in diet.
Furthermore, significant decrease in the levels of Phase 1 (EROD, MROD and PROD) 
and Phase 2 (QR and GST) enzymes following 0.5-2.0% CO exposure indicates the
impairment of xenobiotic metabolism and possible accumulation of toxic
ingredients of the seeds in liver. Overall, the study predicts the involvement of
multiple pathways and related biomolecules in CO induced hepatotoxicity and the
data may be useful in formulating strategies for therapeutic interventions of
suspected CO poisoning study cases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24973489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Apr 15;7(5):1947-56. eCollection 2014.

DCC is expressed in a CD166-positive subpopulation of chondrocytes in human
osteoarthritic cartilage and modulates CRE activity.

Bosserhoff AK(1), Hofmeister S(1), Ruedel A(1), Schubert T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg Regensburg, Germany.
(2)Institute of Applied Pathology Speyer, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: In a recent study we determined a strong differential expression of
DCC in OA compared to normal chondrocytes and a strong impact of the DCC receptor
on cellular mobility triggered by its ligand Netrin-1. Migration of chondrocytes 
or their progenitor cells may play a role in remodeling of cartilage and
pathological conditions. The purpose of this study is to identify subsets of
chondrocytes expressing DCC and to understand signaling pathways used by DCC in
chondrocytes.
METHODS: Immunofluorescent histology of human cartilage was used to determine the
expression pattern of CD166, DCC and p-CREB. Cell culture of chondrocytes and
SW1353, transient transfection, siRNA transfection, EMSA, luciferase assay,
quantitative RT-PCR, ELISA, and Western Blotting were used to study signaling
down-stream of DCC.
RESULTS: DCC expressing chondrocytes are mainly located in the surface layers of 
OA cartilage. These also express CD166 indicating that DCC expressing
chondrocytes are progenitor cells. Interestingly, expression of DCC reduces cAMP 
levels, CREB DNA-binding activity and CRE activity in chondrocytes, whereas
down-regulation of DCC results in induction of CRE signaling.
CONCLUSION: In summary, DCC is up-regulated in CD166-positive chondrogenic
progenitor cells in OA and induces down-regulation of CREB. These findings
indicate that migration of CD166 positive progenitor cells to sites of cartilage 
damage may be directed by regulation of DCC signaling.

PMCID: PMC4069887
PMID: 24966904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jul 8;111(27):E2807-16. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1401505111. Epub 2014 Jun 23.

MeCP2 enforces Foxp3 expression to promote regulatory T cells' resilience to
inflammation.

Li C(1), Jiang S(1), Liu SQ(1), Lykken E(1), Zhao LT(2), Sevilla J(1), Zhu B(2), 
Li QJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710;
and. (2)Institute of Cancer, Xinqiao Hospital, The Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400037, China. (3)Department of Immunology, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710; and qi-jing.li@duke.edu.

Forkhead box P3(+) (Foxp3(+)) regulatory T cells (Tregs) are crucial for
peripheral tolerance. During inflammation, steady Foxp3 expression in Tregs is
essential for maintaining their lineage identity and suppressive function.
However, the molecular machinery governing Tregs' resilience to
inflammation-induced Foxp3 destabilization remains elusive. Here, we demonstrate 
that methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2), an eminent epigenetic regulator known 
primarily as the etiological factor of Rett syndrome, is critical to sustain
Foxp3 expression in Tregs during inflammation. In response to inflammatory
stimuli, MeCP2 is specifically recruited to the Conserved Non-Coding sequence 2
region of the foxp3 locus, where it collaborates with cAMP responsive element
binding protein 1 to promote local histone H3 acetylation, thereby counteracting 
inflammation-induced epigenetic silencing of foxp3. Consequently, Treg-specific
deletion of MeCP2 causes spontaneous immune activation in mice and failure in
protection against autoimmunity. Furthermore, we demonstrate that Foxp3
expression in MeCP2-deficient Tregs diminishes with time, resulting in their
failure to suppress effector T-cell-mediated colitis. Thus, MeCP2 serves as a
critical safeguard that confers Tregs with resilience against inflammation.

PMCID: PMC4103332
PMID: 24958888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Mol Diagn Ther. 2014 Oct;18(5):567-77. doi: 10.1007/s40291-014-0110-7.

Serotonin transporter gene: a new polymorphism may affect response to
antidepressant treatments in major depressive disorder.

Matsumoto Y(1), Fabbri C, Pellegrini S, Porcelli S, Politi P, Bellino S, Iofrida 
C, Mariotti V, Melissari E, Menchetti M, Martinelli V, Cappucciati M, Bozzatello 
P, Brignolo E, Brambilla P, Balestrieri M, Serretti A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna, Viale
Carlo Pepoli 5, 40123, Bologna, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Several gene variants have been related to major
depressive disorder (MDD) treatment outcomes; however, few studies have
investigated a possible different effect on pharmacotherapy and brief
psychotherapy response.
METHODS: A total of 137 MDD patients were randomized to either interpersonal
counseling (IPC; n = 40) or antidepressant pharmacological treatment (n = 97).
Outcomes were remission, response, and symptom improvement at week 8. Five
genetic variants were investigated (5HTR2A rs6314, BDNF rs6265, SLC6A4 rs8076005,
CREB1 rs2253206, and TPH2 rs11179023) as possible modulators of outcomes.
RESULTS: The LC6A4 rs8076005 AA genotype and A allele were associated with
response rate in the antidepressant group (p = 0.015 and 0.005, respectively) and
in the whole sample (p = 0.03 and 0.02, respectively). In the IPC group a
non-significant trend in the same direction was observed. The TPH2 rs11179023 A
allele showed a marginal association with symptom improvement in the IPC group
only. Other gene variants did not impact on outcomes in any treatment group.
CONCLUSION: Our study suggests that rs8076005 in the SLC6A4 gene may be a
modulator of antidepressant response, especially when pharmacological treatment
is used.

PMID: 24958631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Int J Neurosci. 2015 May;125(5):336-43. doi: 10.3109/00207454.2014.936554. Epub
2014 Jul 30.

Association study of CREB1 polymorphisms and suicidality in MDD: results from a
European multicenter study on treatment resistant depression.

Carlberg L(1), Schosser A, Calati R, Serretti A, Massat I, Papageorgiou K,
Kocabas NA, Mendlewicz J, Zohar J, Montgomery SA, Souery D, Kasper S.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Medical University Vienna,
Austria.

PURPOSE: Mood disorders are present in more than 90% of suicides, and a genetic
vulnerability to suicidality is well established. Numerous lines of evidence
relate the transcription factor Cyclic adenosine monophosphate Response Element
Binding protein (CREB1) to suicide, and to the aetiology of major depressive
disorder (MDD). Our aim was to test for association between CREB1 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and both suicide risk (SR) and a personal history
of suicide attempt (SA) in MDD patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A sample of 250 MDD patients collected in the context of a
European multicenter resistant depression study and treated with antidepressants 
over a period of at least 4 weeks were genotyped for five CREB1 SNPs (rs2709376, 
rs2253206, rs7569963, rs7594560, and rs4675690). To assess suicidality, the Mini 
International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) and the Hamilton Rating Scale for
Depression (HAM-D) were applied.
RESULTS: Neither single-marker nor haplotypic association were found between SR
and/or a personal history of SA with any of the investigated SNPs after multiple 
testing correction. For females, an association between rs2709376 and a personal 
history of SA was found (p = 0.016), however not resisting multiple testing
correction.
CONCLUSIONS: Although we found significant CREB1 single marker association with a
personal history of SA in female MDD patients, this finding could not be
confirmed in haplotypic analyses after multiple testing correction. Larger
well-defined cohorts are required to confirm or refute a possible association of 
CREB1 and SA in female MDD patients.

PMID: 24955721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Nat Neurosci. 2014 Aug;17(8):1055-63. doi: 10.1038/nn.3744. Epub 2014 Jun 22.

Nuclear BK channels regulate gene expression via the control of nuclear calcium
signaling.

Li B(1), Jie W(1), Huang L(2), Wei P(1), Li S(1), Luo Z(1), Friedman AK(3),
Meredith AL(4), Han MH(3), Zhu XH(1), Gao TM(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] State Key Laboratory of Organ Failure Research, Department of Neurobiology,
School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China. 
[2] Key Laboratory of Neuroplasticity of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes,
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (2)School of Public Health and
Tropical Medicine, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (3)Department
of Pharmacology and Systems Therapeutics, Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School 
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA. (4)Department of Physiology,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Neurosci. 2014 Dec;17(12):1841.

Ion channels are essential for the regulation of neuronal functions. The
significance of plasma membrane, mitochondrial, endoplasmic reticulum and
lysosomal ion channels in the regulation of Ca(2+) is well established. In
contrast, surprisingly little is known about the function of ion channels on the 
nuclear envelope (NE). Here we demonstrate the presence of functional
large-conductance, calcium-activated potassium channels (BK channels) on the NE
of rodent hippocampal neurons. Functionally, blockade of nuclear BK channels (nBK
channels) induces NE-derived Ca(2+) release, nucleoplasmic Ca(2+) elevation and
cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CREB)-dependent transcription. More 
importantly, blockade of nBK channels regulates nuclear Ca(2+)-sensitive gene
expression and promotes dendritic arborization in a nuclear Ca(2+)-dependent
manner. These results suggest that the nBK channel functions as a molecular link 
between neuronal activity and nuclear Ca(2+) to convey signals from synapse to
nucleus and is a new modulator, operating at the NE, of synaptic
activity-dependent neuronal functions.

PMCID: PMC4115017
PMID: 24952642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Nihon Arukoru Yakubutsu Igakkai Zasshi. 2014 Apr;49(2):83-91.

[Genetic polymorphisms commonly influencing efficacy of diverse addictive
substances].

[Article in Japanese]

Nishizawa D, Ikeda K.

Opioids, such as morphine and fentanyl, are widely used as effective analgesics
for the treatment of acute and chronic pain. In addition, the opioid system has a
key role in the rewarding effects of morphine, ethanol, cocaine and various other
drugs. The authors have focused on G-protein-activated inwardly rectifying
potassium (GIRK) channel subunits, GIRK2 and GIRK3, that are important molecules 
in opioid transmission, and found that the single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
within the GIRK2 and GIRK3 gene regions were significantly associated with
postoperative requirements of analgesics including opioids in patients who
underwent abdominal surgery and mRNA expression of these genes in postmortem
specimens, one of which was also associated with vulnerability to methamphetamine
(METH) dependence. Further, by conducting a multistage genome-wide association
study (GWAS) in healthy subjects, the authors found that genetic polymorphisms
within a linkage disequilibrium block that spans 2q33.3-2q34 were strongly
associated with the requirements for postoperative opioid analgesics after
painful cosmetic surgery. The C allele of the best candidate SNP, rs2952768, was 
associated with more analgesic requirements, and consistent results were obtained
in patients who underwent abdominal surgery. In addition, carriers of the C
allele in this SNP exhibited less vulnerability to severe drug dependence in
patients with methamphetamine dependence, alcohol dependence, and eating
disorders and a lower 'Reward Dependence score on a personality questionnaire in 
healthy subjects. Furthermore, the C/C genotype of this SNP was significantly
associated with the elevated expression of a neighboring gene, CREB1. The results
show that SNPs in this locus are the most potent genetic factors associated with 
human opioid sensitivity known to date, affecting both the efficacy of opioid
analgesics and liability to severe substance dependence. These outcomes provide
valuable information for the personalized treatment of pain and drug dependence.

PMID: 24946391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Jun 12;10(6):e1004195. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004195.
eCollection 2014.

Mitogen and stress activated kinases act co-operatively with CREB during the
induction of human cytomegalovirus immediate-early gene expression from latency.

Kew VG(1), Yuan J(2), Meier J(2), Reeves MB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Addenbrooke's Hospital, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom. (2)Department of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, Iowa, United States of America. (3)Department of Medicine, Addenbrooke's
Hospital, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom; Institute of
Immunity & Transplantation, Division of Infection & Immunity, Royal Free
Hospital, University College London, London, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2014 Sep;10(9):e1004392.

The devastating clinical consequences associated with human cytomegalovirus
(HCMV) infection and reactivation underscores the importance of understanding
triggers of HCMV reactivation in dendritic cells (DC). Here we show that
ERK-mediated reactivation is dependent on the mitogen and stress activated kinase
(MSK) family. Furthermore, this MSK mediated response is dependent on CREB
binding to the viral major immediate early promoter (MIEP). Specifically, CREB
binding to the MIEP provides the target for MSK recruitment. Importantly, MSK
mediated phosphorylation of histone H3 is required to promote histone
de-methylation and the subsequent exit of HCMV from latency. Taken together,
these data suggest that CREB binding to the MIEP is necessary for the recruitment
of the kinase activity of MSKs to initiate the chromatin remodelling at the MIEP 
required for reactivation. Thus the importance of CREB during HCMV reactivation
is to promote chromatin modifications conducive for viral gene expression as well
as acting as a classical transcription factor. Clearly, specific inhibition of
this interaction between CREB and MSKs could provide a strategy for therapeutic
intervention.

PMCID: PMC4055774
PMID: 24945302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 18;9(6):e96770. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096770. eCollection
2014.

Toxoplasma gondii decreases the reproductive fitness in mice.

Dvorakova-Hortova K(1), Sidlova A(1), Ded L(2), Hladovcova D(1), Vieweg M(3),
Weidner W(3), Steger K(3), Stopka P(1), Paradowska-Dogan A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biocev Group, Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Charles University in
Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. (2)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute 
of Biotechnology, Academy of Science, Prague, Czech Republic. (3)Department of
Urology, Pediatric Urology and Andrology, Justus Liebig University of Giessen,
Giessen, Germany.

Toxoplasma gondii is a common protozoan parasite that infects warm-blooded
animals throughout the world, including mice and humans. During infection, both, 
the parasite and the host, utilize various mechanisms to maximize their own
reproductive success. Mice and humans are both the intermediate hosts for
Toxoplasma gondii, which forms specialized vacuoles containing reproductive cysts
in the formers' tissue. As half of the human population is infected, developing a
disease called toxoplasmosis, along with an ever-growing number of couples
suffering with idiopathic infertility, it is therefore surprising that there is a
lack of research on how Toxoplasma gondii can alter reproductive parameters. In
this study, a detailed histometric screening of the testicular function along
with the levels of the pituitary luteinizing hormone (LH) were analysed in
infected mice. Data on relative testis and epididymis weight, and sperm count
were also collected. Based on the results obtained, the level of LH in the urine 
of Toxoplasma gondii infected mice was lower compared to the control. In direct
correlation with the hormone level, testicular function and sperm production was 
also significantly lower in Toxoplasma gondii positive group using sperm count
and histometric analysis as a marker. Not only were the number of leptotene
primary spermatocytes and spermatids lowered, but the number of Sertoli cells and
the tubule diameter were elevated. In parallel, a pilot epigenetic study on
global testicular methylation, and specific methylation of Crem, Creb1 and
Hspa1genes essential for successfully ongoing spermatogenesis was performed.
Global methylation was elevated in Toxoplasma infected mice, and differences in
the DNA methylation of selected genes were detected between the Toxoplasma
positive and control group. These findings demonstrate a direct relation between 
Toxoplasma gondii infection and the decrease of male reproductive fitness in
mice, which may contribute to an increase of idiopathic infertility in humans.

PMCID: PMC4062421
PMID: 24940596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Food Chem Toxicol. 2014 Sep;71:81-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2014.05.021. Epub 2014
Jun 14.

Benzyl butyl phthalate exposure impairs learning and memory and attenuates
neurotransmission and CREB phosphorylation in mice.

Min A(1), Liu F(1), Yang X(1), Chen M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Genetic Regulation and Integrative Biology, School of 
Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan 430079, China. (2)Hubei Key
Laboratory of Genetic Regulation and Integrative Biology, School of Life
Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan 430079, China. Electronic
address: chenmq@mail.ccnu.edu.cn.

The existing data are insufficient to evaluate the neurotoxicity of benzyl butyl 
phthalate (BBP) exposure on the brain, and the underlying mechanisms to explain
these effects remain unclear. Kun Ming (KM) mice were exposed to BBP (0, 50, 250,
1250 mg/kg) via gavage for 14 days. Employing the Morris water maze (MWM) test,
we observed that mice demonstrated poorer learning and memory performance than
the control group at doses of 250 and 1250 mg/kg/day. Reduction of locomotor
activity in mice and depression were indicated by a long "dead time" in the
Forced Swim Test and tail suspension test. Pathological alterations and oxidative
damage to the hippocampus were found. To study the molecular mechanisms
underlying BBP toxicity, the neurotransmitter serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine,
5-HT) and pCREB were tested. The modified levels of 5-HT in the hippocampus and
the decreased levels of CREB phosphorylation after BBP exposure suggested a
potential mechanism underlying BBP toxicity. We hypothesize that BBP exposure
causes a decrease in the number of neurotransmitters, which in turn down
regulates the levels of CREB phosphorylation by the cAMP/protein kinase A
(PKA)-mediated signaling. The results are an attenuation of the effects of CREB
downstream, oxidative damage and impaired behavioral performance.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24937021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Int J Cancer. 2015 Feb 1;136(3):536-46. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29028. Epub 2014 Jun 28.

Interruption of KLF5 acetylation converts its function from tumor suppressor to
tumor promoter in prostate cancer cells.

Li X(1), Zhang B, Wu Q, Ci X, Zhao R, Zhang Z, Xia S, Su D, Chen J, Ma G, Fu L,
Dong JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, College of Life Sciences, Nankai
University, Tianjin, China.

KLF5 possesses both tumor suppressing and tumor promoting activities, though the 
mechanism controlling these opposing functions is unknown. In cultured
noncancerous epithelial cells, KLF5 converts from proproliferative to
antiproliferative activity upon TGFß-induced acetylation, which sequentially
alters the KLF5 transcriptional complex and the expression of genes such as p15
and MYC. In this study, we tested whether the acetylation status of KLF5 also
determines its opposing functions in tumorigenesis using the PC-3 and DU 145
prostate cancer cell lines, whose proliferation is inhibited by TGFß. KLF5
inhibited the proliferation of these cancer cells, and the inhibition was
dependent on KLF5 acetylation. MYC and p15 showed the same patterns of expression
change found in noncancerous cells. In nude mice, KLF5 also suppressed tumor
growth in an acetylation-dependent manner. Furthermore, deacetylation switched
KLF5 to tumor promoting activity, and blocking TGFß signaling attenuated the
tumor suppressor activity of KLF5. RNA sequencing and comprehensive data analysis
suggest that multiple molecules, including RELA, p53, CREB1, MYC, JUN, ER, AR and
SP1, mediate the opposing functions of AcKLF5 and unAcKLF5. These results provide
novel insights into the mechanism by which KLF5 switches from antitumorigenic to 
protumorigenic function and also suggest the roles of AcKLF5 and unAcKLF5,
respectively, in the tumor suppressing and tumor promoting functions of TGFß.

© 2014 UICC.

PMCID: PMC4232457
PMID: 24931571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jun 10;111(23):8661-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1313222111. Epub 2014 May 27.

Encoding and storage of spatial information in the retrosplenial cortex.

Czajkowski R(1), Jayaprakash B(2), Wiltgen B(2), Rogerson T(2), Guzman-Karlsson
MC(2), Barth AL(3), Trachtenberg JT(4), Silva AJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurobiology, Integrative Center for Learning and Memory, Semel
Institute, Brain Research Institute,Psychiatry, andPsychology, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA 90095;Neurobiology Centre, Nencki Institute of
Experimental Biology, Warsaw 02-093, Poland; and silvaa@mednet.ucla.edu
r.czajkowski@nencki.gov.pl. (2)Departments of Neurobiology, Integrative Center
for Learning and Memory, Semel Institute, Brain Research Institute,Psychiatry,
andPsychology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095; (3)Department of 
Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213.
(4)Departments of Neurobiology, Integrative Center for Learning and Memory, Semel
Institute, Brain Research Institute. (5)Departments of Neurobiology, Integrative 
Center for Learning and Memory, Semel Institute, Brain Research
Institute,Psychiatry, andPsychology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA
90095; silvaa@mednet.ucla.edu r.czajkowski@nencki.gov.pl.

The retrosplenial cortex (RSC) is part of a network of interconnected cortical,
hippocampal, and thalamic structures harboring spatially modulated neurons. The
RSC contains head direction cells and connects to the parahippocampal region and 
anterior thalamus. Manipulations of the RSC can affect spatial and contextual
tasks. A considerable amount of evidence implicates the role of the RSC in
spatial navigation, but it is unclear whether this structure actually encodes or 
stores spatial information. We used a transgenic mouse in which the expression of
green fluorescent protein was under the control of the immediate early gene c-fos
promoter as well as time-lapse two-photon in vivo imaging to monitor neuronal
activation triggered by spatial learning in the Morris water maze. We uncovered a
repetitive pattern of cell activation in the RSC consistent with the hypothesis
that during spatial learning an experience-dependent memory trace is formed in
this structure. In support of this hypothesis, we also report three other
observations. First, temporary RSC inactivation disrupts performance in a spatial
learning task. Second, we show that overexpressing the transcription factor CREB 
in the RSC with a viral vector, a manipulation known to enhance memory
consolidation in other circuits, results in spatial memory enhancements. Third,
silencing the viral CREB-expressing neurons with the allatostatin system occludes
the spatial memory enhancement. Taken together, these results indicate that the
retrosplenial cortex engages in the formation and storage of memory traces for
spatial information.

PMCID: PMC4060653
PMID: 24912150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Nov;35(11):2552-61. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.05.007. Epub 2014 May 10.

Enhanced defense against mitochondrial hydrogen peroxide attenuates
age-associated cognition decline.

Chen L(1), Na R(1), Ran Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA. (2)Department of Cellular
and Structural Biology, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio,
San Antonio, TX, USA; Geriatrics Research Education and Clinical Center, Research
and Development Service, South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio,
TX, USA. Electronic address: ran@uthscsa.edu.

Increased mitochondrial hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is associated with Alzheimer's
disease and brain aging. Peroxiredoxin 3 (Prdx3) is the key mitochondrial
antioxidant defense enzyme in detoxifying H2O2. To investigate the importance of 
mitochondrial H2O2 in age-associated cognitive decline, we compared cognition
between aged (17-19 months) APP transgenic mice and APP/Prdx3 double transgenic
mice (dTG) and between old (24 months) wild-type mice and Prdx3 transgenic mice
(TG). Compared with aged APP mice, aged dTG mice showed improved cognition that
was correlated with reduced brain amyloid beta levels and decreased amyloid beta 
production. Old TG mice also showed significantly increased cognitive ability
compared with old wild-type mice. Both aged dTG mice and old TG mice had reduced 
mitochondrial oxidative stress and increased mitochondrial function. Moreover,
CREB signaling, a signaling pathway important for cognition was enhanced in both 
aged dTG mice and old TG mice. Thus, our results indicate that mitochondrial H2O2
is a key culprit of age-associated cognitive impairment, and that a reduction of 
mitochondrial H2O2 could improve cognition by maintaining mitochondrial health
and enhancing CREB signaling.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24906890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2014 Jul;46(7):590-6. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmu036. Epub 2014 Jun 5.

miR-27 inhibits adipocyte differentiation via suppressing CREB expression.

Zhu Y(1), Zhang X(1), Ding X(1), Wang H(1), Chen X(1), Zhao H(1), Jia Y(1), Liu
S(2), Liu Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Luoyang Orthopedic-Traumatological Hospital, Luoyang 471000, China.
(2)Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences and Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200031, China shliu@sibs.ac.cn liuyouwendr@sina.com. (3)Luoyang
Orthopedic-Traumatological Hospital, Luoyang 471000, China shliu@sibs.ac.cn
liuyouwendr@sina.com.

miR-27 plays a negative role in the regulation of adipogenesis. However, the
molecular mechanism still remains to be clarified. In the present study, we found
that miR-27 inhibits adipogenesis partially by repressing the early adipogenic
transcription factor cAMP response element-binding protein by directly targeting 
its 3' untranslated region. In addition, we demonstrated that tumor necrosis
factor-a (TNF-a) treatment up-regulates miR-27 through the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway.
Furthermore, anti-miR-27 reduces the TNF-a-induced inhibition of adipogenesis.
Simultaneously, the levels of miR-27 expression were decreased in mature
adipocytes of obese mice when compared with lean mice. Our data revealed a novel 
mechanism of miR-27 in the regulation of adipogenesis.

© The Author 2014. Published by ABBS Editorial Office in association with Oxford 
University Press on behalf of the Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 24903074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Jun 5;5:e1285. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.244.

CT45A1 acts as a new proto-oncogene to trigger tumorigenesis and cancer
metastasis.

Shang B(1), Gao A(1), Pan Y(1), Zhang G(1), Tu J(2), Zhou Y(1), Yang P(1), Cao
Z(1), Wei Q(1), Ding Y(1), Zhang J(1), Zhao Y(1), Zhou Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cyrus Tang Hematology Center, Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Key Laboratory of Thrombosis and
Hemostasis, Ministry of Health, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(2)The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Soochow University,
Suzhou, Jiangsu, China.

Cancer/testis antigen (CTA)-45 family (CT45) belongs to a new family of genes in 
phylogenetics and is absent in normal tissues except for testis, but is
aberrantly overexpressed in various cancer types. Whether CT45 and other CTAs act
as proto-oncogenes has not been determined. Using breast cancer as a model, we
found that CT45A1, a representative CT45 family member, alone had a weak
tumorigenic effect. However, its neoplastic potency was greatly enhanced in the
presence of growth factors. Overexpression of CT45A1 in breast cancer cells
markedly upregulated various oncogenic and metastatic genes, constitutively
activated ERK and CREB signaling pathways, promoted epithelial-mesenchymal
transition, and increased cell stemness, tumorigenesis, invasion, and metastasis,
whereas silencing CT45A1 significantly reduced cancer cell migration and
invasion. We propose that CT45A1 functions as a novel proto-oncogene to trigger
oncogenesis and metastasis. CT45A1 and other CT45 members are therefore excellent
targets for anticancer drug discovery and targeted tumor therapy, and valuable
genes in the study of a molecular phylogenetic tree.

PMCID: PMC4611718
PMID: 24901056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Eur J Neurosci. 2014 Jul;40(1):2206-15. doi: 10.1111/ejn.12602. Epub 2014 Jun 5.

Human cellular differences in cAMP--CREB signaling correlate with light-dependent
melatonin suppression and bipolar disorder.

Gaspar L(1), van de Werken M, Johansson AS, Moriggi E, Owe-Larsson B, Kocks JW,
Lundkvist GB, Gordijn MC, Brown SA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Zurich, 190
Winterthurerstrasse, Zurich, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Eur J Neurosci. 2014 Jul;40(1):2205.

Various lines of evidence suggest a mechanistic role for altered cAMP-CREB (cAMP 
response element - binding protein) signaling in depressive and affective
disorders. However, the establishment and validation of human inter-individual
differences in this and other major signaling pathways has proven difficult.
Here, we describe a novel lentiviral methodology to investigate signaling
variation over long periods of time directly in human primary fibroblasts. On a
cellular level, this method showed surprisingly large inter-individual
differences in three major signaling pathways in human subjects that nevertheless
correlated with cellular measures of genome-wide transcription and drug toxicity.
We next validated this method by establishing a likely role for cAMP-mediated
signaling in a human neuroendocrine response to light - the light-dependent
suppression of the circadian hormone melatonin - that shows wide inter-individual
differences of unknown origin in vivo. Finally, we show an overall greater
magnitude of cellular CREB signaling in individuals with bipolar disorder,
suggesting a possible role for this signaling pathway in susceptibility to mental
disease. Overall, our results suggest that genetic differences in major signaling
pathways can be reliably detected with sensitive viral-based reporter profiling, 
and that these differences can be conserved across tissues and be predictive of
physiology and disease susceptibility.

© 2014 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24898566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2014 Jul-Aug;17(4):321-6. doi: 10.2350/14-05-1487-CR.1. Epub 
2014 Jun 4.

Primary low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma of the kidney in a child with the
alternative EWSR1-CREB3L1 gene fusion.

Rubinstein JC(1), Visa A, Zhang L, Antonescu CR, Christison-Lagay ER, Morotti R.

Author information: 
(1)1<U+2009> Department of General Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT, USA.

We present the case of a 6-year-old boy with a deceptively bland spindle cell
renal neoplasm found to harbor the EWSR1-CREB3L1 gene fusion. This fusion has
recently been described as a variant translocation in low-grade fibromyxoid
sarcoma (LGFMS), a tumor more typically characterized by a recurrent t(7;16)
chromosomal translocation, resulting in the fusion of FUS and CREB3L2 genes.
LGFMS is an indolent tumor with late metastatic potential and a propensity for
long-term disease recurrence. The tumor is rare in children, with only 33
published cases. In the pediatric population, it has not previously been reported
arising in the kidney.

PMID: 24896634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Oct;35(10):2272-81. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.04.031. Epub 2014 May 2.

PERK mediates eIF2a phosphorylation responsible for BACE1 elevation, CREB
dysfunction and neurodegeneration in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.

Devi L(1), Ohno M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Dementia Research, Nathan Kline Institute, Orangeburg, NY, USA.
(2)Center for Dementia Research, Nathan Kline Institute, Orangeburg, NY, USA;
Department of Psychiatry, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York,
NY, USA. Electronic address: mohno@nki.rfmh.org.

Emerging evidence suggests that aberrant phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation
factor-2a (eIF2a) may induce synaptic failure and neurodegeneration through
persistent translational inhibition of global protein synthesis. However,
elevated phospho-eIF2a also paradoxically causes translational activation of a
subset of messenger RNAs such as the ß-secretase enzyme, ß-site APP-cleaving
enzyme 1 (BACE1) and cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) repressor,
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4). Therefore, we tested whether genetic
reduction of the eIF2a kinase PERK may prevent these deleterious events and
mitigate Alzheimer's disease (AD)-like neuropathology and cognitive impairments
in the 5XFAD mouse model. PERK haploinsufficiency blocked overactivation of the
PERK-eIF2a pathway, as evidenced by significant reductions in phosphorylation of 
PERK and eIF2a, in 5XFAD mice. PERK haploinsufficiency was sufficient to rescue
memory deficits and cholinergic neurodegeneration in this AD model. Notably, PERK
haploinsufficiency also prevented BACE1 elevations, resulting in reduced levels
of amyloid-ß peptides and plaque burden in 5XFAD mice. Moreover, CREB dysfunction
was restored in PERK(+/-)·5XFAD mice concomitant with reversal of ATF4
upregulation. Together, these findings suggest that PERK may be a
disease-modifying therapeutic target to prevent multiple memory-disrupting
mechanisms associated with AD.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4127890
PMID: 24889041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Cell Immunol. 2014 Jul;290(1):52-61. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2014.05.001. Epub
2014 May 13.

A comparative study of the effects of inhibitory cytokines on human natural
killer cells and the mechanistic features of transforming growth factor-beta.

Lee HM(1), Kim KS(2), Kim J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Brain Korea 21 PLUS project for Medical
science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul
120-752, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
Yonsei University College of Medicine, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-752,
Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Microbiology and Brain Korea 21 PLUS project 
for Medical science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 50 Yonsei-ro,
Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-752, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
jkim63@yuhs.ac.

The major factors and mechanisms by which natural killer (NK) cells are inhibited
in cancer patients have not yet been well defined. In this study, we conducted a 
comparative analysis of the effects of TGF-ß, IL-10, and IL-4 on primary NK
cells, and it was demonstrated that (1) TGF-ß most potently inhibited the overall
function of NK cells. (2) It appears that TGF-ß reduced the tyrosine
phosphorylation of Syk and the expression of c-myc. (3) It was also found that
the IL-2-induced promoter-binding activities of C-myb, AP-1, CREB, and AR were
also completely suppressed upon TGF-ß treatment. Interestingly, TGF-ß also
completely suppressed other transcription factors, which are constitutively
activated. Among these factors, we further confirmed roles of AP-1 in NK-92 cell 
activation through c-jun and MEK1 inhibitor assay. Our study provides insight
into the effects of TGF-ß in modulating NK cell functions.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24879062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Neuromuscul Disord. 2014 Aug;24(8):726-35. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2014.05.001. Epub
2014 May 13.

The decreased expression of thioredoxin-1 in brain of mice with experimental
autoimmune myasthenia gravis.

Chen W(1), Zeng X(2), Luo F(2), Lv T(2), Zhou X(2), Bai J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Environmental Science and Engineering, Kunming University of
Science and Technology, Kunming 650500, China; Medical Faculty, Kunming
University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650500, China; Neurology
Department, First People's Hospital of Yunnan Province, Kunming 650032, China.
(2)Medical Faculty, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650500,
China. (3)Medical Faculty, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 
650500, China. Electronic address: jiebai662001@126.com.

Myasthenia gravis (MG) is an autoimmune disease caused by circulating antibodies 
that block acetylcholine receptor (AchR) at the neuromuscular junction. There is 
the cognitive and memory impairment in patients with MG. However, the molecular
mechanisms underlying the alteration of central nervous system in MG remain
unknown. In the present study, we found that the level of malondialdehyde (MDA)
was increased in the brain of experimental autoimmune myasthenia gravis (EAMG).
Furthermore, the expression of thioredoxin-1 (Trx-1) and the activity of cAMP
response element-binding protein (CREB) were significantly decreased in frontal
lobe and hippocampus of mice with EAMG. We also found that the expression of
pro-apoptotic C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) was increased in the frontal lobe
and hippocampus of mice. However, the expressions of glucose regulated protein 78
(GRP78/Bip) was not changed in same areas. Inversely, the expressions of
pro-caspase-12, pro-caspase-3 and pro-caspase-9 were decreased. These data
indicate that Trx-1 mediated endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria pathways are 
involved in brain damage in MG. Trx-1 may be a pivotal target for brain
protective treatment in MG.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24878227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2014 Aug;36:38-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2014.05.006. Epub 
2014 May 24.

Perinatal a-linolenic acid availability alters the expression of genes related to
memory and to epigenetic machinery, and the Mecp2 DNA methylation in the whole
brain of mouse offspring.

He F(1), Lupu DS(1), Niculescu MD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Nutrition Research Institute, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Kannapolis, NC 28081, USA. (2)Department of Nutrition
and Nutrition Research Institute, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Kannapolis, NC 28081, USA. Electronic address: Mihai_Niculescu@unc.edu.

Many animal and human studies indicated that dietary <U+03C9>-3 fatty acids could have
beneficial roles on brain development, memory, and learning. However, the exact
mechanisms involved are far from being clearly understood, especially for
a-linolenic acid (ALA), which is the precursor for the <U+03C9>-3 elongation and
desaturation pathways. This study investigated the alterations induced by
different intakes of flaxseed oil (containing 50% ALA), during gestation and
lactation, upon the expression of genes involved in neurogenesis, memory-related 
molecular processes, and DNA methylation, in the brains of mouse offspring at the
end of lactation (postnatal day 19, P19). In addition, DNA methylation status for
the same genes was investigated. Maternal flaxseed oil supplementation during
lactation increased the expression of Mecp2, Ppp1cc, and Reelin, while decreasing
the expression of Ppp1cb and Dnmt3a. Dnmt1 expression was decreased by postnatal 
flaxseed oil supplementation but this effect was offset by ALA deficiency during 
gestation. Mecp2 DNA methylation was decreased by maternal ALA deficiency during 
gestation, with a more robust effect in the lactation-deficient group. In
addition, linear regression analysis revealed positive correlations between
Mecp2, Reelin, and Ppp1cc, between Gadd45b, Bdnf, and Creb1, and between Egr1 and
Dnmt1, respectively. However, there were no correlations, in any gene, between
DNA methylation and gene expression. In summary, the interplay between ALA
availability during gestation and lactation differentially altered the expression
of genes involved in neurogenesis and memory, in the whole brain of the offspring
at the end of lactation. The Mecp2 epigenetic status was correlated with ALA
availability during gestation. However, the epigenetic status of the genes
investigated was not associated with transcript levels, suggesting that either
the regulation of these genes is not necessarily under epigenetic control, or
that the whole brain model is not adequate for the exploration of epigenetic
regulation in the context of this study.

Copyright © 2014 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4471860
PMID: 24866706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Chin J Nat Med. 2014 Apr;12(4):251-8. doi: 10.1016/S1875-5364(14)60051-0.

Network pharmacology-based prediction and verification of the molecular targets
and pathways for schisandrin against cerebrovascular disease.

Lv YN(1), Li SX(2), Zhai KF(2), Kou JP(3), Yu BY(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, China Pharmaceutical University,
Nanjing 211198, China; Department of Complex Prescription of TCM, China
Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 211198, China. (2)Department of Complex
Prescription of TCM, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 211198, China.
(3)Department of Complex Prescription of TCM, China Pharmaceutical University,
Nanjing 211198, China. Electronic address: junpingkou@163.com. (4)State Key
Laboratory of Natural Medicines, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 211198,
China. Electronic address: boyangyu59@163.com.

AIM: To illuminate the molecular targets for schisandrin against cerebrovascular 
disease based on the combined methods of network pharmacology prediction and
experimental verification.
METHOD: A protein database was established through constructing the drug-protein 
network from literature mining data. The protein-protein network was built
through an in-depth exploration of the relationships between the proteins. The
computational platform was implemented to predict and extract the sensitive
sub-network with significant P-values from the protein-protein network. Then the 
key targets and pathways were identified from the sensitive sub-network. The most
related targets and pathways were also confirmed in hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2)-induced PC12 cells by Western blotting.
RESULTS: Twelve differentially expressed proteins (gene names: NFKB1, RELA,
TNFSF10, MAPK1, CHUK, CASP8, PIGS2, MAPK14, CREB1, IFNG, APP, and BCL2) were
confirmed as the central nodes of the interaction network (45 nodes, 93 edges).
The NF-<U+03BA>B signaling pathway was suggested as the most related pathway of
schisandrin for cerebrovascular disease. Furthermore, schisandrin was found to
suppress the expression and phosphorylation of IKKa, as well as p50 and p65
induced by H2O2 in PC12 cells by Western blotting.
CONCLUSION: The computational platform that integrates literature mining data,
protein-protein interactions, sensitive sub-network, and pathway results in
identification of the NF-<U+03BA>B signaling pathway as the key targets and pathways for
schisandrin.

Copyright © 2014 China Pharmaceutical University. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 24863349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Sep;1841(9):1256-63. doi:
10.1016/j.bbalip.2014.05.004. Epub 2014 May 17.

Cyclic phosphatidic acid and lysophosphatidic acid induce hyaluronic acid
synthesis via CREB transcription factor regulation in human skin fibroblasts.

Maeda-Sano K(1), Gotoh M(2), Morohoshi T(3), Someya T(4), Murofushi H(5),
Murakami-Murofushi K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Endowed Research Division of Human Welfare Sciences, Ochanomizu University,
2-1-1 Ohtsuka, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 112-8610, Japan; ALBION Co., Ltd., Hulic Ginza
building, 1-7-10, Ginza, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0061, Japan. (2)Endowed Research
Division of Human Welfare Sciences, Ochanomizu University, 2-1-1 Ohtsuka,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 112-8610, Japan. (3)SANSHO Co., Ltd., Toyo building, 1-2-10,
Nihonbashi, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 103-0027, Japan. (4)ALBION Co., Ltd., Hulic Ginza
building, 1-7-10, Ginza, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0061, Japan. (5)Science and Education
Center, Ochanomizu University, 2-1-1 Ohtsuka, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 112-8610, Japan.
(6)Endowed Research Division of Human Welfare Sciences, Ochanomizu University,
2-1-1 Ohtsuka, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 112-8610, Japan. Electronic address:
murofushi.kimiko@ocha.ac.jp.

Cyclic phosphatidic acid (cPA) is a naturally occurring phospholipid mediator and
an analog of the growth factor-like phospholipid lysophosphatidic acid (LPA). cPA
has a unique cyclic phosphate ring at the sn-2 and sn-3 positions of its glycerol
backbone. We showed before that a metabolically stabilized cPA derivative,
2-carba-cPA, relieved osteoarthritis pathogenesis in vivo and induced hyaluronic 
acid synthesis in human osteoarthritis synoviocytes in vitro. This study focused 
on hyaluronic acid synthesis in human fibroblasts, which retain moisture and
maintain health in the dermis. We investigated the effects of cPA and LPA on
hyaluronic acid synthesis in human fibroblasts (NB1RGB cells). Using particle
exclusion and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays, we found that both cPA and LPA 
dose-dependently induced hyaluronic acid synthesis. We revealed that the
expression of hyaluronan synthase 2 messenger RNA and protein is up-regulated by 
cPA and LPA treatment time dependently. We then characterized the signaling
pathways up-regulating hyaluronic acid synthesis mediated by cPA and LPA in
NB1RGB cells. Pharmacological inhibition and reporter gene assays revealed that
the activation of the LPA receptor LPAR1, Gi/o protein, phosphatidylinositol-3
kinase (PI3K), extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK), and cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate response element-binding protein (CREB) but not nuclear factor <U+03BA>B
induced hyaluronic acid synthesis by the treatment with cPA and LPA in NB1RGB
cells. These results demonstrate for the first time that cPA and LPA induce
hyaluronic acid synthesis in human skin fibroblasts mainly through the activation
of LPAR1-Gi/o followed by the PI3K, ERK, and CREB signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24845645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Cancer Lett. 2014 Aug 28;351(1):91-9. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.05.003. Epub
2014 May 13.

Aromatase induction in tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer: Role of
phosphoinositide 3-kinase-dependent CREB activation.

Phuong NT(1), Lim SC(2), Kim YM(3), Kang KW(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Chosun University, Gwangju 501-759, Republic of Korea;
College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul
National University, Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of
Pathology, College of Medicine, Chosun University, Gwangju 501-759, Republic of
Korea. (3)College of Pharmacy, Hanyang University, Republic of Korea. (4)College 
of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
kwkang@snu.ac.kr.

Estrogens are important for the development and growth of estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive breast cancer, for which anti-estrogen therapy is one of the most
effective treatments. However, its efficacy can be limited by either de novo or
acquired resistance. Aromatase is a key enzyme for the biosynthesis of estrogens,
and inhibition of this enzyme leads to profound hypoestrogenism. Here, we found
that the basal expression and activity of aromatase were significantly increased 
in tamoxifen (TAM)-resistant human breast cancer (TAMR-MCF-7) cells compared to
control MCF-7 cells. We further revealed that aromatase immunoreactivity in tumor
tissues was increased in recurrence group after TAM therapy compared to
non-recurrence group after TAM therapy. Phosphorylation of Akt, extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK), and p38 kinase were all increased in TAMR-MCF-7
cells. Inhibition of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) suppressed the
transactivation of the aromatase gene and its enzyme activity. Furthermore, we
have also shown that PI3K/Akt-dependent cAMP-response element binding protein
(CREB) activation was required for the enhanced expression of aromatase in
TAMR-MCF-7 cells. Our findings suggest that aromatase expression is up-regulated 
in TAM-resistant breast cancer via PI3K/Akt-dependent CREB activation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24836190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Virol. 2014 Aug;88(15):8361-74. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01202-14. Epub 2014 May 14.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress links hepatitis C virus RNA replication to wild-type
PGC-1a/liver-specific PGC-1a upregulation.

Yao W(1), Cai H(1), Li X(2), Li T(3), Hu L(3), Peng T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Immunology, State key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease,
Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Guangzhou, China Sino-French Hoffmann Institute of Immunology, Guangzhou Medical 
University, Guangzhou, China. (2)Sino-French Hoffmann Institute of Immunology,
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (3)Laboratory of Viral
Immunology, State key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institutes of 
Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Laboratory of Viral Immunology, State key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease,
Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Guangzhou, China Sino-French Hoffmann Institute of Immunology, Guangzhou Medical 
University, Guangzhou, China pengtao@gzhmu.edu.cn.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) causes not only severe liver problems but also
extrahepatic manifestations, such as insulin resistance (IR). Wild-type
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1 alpha (WT-PGC-1a) 
is essential in hepatic gluconeogenesis and has recently been demonstrated to
link HCV infection to hepatic insulin resistance (IR). A recent study has
characterized a novel human liver-specific PGC-1a (L-PGC-1a) transcript, which is
proposed to reflect human adaption to more complex pathways. However, the effect 
of HCV infection on L-PGC-1a expression and the mechanism by which HCV modulates 
WT-PGC-1a/L-PGC-1a remain unclear. In this study, we showed that HCV infection
upregulated both WT-PGC-1a and L-PGC-1a, which further promoted HCV production.
The upregulation of both PGC-1a isoforms depended on HCV RNA replication. By
using promoter-luciferase reporters, kinase inhibitors, and dominant negative
mutants, we further observed that the HCV-induced upregulation of WT-PGC-1a was
mediated by the phosphorylation of cyclic AMP (cAMP)-responsive element-binding
protein (CREB), whereas that of L-PGC-1a was mediated by CREB phosphorylation and
forkhead box O1 dephosphorylation. Moreover, HCV infection induced endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress, and pharmacological induction of ER stress upregulated
WT-PGC-1a/L-PGC-1a and phosphorylated CREB. In contrast, pharmacological
inhibition of HCV-induced ER stress impaired WT-PGC-1a/L-PGC-1a upregulation
along with decreased phosphorylated CREB. The correlation of hepatic mPGC-1a with
ER stress was further confirmed in mice. Overall, HCV infection upregulates both 
WT-PGC-1a and L-PGC-1a through an ER stress-mediated, phosphorylated
CREB-dependent pathway, and both PGC-1a isoforms promote HCV production in
turn.IMPORTANCE: HCV causes not only severe liver problems but also extrahepatic 
manifestations, such as insulin resistance (IR). As a key regulator in energy
metabolism, wild-type PGC-1a (WT-PGC-1a), has recently been demonstrated to link 
HCV infection to hepatic IR. A recent study has characterized a novel human
liver-specific PGC-1a (L-PGC-1a), which reflects human adaption to more complex
pathways. However, the effect of HCV infection on L-PGC-1a expression and the
mechanism by which HCV regulates WT-PGC-1a/L-PGC-1a remain unclear. In this
study, we showed that HCV infection upregulated both WT-PGC-1a and L-PGC-1a,
which further promoted HCV production. WT-PGC-1a upregulation was mediated by
CREB phosphorylation, whereas L-PGC-1a upregulation was mediated by CREB
phosphorylation and FoxO1 dephosphorylation. HCV-induced ER stress mediated
WT-PGC-1a/L-PGC-1a upregulation and CREB phosphorylation. Overall, this study
provides new insights into the mechanism by which HCV upregulates
WT-PGC-1a/L-PGC-1a and highlights the novel intervention of HCV-ER stress-PGC-1a 
signaling for HCV therapy and HCV-induced IR therapy.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4135942
PMID: 24829353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Aug;99(8):2795-803. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-1593. Epub
2014 May 13.

Metformin inhibits StAR expression in human endometriotic stromal cells via
AMPK-mediated disruption of CREB-CRTC2 complex formation.

Xu JN(1), Zeng C, Zhou Y, Peng C, Zhou YF, Xue Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking University First Hospital,
Beijing 100034, People's Republic of China.

CONTEXT: Endometriosis is an estrogen-dependent disease affecting reproductive
women. Metformin could have a therapeutic effect on endometriosis through
regulation of local estrogen production.
OBJECTS: The aim of this study was to investigate the molecular and cellular
mechanism by which metformin regulates StAR expression in human endometriotic
stromal cells (ESCs).
METHODS: ESCs derived from ovarian endometriomas were cultured with metformin and
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). StAR mRNA was measured by quantitative PCR;
pregnenolone, progesterone, and estrogen production were measured by ELISA kits; 
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR), AMP-activated protein kinase, cAMP
response element binding protein (CREB), and CREB-regulated transcription
coactivator 2 (CRTC2) protein expression were measured by Western blot assay; and
CRTC2 translocation and its association with CREB were assessed by
coimmunoprecipitation assay and CRTC2-CREB complex binding by a chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay.
RESULTS: 1) StAR mRNA levels in ESCs are 264 times higher than those in
endometrial cells. 2) Metformin downregulates the StAR mRNA expression (maximum
31.7%) stimulated by PGE2 (2.4-fold) in ESCs. 3) PGE2 induces CRTC2 translocation
and enhances its association with CREB to form a transcription complex that binds
to the StAR promoter region. 4) Metformin prevents the nuclear translocation of
CRTC2 by increasing AMP-activated protein kinase phosphorylation. This inhibits
transcription of StAR by disrupting formation of the CREB-CRTC2 complex, involved
in activation of the StAR promoter cAMP response element.
CONCLUSIONS: We have demonstrated a detailed mechanistic analysis of StAR
expression regulated by metformin in ESCs. Our data highlight a role for CRTC2 in
the mechanism by which metformin inhibits StAR expression.

PMID: 24823468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Cell Physiol. 2014 Dec;229(12):2137-41. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24672.

Ras oncoprotein disrupts the TSH/CREB signaling upstream adenylyl cyclase in
human thyroid cell.

Salzano M(1), Russo E, Salzano S, Bifulco M, Vitale M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Salerno, Baronissi 84081,
Salerno, Italy; Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Salamanca (IBSAL),
Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.

Activating mutations in RAS genes and p21 Ras overactivation are common
occurrences in a variety of human tumors. p21 Ras oncoproteins deregulate a
number of signaling pathways, dedifferentiating the thyroid cell, and negatively 
regulating the expression of thyroid specific genes. In rat thyroid cells, Ras
oncoproteins inhibit the TSH pathway by reducing PKA activity and thus the
expression of thyroid specific genes, while in mouse melanocytes, Ras
oncoproteins reduce the aMSH-stimulated cAMP signaling by increasing the
expression of the phosphodiesterase-4B. Given these cell-dependent differences,
we investigated if and how the TSH/CREB pathway is modulated by Ras oncoprotein
in a human thyroid cell line. CREB phosphorylation was stimulated by TSH and
forskolin in TAD-2 cells. Ras(V12) expression negatively regulated the
TSH-stimulated CREB phosphorylation but was ineffective on forskolin-stimulated
CREB phosphorylation. Phosphodiesterase inhibition by IBMX enhanced
TSH-stimulated CREB phosphorylation, but did not restore TSH-stimulated CREB
phosphorylation inhibited by Ras oncoprotein. These data indicate that Ras
oncoprotein disrupts the TSH/CREB pathway, upstream adenylyl cyclase, and
highlight the existence of mechanisms of interaction between Ras and the cAMP
pathway different in human and in rat thyroid cells.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24819468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. FASEB J. 2014 Aug;28(8):3679-90. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-251900. Epub 2014 May 6.

TNF-a expression in neutrophils and its regulation by glycogen synthase kinase-3:
a potentiating role for lithium.

Giambelluca MS(1), Bertheau-Mailhot G(1), Laflamme C(1), Rollet-Labelle E(1),
Servant MJ(2), Pouliot M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec and Faculty 
of Medicine, Université Laval, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada; and. (2)Faculty of
Pharmacy, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Quebec, Canada. (3)Centre de
Recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec and Faculty of Medicine, 
Université Laval, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada; and marc.pouliot@crchul.ulaval.ca.

Glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3) is associated with several cellular systems,
including immune response. Lithium, a widely used pharmacological treatment for
bipolar disorder, is a GSK-3 inhibitor. GSK-3a is the predominant isoform in
human neutrophils. In this study, we examined the effect of GSK-3 inhibition on
the production of TNF-a by neutrophils. In the murine air pouch model of
inflammation, lithium chloride (LiCl) amplified TNF-a release. In
lipopolysaccharide-stimulated human neutrophils, GSK-3 inhibitors mimicked the
effect of LiCl, each potentiating TNF-a release after 4 h, in a
concentration-dependent fashion, by up to a 3-fold increase (ED50 of 1 mM for
lithium). LiCl had no significant effect on cell viability. A positive
association was revealed between GSK-3 inhibition and prolonged activation of the
p38/MNK1/eIF4E pathway of mRNA translation. Using lysine and arginine labeled
with stable heavy isotopes followed by quantitative mass spectrometry, we
determined that GSK-3 inhibition markedly increases (by more than 3-fold) de novo
TNF-a protein synthesis. Our findings shed light on a novel mechanism of control 
of TNF-a expression in neutrophils with GSK-3 regulating mRNA translation and
raise the possibility that lithium could be having a hitherto unforeseen effect
on inflammatory diseases.

© FASEB.

PMID: 24803542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. FEBS Lett. 2014 Jun 13;588(13):2141-6. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.04.027. Epub
2014 May 2.

Human S100A9 potentiates IL-8 production in response to GM-CSF or fMLP via
activation of a different set of transcription factors in neutrophils.

Simard JC(1), Noël C(1), Tessier PA(2), Girard D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Recherche en Inflammation et Physiologie des Granulocytes,
Université du Québec, Canada. (2)Axe Maladies Infectieuses et Immunitaires,
Centre de Recherche du CHU de Québec, and Faculté de Médecine, Université Laval, 
Québec, Canada. (3)Laboratoire de Recherche en Inflammation et Physiologie des
Granulocytes, Université du Québec, Canada. Electronic address:
Denis.girard@iaf.inrs.ca.

Inflammation is highly regulated by various agents. Unexpectedly, we report here 
that the damage-associated molecular pattern S100A9 protein, a potent neutrophil 
activator and inducer of cytokine production in monocytes, is not a direct
activator of cytokine production in human neutrophils. However, S100A9 primed
IL-8 production in fMLP- and GM-CSF-stimulated neutrophiles via NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB-1,
and NF-<U+03BA>B, STAT3 and STAT5, respectively. Pharmacological inhibition confirmed
the importance of these transcription factors by significantly decreasing IL-8
production. This is the first time that a different set of transcription factors 
are shown to be involved in S100A9-primed neutrophils in response to
proinflammatory agonist.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24796790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jun 13;448(4):430-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.04.125. Epub 2014 May 2.

Increased expression of sorcin is associated with multidrug resistance in
leukemia cells via up-regulation of MDR1 expression through cAMP response
element-binding protein.

Yamagishi N(1), Nakao R(2), Kondo R(2), Nishitsuji M(2), Saito Y(2), Kuga T(2),
Hatayama T(2), Nakayama Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Division of Biological
Sciences, Kyoto Pharmaceutical University, 5 Nakauchi-cho, Misasagi,
Yamashina-ku, Kyoto 607-8414, Japan; Radioisotope Center, Kyoto Pharmaceutical
University, 5 Nakauchi-cho, Misasagi, Yamashina-ku, Kyoto 607-8414, Japan.
Electronic address: yamagisi@mb.kyoto-phu.ac.jp. (2)Department of Biochemistry & 
Molecular Biology, Division of Biological Sciences, Kyoto Pharmaceutical
University, 5 Nakauchi-cho, Misasagi, Yamashina-ku, Kyoto 607-8414, Japan.

Sorcin, a 22 kDa Ca(2+) binding protein, was first identified in a
vincristine-resistant Chinese hamster lung cell line, and was later demonstrated 
to be involved in the development of multidrug-resistance (MDR) phenotypes in a
variety of human cancer cell lines. However, the exact role of sorcin in MDR
cells is yet to be fully elucidated. Here we explored the role of sorcin in the
development of MDR in leukemia cells, and revealed that the expression level of
sorcin was directly correlated to the expression of MDR1/P-glycoprotein (P-gp).
In addition, it was shown that sorcin induced the expression of MDR1/P-gp through
a cAMP response element (CRE) between -716 and -709 bp of the mdr1/p-gp gene.
Furthermore, overexpression of sorcin increased the phosphorylation of CREB1 and 
the binding of CREB1 to the CRE sequence of mdr1/p-gp promoter, and induced the
expression of MDR1/P-gp. These findings suggested that sorcin induces MDR1/P-gp
expression markedly through activation of the CREB pathway and is associated with
the MDR phenotype. The new findings may be helpful for understanding the
mechanisms of MDR in human cancer cells, prompting its further investigation as a
molecular target to overcome MDR.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24796664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014 Jul 1;90(1):62-72. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2014.04.012. Epub
2014 Apr 30.

Lysophosphatidic acid-induced IL-8 secretion involves MSK1 and MSK2 mediated
activation of CREB1 in human fibroblast-like synoviocytes.

Zhao C(1), Hui W(1), Fernandes MJ(1), Poubelle PE(1), Bourgoin SG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology and Immunology Research Center, CHU de Québec Research Center and
Faculty of Medicine, Laval University, 2705 Laurier Boulevard, Québec, QC, G1V
4G2, Canada. (2)Rheumatology and Immunology Research Center, CHU de Québec
Research Center and Faculty of Medicine, Laval University, 2705 Laurier
Boulevard, Québec, QC, G1V 4G2, Canada. Electronic address:
sylvain.bourgoin@crchul.ulaval.ca.

Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is a pleiotropic lipid mediator that promotes
motility, survival, and the synthesis of chemokines/cytokines such as
interleukin-8 (IL-8) and interleukin-6 by human fibroblast-like synoviocytes from
patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RAFLS). In those cells LPA was reported to
induce IL-8 secretion through activation of various signaling pathways including 
p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK), p42/44 MAPK, and Rho kinase. In 
addition to those pathways we report that mitogen- and stress-activated protein
kinases (MSKs) known to be activated downstream of the ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK
cascades and CREB are phosphorylated in response to LPA. The silencing of MSKs
with small-interfering RNAs and the pharmacological inhibitor of MSKs SB747651A
shows a role for both MSK1 and MSK2 in LPA-mediated phosphorylation of CREB at
Ser-133 and secretion of IL-8 and MCP-1. Whereas CREB inhibitors have off target 
effects and increased LPA-mediated IL-8 secretion, the silencing of CREB1 with
short hairpin RNA significantly reduced LPA-induced chemokine production in
RAFLS. Taken together the data clearly suggest that MSK1 and MSK2 are the major
CREB kinases in RAFLS stimulated with LPA and that phosphorylation of CREB1 at
Ser-133 downstream of MSKs plays a significant role in chemokine production.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24792438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2014 Apr;65(2):209-15.

Aging impairs transcriptional regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor in
human microvascular endothelial cells: implications for angiogenesis and cell
survival.

Ahluwalia A(1), Jones MK, Szabo S, Tarnawski AS.

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Long Beach Healthcare System, Long Beach, CA, USA.
atarnawski@yahoo.com.

In some tissues, aging impairs angiogenesis and reduces expression of vascular
endothelial growth factor A (VEGF), a fundamental regulator of angiogenesis. We
previously examined angiogenesis in aging and young gastric mucosa in vivo and in
vitro and showed that an imbalance between expressions of VEGF (pro-angiogenic
factor) and endostatin (anti-angiogenic protein) results in an aging-related
impairment of angiogenesis in rats. However, the human relevance of these
findings, and whether these mechanisms apply to endothelial cells derived from
other tissues, is not clear. Since P-STAT3 and P-CREB are transcription factors
that, in association with HIF-1a, can activate VEGF gene expression in some cells
(e.g., liver cancer cells, vascular smooth muscle cells), we examined the
expression of these two proteins in human dermal microvascular endothelial cells 
(HMVECs) derived from aging and neonatal individuals. We examined and quantified 
in vitro angiogenesis, expression of VEGF, P-STAT3, P-CREB and importin-a in
HMVECs isolated from neonates (neonatal) and a 66 year old subject (aging). We
also examined the effects of treatment with exogenous VEGF and endostatin on in
vitro angiogenesis in these cells. Endothelial cells isolated from aging
individuals had impaired angiogenesis (vs. neonatal endothelial cells) and
reduced expression of VEGF mRNA and protein. Aged HMVECs also had reduced
importin-a expression, and reduced expression and nuclear translocation of
P-STAT3 and P-CREB. Reduced VEGF gene expression in aged HMVECs strongly
correlated with the decreased levels of P-STAT3, P-CREB and importin-a in these
cells. Our study clearly demonstrates that endothelial cells from aging
individuals have impaired angiogenesis and reduced expression of VEGF likely due 
to impaired nuclear transport of P-STAT3 and P-CREB transcription factors in
these cells.

PMID: 24781730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Aug;53(1):1-16. doi: 10.1530/JME-13-0287. Epub 2014 Apr
29.

p38 MAPK regulates steroidogenesis through transcriptional repression of STAR
gene.

Zaidi SK(1), Shen WJ(1), Bittner S(2), Bittner A(2), McLean MP(2), Han J(2),
Davis RJ(2), Kraemer FB(1), Azhar S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric ResearchEducation and Clinical Center (GRECC-182B), VA Palo Alto
Health Care System, 3801 Miranda Avenue, Palo Alto, California 94304, USADivision
of EndocrinologyDivision of Gastroenterology and HepatologyStanford University,
Stanford, California 94305, USADepartment of Obstetrics and GynecologyUniversity 
of South Florida College of Medicine, Tampa, Florida 33612, USAState Key
Laboratory of Cellular Stress BiologySchool of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, 
Xiamen, Fujian 361005, ChinaProgram in Molecular MedicineUniversity of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USAGeriatric
ResearchEducation and Clinical Center (GRECC-182B), VA Palo Alto Health Care
System, 3801 Miranda Avenue, Palo Alto, California 94304, USADivision of
EndocrinologyDivision of Gastroenterology and HepatologyStanford University,
Stanford, California 94305, USADepartment of Obstetrics and GynecologyUniversity 
of South Florida College of Medicine, Tampa, Florida 33612, USAState Key
Laboratory of Cellular Stress BiologySchool of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, 
Xiamen, Fujian 361005, ChinaProgram in Molecular MedicineUniversity of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA. (2)Geriatric
ResearchEducation and Clinical Center (GRECC-182B), VA Palo Alto Health Care
System, 3801 Miranda Avenue, Palo Alto, California 94304, USADivision of
EndocrinologyDivision of Gastroenterology and HepatologyStanford University,
Stanford, California 94305, USADepartment of Obstetrics and GynecologyUniversity 
of South Florida College of Medicine, Tampa, Florida 33612, USAState Key
Laboratory of Cellular Stress BiologySchool of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, 
Xiamen, Fujian 361005, ChinaProgram in Molecular MedicineUniversity of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA. (3)Geriatric
ResearchEducation and Clinical Center (GRECC-182B), VA Palo Alto Health Care
System, 3801 Miranda Avenue, Palo Alto, California 94304, USADivision of
EndocrinologyDivision of Gastroenterology and HepatologyStanford University,
Stanford, California 94305, USADepartment of Obstetrics and GynecologyUniversity 
of South Florida College of Medicine, Tampa, Florida 33612, USAState Key
Laboratory of Cellular Stress BiologySchool of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, 
Xiamen, Fujian 361005, ChinaProgram in Molecular MedicineUniversity of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USAGeriatric
ResearchEducation and Clinical Center (GRECC-182B), VA Palo Alto Health Care
System, 3801 Miranda Avenue, Palo Alto, California 94304, USADivision of
EndocrinologyDivision of Gastroenterology and HepatologyStanford University,
Stanford, California 94305, USADepartment of Obstetrics and GynecologyUniversity 
of South Florida College of Medicine, Tampa, Florida 33612, USAState Key
Laboratory of Cellular Stress BiologySchool of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, 
Xiamen, Fujian 361005, ChinaProgram in Molecular MedicineUniversity of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA
salman.azhar@va.gov.

STAR/StarD1, part of a protein complex, mediates the transport of cholesterol
from the outer to inner mitochondrial membrane, which is the rate-limiting step
for steroidogenesis, and where steroid hormone synthesis begins. Herein, we
examined the role of oxidant-sensitive p38 MAPKs in the regulation of STAR gene
transcription, using model steroidogenic cell lines. Our data indicate that
oxidant activation of p38 MAPK exhibits a negative regulatory role in the
induction of functional expression of STAR, as evidenced by enhanced induction of
STAR (mRNA/protein) expression and increased steroidogenesis during
pharmacological inhibition of p38 MAPK or in cells with increased transient
overexpression of a dominant-negative (dn) form of p38 MAPKa or p38 MAPKß.
Studies with rat Star-promoter demonstrated that overexpression of p38 MAPKa-wt, 
-ß, or -<U+03B3> significantly reduced both basal and cAMP-sensitive promoter activity. 
In contrast, overexpression of p38 MAPKa-dn, -ß, or -<U+03B3> enhanced the Star promoter
activity under basal conditions and in response to cAMP stimulation. Use of
various constitutively active and dn constructs and designer knock-out cell lines
demonstrated that MKK3 and MKK6, the upstream activators of p38 MAPKs, play a
role in p38 MAPKa-mediated inhibition of Star promoter activity. In addition, our
studies raised the possibility of CREB being a potential target of the p38 MAPK
inhibitory effect on Star promoter activity. Collectively, these data provide
novel mechanistic information about how oxidant-sensitive p38 MAPKs, particularly
p38 MAPKa, contribute to the negative regulation of Star gene expression and
inhibit steroidogenesis.

© 2014 Society for Endocrinology.

PMCID: PMC4077990
PMID: 24780837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Int J Cardiol. 2014 Jul 1;174(3):764-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2014.04.078. Epub
2014 Apr 13.

CREB is activated in smooth muscle cells isolated from atherosclerotic plaques
and reduces smooth muscle cell proliferation via p21-dependent mechanism.

Sun L(1), Zhao R(2), Bai Y(3), Cao R(3), Wang F(4), Yang S(1), Qin Z(1), Du G(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Pharmaceutical Screening, Chinese Academy of Medical
Science and Peking Union Medical College, 1 Xian Nong Tan Street, Beijing 100050,
China; State Key Laboratory for Bioactive Substances and Functions of Natural
Medicines, Beijing 100050, China. (2)National Center for Pharmaceutical
Screening, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, 1
Xian Nong Tan Street, Beijing 100050, China; Beijing Key Laboratory of Bioactive 
Substances and Resources Utilization of Chinese Herbal Medicine, Ministry of
Education, Beijing 100050, China. (3)Department of Geriatric Cardiology, Chinese 
PLA General Hospital, No. 28, Fuxing Road, Beijing 100853, China. (4)Department
of Neurosurgery, PLA General Hospital, 28 Fuxing Road, Haidian District, Beijing 
100853, China. (5)National Center for Pharmaceutical Screening, Chinese Academy
of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, 1 Xian Nong Tan Street,
Beijing 100050, China; Beijing Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substances and
Resources Utilization of Chinese Herbal Medicine, Ministry of Education, Beijing 
100050, China. Electronic address: dugh@imm.ac.cn.

PMID: 24774361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Melanoma Res. 2014 Aug;24(4):404-7. doi: 10.1097/CMR.0000000000000077.

Akt and PI3K-dependent but CREB-independent upregulation of MCAM by endothelin-3 
in human melanocytes.

Williams B(1), Schneider RJ, Jamal S.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Dermatology bNYU Cancer Institute, New York University School
of Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

Melanoma cell adhesion molecule (MCAM) is upregulated during melanoma
progression, and associated with invasion and metastasis. Little is known about
the factors that regulate MCAM expression in vivo. Mutations that upregulate MCAM
have not been found, and AKT activating mutations are rare in melanomas. This
suggests that an epigenetic factor may be responsible for upregulating MCAM and
activating AKT in vivo. Although endothelin-1 and endothelin-3 (ET-1, ET-3) are
physiologically relevant factors capable of upregulating MCAM in melanocytic
cells, a mechanism of action has never been established. Here we show that
pharmacologic inhibition of map kinase kinase (MEK) or phosphoinositol 3 kinase
(PI3K) blocks MCAM upregulation by ET-3, implicating MEK and PI3K/Akt kinases in 
ET-3 regulation of MCAM. Despite the fact that there are cAMP response element
binding protein (CREB) sites in the MCAM promoter, suppression of CREB expression
by siRNA silencing does not block ET-3 mediated upregulation of MCAM. Rather,
ET-3 stimulation of melanocytes promotes Akt phosphorylation at Ser 473, which is
suppressed by PI3K inhibition or silencing of Akt, in turn blocking ET-3
upregulation of MCAM. We conclude therefore that ETs upregulate MCAM in an Akt
and ERK/MEK-dependent, but CREB-independent manner, providing an understanding
for possible pharmacologic intervention in progressing melanoma.

PMID: 24743054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Oral Sci. 2014 Mar;56(1):67-76.

Melatonin regulates human bone sialoprotein gene transcription.

Matsumura H(1), Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo.

Melatonin is produced by the pineal gland and regulates various physiological
processes including osteoblast differentiation and bone formation. Bone
sialoprotein (BSP) is a mineralized connective tissue-specific protein expressed 
in the early stage of cementum and bone mineralization. To elucidate the effects 
of melatonin on human BSP gene expression, we utilized human Saos2
osteoblast-like cells. Melatonin (100 nM) increased the level of BSP mRNA at 3 h,
and the level became maximal at 12 and 24 h. We then investigated the
melatonin-induced transcriptional activity of luciferase constructs (between
-84LUC and -868LUC) including different lengths of the human BSP gene promoter
transfected into Saos2 cells. The effects of melatonin abrogated in constructs
included 2-bp mutations in the two cAMP response elements (CRE1 and CRE2). The
effects of melatonin were suppressed by protein kinase A, tyrosine kinase, ERK1/2
and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitors. Gel mobility shift assays showed
that melatonin increased the binding of nuclear proteins to CRE1 and CRE2, and
antibodies against CRE binding protein 1 (CREB1), phospho-CREB1, c-Fos, c-Jun,
JunD and Fra2 disrupted CRE1 and CRE2 protein complex formation. These data
indicate that melatonin induces BSP transcription via the CRE1 and CRE2 elements 
in the human BSP gene promoter. (J Oral Sci 56, 67-76, 2014).

PMID: 24739710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Ethnopharmacol. 2014 May 28;154(1):218-28. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2014.04.008. Epub
2014 Apr 13.

ATF-2/CREB/IRF-3-targeted anti-inflammatory activity of Korean red ginseng water 
extract.

Yang Y(1), Yang WS(1), Yu T(1), Sung GH(2), Park KW(3), Yoon K(1), Son YJ(4),
Hwang H(1), Kwak YS(5), Lee CM(6), Rhee MH(7), Kim JH(8), Cho JY(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746,
Republic of Korea. (2)Mushroom Research Division, National Institute of
Horticultural and Herbal Science, Rural Development Administration, Eumseong
369-873, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Food Science and Biotechnology,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of
Pharmacy, Sunchon National University, Suncheon 540-742, Republic of Korea.
(5)Ginseng Corporation Central Research Institute, Daejeon 305-805, Republic of
Korea. (6)Metabolic Engineering Division, National Academy of Agricultural
Science, Rural Development Administration, Suwon 441-707, Republic of Korea.
(7)College of Veterinary Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702-701, 
Republic of Korea. (8)Department of Veterinary Physiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Biosafety Research Institute, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju
561-756, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: jhkim1@chonbuk.ac.kr.
(9)Department of Genetic Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: jaecho@skku.edu.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Korean Red Ginseng (KRG) is one of the
representative traditional herbal medicines prepared from Panax ginseng Meyer
(Araliaceae) in Korea. It has been reported that KRG exhibits a lot of different 
biological actions such as anti-aging, anti-fatigue, anti-stress,
anti-atherosclerosis, anti-diabetic, anti-cancer, and anti-inflammatory
activities. Although systematic studies have investigated how KRG is able to
ameliorate various inflammatory diseases, its molecular inhibitory mechanisms had
not been carried out prior to this study.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In order to investigate these mechanisms, we evaluated the
effects of a water extract of Korean Red Ginseng (KRG-WE) on the in vitro
inflammatory responses of activated RAW264.7 cells, and on in vivo gastritis and 
peritonitis models by analyzing the activation events of inflammation-inducing
transcription factors and their upstream kinases.
RESULTS: KRG-WE reduced the production of nitric oxide (NO), protected cells
against NO-induced apoptosis, suppressed mRNA levels of inducible NO synthase
(iNOS), cyclooxygenase (COX)-2, and interferon (IFN)-ß, ameliorated
EtOH/HCl-induced gastritis, and downregulated peritoneal exudate-derived NO
production from lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-injected mice. The inhibition of these
inflammatory responses by KRG-WE was regulated through the suppression of p38,
c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and by subsequent
inhibition of activating transcription factor (ATF)-2, cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB), and IRF-3 activation. Of ginsensides included in 
this extract, interestingly, G-Rc showed the highest inhibitory potency on
IRF-3-mediated luciferase activity.
CONCLUSION: These results strongly suggest that the anti-inflammatory activities 
of KRG-WE could be due to its inhibition of the p38/JNK/TBK1 activation pathway.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24735861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jun 6;289(23):16442-51. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.532069. Epub 2014
Apr 9.

Heme oxygenase-1 regulates dendritic cell function through modulation of p38
MAPK-CREB/ATF1 signaling.

Al-Huseini LM(1), Aw Yeang HX(2), Hamdam JM(2), Sethu S(2), Alhumeed N(2), Wong
W(2), Sathish JG(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Medical Research Council (MRC) Centre for Drug Safety Science and
Department of Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, Sherrington Buildings, Ashton 
Street, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3GE, United Kingdom and the
Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, College of Medicine, Al-Qadisiyah
University, P. O. Box 80, Diwaniyah 58001, Iraq. (2)From the Medical Research
Council (MRC) Centre for Drug Safety Science and Department of Molecular and
Clinical Pharmacology, Sherrington Buildings, Ashton Street, University of
Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3GE, United Kingdom and. (3)From the Medical Research
Council (MRC) Centre for Drug Safety Science and Department of Molecular and
Clinical Pharmacology, Sherrington Buildings, Ashton Street, University of
Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3GE, United Kingdom and Jean.Sathish@liv.ac.uk.

Dendritic cells (DCs) are critical for the initiation of immune responses
including activation of CD8 T cells. Intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
levels influence DC maturation and function. Intracellular heme, a product of
catabolism of heme-containing metalloproteins, is a key inducer of ROS.
Intracellular heme levels are regulated by heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), which
catalyzes the degradation of heme. Heme oxygenase-1 has been implicated in
regulating DC maturation; however, its role in other DC functions is unclear.
Furthermore, the signaling pathways modulated by HO-1 in DCs are unknown. In this
study, we demonstrate that inhibition of HO-1 activity in murine bone
marrow-derived immature DCs (iDCs) resulted in DCs with raised intracellular ROS 
levels, a mature phenotype, impaired phagocytic and endocytic function, and
increased capacity to stimulate antigen-specific CD8 T cells. Interestingly, our 
results reveal that the increased ROS levels following HO-1 inhibition did not
underlie the changes in phenotype and functions observed in these iDCs.
Importantly, we show that the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK),
cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB), and activating transcription
factor 1 (ATF1) pathway is involved in the mediation of the phenotypic and
functional changes arising from HO-1 inhibition. Furthermore, up-regulation of
HO-1 activity rendered iDCs refractory to lipopolysaccharide-induced activation
of p38 MAPK-CREB/ATF1 pathway and DC maturation. Finally, we demonstrate that
treatment of iDC with the HO-1 substrate, heme, recapitulates the effects that
result from HO-1 inhibition. Based on these results, we conclude that HO-1
regulates DC maturation and function by modulating the p38 MAPK-CREB/ATF1
signaling axis.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4047411
PMID: 24719331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Case Rep Med. 2014;2014:984369. doi: 10.1155/2014/984369. Epub 2014 Feb 17.

Clear cell sarcoma-like tumor of the gastrointestinal tract, presenting as a
second malignancy after childhood hepatoblastoma.

Thway K(1), Judson I(2), Fisher C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sarcoma Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, London SW3 6JJ, UK ; Department of
Histopathology, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, 203 Fulham Road, London
SW3 6JJ, UK. (2)Sarcoma Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, London SW3 6JJ, UK.

Clear cell sarcoma-like tumor of the gastrointestinal tract (CCSLGT) is a rare
malignant neoplasm arising within the wall of the small bowel, stomach, or large 
bowel, predominantly in children and young adults. It is an aggressive tumor with
a high rate of local recurrence, metastases, and early death from disease.
Histologically, it is composed of relatively monomorphic ovoid or round cells
with clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm, arranged in sheets and sometimes papillary 
or alveolar architectures, often with CD68-positive osteoclast-like giant cells
in variable numbers, and is associated with EWSR1-CREB1 gene fusions. Its
pathogenesis is unknown, and histologically it can be easily confused with a
variety of intra-abdominal neoplasms. We describe a case of CCSLGT with molecular
characterization, presenting as an acutely obstructing small bowel mass in a
33-year-old male, which occurred as a second malignant neoplasm 20 years after
treatment with surgery, radiotherapy, and cisplatin and doxorubicin chemotherapy 
for childhood hepatoblastoma. This gives further insight into the clinical
setting of this highly aggressive neoplasm and highlights the use of radiation
therapy as a possible etiologic factor.

PMCID: PMC3970439
PMID: 24715928  [PubMed]


257. Cell Signal. 2014 Jul;26(7):1604-15. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.03.028. Epub
2014 Apr 3.

TGF-ß1-ROS-ATM-CREB signaling axis in macrophage mediated migration of human
breast cancer MCF7 cells.

Singh R(1), Shankar BS(2), Sainis KB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Biology & Health Sciences Division, Bio-Science Group, Bhabha Atomic
Research Centre, Mumbai 400 085, India. (2)Radiation Biology & Health Sciences
Division, Bio-Science Group, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 400 085,
India. Electronic address: bshankar@barc.gov.in.

Macrophages in the tumor microenvironment play an important role in tumor cell
survival. They influence the tumor cell to proliferate, invade into surrounding
normal tissues and metastasize to local and distant sites. In this study, we
evaluated the effect of conditioned medium from monocytes and macrophages on
growth and migration of breast cancer cells. Macrophage conditioned medium (M<U+03D5>CM)
containing elevated levels of cytokines TNF-a, IL-1ß and IL-6 had a differential 
effect on non-invasive (MCF7) and highly invasive (MDA-MB-231) breast cancer cell
lines. M<U+03D5>CM induced the secretion of TGF-ß1 in MCF7 cells. This was associated
with apoptosis in a fraction of cells and generation of reactive oxygen and
nitrogen species (ROS and RNS) and DNA damage in the remaining cells. This, in
turn, increased expression of cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) and
vimentin resulting in migration of cells. These effects were inhibited by
neutralization of TNF-a, IL-1ß and IL-6, inhibition of ROS and RNS, DNA damage
and siRNA mediated knockdown of ATM. In contrast, MDA-MB-231 cells which had
higher basal levels of pCREB were not affected by M<U+03D5>CM. In summary, we have found
that pro-inflammatory cytokines secreted by macrophages induce TGF-ß1 in tumor
cells, which activate pCREB signaling, epithelial-mesenchymal-transition (EMT)
responses and enhanced migration.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24705025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Neurosci Lett. 2014 Jun 6;570:53-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2014.03.064. Epub 2014 
Apr 3.

Association of CREB1 gene polymorphism with drug seeking behaviour in eastern
Indian addicts.

Pal A(1), Chakraborty J(2), Das S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology Department, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, 4 Raja S. 
C. Mullick Road, Jadavpur, Kolkata 700032, India. (2)Baulmon, 34 Jadavpur Central
Road, Kolkata 700032, India. (3)Neurobiology Department, CSIR-Indian Institute of
Chemical Biology, 4 Raja S. C. Mullick Road, Jadavpur, Kolkata 700032, India.
Electronic address: sumantra00@yahoo.com.

cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) is a major transcription factor
which plays an important role in a wide array of cellular functions. CREB also
has a significant function in developing substance abuse. A study was undertaken 
to identify the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) at selective areas of CREB1
gene in heroin as well as in alcohol addicts in comparison with control
population. One hundred and forty control subjects, 112 heroin and 102
alcoholics, all male and residing in Kolkata, a city in eastern India
participated in the study. SNPs from several exonic regions of CREB1 gene were
assessed to investigate possible associations with addiction. One SNP in exon 3, 
rs35349697, demonstrated a significant correlation with opioid addiction as well 
as with alcohol addiction. A novel SNP, also located in exon 3, was identified
which showed epistatic interaction with rs35349697 to decrease susceptibility to 
narcotic addiction in the population. The study is the first report on the
identification of a role of CREB1 gene polymorphism with addiction.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24704376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Aug 15;23(16):4345-56. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu152. Epub 2014 Apr
3.

Distinct pathways leading to TDP-43-induced cellular dysfunctions.

Yamashita M(1), Nonaka T(2), Hirai S(3), Miwa A(3), Okado H(3), Arai T(4),
Hosokawa M(5), Akiyama H(5), Hasegawa M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology and Cell Biology. (2)Department of Neuropathology
and Cell Biology, nonaka-tk@igakuken.or.jp hasegawa-ms@igakuken.or.jp.
(3)Department of Brain Development and Neural Regeneration and. (4)Department of 
Neuropsychiatry, Division of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan. (5)Dementia Research Project, Tokyo
Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo 156-8506, Japan.

TAR DNA-binding protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43) is the major component protein of
inclusions found in brains of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD-TDP). However, the molecular
mechanisms by which TDP-43 causes neuronal dysfunction and death remain unknown. 
Here, we report distinct cytotoxic effects of full-length TDP-43 (FL-TDP) and its
C-terminal fragment (CTF) in SH-SY5Y cells. When FL-TDP was overexpressed in the 
cells using a lentiviral system, exogenous TDP-43, like endogenous TDP-43, was
expressed mainly in nuclei of cells without any intracellular inclusions.
However, these cells showed striking cell death, caspase activation and growth
arrest at G2/M phase, indicating that even simple overexpression of TDP-43
induces cellular dysfunctions leading to apoptosis. On the other hand, cells
expressing TDP-43 CTF showed cytoplasmic aggregates but without significant cell 
death, compared with cells expressing FL-TDP. Confocal microscopic analyses
revealed that RNA polymerase II (RNA pol II) and several transcription factors,
such as specificity protein 1 and cAMP-response-element-binding protein, were
co-localized with the aggregates of TDP-43 CTF, suggesting that sequestration of 
these factors into TDP-43 aggregates caused transcriptional dysregulation.
Indeed, accumulation of RNA pol II at TDP-43 inclusions was detected in brains of
patients with FTLD-TDP. Furthermore, apoptosis was not observed in affected
neurons of FTLD-TDP brains containing phosphorylated and aggregated TDP-43
pathology. Our results suggest that different pathways of TDP-43-induced cellular
dysfunction may contribute to the degeneration cascades involved in the onset of 
ALS and FTLD-TDP.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24698978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi. 2014 Jan;49(1):36-41.

[Regulation of aquaporin 3 protein expression in amnion epithelial cells through 
cAMP-PKA signal pathway].

[Article in Chinese]

Ding S(1), Hua Y(1), Wu J(1), Xie A(1), Zhu X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou 325027, China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou
325027, China. Email: zjwzzxq@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of aquaporins-3 (AQP3) in amniotic
epithelial cells regulated by cyclic adenosine monophosphate-protein kinase A
(cAMP-PKA) signal pathway and to explore the mechanisms of its expression.
METHODS: The amniotic epithelial cells were collected from 30 patients who
underwent elective caesarean sections at term with normal amniotic fluid volume
and primarily cultured. The cultured cells were treated with (1)forskolin groups:
different concentration (0, 2.5, 5, 50 or 100 µmol/L) of forskolin treated cells 
for 2 hours, and the optimal concentration of forskolin treated cells with
different time (0, 1, 2, 10 or 20 hours); (2)SP-cAMP groups: different
concentration (0, 2.5, 5, 50 or 100 µmol/L) of SP-cAMP treated cells for 2 hours,
and the optimal concentration of SP-cAMP treated cells with different time (0, 1,
2, 10 or 20 hours); (3)H-89 groups: different concentration (0, 5, 10, 50 or 100 
µmol/L) of H-89 treated cells for 2 hours, and the optimal concentration of H-89 
treated cells with different time (0, 1, 2, 10 or 20 hours ). The level of
intracellular cAMP and activity of PKA were detected by using ELISA, and
immunohistochemistry was used to detect the localization of AQP3, the protein
expression of total cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB) and phospho-CREB
(p-CREB) and AQP3 were assessed by western blot analysis. Cell proliferation was 
assessed by cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8) assay.
RESULTS: (1) The brown staining of AQP3 was detected in both cell membrane and
cytoplasm in each group. (2) There was no significant change of the cell
proliferation rate among groups with different concentration of forskolin,
SP-cAMP and H-89 treatment (P > 0.05). (3) After different concentration of
forskolin treated 2 hours, the expression of total CREB had no significant
difference among them(P > 0.05). While the expression of cAMP level, PKA
activity, p-CREB and AQP3 protein were significantly changed, which were higher
in 2.5 µmol/L, 5 µmol/L, 50 µmol/L forskolin group when compared with 0 µmol/L (P
< 0.05). Their expressions in 5 µmol/L forskolin group were higher than that in
2.5 µmol/L and 50 µmol/L (P < 0.05). The optimal forskolin concentration was 5
µmol/L. (4) After different concentration of SP-cAMP treated 2 hours, the
expression of total CREB and cAMP level had no significant difference among them 
(P > 0.05), while the expression of PKA activity, p-CREB and AQP3 protein were
significantly changed, which were higher in 5 µmol/L, 50 µmol/L SP-cAMP group
when compared with 0 µmol/L (P < 0.05). Their expressions in 50 µmol/L SP-cAMP
group were higher than that in 5 µmol/L (P < 0.05). The optimal SP-cAMP
concentration was 50 µmol/L. (5) After different concentration of H-89 treated 2 
hours, the expression of total CREB and cAMP level had no significant difference 
among them (P > 0.05), while the expression of PKA activity, p-CREB and AQP3
protein were significantly changed, which were lower in 10 µmol/L, 50 µmol/L and 
100 µmol/L H-89 group when compared with 0 µmol/L (P < 0.05). Their expressions
in 10 µmol/L H-89 group were lower than that in 50 µmol/L, 100 µmol/L (P < 0.05).
The optimal H-89 concentration was 10 µmol/L. (6) p-CREB and AQP3 protein
expression were significantly lower in 5 µmol/L forskolin combined 10 µmol/L H-89
incubating 2 hours group when compared with 5 µmol/L forskolin, but higher than
that in 10 µmol/L H-89 treated group (P < 0.05). Total CREB was no significant
difference among the three groups (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: cAMP-PKA signal transduction pathway may regulate AQP3 protein
expression in human amniotic epithelial cells.

PMID: 24694916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Molecules. 2014 Apr 1;19(4):3940-54. doi: 10.3390/molecules19043940.

Water extract of Acer tegmentosum reduces bone destruction by inhibiting
osteoclast differentiation and function.

Ha H(1), Shim KS(1), Kim T(1), An H(1), Lee CJ(1), Lee KJ(1), Ma JY(2).

Author information: 
(1)KM-Based Herbal Drug Development Group, Korea Institute of Oriental Medicine, 
Daejeon 305-811, Korea. (2)KM-Based Herbal Drug Development Group, Korea
Institute of Oriental Medicine, Daejeon 305-811, Korea. jyma@kiom.re.kr.

The stem of Acer tegmentosum has been widely used in Korea for the treatment of
hepatic disorders. In this study, we investigated the bone protective effect of
water extract of the stem of Acer tegmentosum (WEAT). We found that WEAT inhibits
osteoclast differentiation induced by receptor activator of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B
ligand (RANKL), an essential cytokine for osteoclast differentiation. In
osteoclast precursor cells, WEAT inhibited RANKL-induced activation of JNK,
NF-<U+03BA>B, and cAMP response element-binding protein, leading to suppression of the
induction of c-Fos and nuclear factor of activated T cells cytoplasmic 1, key
transcription factors for osteoclast differentiation. In addition, WEAT inhibited
bone resorbing activity of mature osteoclasts. Furthermore, the oral
administration of WEAT reduced RANKL-induced bone resorption and trabecular bone 
loss in mice. Taken together, our study demonstrates that WEAT possesses a
protective effect on bone destruction by inhibiting osteoclast differentiation
and function.

PMID: 24694651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2014 Aug;231(15):2989-98. doi:
10.1007/s00213-014-3472-y. Epub 2014 Feb 28.

The effects of lobeline on nicotine withdrawal-induced depression-like behavior
in mice.

Roni MA(1), Rahman S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, South Dakota State
University, Avera Health and Science Center, SAV 265, Brookings, SD, 57007, USA.

RATIONALE: Evidence suggests that neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
(nAChR) ligand lobeline has antidepressant-like properties.
OBJECTIVES: The present study investigated the effects of lobeline on nicotine
withdrawal-induced depression-like behavior.
METHODS: Adult C57BL/6J mice were exposed to nicotine (200 µg/ml) in drinking
solution for 3 weeks. During withdrawal, depression-like behavior was measured by
the forced swim test (FST). We also determined norepinephrine (NE) levels in the 
prefrontal cortex (PFC) and hippocampus during nicotine withdrawal. Furthermore, 
we determined the effects of repeated treatment with lobeline or a selective a4ß2
nAChR ligand 3-(pyridine-3´-yl)-cytisine on brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF) and phosphorylated cAMP-responsive element binding (p-CREB) protein
expression in the hippocampus.
RESULTS: Withdrawal from chronic nicotine increased immobility time in the FST, a
measure for depression-like behavior. Pretreatment with lobeline significantly
decreased immobility time during nicotine withdrawal. In addition, pretreatment
with lobeline attenuated nicotine withdrawal-induced increased NE levels in the
PFC and hippocampus. Further, repeated treatment with lobeline or
3-(pyridine-3´-yl)-cytisine decreased immobility time in the FST and reduced
withdrawal-induced increased BDNF and p-CREB expression in the hippocampus.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our results indicate that lobeline attenuated
nicotine withdrawal-induced depression-like behavior likely by targeting brain
nAChRs, noradrenergic neurotransmission, and/or hippocampal BDNF. Thus, lobeline 
may have some potential to prevent smoking relapse by counteracting nicotine
withdrawal-induced depression in humans.

PMID: 24682499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Cell Biol Int. 2014 Jun;38(6):757-67. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10255. Epub 2014 Feb 20.

Expansion of the polyQ repeats in THAP11 forms intranuclear aggregation and
causes cell G0/G1 arrest.

Yin RH(1), Li Y, Yang F, Zhan YQ, Yu M, Ge CH, Xu WX, Tang LJ, Wang XH, Chen B,
Yang Y, Li JJ, Li CY, Yang XM.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, 100850, China.

Polyglutamine diseases are a group of neurodegenerative disorders caused by
expansion of a CAG repeat that encodes polyglutamine in each respective disease
gene. The transcription factor THAP11, a member of THAP family, is involved in
cell growth, ES cell pluripotency and embryogenesis. Previous studies suggest
that THAP11 protein contains a 29-residue repeat polyglutamine motif and the
number of polyglutamine ranges from 20 to 41 in Indian population. We have
investigated the CAG numbers at the THAP11 locus in normal individuals and
neurodegenerative disease patients of Chinese Han population and a 38Q expansion 
(THAP11(38Q)) was found in patients. Using fluorescence confocal-based cell
imaging, THAP11(38Q) protein formed intranuclear inclusions easier than
THAP11(29Q) in PC12 cells. Enhanced toxicity was investigated in
THAP11(38Q)-expressing cells by growth inhibition and G0/G1 arrest. CREB-mediated
transcription activity was inhibited by THAP11(38Q). The transcription factor,
TBP, coactivator CBP, and chaperon protein, HSP70, could be recruited to
THAP11(38Q). These results indicate that expansion of the polyglutamine in THAP11
forms intracellular aggregation and is toxic in PC12 cells, suggesting a putative
role of THAP11 in polyglutamine disease.

© 2014 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 24677642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Bone Miner Res. 2014 Aug;29(8):1823-32. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2229.

Identification of novel transcription factors in osteoclast differentiation using
genome-wide analysis of open chromatin determined by DNase-seq.

Inoue K(1), Imai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Integrative Pathophysiology, Proteo-Science Center, Graduate
School of Medicine, Ehime University, Ehime, Japan; Department of Biological
Resources, Integrated Center for Sciences, Ehime University, Ehime, Japan.

Clarification of the mechanisms underlying osteoclast differentiation enables us 
to understand the physiology of bone metabolism as well as the pathophysiology of
bone diseases such as osteoporosis. Recently, it has been reported that
epigenetics can determine cell fate and regulate cell type-specific gene
expression. However, little is known about epigenetics during osteoclastogenesis.
To reveal a part of epigenetics, especially focused on chromatin dynamics, during
early osteoclastogenesis and to identify novel transcription factors involved in 
osteoclastogenesis, we performed a genome-wide analysis of open chromatin during 
receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B ligand (RANKL)-induced osteoclastogenesis using DNase
I hypersensitive sites sequencing (DNase-seq). DNase-seq was performed using the 
extracted nuclei from RAW264 cells treated with or without RANKL for 24 hours,
followed by several bioinformatic analyses. DNase I hypersensitive sites (DHSs)
were dynamically changed during RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis and they
accumulated in promoter regions. The distributions of DHSs among cis-regulatory
DNA regions were identical regardless of RANKL stimulation. Motif discovery
analysis successfully identified well-known osteoclastogenic transcription
factors including Jun, CREB1, FOS, ATF2, and ATF4, but also novel transcription
factors for osteoclastogenesis such as Zscan10, Atf1, Nrf1, and Srebf2. siRNA
knockdown of these identified novel transcription factors impaired
osteoclastogenesis. Taken together, DNase-seq is a useful tool for comprehension 
of epigenetics, especially chromatin dynamics during osteoclastogenesis and for
identification of novel transcription factors involved in osteoclastogenesis.
This study may reveal underlying mechanisms that determine cell type-specific
differentiation of bone cells and may lead to investigation of novel therapeutic 
targets for osteoporosis.

© 2014 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 24677342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Neuroscience. 2014 Jun 6;269:35-42. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.03.023. Epub
2014 Mar 21.

The dense core vesicle protein IA-2, but not IA-2ß, is required for active
avoidance learning.

Carmona GN(1), Nishimura T(1), Schindler CW(2), Panlilio LV(2), Notkins AL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Medicine Section, Laboratory of Sensory Biology Branch, National 
Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA. (2)Preclinical Pharmacology Section, Behavioral Neuroscience
Research Branch, National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institutes of Health,
Baltimore, MD, USA. (3)Experimental Medicine Section, Laboratory of Sensory
Biology Branch, National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. Electronic address:
anotkins@mail.nih.gov.

The islet-antigens IA-2 and IA-2ß are major autoantigens in type-1 diabetes and
transmembrane proteins in dense core vesicles (DCV). Recently we showed that
deletion of both IA-2 and IA-2ß alters the secretion of hormones and
neurotransmitters and impairs behavior and learning. The present study was
designed to evaluate the contribution to learning of each of these genes by using
single knockout (SKO) and double knockout (DKO) mice in an active avoidance test.
After 5 days of training, wild-type (WT) mice showed 60-70% active avoidance
responses, whereas the DKO mice showed only 10-15% active avoidance responses.
The degree of active avoidance responses in the IA-2 SKO mice was similar to that
of the DKO mice, but in contrast, the IA-2ß SKO mice behaved like WT mice showing
60-70% active avoidance responses. Molecular studies revealed a marked decrease
in the phosphorylation of the cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) and
Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CAMKII) in the striatum and
hippocampus of the IA-2 SKO and DKO mice, but not in the IA-2ß SKO mice. To
evaluate the role of CREB and CAMKII in the SKO and DKO mice, GBR-12909, which
selectively blocks the dopamine uptake transporter and increases CREB and CAMKII 
phosphorylation, was administered. GBR-12909 restored the phosphorylation of CREB
and CAMKII and increased active avoidance learning in the DKO and IA-2 SKO to
near the normal levels found in the WT and IA-2ß SKO mice. We conclude that in
the absence of the DCV protein IA-2, active avoidance learning is impaired.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4038122
PMID: 24662847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Mol Cancer. 2014 Mar 21;13:69. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-69.

Exemestane blocks mesothelioma growth through downregulation of cAMP, pCREB and
CD44 implicating new treatment option in patients affected by this disease.

Nuvoli B, Germoni S, Morosetti C, Santoro R, Cortese G, Masi S, Cordone I, Galati
R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Area, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Rome 00144,
Italy. galati@ifo.it.

BACKGROUND: Recent evidence suggests that aromatase may be involved in the
pathogenesis of malignant mesothelioma. Here, we evaluated the effect of
exemestane, an inhibitor of aromatase, in the treatment of mesothelioma using in 
vitro and in vivo preclinical models.
RESULTS: We show a significant reduction of cell proliferation, survival,
migration and block of cells in S phase of cell cycle in mesothelioma cells upon 
exemestane treatment. Moreover, we find that CD44, which is involved in
mesothelioma cells migration, was modulated by exemestane via cAMP and pCREB.
Most importantly, in mice mesothelioma xenograft exemestane causes a significant 
decrease in tumor size and the association pemetrexed/exemestane is more
effective than pemetrexed/cisplatin.
CONCLUSION: The preclinical mesothelioma model suggests that exemestane might be 
beneficial in mesothelioma treatment.

PMCID: PMC3976636
PMID: 24655565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014 Mar 20;10(3):e1003524. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003524. 
eCollection 2014.

Computational analyses of synergism in small molecular network motifs.

Zhang Y(1), Smolen P(1), Baxter DA(1), Byrne JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, The University of Texas Medical School
at Houston, Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Cellular functions and responses to stimuli are controlled by complex regulatory 
networks that comprise a large diversity of molecular components and their
interactions. However, achieving an intuitive understanding of the dynamical
properties and responses to stimuli of these networks is hampered by their large 
scale and complexity. To address this issue, analyses of regulatory networks
often focus on reduced models that depict distinct, reoccurring connectivity
patterns referred to as motifs. Previous modeling studies have begun to
characterize the dynamics of small motifs, and to describe ways in which
variations in parameters affect their responses to stimuli. The present study
investigates how variations in pairs of parameters affect responses in a series
of ten common network motifs, identifying concurrent variations that act
synergistically (or antagonistically) to alter the responses of the motifs to
stimuli. Synergism (or antagonism) was quantified using degrees of nonlinear
blending and additive synergism. Simulations identified concurrent variations
that maximized synergism, and examined the ways in which it was affected by
stimulus protocols and the architecture of a motif. Only a subset of
architectures exhibited synergism following paired changes in parameters. The
approach was then applied to a model describing interlocked feedback loops
governing the synthesis of the CREB1 and CREB2 transcription factors. The effects
of motifs on synergism for this biologically realistic model were consistent with
those for the abstract models of single motifs. These results have implications
for the rational design of combination drug therapies with the potential for
synergistic interactions.

PMCID: PMC3961176
PMID: 24651495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Hippocampus. 2014 Jul;24(7):808-18. doi: 10.1002/hipo.22272. Epub 2014 Mar 28.

Elevation of endogenous anandamide impairs LTP, learning, and memory through CB1 
receptor signaling in mice.

Basavarajappa BS(1), Nagre NN, Xie S, Subbanna S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Analytical Psychopharmacology, Nathan Kline Institute for
Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, New York; New York State Psychiatric Institute,
College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New York;
Department of Psychiatry, College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University, 
New York, New York.

In rodents, many exogenous and endogenous cannabinoids, such as anandamide (AEA) 
and 2-arachidonyl glycerol (2-AG), have been shown to play an important role in
certain hippocampal memory processes. However, the mechanisms by which endogenous
AEA regulate this processes are not well understood. Here the effects of AEA on
long-term potentiation (LTP), hippocampal-dependent learning and memory tasks,
pERK1/2, pCaMKIV, and pCREB signaling events in both cannabinoid receptor type 1 
(CB1R) wild-type (WT) and knockout (KO) mice were assessed following
administration of URB597, an inhibitor of the fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH). 
Acute administration of URB597 enhanced AEA levels without affecting the levels
of 2-AG or CB1R in the hippocampus and neocortex as compared to vehicle. In
hippocampal slices, URB597 impaired LTP in CB1R WT but not in KO littermates.
URB597 impaired object recognition, spontaneous alternation and spatial memory in
the Y-maze test in CB1R WT mice but not in KO mice. Furthermore, URB597 enhanced 
ERK phosphorylation in WT without affecting total ERK levels in WT or KO mice.
URB597 impaired CaMKIV and CREB phosphorylation in WT but not in KO mice. CB1R KO
mice have a lower pCaMKIV/CaMKIV ratio and higher pCREB/CREB ratio as compared to
WT littermates. Our results indicate that pharmacologically elevated AEA impair
LTP, learning and memory and inhibit CaMKIV and CREB phosphorylation, via the
activation of CB1Rs. Collectively, these findings also suggest that
pharmacological elevation of AEA beyond normal concentrations is also detrimental
for the underlying physiological responses.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4077345
PMID: 24648181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. FEBS J. 2014 May;281(10):2339-52. doi: 10.1111/febs.12786. Epub 2014 Apr 7.

Combinatorial action of transcription factors orchestrates cell cycle-dependent
expression of the ribosomal protein genes and ribosome biogenesis.

Nosrati N(1), Kapoor NR, Kumar V.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, New Delhi, India.

Nucleolar assembly begins at the early G1 phase of the cell cycle and is a hub of
ribosomal DNA transcription and rRNA biosynthesis. The newly-formed rRNAs
together with ribosomal proteins (RPs) constitute the building block of the
ribosomal machinery. Although RPs play a major role in protein biosynthesis,
their own regulation and expression is rather poorly understood. In the present
study, we investigated the regulation of RP genes RPS27a, RPS24, RPS6, RPL9 and
RPL4 in synchronized mammalian cell culture. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis
indicated their expression during the mid to late G1 phase, whereas the rRNA
genes were expressed during the early G1 phase of the cell cycle. The promoter
reporter analysis of the RPS27a gene revealed that it could be synergistically
stimulated by the transcription factors specificity protein 1 (Sp1) and cAMP
response element-binding protein (CREB). However, E2F transcription factor 1
(E2F1) appeared to negatively regulate gene expression. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies confirmed the promoter occupancy of Sp1, CREB and
E2F1. Although Sp1 and CREB binding enhanced the promoter occupancy of histone
acetyltransferases PCAF, p300 and CREB binding protein, E2F1 facilitated the
recruitment of histone deacetylases. Both acetylation (histone H4 pan-acetyl,
histone H3 acetyl Lys 14) and methylation (histone H3 trimethyl Lys 9) marks were
observed in the RPS27a promoter region, suggesting their important regulatory
role in gene expression. Because the promoter regions of most RP genes are well
conserved, we propose that their orchestrated regulation and synthesis during the
cell cycle facilitates ribosome biogenesis.

© 2014 FEBS.

PMID: 24646001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Genome Res. 2014 Apr;24(4):592-603. doi: 10.1101/gr.166751.113. Epub 2014 Mar 18.

Restless legs syndrome-associated intronic common variant in Meis1 alters
enhancer function in the developing telencephalon.

Spieler D(1), Kaffe M, Knauf F, Bessa J, Tena JJ, Giesert F, Schormair B, Tilch
E, Lee H, Horsch M, Czamara D, Karbalai N, von Toerne C, Waldenberger M, Gieger
C, Lichtner P, Claussnitzer M, Naumann R, Müller-Myhsok B, Torres M, Garrett L,
Rozman J, Klingenspor M, Gailus-Durner V, Fuchs H, Hrabe de Angelis M, Beckers J,
Hölter SM, Meitinger T, Hauck SM, Laumen H, Wurst W, Casares F, Gómez-Skarmeta
JL, Winkelmann J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center
for Environmental Health, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany;

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) identified the MEIS1 locus for Restless
Legs Syndrome (RLS), but causal single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and their 
functional relevance remain unknown. This locus contains a large number of highly
conserved noncoding regions (HCNRs) potentially functioning as cis-regulatory
modules. We analyzed these HCNRs for allele-dependent enhancer activity in
zebrafish and mice and found that the risk allele of the lead SNP rs12469063
reduces enhancer activity in the Meis1 expression domain of the murine embryonic 
ganglionic eminences (GE). CREB1 binds this enhancer and rs12469063 affects its
binding in vitro. In addition, MEIS1 target genes suggest a role in the
specification of neuronal progenitors in the GE, and heterozygous Meis1-deficient
mice exhibit hyperactivity, resembling the RLS phenotype. Thus, in vivo and in
vitro analysis of a common SNP with small effect size showed allele-dependent
function in the prospective basal ganglia representing the first
neurodevelopmental region implicated in RLS.

PMCID: PMC3975059
PMID: 24642863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Bone Miner Metab. 2015 Mar;33(2):142-53. doi: 10.1007/s00774-014-0576-8. Epub
2014 Mar 15.

Effects of interleukin-11 on the expression of human bone sialoprotein gene.

Matsumura H(1), Nakayama Y, Takai H, Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Matsudo, Chiba, 271-8587, Japan.

Interleukin-11 (IL-11) is a bone marrow stromal fibroblast-derived cytokine with 
a wide spectrum of activities in different biological systems. IL-11 and IL-6 are
two cytokines known to rely on osteoblast-osteoclast communication for their
effects on osteoclast differentiation. Bone sialoprotein (BSP) is a mineralized
connective tissue-specific protein expressed in differentiated osteoblasts,
odontoblasts, and cementoblasts. To determine the molecular basis of the
transcriptional regulation of the human BSP gene by IL-11, we conducted real-time
polymerase chain reactions (PCR), transient transfection analyses with chimeric
constructs of the human BSP gene promoter linked to a luciferase reporter gene,
gel mobility shift assays, and a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay using human 
osteoblast-like Saos2 cells. IL-11 (20 ng/ml) increased BSP, Runx2, and Osterix
mRNA levels at 6 h and the alkaline phosphatase (ALP) mRNA level at 12 h in
osteoblast-like Saos2 cells. In a transient transfection assay, IL-11 (20 ng/ml, 
12 h) increased luciferase activities of constructs between -60LUC and -868LUC
including the human BSP gene promoter. Transcriptional stimulations by IL-11 were
partially inhibited in the constructs that included 2-bp mutations in the cAMP
response element 1 (CRE1, -72 to -79) and CRE2 (-667 to -674). When mutations
were made in pairs of CRE1 and CRE2 in -868LUC, the effect of IL-11 on luciferase
activity was almost totally abrogated. Transcriptional activities induced by
IL-11 were inhibited by protein kinase A, tyrosine kinase, ERK1/2, and PI3-kinase
inhibitors. Gel mobility shift analyses showed that IL-11 increased nuclear
proteins binding to CRE1 and CRE2. CREB1, phospho-CREB1, c-Fos, and c-Jun
antibodies disrupted the formation of CRE1 and CRE2 protein complexes. These data
demonstrate that IL-11 stimulates BSP gene transcription via CRE1 and CRE2
elements in the human BSP gene promoter.

PMID: 24633490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jun;1843(6):1172-81. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.03.002. Epub 2014 Mar 11.

Non-classical testosterone signaling is mediated by a G-protein-coupled receptor 
interacting with Gna11.

Shihan M(1), Bulldan A(1), Scheiner-Bobis G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Veterinär-Physiologie und -Biochemie, Fachbereich
Veterinärmedizin, Justus-Liebig-Universität Giessen, Germany. (2)Institut für
Veterinär-Physiologie und -Biochemie, Fachbereich Veterinärmedizin,
Justus-Liebig-Universität Giessen, Germany. Electronic address:
Georgios.Scheiner-Bobis@vetmed.uni-giessen.de.

Testosterone is known to mediate its effects by two different mechanisms of
action. In the so-called "classical" pathway testosterone binds to cytosolic
androgen receptors (AR), which essentially function as ligand-activated
transcription factors. Once activated, these receptors bind to DNA and activate
the expression of target genes. In the "non-classical" pathway, the steroid
hormone binds to receptors associated with the plasma membrane and induces
signaling cascades mediated through activation of Erk1/2. The precise nature of
the membrane-associated AR, however, remains controversial. Although some assume 
that the membrane and cytosolic AR are identical, others propose that the AR of
the membrane is a G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR). To evaluate these two
possibilities we first searched for testosterone-induced signaling cascades in
the spermatogenic cell line GC-2. Testosterone was found to cause phosphorylation
(activation) of Erk1/2, CREB, and ATF-1, consistent with its non-classical
mechanism of action. Silencing of AR expression by means of siRNA did not
influence testosterone-induced activation of Erk1/2, CREB, or ATF-1, indicating
that this pathway is not activated by the classical cytosolic/nuclear AR. In
contrast, when the expression of the G-protein Gna11 is suppressed, the
activation of these signaling molecules is abolished, suggesting that these
responses are elicited through a membrane-bound GPCR. The results presented here 
and the identification of the testosterone-specific GPCR in future investigations
will help to reveal and characterize new testosterone-mediated mechanisms
associated not only with fertility and reproduction but perhaps also with other
physiological processes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24631506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 10;9(3):e90885. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090885. eCollection
2014.

Efficient and simple production of insulin-producing cells from embryonal
carcinoma stem cells using mouse neonate pancreas extract, as a natural inducer.

Ebrahimie M(1), Esmaeili F(2), Cheraghi S(3), Houshmand F(4), Shabani L(5),
Ebrahimie E(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Shahrekord University,
Shahrekord, Iran. (2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, University
of Isfahan, Isfahan, Iran; Research Institute of Biotechnology, Shahrekord
University, Shahrekord, Iran. (3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic
Sciences, Azad Islamic University of Shahrekord, Shahrekord, Iran. (4)Department 
of Physiology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Shahrekord University of Medical
Sciences, Shahrekord, Iran. (5)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, 
Shahrekord University, Shahrekord, Iran; Research Institute of Biotechnology,
Shahrekord University, Shahrekord, Iran. (6)Institute of Biotechnology, Shiraz
University, Shiraz, Iran; School of Molecular and Biomedical Science, The
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.

An attractive approach to replace the destroyed insulin-producing cells (IPCs) is
the generation of functional ß cells from stem cells. Embryonal carcinoma (EC)
stem cells are pluripotent cells which can differentiate into all cell types. The
present study was carried out to establish a simple nonselective inductive
culture system for generation of IPCs from P19 EC cells by 1-2 weeks old mouse
pancreas extract (MPE). Since, mouse pancreatic islets undergo further remodeling
and maturation for 2-3 weeks after birth, we hypothesized that the mouse neonatal
MPE contains essential factors to induce in vitro differentiation of pancreatic
lineages. Pluripotency of P19 cells were first confirmed by expression analysis
of stem cell markers, Oct3/4, Sox-2 and Nanog. In order to induce
differentiation, the cells were cultured in a medium supplemented by different
concentrations of MPE (50, 100, 200 and 300 µg/ml). The results showed that P19
cells could differentiate into IPCs and form dithizone-positive cell clusters.
The generated P19-derived IPCs were immunoreactive to proinsulin, insulin and
insulin receptor beta. The expression of pancreatic ß cell genes including,
PDX-1, INS1 and INS2 were also confirmed. The peak response at the 100 µg/ml MPE 
used for investigation of EP300 and CREB1 gene expression. When stimulated with
glucose, these cells synthesized and secreted insulin. Network analysis of the
key transcription factors (PDX-1, EP300, CREB1) during the generation of IPCs
resulted in introduction of novel regulatory candidates such as MIR17, and VEZF1 
transcription factors, as well as MORN1, DKFZp761P0212, and WAC proteins.
Altogether, we demonstrated the possibility of generating IPCs from
undifferentiated EC cells, with the characteristics of pancreatic ß cells. The
derivation of pancreatic cells from EC cells which are ES cell siblings would
provide a valuable experimental tool in study of pancreatic development and
function as well as rapid production of IPCs for transplantation.

PMCID: PMC3948699
PMID: 24614166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Cell Signal. 2014 Jun;26(6):1310-25. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.02.016. Epub
2014 Mar 5.

Does GRK-ß arrestin machinery work as a "switch on" for GPR17-mediated activation
of intracellular signaling pathways?

Daniele S(1), Trincavelli ML(2), Fumagalli M(3), Zappelli E(1), Lecca D(3),
Bonfanti E(3), Campiglia P(4), Abbracchio MP(3), Martini C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, University of Pisa, 56126 Pisa, Italy. (2)Department
of Pharmacy, University of Pisa, 56126 Pisa, Italy. Electronic address:
maria.trincavelli@farm.unipi.it. (3)Department of Pharmacological and
Biomolecular Sciences, University of Milan, 20133 Milan, Italy. (4)Department of 
Pharmacy, University of Salerno, 84084 Salerno, Italy. (5)Department of Pharmacy,
University of Pisa, 56126 Pisa, Italy. Electronic address:
claudia.martini@unipi.it.

During oligodendrocyte-precursor cell (OPC) differentiation program, an
impairment in the regulatory mechanisms controlling GPR17 spatio-temporal
expression and functional activity has been suggested to contribute to defective 
OPC maturation, a crucial event in the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis. GRK-ß 
arrestin machinery is the primary actor in the control of G-protein coupled
receptor (GPCR) functional responses and changes in these regulatory protein
activities have been demonstrated in several immune/inflammatory diseases.
Herein, in order to shed light on the molecular mechanisms controlling GPR17
regulatory events during cell differentiation, the role of GRK/ß-arrestin
machinery in receptor desensitization and signal transduction was investigated,
in transfected cells and primary OPC. Following cell treatment with the two
classes of purinergic and cysteinyl-leukotriene (cysLT) ligands, different GRK
isoforms were recruited to regulate GPR17 functional responses. CysLT-mediated
receptor desensitization mainly involved GRK2; this kinase, via a G
protein-dependent mechanism, promoted a transient binding of the receptor to
ß-arrestins, rapid ERK phosphorylation and sustained nuclear CREB activation.
Furthermore, GRK2, whose expression parallels that of the receptor during
differentiation process, appeared to be crucial to induce cysLT-mediated
maturation of OPCs. On the other hand, purinergic ligand exclusively recruited
the GRK5 subtype, and induced, via a G protein-independent/ß-arrestin-dependent
mechanism, a receptor/ß-arrestin stable association, slower and sustained ERK
stimulation and marginal CREB activation. These results show that purinergic and 
cysLT ligands, through the recruitment of specific GRK isoforms, address distinct
intracellular pathways, most likely reinforcing the same final response. The
identification of these mechanisms and players controlling GPR17 responses during
OPC differentiation could be useful to identify new targets in demyelination
diseases and to develop new therapeutical strategies.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24613411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Diabetologia. 2014 Jun;57(6):1242-8. doi: 10.1007/s00125-014-3203-2. Epub 2014
Mar 5.

The transcription factor CREB has no non-redundant functions in hepatic glucose
metabolism in mice.

Lee D(1), Le Lay J, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute for Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 12-126 Translational
Research Center, 3400 Civic Center Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA, 19104-6145, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Excessive hepatic glucose production is a hallmark of insulin
resistance in type 2 diabetes. The cAMP responsive transcription factor cAMP
responsive element binding protein (CREB), thought to be a key activator of the
hepatic gluconeogenic gene regulation programme, has been suggested as a
therapeutic target to reduce glucose output by the liver. Here, we test directly 
the requirement for hepatocytic CREB for the maintenance of glucose homeostasis.
METHODS: We derived mice with a Creb (also known as Creb1) loxP allele for
conditional, cell-type specific gene ablation. Hepatocyte-specific deletion of
Creb was induced by injecting Creb (loxP/loxP) mice with Cre recombinase
expression adeno-associated virus.
RESULTS: Strikingly, we found no difference in fed and fasted glucose levels, or 
in glucose, insulin and glucagon tolerance in mice fed a normal chow or a
high-fat diet. In addition, mRNA levels of liver-specific genes, including
several CREB target genes involved in gluconeogenesis, were not affected by CREB 
deficiency in the liver.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Our data show that CREB has no non-redundant functions
in hepatic glucose metabolism, and is therefore not likely to be a useful target 
for the development of glucose-lowering drugs.

PMID: 24595858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Carcinogenesis. 2014 Sep;35(9):1968-76. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgu058. Epub 2014 Mar
3.

Mirk/dyrk1B kinase is upregulated following inhibition of mTOR.

Deng X(1), Hu J(1), Ewton DZ(1), Friedman E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY 13210, 
USA. (2)Department of Pathology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY
13210, USA friedmae@upstate.edu.

The PI3K/PTEN/Akt/mTOR/p70S6K pathway is one of the most frequently deregulated
signaling pathways in solid tumors and has a functional role in drug resistance. 
However, targeting this pathway leads to compensatory activation of several
mediators of cell survival. Expression of the reactive oxygen species-controlling
kinase Mirk/dyrk1B was increased severalfold by the mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) inhibitors RAD001, WYE354 and rapamycin, with less effect by the Akt
inhibitors AZD5363 and MK-2206. Upregulation of Mirk messenger RNA (mRNA)
expression was mediated by cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CREB)
binding to two sites in the Mirk promoter upstream of the transcription start
site and one site within exon 4. Depletion of CREB reduced Mirk expression,
whereas depletion of mTOR increased it. Moreover, hydroxytamoxifen activation of 
an Akt-estrogen receptor construct blocked an increase in Mirk mRNA and protein. 
Addition of a Mirk/dyrk1B kinase inhibitor increased the sensitivity of Panc1
pancreatic cancer cells and three different ovarian cancer cell lines to the mTOR
inhibitor RAD001. Targeting Mirk kinase could improve the utility of mTOR
inhibitors and so presents an attractive drug target.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4146409
PMID: 24590896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Reproduction. 2014 Jun;147(6):897-906. doi: 10.1530/REP-13-0654. Epub 2014 Feb
28.

Possible roles of the cAMP-mediators EPAC and RAP1 in decidualization of rat
uterus.

Kusama K(1), Yoshie M(2), Tamura K(2), Daikoku T(1), Takarada T(1), Tachikawa
E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrine and Neural PharmacologyTokyo University of Pharmacy
and Life Sciences, 1432-1 Horinouchi, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0392, JapanDivision of 
Reproductive SciencesPerinatal Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3026, USA. (2)Department of
Endocrine and Neural PharmacologyTokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, 
1432-1 Horinouchi, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0392, JapanDivision of Reproductive
SciencesPerinatal Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 
Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3026, USA yoshie@toyaku.ac.jp
hiro@toyaku.ac.jp.

The optimal decidualization of endometrial stromal cells (ESCs) following embryo 
implantation is one of the critical steps to establish pregnancy in rodents and
humans. This step is intricately regulated by ovarian hormones. Using in vitro
human ESCs model, we previously showed that activation of a cAMP mediator,
exchange protein directly activated by cAMP (EPAC), promotes ovarian steroid- or 
cAMP analog-induced decidualization. However, expressions and functions of EPAC
and RAP1 in the uterus during pregnancy have not yet been examined. In this
study, we found that the expression of EPAC2 and RAP1 was markedly upregulated in
the decidual cells at the implantation sites on days 7 and 9 of pregnancy in
rats. Furthermore, both delayed-implantation and artificial decidualization
models showed that EPAC2 and RAP1 expression was enhanced in decidual cells.
Significant activation of cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB), a
central transcriptional factor of cAMP signaling, was observed in decidual cells.
These spatiotemporal expressions of protein related EPAC pathway are overlapped
by sites with activated cAMP signaling, indicating the association of EPAC
signaling with decidualization. Strikingly, further studies in in vitro rat
decidualization model showed that the cAMP analog and medroxyprogesterone
stimulated the expression of decidual markers, while knockdown of EPAC1/2 and
RAP1 attenuated the expressions of these markers. Together, these findings
suggest that EPAC and RAP1 are the crucial factors for endometrial
decidualization in rat pregnancy.

© 2014 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 24586073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. BMC Genomics. 2013;14 Suppl 8:S9. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-S8-S9. Epub 2013 Dec 
9.

Post genome-wide association studies functional characterization of prostate
cancer risk loci.

Jiang J, Cui W, Vongsangnak W, Hu G, Shen B.

BACKGROUND: Over the last decade, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have
discovered many risk associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of
prostate cancer (PCa). However, the majority of the associated PCa SNPs,
including those in linkage disequilibrium (LD) blocks, are generally not located 
in protein coding regions. The systematical investigation of the functional roles
of these SNPs, especially the non-coding SNPs, becomes very necessary and helpful
to the understanding of the molecular mechanism of PCa.
RESULTS: In this work, we proposed a comprehensive framework at network level to 
integrate the SNP annotation, target gene assignment, gene ontology (GO)
classification, pathway enrichment analysis and regulatory network reconstruction
to illustrate the molecular functions of PCa associated SNPs. By LD expansion, we
first identified 1828 LD SNPs using 49 reported GWAS SNPs as a start. We
carefully annotated these 1828 LD SNPs via either UCSC known genes, UCSC
regulation elements, or expression Quantitative Trait Loci (eQTL) data. As a
result, we found 1154 SNPs were functionally annotated and obtained 205 unique
PCa genes for further enrichment analysis. The enriched GO biological processes
and pathways were found mainly related to regulation of cell death, apoptosis,
cell proliferation, and metabolic process, which have been proved essential to
cancer development. We constructed PCa genes specific transcription regulatory
networks, finding several important genetic regulators for PCa, such as
IGF-1/IGF-2 receptors, SP1, CREB1, and androgen receptor (AR).
CONCLUSIONS: A comprehensive framework was proposed for integrative and
systematic analysis of PCa SNPs, the analysis can provide essential information
for the understanding of the regulatory function of GWAS SNPs in PCa, and will
facilitate the discovery of novel candidate biomarkers for diagnosis and
prognosis of PCa.

PMCID: PMC4042239
PMID: 24564736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Cancer Epidemiol. 2014 Apr;38(2):152-6. doi: 10.1016/j.canep.2014.01.003. Epub
2014 Feb 18.

Decreased expression of microRNA-200b is an independent unfavorable prognostic
factor for glioma patients.

Men D(1), Liang Y(2), Chen L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical
College, Zhanjiang, Guangdong 524001, China. Electronic address:
475080010@qq.com. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, The Affiliated Hospital of
Guangdong Medical College, Zhanjiang, Guangdong 524001, China. Electronic
address: lys845@163.com. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, The Affiliated Hospital
of Guangdong Medical College, Zhanjiang, Guangdong 524001, China. Electronic
address: lysghq@163.com.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: As a member of the microRNA (miR)-200 family, miR-200b has
been recognized as one of the fundamental regulators of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition, chemosensitivity, cell proliferation, and cell cycle. Especially in
glioma, miR-200b targets the CREB1 gene and suppresses the tumor cell growth in
vitro. However, its involvement in human glioma has not yet been determined. The 
aim of this study was to investigate the clinical significance of miR-200b
expression in this disease.
METHODS: miR-200b expression in 266 pairs of human gliomas and matched
nonneoplastic brain tissues was measured by real-time quantitative RT-PCR assay.
RESULTS: Compared with nonneoplastic brain tissues, the expression level of
miR-200b was significantly decreased in glioma tissues (tumor vs. normal: 2.87 ± 
2.05 vs. 8.78 ± 2.50, P<0.001). Of 266 patients with gliomas, 166 (62.41%) were
in low miR-200b expression group. In addition, we found that the glioma tissues
from high-grade tumors (grade III and IV) had much lower miR-200b expression than
glioma tissues from low grade tumors (grade I and II). Moreover, the expression
level of miR-200b was positively correlated with Karnofsky performance status
(KPS) scores of glioma tissues. The results of a 60-month follow-up in 266 glioma
patients further demonstrated that lower miR-200b expression was correlated with 
worse progression-free survival and overall survival in the patients with grade
III and IV gliomas. Both univariate and multivariate analyses revealed that
miR-200b was an independent prognostic indicator for glioma.
CONCLUSION: These findings prove that the decreased expression of miR-200b may be
associated with malignant tumor progression and poor prognosis in patients with
gliomas, suggesting the potential role of miR-200b in glioma management. miR-200b
may be a novel and valuable signature for predicting the clinical outcome of
patients with gliomas.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24559637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 May 5;388(1-2):20-31. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.02.005.
Epub 2014 Feb 18.

Cyclic adenosine monophosphate-induced argininosuccinate synthase 1 expression is
essential during mouse decidualization.

Huang Z(1), Wang TS(2), Zhao YC(3), Zuo RJ(4), Deng WB(4), Chi YJ(3), Yang ZM(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China; College of
Life Science, Anqing Normal University, Anqing 246011, China. (2)School of
Science, Shantou University, Shantou 515000, China. (3)School of Life Science,
Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin 150030, China. (4)School of Life
Science, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China. (5)School of Science, Shantou
University, Shantou 515000, China; College of Veterinary Medicine, South China
Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China. Electronic address:
zmyang@scau.edu.cn.

L-Arginine (L-Arg), a conditional essential amino acid in adults, has been shown 
to enhance pregnancy outcome. Argininosuccinate synthase (Ass1) and
argininosuccinate lyase (Asl) are the key enzyme for L-Arginine (L-Arg)
biosynthesis. Based our microarray analysis, Ass1 expression is upregulated
significantly at implantation site on day 5 of pregnancy compared to that at
inter-implantation site. However, the expression, regulation and function of Ass1
during early pregnancy remain unknown. Here we found that Ass1 is highly
expressed in mouse decidua and uterine stromal cells undergoing decidualization, 
and Asl is weakly expressed in mouse decidua and uterine stromal cells undergoing
decidualization. a-Methyl-DL-aspartic acid (MDLA), a specific inhibitor for Ass1,
can significantly increase the rate of embryonic reabsorption. Under in vitro
induced decidualization, MDLA clearly inhibits the expression of
decidual/trophoblast prolactin-related protein (Dtprp), a marker for
decidualization in mice. Only Ass1 expression is induced by cAMP through
PKA/p-Creb signaling pathway. Results from our cell culture models further
indicates that the high level of L-Arg enhances stromal proliferation, while
enzymatic activity or Ass1 expression level is essential to determine the
magnitude of both mouse and human decidualization. Interestingly, L-Arg at high
concentration down-regulates Ass1 and Asl expression by negative feedback to
maintain L-Arg homeostasis. These findings highlight that cAMP-induced Ass1
expression is important in controlling the magnitude of decidualization through
regulating L-Arg level.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24556046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Hippocampus. 2014 Jul;24(7):733-9. doi: 10.1002/hipo.22263. Epub 2014 Feb 27.

GPR40 activation leads to CREB and ERK phosphorylation in primary cultures of
neurons from the mouse CNS and in human neuroblastoma cells.

Zamarbide M(1), Etayo-Labiano I, Ricobaraza A, Martínez-Pinilla E, Aymerich MS,
Luis Lanciego J, Pérez-Mediavilla A, Franco R.

Author information: 
(1)Neurosciences Division, Center for Applied Medical Research-CIMA, University
of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

GPR40, the free fatty acid receptor 1, is expressed strongly in the primate
pancreas and brain. While the role of pancreatic GPR40 in glucose homeostasis has
been extensively studied, the absence of this G-protein-coupled receptor from the
brain of rodents has hampered studies into its role in the central nervous
system. However, we found intense GPR40 mRNA expression by in situ hybridization 
in mouse hippocampal and motor cortex neurons. Furthermore, in a neuroblastoma
cell GPR40 was activated by docosahexaenoic acid and selective agonists, yet not 
by palmitic acid. Significantly, the activation of GPR40 provoked the
phosphorylation of the cAMP response element-binding protein, CREB. The receptor 
was also functional in primary cultures of murine neurons, in which its
activation by a selective agonist produced the phosphorylation of CREB and of
extracellular signal-regulated kinases, ERK1/2. These results suggest that mice
represent a suitable model for elucidating the role of GPR40 in brain function.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24550142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Hippocampus. 2014 Jun;24(6):712-23. doi: 10.1002/hipo.22262. Epub 2014 Mar 4.

PERIOD1 coordinates hippocampal rhythms and memory processing with daytime.

Rawashdeh O(1), Jilg A, Jedlicka P, Slawska J, Thomas L, Saade A, Schwarzacher
SW, Stehle JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and Molecular Anatomy, Dr. Senckenbergische Anatomie,
Goethe-University, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, Frankfurt, Germany.

In species ranging from flies to mammals, parameters of memory processing, like
acquisition, consolidation, and retrieval are clearly molded by time of day.
However, mechanisms that regulate and adapt these temporal differences are
elusive, with an involvement of clock genes and their protein products
suggestive. Therefore, we analyzed initially in mouse hippocampus the
daytime-dependent dynamics of parameters, known to be important for proper memory
formation, like phosphorylation of the "memory molecule" cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) responsive element binding protein (CREB) and chromatin
remodeling. Next, in an effort to characterize the mechanistic role of clock
genes within hippocampal molecular dynamics, we compared the results obtained
from wildtype (WT) -mice and mice deficient for the archetypical clock gene
Period1 (Per1(-/-) -mice). We detected that the circadian rhythm of CREB
phosphorylation in the hippocampus of WT mice disappeared completely in mice
lacking Per1. Furthermore, we found that the here for the first time described
profound endogenous day/night rhythms in histone modifications in the hippocampus
of WT-mice are markedly perturbed in Per1(-/-) -mice. Concomitantly, both, in
vivo recorded LTP, a cellular correlate for long-term memory, and hippocampal
gene expression were significantly altered in the absence of Per1. Notably, these
molecular perturbations in Per1(-/-) -mice were accompanied by the loss of
daytime-dependent differences in spatial working memory performance. Our data
provide a molecular blueprint for a novel role of PER1 in temporally shaping the 
daytime-dependency of memory performance, likely, by gating CREB signaling, and
by coupling to downstream chromatin remodeling.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24550127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Jun;21(6):915-28. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.11. Epub 2014 Feb
14.

The nitric oxide-cGKII system relays death and survival signals during embryonic 
retinal development via AKT-induced CREB1 activation.

Socodato R(1), Brito R(1), Portugal CC(1), de Oliveira NA(1), Calaza KC(2),
Paes-de-Carvalho R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Program of Neurosciences, Institute of Biology, Fluminense Federal University,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. (2)1] Program of Neurosciences, Institute of Biology,
Fluminense Federal University, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil [2] Department of
Neurobiology, Institute of Biology, Fluminense Federal University, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

During early neurogenesis, retinal neuronal cells display a conserved
differentiation program in vertebrates. Previous studies established that nitric 
oxide (NO) and cGMP accumulation regulate essential events in retinal physiology.
Here we used pharmacological and genetic loss-of-function to investigate the
effects of NO and its downstream signaling pathway in the survival of developing 
avian retinal neurons in vitro and in vivo. Six-day-old (E6) chick retinal cells 
displayed increased calcium influx and produced higher amounts of NO when
compared with E8 cells. L-arginine (substrate for NO biosynthesis) and
S-nitroso-N-acetyl-D,L-penicillamine (SNAP; a nitrosothiol NO donor) promoted
extensive cell death in E6 retinas, whereas in E8 both substances decreased
apoptosis. The effect of NO at both periods was mediated by soluble guanylyl
cyclase (sGC) and cGMP-dependent kinase (cGK) activation. In addition,
shRNA-mediated cGKII knockdown prevented NO-induced cell death (E6) and cell
survival (E8). This, NO-induced cell death or cell survival was not correlated
with an early inhibition of retinal cell proliferation. E6 cells also responded
differentially from E8 neurons regarding cyclic AMP-responsive element-binding
protein (CREB) activation in the retina in vivo. NO strongly decreased nuclear
phospho-CREB staining in E6 but it robustly enhanced CREB phosphorylation in the 
nuclei of E8 neurons, an effect that was completely abrogated by cGKII shRNAs at 
both embryonic stages. The ability of NO in regulating CREB differentially during
retinal development relied on the capacity of cGKII in decreasing (E6) or
increasing (E8) nuclear AKT (V-Akt murine thymoma viral oncogene) activation.
Accordingly, inhibiting AKT prevented both cGKII shRNA-mediated CREB upregulation
in E6 and SNAP-induced CREB activation in E8. Furthermore, shRNA-mediated in vivo
cGKII or in vitro CREB1 knockdown confirmed that NO/cGKII dualistically regulated
the downstream CREB1 pathway and caspase activation in the chick retina to
modulate neuronal viability. These data demonstrate that NO-mediated cGKII
signaling may function to control the viability of neuronal cells during early
retinal development via AKT/CREB1 activity.

PMCID: PMC4013510
PMID: 24531539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Exp Cell Res. 2014 Apr 15;323(1):189-97. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.02.001. Epub
2014 Feb 10.

Phytoestrogen, tanshinone IIA diminishes collagen deposition and stimulates new
elastogenesis in cultures of human cardiac fibroblasts.

Mao S(1), Wang Y(2), Zhang M(3), Hinek A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Physiology & Experimental Medicine Program, Heart Center, Hospital for Sick
Children, 555 University Avenue, Ontario, Toronto, QJ;Canada M5G 1X8; Department 
of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 
Second Clinical Medical College, Guangzhou University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Guangzhou, China; Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Guangzhou, China. (2)Physiology & Experimental Medicine Program, Heart 
Center, Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Avenue, Ontario, Toronto,
QJ;Canada M5G 1X8. (3)Second Clinical Medical College, Guangzhou University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, China; Guangdong Provincial Hospital of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, China. (4)Physiology & Experimental
Medicine Program, Heart Center, Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University
Avenue, Ontario, Toronto, QJ;Canada M5G 1X8; Department of Laboratory Medicine
and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address:
alek.hinek@sickkids.ca.

It has been previously reported that oral or intra-peritoneal administration of
tanshinone IIA can alleviate the ventricular hypertrophy and fibrosis that
develops in rats after experimental cardiac infarction. Our present studies,
performed on cultures of human cardiac fibroblasts, investigated the mechanism by
which tanshinone IIA produces these beneficial effects. We found that treatment
of cardiac fibroblasts with 0.1-10µM tanshinone IIA significantly inhibited their
deposition of collagen I, while enhancing production of new elastic fibers.
Moreover, both anti-collagenogenic and pro-elastogenic effects of tanshinone IIA 
occurred only after selective activation of the G protein-coupled estrogen
receptor (GPER). This subsequently leads to initiation of the PKA/CREB
phosphorylation pathway that inversely modulated transcription of collagen I and 
elastin genes. Interestingly, treatment of human cardiac fibroblasts with
tanshinone IIA additionally up-regulated the production of the 67-kDa elastin
binding protein, which facilitates tropoelastin secretion, and increased
synthesis of lysyl oxidase, catalyzing cross-linkings of tropoelastin. Moreover, 
tanshinone IIA also caused up-regulation in the synthesis of collagenolytic
MMP-1, but down-regulated levels of elastolytic MMP-2 and MMP-9. In summary, our 
data validate a novel mechanism in which tanshinone IIA, interacting with a
non-classic estrogen receptor, maintains the proper balance between the net
deposition of collagen and elastin, allowing for optimal durability and
resiliency of the newly deposited matrix.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24525372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 29;9(1):e87104. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087104. eCollection
2014.

MASP-1 induces a unique cytokine pattern in endothelial cells: a novel link
between complement system and neutrophil granulocytes.

Jani PK(1), Kajdácsi E(1), Megyeri M(2), Dobó J(2), Doleschall Z(3), Futosi K(4),
Tímár CI(4), Mócsai A(4), Makó V(1), Gál P(2), Cervenak L(1).

Author information: 
(1)3rd Department of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Institute of Enzymology, Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Hungarian
Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary. (3)Department of Pathogenetics, National 
Institute of Oncology, Budapest, Hungary. (4)Department of Physiology, Semmelweis
University School of Medicine, Budapest, Hungary.

Microbial infection urges prompt intervention by the immune system. The
complement cascade and neutrophil granulocytes are the predominant contributors
to this immediate anti-microbial action. We have previously shown that
mannan-binding lectin-associated serine protease-1 (MASP-1), the most abundant
enzyme of the complement lectin pathway, can induce p38-MAPK activation, NFkappaB
signaling, and Ca(2+)-mobilization in endothelial cells. Since neutrophil
chemotaxis and transmigration depends on endothelial cell activation, we aimed to
explore whether recombinant MASP-1 (rMASP-1) is able to induce cytokine
production and subsequent neutrophil chemotaxis in human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVEC). We found that HUVECs activated by rMASP-1 secreted
IL-6 and IL-8, but not IL-1alpha, IL-1ra, TNFalpha and MCP-1. rMASP-1 induced
dose-dependent IL-6 and IL-8 production with different kinetics. rMASP-1
triggered IL-6 and IL-8 production was regulated predominantly by the p38-MAPK
pathway. Moreover, the supernatant of rMASP-1-stimulated HUVECs activated the
chemotaxis of neutrophil granulocytes as an integrated effect of cytokine
production. Our results implicate that besides initializing the complement lectin
pathway, MASP-1 may activate neutrophils indirectly, via the endothelial cells,
which link these effective antimicrobial host defense mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3906121
PMID: 24489848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2014 Apr 15;306(8):L797-807. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00347.2013. Epub 2014 Jan 31.

IL-1ß induction of MUC5AC gene expression is mediated by CREB and NF-<U+03BA>B and
repressed by dexamethasone.

Chen Y(1), Garvin LM, Nickola TJ, Watson AM, Colberg-Poley AM, Rose MC.

Author information: 
(1)Children's National, 111 Michigan Ave NW, Washington, DC 20010.
mrose@childrensnational.org.

Chronic airway diseases are characterized by inflammation and mucus
overproduction. The MUC5AC mucin gene is upregulated by the proinflammatory
cytokine interleukin-1 ß (IL-1ß) via activation of cAMP response element-binding 
protein (CREB) in the NCI-H292 cancer cell line and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) in 
the HBE1 transformed cell line, with each transcription factor binding to a
cognate cis site in the proximal or distal region, respectively, of the MUC5AC
promoter. We utilized primary differentiated human bronchial epithelial (HBE) and
A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells to further investigate the contributions of CREB
and NF-<U+03BA>B subunits to the IL-1ß-induced upregulation of MUC5AC. Data show that
ligand binding of IL-1ß to the IL-1ß receptor is required to increase MUC5AC mRNA
abundance. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses show direct binding of CREB to 
the previously identified cAMP response element site and binding of p65 and p50
subunits to a novel NF-<U+03BA>B site in a mucin-regulatory domain in the proximal
promoter and to a previously identified NF-<U+03BA>B site in the distal promoter. P50
binds to both NF-<U+03BA>B sites at 1 h following IL-1ß exposure, but is replaced at 2 h
by p65 in A549 cells and by a p50/p65 heterodimer in HBE cells. Thus IL-1ß
activates multiple domains in the MUC5AC promoter but exhibits some cell-specific
responses, highlighting the complexity of MUC5AC transcriptional regulation. Data
show that dexamethasone, a glucocorticoid that transcriptionally represses MUC5AC
gene expression under constitutive conditions, also represses IL-1ß-mediated
upregulation of MUC5AC gene expression. A further understanding of mechanisms
mediating MUC5AC regulation should lead to a honing of therapeutic approaches for
the treatment of mucus overproduction in inflammatory lung diseases.

PMCID: PMC3989721
PMID: 24487386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Gene. 2014 Apr 1;538(2):228-34. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.01.059. Epub 2014 Jan
30.

Conserved transcription factor binding sites suggest an activator basal promoter 
and a distal inhibitor in the galanin gene promoter in mouse ES cells.

Gonzalez S(1), Binato R(2), Guida L(3), Mencalha AL(4), Abdelhay E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nacional de Câncer, Centro de Transplante de Medula Óssea, RJ,
Brazil; Departamento de Genética Médica, Instituto Fernandes Figueira, Fundação
Oswaldo Cruz, RJ, Brazil. Electronic address: sayonara@iff.fiocruz.br.
(2)Instituto Nacional de Câncer, Centro de Transplante de Medula Óssea, RJ,
Brazil. Electronic address: rbgomes@inca.gov.br. (3)Departamento de Genética
Médica, Instituto Fernandes Figueira, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, RJ, Brazil.
(4)Instituto Nacional de Câncer, Centro de Transplante de Medula Óssea, RJ,
Brazil.

Galanin and its receptors have been shown to be expressed in undifferentiated
mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells through transcriptome and proteomic analyses.
Although transcriptional regulation of galanin has been extensively studied, the 
regulatory proteins that mediate galanin expression in mouse ES cells have not
yet been determined. Through sequence alignments, we have found a high degree of 
similarity between mouse and human galanin upstream sequences at -146 bp/+69 bp
(proximal region) and -2,408 bp/-2,186 bp (distal region). These regions could be
recognized by ES cell nuclear proteins, and EMSA analysis suggests a specific
functionality. Analysis of the proximal region (PR) using EMSA and ChIP assays
showed that the CREB protein interacts with the galanin promoter both in vitro
and in vivo. Additional EMSA analysis revealed that an SP1 consensus site
mediated protein-DNA complex formation. Reporter assays showed that CREB is an
activator of galanin expression and works cooperatively with SP1. Furthermore,
analysis of the distal region (DR) using EMSA assays demonstrated that both HOX-F
and PAX 4/6 consensus sites mediated protein-DNA complex formation, and both
sites inhibited luciferase activity in reporter assays. These data together
suggest that CRE and SP1 act as activators at the basal promoter, while HOX-F and
PAX 4/6 act as silencers of transcription. The interplay of these transcription
factors (TF) may drive regulated galanin expression in mouse ES cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24487089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Mol Pharmacol. 2014 Apr;85(4):630-9. doi: 10.1124/mol.113.090076. Epub 2014 Jan
30.

Nanomolar bifenthrin alters synchronous Ca2+ oscillations and cortical neuron
development independent of sodium channel activity.

Cao Z(1), Cui Y, Nguyen HM, Jenkins DP, Wulff H, Pessah IN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, School of Veterinary Medicine (Z.C.,
Y.C., I.N.P.), and Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine (H.M.N.,
D.P.J., H.W.), University of California Davis, Davis, California.

Bifenthrin, a relatively stable type I pyrethroid that causes tremors and impairs
motor activity in rodents, is broadly used. We investigated whether nanomolar
bifenthrin alters synchronous Ca(2+) oscillations (SCOs) necessary for
activity-dependent dendritic development. Primary mouse cortical neurons were
cultured 8 or 9 days in vitro (DIV), loaded with the Ca(2+) indicator Fluo-4, and
imaged using a Fluorescence Imaging Plate Reader Tetra. Acute exposure to
bifenthrin rapidly increased the frequency of SCOs by 2.7-fold (EC50 = 58 nM) and
decreased SCO amplitude by 36%. Changes in SCO properties were independent of
modifications in voltage-gated sodium channels since 100 nM bifenthrin had no
effect on the whole-cell Na(+) current, nor did it influence neuronal resting
membrane potential. The L-type Ca(2+) channel blocker nifedipine failed to
ameliorate bifenthrin-triggered SCO activity. By contrast, the metabotropic
glutamate receptor (mGluR)5 antagonist MPEP [2-methyl-6-(phenylethynyl)pyridine] 
normalized bifenthrin-triggered increase in SCO frequency without altering
baseline SCO activity, indicating that bifenthrin amplifies mGluR5 signaling
independent of Na(+) channel modification. Competitive [AP-5;
(-)-2-amino-5-phosphonopentanoic acid] and noncompetitive (dizocilpine, or MK-801
[(5S,10R)-(+)-5-methyl-10,11-dihydro-5H-dibenzo[a,d]cyclohepten-5,10-imine
maleate]) N-methyl-d-aspartate antagonists partially decreased both basal and
bifenthrin-triggered SCO frequency increase. Bifenthrin-modified SCO rapidly
enhanced the phosphorylation of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB).
Subacute (48 hours) exposure to bifenthrin commencing 2 DIV-enhanced neurite
outgrowth and persistently increased SCO frequency and reduced SCO amplitude.
Bifenthrin-stimulated neurite outgrowth and CREB phosphorylation were dependent
on mGluR5 activity since MPEP normalized both responses. Collectively these data 
identify a new mechanism by which bifenthrin potently alters Ca(2+) dynamics and 
Ca(2+)-dependent signaling in cortical neurons that have long term impacts on
activity driven neuronal plasticity.

PMCID: PMC3965893
PMID: 24482397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Vis Exp. 2014 Jan 13;(83):e51075. doi: 10.3791/51075.

Aplysia Ganglia preparation for electrophysiological and molecular analyses of
single neurons.

Akhmedov K(1), Kadakkuzha BM, Puthanveettil SV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, The Scripps Research Institute, Florida.

A major challenge in neurobiology is to understand the molecular underpinnings of
neural circuitry that govern a specific behavior. Once the specific molecular
mechanisms are identified, new therapeutic strategies can be developed to treat
abnormalities in specific behaviors caused by degenerative diseases or aging of
the nervous system. The marine snail Aplysia californica is well suited for the
investigations of cellular and molecular basis of behavior because neural
circuitry underlying a specific behavior could be easily determined and the
individual components of the circuitry could be easily manipulated. These
advantages of Aplysia have led to several fundamental discoveries of neurobiology
of learning and memory. Here we describe a preparation of the Aplysia nervous
system for the electrophysiological and molecular analyses of individual neurons.
Briefly, ganglion dissected from the nervous system is exposed to protease to
remove the ganglion sheath such that neurons are exposed but retain neuronal
activity as in the intact animal. This preparation is used to carry out
electrophysiological measurements of single or multiple neurons. Importantly,
following the recording using a simple methodology, the neurons could be isolated
directly from the ganglia for gene expression analysis. These protocols were used
to carry out simultaneous electrophysiological recordings from L7 and R15
neurons, study their response to acetylcholine and quantitating expression of
CREB1 gene in isolated single L7, L11, R15, and R2 neurons of Aplysia.

PMCID: PMC4089395
PMID: 24457225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2014 Feb 3;53(6):1548-51. doi: 10.1002/anie.201307712.
Epub 2014 Jan 21.

Helical propensity in an intrinsically disordered protein accelerates ligand
binding.

Iemantavicius V(1), Dogan J, Jemth P, Teilum K, Kjaergaard M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 2200
København N (Denmark).

Many intrinsically disordered proteins fold upon binding to other macromolecules.
The secondary structure present in the well-ordered complex is often formed
transiently in the unbound state. The consequence of such transient structure for
the binding process is, however, not clear. The activation domain of the
activator for thyroid hormone and retinoid receptors (ACTR) is intrinsically
disordered and folds upon binding to the nuclear coactivator binding domain
(NCBD) of the CREB binding protein. A number of mutants was designed that
selectively perturbs the amount of secondary structure in unbound ACTR without
interfering with the intermolecular interactions between ACTR and NCBD. Using NMR
spectroscopy and fluorescence-monitored stopped-flow kinetic measurements we show
that the secondary structure content in helix 1 of ACTR indeed influences the
binding kinetics. The results thus support the notion of preformed secondary
structure as an important determinant for molecular recognition in intrinsically 
disordered proteins.

Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24449148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;805:331-51. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-02970-2_14.

Free-energy landscape of intrinsically disordered proteins investigated by
all-atom multicanonical molecular dynamics.

Higo J(1), Umezawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Protein Research, Osaka University, 3-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka,
565-0871, Japan, higo@protein.osaka-u.ac.jp.

We introduce computational studies on intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs).
Especially, we present our multicanonical molecular dynamics (McMD) simulations
of two IDP-partner systems: NRSF-mSin3 and pKID-KIX. McMD is one of enhanced
conformational sampling methods useful for conformational sampling of
biomolecular systems. IDP adopts a specific tertiary structure upon binding to
its partner molecule, although it is unstructured in the unbound state (i.e. the 
free state). This IDP-specific property is called "coupled folding and binding". 
The McMD simulation treats the biomolecules with an all-atom model immersed in an
explicit solvent. In the initial configuration of simulation, IDP and its partner
molecules are set to be distant from each other, and the IDP conformation is
disordered. The computationally obtained free-energy landscape for coupled
folding and binding has shown that native- and non-native-complex clusters
distribute complicatedly in the conformational space. The all-atom simulation
suggests that both of induced-folding and population-selection are coupled
complicatedly in the coupled folding and binding. Further analyses have
exemplified that the conformational fluctuations (dynamical flexibility) in the
bound and unbound states are essentially important to characterize IDP
functioning.

PMID: 24446368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Ovarian Res. 2014 Jan 21;7:9. doi: 10.1186/1757-2215-7-9.

Risk miRNA screening of ovarian cancer based on miRNA functional synergistic
network.

Ying H(1), Lyu J, Ying T, Li J, Jin S, Shao J, Wang L, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical
University, No,36, Sanhao Street, Heping District, Shenyang, Liaoning Province
110004, China. huanchunying2@hotmail.com.

Retraction in
    J Ovarian Res. 2015;8(1):17.

BACKGROUND: miRNAs are proved to have causal roles in tumorgenesis involving
various types of human cancers, but the mechanism is not clear. We aimed to
explore the effect of miRNAs on the development of ovarian cancer and the
underlying mechanism.
METHODS: The miRNA expression profile GSE31801 was downloaded from GEO (Gene
Expression Omnibus) database. Firstly, the differentially expressed miRNAs were
screened. Target genes of the miRNAs were collected from TargetScan, PicTar,
miRanda, and DIANA-microT database, then the miRNA-miRNA co-regulating network
was constructed using miRNA pairs with common regulated target genes. Next, the
functional modules in the network were studied, the miRNA pairs regulated at
least one modules were enriched to form the miRNA functional synergistic network 
(MFSN).
RESULTS: Risk miRNA were selected in MFSN according to the topological structure.
Transcript factors (TFs) in MFSN were identified, followed by the
miRNA-transcript factor networks construction. Totally, 42 up- and 61
down-regulated differentially expressed miRNAs were identified, of which 68
formed 2292 miRNA pairs in the miRNA-miRNA co-regulating network. GO: 0007268
(synaptic transmission) and GO: 0019226 (transmission of nerve impulse) were the 
two common functions of miRNAs in MFSN, and hsa-miR-579 (36), hsa-miR-942 (31),
hsa-miR-105 (31), hsa-miR-150 (34), and hsa-miR-27a* (32) were selected as the
hub nodes in MFSN.
CONCLUSIONS: In all, 17 TFs, including CREM, ERG, and CREB1 were screened as the 
cancer related TFs in MFSN. Other TFs, such as BIN1, FOXN3, FOXK1, FOXP2, and
ESRRG with high degrees may be inhibited in ovarian cancer. MFSN gave us a new
shed light on the mechanism studies in ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC3902002
PMID: 24444095  [PubMed]


293. Biochem J. 2014 Mar 15;458(3):469-79. doi: 10.1042/BJ20131115.

CREB phosphorylation at Ser133 regulates transcription via distinct mechanisms
downstream of cAMP and MAPK signalling.

Naqvi S, Martin KJ(1), Arthur JS.

Author information: 
(1)*MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, College of Life Sciences, University of
Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, U.K.

CREB (cAMP-response-element-binding protein) is an important transcription factor
for the activation of a number of immediate early genes. CREB is phosphorylated
on Ser133 by PKA (protein kinase A), promoting the recruitment of the
co-activator proteins CBP (CREB-binding protein) and p300; this has been proposed
to increase the transcription of CREB-dependent genes. CREB is also
phosphorylated on Ser133 by MSK1/2 (mitogen- and stress-activated kinase 1/2) in 
cells in response to the activation of MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase)
signalling; however, the relevance of this to gene transcription has been
controversial. To resolve this problem, we created a mouse with a Ser133 to
alanine residue mutation in the endogenous Creb gene. Unlike the total CREB
knockout, which is perinatally lethal, these mice were viable, but born at less
than the expected Mendelian frequency on a C57Bl/6 background. Using embryonic
fibroblasts from the S133A-knockin mice we show in the present study that Ser133 
phosphorylation downstream of PKA is required for CBP/p300 recruitment. The
requirement of Ser133 phosphorylation for the PKA-mediated induction of
CREB-dependent genes was, however, promoter-specific. Furthermore, we show that
in cells the phosphorylation of CREB on Ser133 by MSKs does not promote strong
recruitment of CBP or p300. Despite this, MSK-mediated CREB phosphorylation is
critical for the induction of CREB-dependent genes downstream of MAPK signalling.

PMID: 24438093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Hippocampus. 2014 Apr;24(4):363-8. doi: 10.1002/hipo.22245. Epub 2014 Jan 28.

Promoter hypermethylation of the phosphatase DUSP22 mediates PKA-dependent TAU
phosphorylation and CREB activation in Alzheimer's disease.

Sanchez-Mut JV(1), Aso E, Heyn H, Matsuda T, Bock C, Ferrer I, Esteller M.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics and Biology Program (PEBC), Bellvitge Biomedical Research
Institute (IDIBELL), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

Genetic screening in Alzheimer's disease (AD) has identified only a handful of
genes that are mutated in the disorder. Thus, for a very large proportion of
patients, the biology of their disease is poorly understood. Epigenetic
alterations may provide an explanation in these cases. Using DNA methylation
profiles of human hippocampus from controls and patients, we have identified the 
presence of promoter hypermethylation of the dual-specificity phosphatase 22
(DUSP22) gene in AD. DUSP22 is a likely candidate gene for involvement in the
pathogenesis of the disorder since, as we demonstrate here, it inhibits PKA
activity and thereby determines TAU phosphorylation status and CREB signaling.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Hippocampus Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4233982
PMID: 24436131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Biol Pharm Bull. 2013;36(12):1950-8.

Osthole reverses beta-amyloid peptide cytotoxicity on neural cells by enhancing
cyclic AMP response element-binding protein phosphorylation.

Hu Y, Wen Q, Liang W, Kang T, Ren L, Zhang N, Zhao D, Sun D, Yang J.

Accumulation of ß-amyloid peptide (Aß) in the brain plays an important role in
the pathogenesis of Alzheimers disease (AD). Previous studies have demonstrated 
the neuroprotective role of osthole against oxygen and glucose deprivation in
cortical neurons. However, the effects of osthole on Aß-induced neurotoxicity in 
neural cells have rarely been reported. The current study was designed to
investigate the protective effects of osthole on a cell model of AD insulted by
exogenous Aß25-35 and the potential mechanism(s). In this study,
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay,
immunofluorescence analysis, apoptosis assay, reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) techniques 
were used in primary cortical neurons and SH-SY5Y cells. Our data showed that
osthole reduced intracellular Aß levels in neural cells, which was associated
with decreased BACE1 protein; osthole reversed exogenous Aß25-35-induced cell
viability loss, apoptosis, and synapsin-1 reduction, which was related to the
reestablishment of phosphorylation of cyclic AMP response element-binding protein
(CREB). The collective evidence indicates that osthole possesses the ability to
protect cortical neurons and SH-SY5Y cells against Aß injury, and the underlying 
mechanism may be attributed to the enhancement of CREB phosphorylation.

PMID: 24432380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2013;4(6):156.

Quantitative proteomic analysis of sphere-forming stem-like oral cancer cells.

Misuno K, Liu X, Feng S, Hu S.

INTRODUCTION: The purpose of this study is to identify target proteins that may
play important functional roles in oral cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) using mass 
spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics.
METHODS: Sphere-formation assays were performed on highly invasive UM1 and lowly 
invasive UM2 oral cancer cell lines, which were derived from the same tongue
squamous cell carcinoma, to enrich CSCs. Quantitative proteomic analysis of
CSC-like and non-CSC UM1 cells was carried out using tandem mass tagging and
two-dimensional liquid chromatography with Orbitrap mass spectrometry.
RESULTS: CSC-like cancer cells were found to be present in the highly invasive
UM1 cell line but absent in the lowly invasive UM2 cell line. Stem cell markers
SOX2, OCT4, SOX9 and CD44 were up-regulated, whereas HIF-1 alpha and PGK-1 were
down-regulated in CSC-like UM1 cells versus non-CSC UM1 cells. Quantitative
proteomic analysis indicated that many proteins in cell cycle, metabolism, G
protein signal transduction, translational elongation, development, and RNA
splicing pathways were differentially expressed between the two cell phenotypes. 
Both CREB-1-binding protein (CBP) and phosphorylated CREB-1 were found to be
significantly over-expressed in CSC-like UM1 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: CSC-like cells can be enriched from the highly invasive UM1 oral
cancer cell line but not from the lowly invasive UM2 oral cancer cell line. There
are significant proteomic alterations between CSC-like and non-CSC UM1 cells. In 
particular, CBP and phosphorylated CREB-1 were significantly up-regulated in
CSC-like UM1 cells versus non-CSC UM1 cells, suggesting that the CREB pathway is 
activated in the CSC-like cells.

PMCID: PMC4056689
PMID: 24423398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Nutr Res. 2014 Jan;34(1):85-93. doi: 10.1016/j.nutres.2013.10.010. Epub 2013 Oct 
29.

Acute exposure to high-fat diets increases hepatic expression of genes related to
cell repair and remodeling in female rats.

Miller CN(1), Morton HP(2), Cooney PT(3), Winters TG(3), Ramseur KR(3), Rayalam
S(4), Della-Fera MA(5), Baile CA(6), Brown LM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Foods and Nutrition, University of Georgia, Athens, GA.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, GA.
(3)Department of Nutrition, University of North Carolina at Greensboro,
Greensboro, NC. (4)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Philadelphia College of
Osteopathic Medicine, Suwanee, GA. (5)Department of Animal and Dairy Science,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA. (6)Department of Foods and Nutrition,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA; Department of Animal and Dairy Science,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA. Electronic address: cbaile@uga.edu.

High-fat diets (HFD) promote the development of both obesity and fatty liver
disease through the up-regulation of hepatic lipogenesis. Insulin resistance, a
hallmark of both conditions, causes dysfunctional fuel partitioning and increases
in lipogenesis. Recent work has demonstrated that systemic insulin resistance
occurs in as little as the first 72 hours of an HFD, suggesting the potential for
hepatic disruption with HFD at this time point. The current study sought to
determine differences in expression of lipogenic genes between sexes in
3-month-old male and female Long-Evans rats after 72 hours of a 40% HFD or a 17% 
fat (chow) diet. Owing to the response of estrogen on hepatic signaling, we
hypothesized that a sexual dimorphic response would occur in the expression of
lipogenic enzymes, inflammatory cytokines, apoptotic, and cell repair and
remodeling genes. Both sexes consumed more energy when fed an HFD compared with
their low fat-fed controls. However, only the males fed the HFD had a significant
increase in body fat. Regardless of sex, HFD caused down-regulation of lipogenic 
and inflammatory genes. Interestingly, females fed an HFD had up-regulated
expression of apoptotic and cell repair-related genes compared with the males.
This may suggest that females are more responsive to the acute hepatic injury
effects caused by HFDs. In summary, neither male nor female rats displayed
disrupted hepatic metabolic pathways after 72 hours of the HFD treatment. In
addition, female rats appear to have protection from increases in fat deposition,
possibly due to increased caloric expenditure; male rats fed an HFD were less
active, as demonstrated by distance traveled in their home cage.

© 2013.

PMID: 24418250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 26;8(12):e83097. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083097.
eCollection 2013.

cis-Acting elements and trans-acting factors in the transcriptional regulation of
raf kinase inhibitory protein expression.

Zhang B(1), Wang O(1), Qin J(1), Liu S(1), Sun S(2), Liu H(1), Kuang J(2), Jiang 
G(3), Zhang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Regulation Biology of Ministry of
Education, College of Life Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (3)Analysis and Testing 
Center, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China.

The Raf kinase inhibitory protein (RKIP) is down-regulated in multiple types of
human cancers. Decreased RKIP transcription activity may be one of the major
mechanisms responsible for the downregulation of RKIP expression in human
diseases. To test this hypothesis, we need to gain basic knowledge of the
transcriptional regulation of RKIP. To achieve this objective, we made a
systematic effort to identify cis-acting elements and trans-acting factors that
control RKIP promoter activity. We found that full RKIP promoter activity
requires the region -56 to +261 relative to the transcription start site. Within 
the full promoter region, there are two motifs rich in G/C that responded to
transcription factor Sp1, one cAMP-responsive element that responded to the
transcription factor CREB, and one docking site for the histone acetylase p300.
In human melanoma A375 cells and human cervical cancer HeLa cells, mutation or
deletion of each of these cis-acting elements decreased promoter activity. In
A375 cells, knockdown of the corresponding transcription factors Sp1, CREB, or
p300 decreased RKIP promoter activity, whereas overexpression of CREB and p300
increased RKIP promoter activity. The results obtained with HeLa cells also
supported the idea that Sp1 and CREB play positive roles in the regulation of
RKIP transcription. These findings suggest that regulators of the expression or
activity of Sp1, CREB, and p300 are involved in regulating RKIP transcription.

PMCID: PMC3873293
PMID: 24386147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Food Chem Toxicol. 2014 Mar;65:129-39. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2013.12.032. Epub 2013 
Dec 28.

Hydroalcoholic extract of Rhodiola rosea L. (Crassulaceae) and its hydrolysate
inhibit melanogenesis in B16F0 cells by regulating the CREB/MITF/tyrosinase
pathway.

Chiang HM(1), Chien YC(2), Wu CH(3), Kuo YH(4), Wu WC(5), Pan YY(5), Su YH(5),
Wen KC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cosmeceutics, China Medical University, Taichung 404, Taiwan.
Electronic address: hmchiang@mail.cmu.edu.tw. (2)Department of Cosmeceutics,
China Medical University, Taichung 404, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Pharmacy,
China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. (3)Graduate Institute of Pharmacy,
China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. (4)Department of Chinese
Pharmaceutical Sciences and Chinese Medicine Resources, China Medical University,
Taichung 404, Taiwan; Department of Biotechnology, Asia University, Taichung 413,
Taiwan. (5)Department of Cosmeceutics, China Medical University, Taichung 404,
Taiwan. (6)Department of Cosmeceutics, China Medical University, Taichung 404,
Taiwan. Electronic address: kcwen0520@mail.cmu.edu.tw.

We investigated the effects of an aqueous alcohol extract of Rhodiola rosea (R.
rosea) and its hydrolysate on melanin synthesis and the mechanisms mediating the 
activity. The ratio of tyrosol to salidroside was 2.3 in hydroalcoholic extract, 
and 51.0 in hydrolysate. We found that R. rosea extract and its hydrolysate
inhibited melanin synthesis and tyrosinase activity in mouse melanoma cells
(B16F0 cells). R. rosea extract also inhibited gene and protein expression of
melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R) and inhibited c-AMP response element binding
protein (CREB) phosphorylation, suppressed the activation of AKT and glycogen
synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK3ß), and inhibited the expression of
microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) and tyrosinase-related
protein 1 (TRP-1). R. rosea hydrolysate inhibited the phosphorylation of CREB,
the activation of AKT and GSK3ß, and the expression of MITF and tyrosinase. Our
results suggest that R. rosea extract is a novel tyrosinase inhibitor and that it
exerts its effects by regulating the CREB/MITF/tyrosinase pathway in B16F0.
Further in vivo studies are needed to determine the effectiveness of R. rosea
extract as a skin whitening agent.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24380755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Cancer Biol Med. 2013 Sep;10(3):131-7. doi: 10.7497/j.issn.2095-3941.2013.03.002.

Mechanism of T cell regulation by microRNAs.

Liu J(1), Wu CP(1), Lu BF(2), Jiang JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biological Treatment, The Third Affiliated Hospital of
Soochow University, Changzhou 213003, China; (2)Department of Immunology,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, non-coding single-stranded RNAs that can modulate
target gene expression at post-transcriptional level and participate in cell
proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. T cells have important functions
in acquired immune response; miRNAs regulate this immune response by targeting
the mRNAs of genes involved in T cell development, proliferation,
differentiation, and function. For instance, miR-181 family members function in
progression by targeting Bcl2 and CD69, among others. MiR-17 to miR-92 clusters
function by binding to CREB1, PTEN, and Bim. Considering that the suppression of 
T cell-mediated immune responses against tumor cells is involved in cancer
progression, we should investigate the mechanism by which miRNA regulates T cells
to develop new approaches for cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC3860337
PMID: 24379987  [PubMed]


301. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 14;289(7):4326-33. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.540500. Epub 2013 
Dec 30.

Control of Foxo1 gene expression by co-activator P300.

Wondisford AR(1), Xiong L, Chang E, Meng S, Meyers DJ, Li M, Cole PA, He L.

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics and.

FOXO1 is an important downstream mediator of the insulin signaling pathway. In
the fed state, elevated insulin phosphorylates FOXO1 via AKT, leading to its
nuclear exclusion and degradation. A reduction in nuclear FOXO1 levels then leads
to suppression of hepatic glucose production. However, the mechanism leading to
expression of Foxo1 gene in the fasted state is less clear. We found that Foxo1
mRNA and FOXO1 protein levels of Foxo1 were increased significantly in the liver 
of mice after 16 h of fasting. Furthermore, dibutyrl cAMP stimulated the
expression of Foxo1 at both mRNA and protein level in hepatocytes. Because
cAMP-PKA regulates hepatic glucose production through cAMP-response
element-binding protein co-activators, we depleted these co-activators using
adenoviral shRNAs. Interestingly, only depletion of co-activator P300 resulted in
the decrease of Foxo1 mRNA and FOXO1 protein levels. In addition, inhibition of
histone acetyltransferase activity of P300 significantly decreased hepatic Foxo1 
mRNA and FOXO1 protein levels in fasted mice, as well as fasting blood glucose
levels. By characterization of Foxo1 gene promoter, P300 regulates the Foxo1 gene
expression through the binding to tandem cAMP-response element sites in the
proximal promoter region of Foxo1 gene.

PMCID: PMC3924295
PMID: 24379407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Pathology. 2014 Feb;46(2):105-12. doi: 10.1097/PAT.0000000000000049.

Promiscuous genes involved in recurrent chromosomal translocations in soft tissue
tumours.

Antonescu CR(1), Dal Cin P.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
2Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, United
States.

Soft tissue tumours represent a heterogeneous group of mesenchymal lesions and
their classification continues to evolve as a result of incorporating advances in
cytogenetic and molecular techniques. In the last decade, traditional diagnostic 
approaches were supplemented with a significant number of reliable molecular
diagnostic tools, detecting tumour type specific genetic alterations.
Additionally, the successful application of some of these techniques to formalin 
fixed, paraffin embedded tissue enabled a broader range of clinical material to
be subjected to molecular analysis. However, despite all these remarkable
advances, the realisation that some of the genetic abnormalities are not fully
histotype specific and that certain gene aberrations can be shared among
different sarcoma types, otherwise completely unrelated clinically or
immunophenotypically, has introduced some drawbacks in surgical pathology
practice. One such common example is the presence of EWSR1 gene rearrangements by
fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH), a test now preferred over the
elaborate RT-PCR testing, in a variety of benign and highly malignant soft tissue
tumours, in addition to a subset of carcinomas. Furthermore, the presence of
identical gene fusions in completely different sarcoma types (i.e., EWSR1-ATF1,
EWSR1-CREB1) or in non-mesenchymal malignancies (epithelial or haematological)
has raised skepticism as to their diagnostic utility, and their lack of
specificity has been compared to the limitations of other ancillary techniques,
in particular immunohistochemistry. This review catalogues the main groups of
genes that behave in a promiscuous manner within recurrent fusion events in soft 
tissue tumours. Although we acknowledge that the present molecular classification
of soft tissue tumours is much more complex than two decades ago, when EWSR1 gene
rearrangements had been described as the hallmark of Ewing sarcoma, we make the
strong argument that with very few exceptions, the prevalence of fusion
transcripts in most sarcomas is such that they come to define these entities and 
can be used as highly specific molecular diagnostic markers in the right clinical
and pathological context.

PMID: 24378390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Cell Mol Med. 2014 Jan;18(1):80-90. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12166. Epub 2013 Nov 6.

ATF4 deficiency protects hepatocytes from oxidative stress via inhibiting CYP2E1 
expression.

Wang C(1), Li H, Meng Q, Du Y, Xiao F, Zhang Q, Yu J, Li K, Chen S, Huang Z, Liu 
B, Guo F.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, The Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai,
China.

Activating transcription factor (ATF) 4 is involved in the regulation of
oxidative stress in fibroblasts and neurons. The role of ATF4 in hepatocytes,
however, is unknown. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of ATF4 in
hepatocytes in oxidative stress under a high-fat diet (HFD). Here, we showed that
palmitate-stimulated reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and triglyceride
(TG) accumulation is blocked by ATF4 deficiency in primary hepatocytes.
Consistently, HFD-induced oxidative stress, TG accumulation and expression of
cytochrome P450, family 2, subfamily, polypeptide 1 (CYP2E1) are also blocked by 
knocking down ATF4 expression in the mouse liver. This suggests that ATF4 might
regulate oxidative stress via CYP2E1 under an HFD. In addition, we observed that 
expression of CYP2E1 is indirectly regulated by ATF4 in a cAMP-responsive element
binding protein (CREB)-dependent manner, which can directly activate the CYP2E1
promoter activity. Notably, ATF4-stimulated ROS production is inhibited in vivo
by treatment with diallyl sulphide, a selective CYP2E1 inhibitor. Finally, we
showed that ATF4 expression in the liver is responsible for the protective
effects against HFD-induced CYP2E1 expression, oxidative stress, and TG
accumulation. Taken together, these observations suggest that ATF4 is a novel
regulator of oxidative stress as well as accumulation of TG in response to HFD.

© 2013 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC3916120
PMID: 24373582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Neurotox Res. 2014 Jul;26(1):52-63. doi: 10.1007/s12640-013-9451-y. Epub 2013 Dec
24.

Disturbance of intracellular calcium homeostasis and CaMKII/CREB signaling is
associated with learning and memory impairments induced by chronic aluminum
exposure.

Wang B(1), Zhao J, Yu M, Meng X, Cui X, Zhao Y, Zhu Y, Xing W, Guan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Basic Medical
Sciences of China Medical University Shenyang, No. 92 Bei'er Road, Heping
District, Shenyang, 110001, People's Republic of China, cmuwb@hotmail.com.

Aluminum-induced neuronal injury has been implicated in various neurodegenerative
disorders. However, the underlying mechanism involved in this pathogenesis still 
remains unknown. Our present findings demonstrated that chronic aluminum exposure
resulted in spatial learning impairment and significantly increased intracellular
calcium level in the hippocampus of rats. Examination of the associated protein
molecules essential for induction and maintenance of long-term potentiation
revealed that aluminum exposure could increase the expression level of calmodulin
(CaM), but the expression levels of CaM-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII), and
phosphorylated cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) were significantly 
reduced, whereas the total protein levels of CaMKII and CREB did not change in
the aluminum-treated hippocampus. Thus, we provide a previously unrecognized
mechanism whereby chronic aluminum exposure impairs hippocampal learning and
memory, at least in part, through disruption of intracellular calcium homeostasis
and CaM/CaMKII/CREB signaling pathway.

PMID: 24366850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Mol Cell Biochem. 2014 Apr;389(1-2):69-77. doi: 10.1007/s11010-013-1928-8. Epub
2013 Dec 24.

PF-3758309, p21-activated kinase 4 inhibitor, suppresses migration and invasion
of A549 human lung cancer cells via regulation of CREB, NF-<U+03BA>B, and ß-catenin
signalings.

Ryu BJ(1), Lee H, Kim SH, Heo JN, Choi SW, Yeon JT, Lee J, Lee J, Cho JY, Kim SH,
Lee SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Translational Therapeutics, Korea Research Institute of Chemical
Technology, Yuseong-Gu, Taejon, 305-600, Korea.

Migration and invasion comprise key steps in cancer metastasis. Through the
migration and invasion into and out of lymphatic and/or blood vessels, cancer
cells can be spread out into the tissues in remote site from the origin.
Degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM) must be preceded prior to the
metastasis of cancer cells. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) can degrade ECM, thus
allow cells to migrate from the original site. Among MMPs, two gelatinase MMP-2
and MMP-9 play particularly important roles in ECM degradation. Here, we report
that recently developed p21-activated kinase 4 inhibitor PF-3758309 shows
anti-metastatic effect in A549 human lung cancer cell. PF-3758309 suppresses
CREB, NF-<U+03BA>B, and ß-catenin pathways, which are well known to be closely related
with cell migration. This leads to the downregulation of MMP-2/MMP-9 expressions 
and the inhibition of A549 lung cancer metastasis.

PMID: 24366569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Mar;34(5):877-87. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00360-13. Epub 2013 Dec
23.

DREAM controls the on/off switch of specific activity-dependent transcription
pathways.

Mellström B(1), Sahún I, Ruiz-Nuño A, Murtra P, Gomez-Villafuertes R, Savignac M,
Oliveros JC, Gonzalez P, Kastanauskaite A, Knafo S, Zhuo M, Higuera-Matas A,
Errington ML, Maldonado R, DeFelipe J, Jefferys JG, Bliss TV, Dierssen M, Naranjo
JR.

Author information: 
(1)National Center of Biotechnology, CSIC and CIBERNED, Madrid, Spain.

Changes in nuclear Ca(2+) homeostasis activate specific gene expression programs 
and are central to the acquisition and storage of information in the brain. DREAM
(downstream regulatory element antagonist modulator), also known as
calsenilin/KChIP-3 (K(+) channel interacting protein 3), is a Ca(2+)-binding
protein that binds DNA and represses transcription in a Ca(2+)-dependent manner. 
To study the function of DREAM in the brain, we used transgenic mice expressing a
Ca(2+)-insensitive/CREB-independent dominant active mutant DREAM (daDREAM). Using
genome-wide analysis, we show that DREAM regulates the expression of specific
activity-dependent transcription factors in the hippocampus, including Npas4,
Nr4a1, Mef2c, JunB, and c-Fos. Furthermore, DREAM regulates its own expression,
establishing an autoinhibitory feedback loop to terminate activity-dependent
transcription. Ablation of DREAM does not modify activity-dependent transcription
because of gene compensation by the other KChIP family members. The expression of
daDREAM in the forebrain resulted in a complex phenotype characterized by loss of
recurrent inhibition and enhanced long-term potentiation (LTP) in the dentate
gyrus and impaired learning and memory. Our results indicate that DREAM is a
major master switch transcription factor that regulates the on/off status of
specific activity-dependent gene expression programs that control synaptic
plasticity, learning, and memory.

PMCID: PMC4023831
PMID: 24366545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Biochem J. 2014 Mar 1;458(2):335-41. doi: 10.1042/BJ20130818.

Neuregulin-1ß induces embryonic stem cell cardiomyogenesis via ErbB3/ErbB2
receptors.

Hao J, Galindo CL(1), Tran TL(1), Sawyer DB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, U.S.A.

NRG-1ß (neuregulin-1ß) serves multiple functions during embryonic heart
development by signalling through ErbB family receptor tyrosine kinases (ErbB2,
ErbB3 and ErbB4). Previous studies reported that NRG-1ß induces cardiomyogenesis 
of mESCs (mouse embryonic stem cells) at the later stages of differen-tiation
through ErbB4 receptor activation. In the present study we systematically
examined NRG-1ß induction of cardiac myocytes in mESCs and identified a novel
time window, the first 48 h, for NRG-1ß-based cardiomyogenesis. At this time
point ErbB3, but not ErbB4, is expressed. In contrast with the later
differentiation of mESCs in which NRG-1ß induces cardiomyogenesis via the ErbB4
receptor, we found that knocking down ErbB3 or ErbB2 with siRNA during the early 
differentiation inhibited NRG-1ß-induced cardiomyogenesis in mESCs. Microarray
analysis of RNA expression at this early time point indicated that NRG-1ß
treatment in mESCs resulted in gene expression changes important to
differentiation including up-regulation of components of PI3K (phosphoinositide
3-kinase), a known mediator of the NRG-1ß/ErbB signalling pathway, as well as
activation of CREB (cAMP-response-element-binding protein). Further study
demonstrated that the NRG-1ß-induced phosphorylation of CREB was required for
cardiomyogenesis of mESCs. In summary, we report a previously unrecognized role
for NRG-1ß/ErbB3/CREB signalling at the pre-mesoderm stage for stem cell cardiac 
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4654571
PMID: 24364879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Agric Food Chem. 2014 Jan 15;62(2):434-42. doi: 10.1021/jf4030739. Epub 2013
Dec 30.

Beneficial effect of betulinic acid on hyperglycemia via suppression of hepatic
glucose production.

Kim SJ(1), Quan HY, Jeong KJ, Kim do Y, Kim Gw, Jo HK, Chung SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Kyung
Hee University , 1 Hoegi-dong, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 130-701, Korea.

The inhibitory effect of betulinic acid (BA) on hepatic glucose production was
examined in HepG2 cells and high fat diet (HFD)-fed ICR mice. BA significantly
inhibited the hepatic glucose production (HGP) and gene expression levels of
PGC-1a, PEPCK, and G6Pase. BA activated AMPK and suppressed the expression level 
of phosphorylated CREB. These effects were all abolished in the presence of
compound C (an AMPK inhibitor). Moreover, inhibition of AMPK by overexpression of
dominant negative AMPK prevented BA from suppression of HGP, indicating that the 
inhibitory effect of BA on HGP is AMPK-dependent. In addition, BA markedly
phosphorylated CAMKK, and phosphorylation of AMPK and ACC, and suppression of HGP
were all reversed in the presence of STO-609 (a CAMKK inhibitor), suggesting that
CAMKK is an upstream kinase for AMPK. In an animal study, HFD-fed ICR mice were
orally administered with 5 or 10 mg of BA per kg (B5 and B10) for three weeks.
Plasma glucose, triglyceride, and the insulin resistance index of the B10 group
were decreased by 34%, 59%, and 38%, respectively. In a pyruvate tolerance test, 
pyruvate-induced glucose excursion was decreased by 27% when mice were pretreated
with 10 mg/kg of BA. In summary, BA effectively ameliorates hyperglycemia through
inhibition of hepatic gluconeogenesis via modulating the CAMKK-AMPK-CREB
signaling pathway.

PMID: 24354358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2909. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3909.

Adenosine is required for sustained inflammasome activation via the A2A receptor 
and the HIF-1a pathway.

Ouyang X(1), Ghani A(2), Malik A(2), Wilder T(3), Colegio OR(4), Flavell RA(4),
Cronstein BN(3), Mehal WZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Section of Digestive Diseases, Yale University, TAC S223A, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520, USA [2] Section of Digestive Diseases, Department of Veterans 
Affairs Connecticut Healthcare, West Haven, Connecticut 06516, USA. (2)Section of
Digestive Diseases, Yale University, TAC S223A, New Haven, Connecticut 06520,
USA. (3)Department of Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, 550 First
Avenue, New York, New York 10016, USA. (4)Department of Immunobiology, Yale
University, TAC S569A, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Inflammasome pathways are important in chronic diseases; however, it is not known
how the signalling is sustained after initiation. Inflammasome activation is
dependent on stimuli such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and ATP that provide two
distinct signals resulting in rapid production of interleukin (IL)-1ß, with the
lack of response to repeat stimulation. Here we report that adenosine is a key
regulator of inflammasome activity, increasing the duration of the inflammatory
response via the A(2A) receptor. Adenosine does not replace signals provided by
stimuli such as LPS or ATP but sustains inflammasome activity via a
cAMP/PKA/CREB/HIF-1a pathway. In the setting of the lack of IL-1ß responses after
previous exposure to LPS, adenosine can supersede this tolerogenic state and
drive IL-1ß production. These data reveal that inflammasome activity is
sustained, after initial activation, by A(2A) receptor-mediated signalling.

PMCID: PMC3895487
PMID: 24352507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 9;8(12):e80637. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080637. eCollection
2013.

The a and <U+0394> isoforms of CREB1 are required to maintain normal pulmonary vascular 
resistance.

Li L(1), Howell K(1), Sands M(1), Banahan M(1), Frohlich S(2), Rowan SC(1), Neary
R(1), Ryan D(3), McLoughlin P(1).

Author information: 
(1)University College Dublin, School of Medicine and Medical Sciences, Conway
Institute, Dublin, Ireland. (2)University College Dublin, School of Medicine and 
Medical Sciences, Conway Institute, Dublin, Ireland ; Department of Anaesthesia
and Critical Care, St Vincent's University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Department of Anaesthesia and Critical Care, St Vincent's University Hospital,
Dublin, Ireland.

Chronic hypoxia causes pulmonary hypertension associated with structural
alterations in pulmonary vessels and sustained vasoconstriction. The
transcriptional mechanisms responsible for these distinctive changes are unclear.
We have previously reported that CREB1 is activated in the lung in response to
alveolar hypoxia but not in other organs. To directly investigate the role of a
and <U+0394> isoforms of CREB1 in the regulation of pulmonary vascular resistance we
examined the responses of mice in which these isoforms of CREB1 had been
inactivated by gene mutation, leaving only the ß isoform intact (CREB(a<U+0394>) mice). 
Here we report that expression of CREB regulated genes was altered in the lungs
of CREB(a<U+0394>) mice. CREB(a<U+0394>) mice had greater pulmonary vascular resistance than
wild types, both basally in normoxia and following exposure to hypoxic conditions
for three weeks. There was no difference in rho kinase mediated vasoconstriction 
between CREB(a<U+0394>) and wild type mice. Stereological analysis of pulmonary vascular
structure showed characteristic wall thickening and lumen reduction in hypoxic
wild-type mice, with similar changes observed in CREB(a<U+0394>). CREB(a<U+0394>) mice had
larger lungs with reduced epithelial surface density suggesting increased
pulmonary compliance. These findings show that a and <U+0394> isoforms of CREB1 regulate
homeostatic gene expression in the lung and that normal activity of these
isoforms is essential to maintain low pulmonary vascular resistance in both
normoxic and hypoxic conditions and to maintain the normal alveolar structure.
Interventions that enhance the actions of a and <U+0394> isoforms of CREB1 warrant
further investigation in hypoxic lung diseases.

PMCID: PMC3857174
PMID: 24349008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Arch Pharm Res. 2014 May;37(5):567-74. doi: 10.1007/s12272-013-0302-4. Epub 2013 
Dec 18.

Hypo-pigmenting effect of sesquiterpenes from Inula britannica in B16 melanoma
cells.

Choo SJ(1), Ryoo IJ, Kim KC, Na M, Jang JH, Ahn JS, Yoo ID.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Biology Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, 30 Yeongudanji-ro, Ochang, Cheongwon, Chungbuk, 363-883, Republic 
of Korea.

Erratum in
    Arch Pharm Res. 2014 May;37(5):687. Kim, Kwan Chul [added]; Na, Minkyun [added].

During the course of screens to identify anti-melanogenic agents from natural
resources, we found that the methanol extract of the dried flower of Inula
britannica L. inhibited melanin synthesis in cultured melanoma cells stimulated
with 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX). A bioassay-guided isolation of the
chloroform fraction of the I. britannica using an in vitro melanogenesis
inhibition assay led to the isolation of sesquiterpenes,
1-O-acetylbritannilactone (1), britannilactone (2) and neobritannilactone B (3). 
Compounds 1 and 2 significantly reduced melanin production in a dose-dependent
manner with IC50 values of 13.3 and 15.5 µM, respectively, whereas compound 3 was
found to be cytotoxic. Compound 1 also inhibited the tyrosinase activity only in 
cell based-systems. Western blot analysis indicated that compound 1 inhibited
melanogenesis by activating extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and Akt
signaling and also inhibiting cAMP related binding protein, which regulates its
downstream pathway, including tyrosinase, tyrosinase related protein-1 and TRP-2.
These results demonstrated that compound 1, a major sesquiterpene from the
flowers of I. britannica, exhibited anti-melanogenic activity by suppression of
tyrosinase expression via ERK and Akt signaling. Taken together, our results
suggest that these compounds may act as potent natural skin-lightening agents.

PMID: 24346861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 5;8(12):e82164. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082164. eCollection
2013.

Broad-scale phosphoprotein profiling of beta adrenergic receptor (ß-AR) signaling
reveals novel phosphorylation and dephosphorylation events.

Chruscinski AJ(1), Singh H, Chan SM, Utz PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology and Heart Transplantation, Department of Medicine,
Toronto General Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

ß-adrenergic receptors (ß-ARs) are model G-protein coupled receptors that mediate
signal transduction in the sympathetic nervous system. Despite the widespread
clinical use of agents that target ß-ARs, the signaling pathways that operate
downstream of ß-AR stimulation have not yet been completely elucidated. Here, we 
utilized a lysate microarray approach to obtain a broad-scale perspective of
phosphoprotein signaling downstream of ß-AR. We monitored the time course of
phosphorylation states of 54 proteins after ß-AR activation mouse embryonic
fibroblast (MEF) cells. In response to stimulation with the non-selective ß-AR
agonist isoproterenol, we observed previously described phosphorylation events
such as ERK1/2(T202/Y204) and CREB(S133), but also novel phosphorylation events
such as Cdc2(Y15) and Pyk2(Y402). All of these events were mediated through cAMP 
and PKA as they were reproduced by stimulation with the adenylyl cyclase
activator forskolin and were blocked by treatment with H89, a PKA inhibitor. In
addition, we also observed a number of novel isoproterenol-induced protein
dephosphorylation events in target substrates of the PI3K/AKT pathway: GSK3ß(S9),
4E-BP1(S65), and p70s6k(T389). These dephosphorylations were dependent on cAMP,
but were independent of PKA and correlated with reduced PI3K/AKT activity.
Isoproterenol stimulation also led to a cAMP-dependent dephosphorylation of
PP1a(T320), a modification known to correlate with enhanced activity of this
phosphatase. Dephosphorylation of PP1a coincided with the secondary decline in
phosphorylation of some PKA-phosphorylated substrates, suggesting that PP1a may
act in a feedback loop to return these phosphorylations to baseline. In summary, 
lysate microarrays are a powerful tool to profile phosphoprotein signaling and
have provided a broad-scale perspective of how ß-AR signaling can regulate key
pathways involved in cell growth and metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3855414
PMID: 24340001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jan 31;289(5):2711-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.525501. Epub 2013 
Dec 12.

NF-<U+03BA>B and enhancer-binding CREB protein scaffolded by CREB-binding protein
(CBP)/p300 proteins regulate CD59 protein expression to protect cells from
complement attack.

Du Y(1), Teng X, Wang N, Zhang X, Chen J, Ding P, Qiao Q, Wang Q, Zhang L, Yang
C, Yang Z, Chu Y, Du X, Zhou X, Hu W.

Author information: 
(1)From the Cancer Institute, Collaborative Innovation Center of Cancer Medicine,
Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center and Department of Oncology, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.

The complement system can be activated spontaneously for immune surveillance or
induced to clear invading pathogens, in which the membrane attack complex (MAC,
C5b-9) plays a critical role. CD59 is the sole membrane complement regulatory
protein (mCRP) that restricts MAC assembly. CD59, therefore, protects innocent
host cells from attacks by the complement system, and host cells require the
constitutive and inducible expression of CD59 to protect themselves from
deleterious destruction by complement. However, the mechanisms that underlie CD59
regulation remain largely unknown. In this study we demonstrate that the widely
expressed transcription factor Sp1 may regulate the constitutive expression of
CD59, whereas CREB-binding protein (CBP)/p300 bridge NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB, which
surprisingly functions as an enhancer-binding protein to induce the up-regulation
of CD59 during in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-triggered complement activation, thus 
conferring host defense against further MAC-mediated destruction. Moreover,
individual treatment with LPS, TNF-a, and the complement activation products
(sublytic MAC (SC5b-9) and C5a) could increase the expression of CD59 mainly by
activating NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB signaling pathways. Together, our findings identify a
novel gene regulation mechanism involving CBP/p300, NF-<U+03BA>B, and CREB; this
mechanism suggests potential drug targets for controlling various
complement-related human diseases.

PMCID: PMC3908404
PMID: 24338025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Neuropharmacology. 2014 Apr;79:290-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2013.12.001. Epub
2013 Dec 10.

The involvement of the GPR39-Zn(2+)-sensing receptor in the pathophysiology of
depression. Studies in rodent models and suicide victims.

Mlyniec K(1), Doboszewska U(2), Szewczyk B(3), Sowa-Kucma M(4), Misztak P(3),
Piekoszewski W(5), Trela F(6), Ostachowicz B(7), Nowak G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Medyczna 9,
PL 30-688 Kraków, Poland; Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences
and Center of Excellence in Neuropsychopharmacology, Smetna 12, PL 31-343 Kraków,
Poland. Electronic address: katarzyna.mlyniec@uj.edu.pl. (2)Department of
Pharmacobiology, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Medyczna 9, PL 30-688
Kraków, Poland; Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences and Center 
of Excellence in Neuropsychopharmacology, Smetna 12, PL 31-343 Kraków, Poland.
(3)Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences and Center of Excellence
in Neuropsychopharmacology, Smetna 12, PL 31-343 Kraków, Poland. (4)Institute of 
Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences and Center of Excellence in
Neuropsychopharmacology, Smetna 12, PL 31-343 Kraków, Poland; Centre of Applied
Biotechnology and Basic Sciences, University of Rzeszów, Kolbuszowa, Poland.
(5)Department of Analytical Chemistry Faculty of Chemistry, Jagiellonian
University, Krakow, Poland; Laboratory of High Resolution Mass Spectrometry,
Regional Laboratory of Physicochemical Analysis and Structural Research, Faculty 
of Chemistry, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland. (6)Department of Forensic 
Medicine, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Kraków, Poland. (7)Faculty of 
Physics and Applied Computer Science, AGH University of Science and Technology,
Kraków, Poland.

Zinc is one of the most important trace elements in our body. Patients suffering 
from depression show lower serum zinc levels compared to healthy controls. Zincs 
antagonism to the glutamatergic system seems to be responsible for mood recovery.
Recent years have shown that zinc may regulate neurotransmission via the
metabotropic GPR39 receptor. Activation of the GPR39-Zn(2+)-sensing receptor
(GPR39) triggers diverse neuronal pathways leading to a cAMP-responsive element
binding the protein (CREB) expression, which then induces synthesis of the
brain-derived neurotrophic factor and, in turn, activation of the Tropomyosin
receptor kinase B (TrkB) receptor. In the present study, we investigated the
alteration of the GPR39 in different models of depression, such as zinc
deficiency and olfactory bulbectomy and in suicide victims. Additionaly, we
focused on CREB-BDNF/TrkB under zinc deficient conditions in mice. To demonstrate
depressive-like behaviour, a standard and modified forced swim test (FST) was
performed. To evaluate expression of GPR39, CREB, BDNF and TrkB, Western Blot
analysis was used. Zinc deficient mice and rats showed decreased GPR39 expression
in the hippocampus and frontal cortex. A decreased level of hippocampal and
cortical GPR39 was also observed in suicide victims. In contrast, increased GPR39
in the hippocampus of olfactory bulbectomized rats was observed. Additionally, we
found a decreased expression of CREB, BDNF and TrkB only in the hippocampus of
zinc-deficient mice. Our present study demonstrates the associacion of the GPR39 
Zn(2+)-sensing receptor in the pathomechanism of depression. Down-regulation of
CREB, BDNF, TrkB and GPR39 receptor found under zinc-deficient conditions in the 
hippocampus, may play an important role in the pathophysiology of mood disorders,
since most of patients suffering from depression show lower serum zinc.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24333148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. BMC Genomics. 2013 Dec 14;14:880. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-880.

Age-associated bidirectional modulation of gene expression in single identified
R15 neuron of Aplysia.

Kadakkuzha BM, Akhmedov K, Capo TR, Carvalloza AC, Fallahi M, Puthanveettil
SV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Scripps Florida, 130 Scripps Way, Jupiter, FL
33458, USA. sputhanv@scripps.edu.

BACKGROUND: Despite the advances in our understanding of aging-associated
behavioral decline, relatively little is known about how aging affects neural
circuits that regulate specific behaviors, particularly the expression of genes
in specific neural circuits during aging. We have addressed this by exploring a
peptidergic neuron R15, an identified neuron of the marine snail Aplysia
californica. R15 is implicated in reproduction and osmoregulation and responds to
neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine, serotonin and glutamate and is
characterized by its action potential bursts.
RESULTS: We examined changes in gene expression in R15 neurons during aging by
microarray analyses of RNAs from two different age groups, mature and old
animals. Specifically we find that 1083 ESTs are differentially regulated in
mature and old R15 neurons. Bioinformatics analyses of these genes have
identified specific biological pathways that are up or downregulated in mature
and old neurons. Comparison with human signaling networks using pathway analyses 
have identified three major networks [(1) cell signaling, cell morphology, and
skeletal muscular system development (2) cell death and survival, cellular
function maintenance and embryonic development and (3) neurological diseases,
developmental and hereditary disorders] altered in old R15 neurons. Furthermore, 
qPCR analysis of single R15 neurons to quantify expression levels of candidate
regulators involved in transcription (CREB1) and translation (S6K) showed that
aging is associated with a decrease in expression of these regulators, and
similar analysis in three other neurons (L7, L11 and R2) showed that gene
expression change during aging could be bidirectional.
CONCLUSIONS: We find that aging is associated with bidirectional changes in gene 
expression. Detailed bioinformatics analyses and human homolog searches have
identified specific biological processes and human-relevant signaling pathways in
R15 that are affected during aging. Evaluation of gene expression changes in
different neurons suggests specific transcriptomic signature of single neurons
during aging.

PMCID: PMC3909179
PMID: 24330282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Mol Neurosci. 2014 May;53(1):59-68. doi: 10.1007/s12031-013-0197-z. Epub 2013
Dec 10.

UCH-L1 inhibition involved in CREB dephosphorylation in hippocampal slices.

Xie M(1), Wang SH, Lu ZM, Pan Y, Chen QC, Liao XM.

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Genetic Regulation and Integrative Biology, College of
Life Science, Central China Normal University, Number 152, Luoyu Road, Wuhan,
430079, China.

Ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase L1 (UCH-L1) is abundantly expressed in the brain
and is critical for the normal function of synapses. cAMP response element
binding protein (CREB) is a transcription factor which initiates the expression
of proteins that related to the regulation of synaptic plasticity and memory
function. Studies have shown that UCH-L1 can influence the expression and
activity of CREB, but the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. In this study, we
used UCH-L1 inhibitor LDN to treat mice hippocampal slices and found that UCH-L1 
inhibition caused the dephosphorylation of CREB at Ser133 site. Meanwhile,
hyperphosphorylation of microtubule-associated protein tau; increased expression 
of synaptic protein components of PSD-95 and synapsin-1, and decreased activity
of tyrosine kinase Fyn were observed after UCH-L1 inhibition. Moreover, all these
alternations have an influence on the normal function of N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptor NR2B subunit which is likely to result in the dephosphorylation
of CREB. We also found that LDN treatment mediated protein kinase A (PKA)
deactivation was involved in the dephosphorylation of CREB. Thus, our study
introduces a novel possible mechanism for elaborating the effects of UCH-L1
inhibition on the CREB activity and the implicated signaling pathways.

PMID: 24323362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Antiviral Res. 2014 Feb;102:11-22. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.11.012. Epub
2013 Dec 5.

Inhibition of human cytomegalovirus replication by overexpression of CREB1.

Chia YL(1), Ng CH(1), Lashmit P(2), Chu KL(1), Lew QJ(1), Ho JP(1), Lim HL(3),
Nissom PM(3), Stinski MF(2), Chao SH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Expression Engineering, Bioprocessing Technology Institute, Agency for
Science, Technology and Research (A(*)STAR), 20 Biopolis Way, #06-01 Centros,
Singapore 138668, Singapore. (2)Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa,
51 Newton Rd., 3-772 Bowen Science Building, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
(3)Microarray Groups, Bioprocessing Technology Institute, Agency for Science,
Technology and Research (A(*)STAR), 20 Biopolis Way, #06-01 Centros, Singapore
138668, Singapore. (4)Expression Engineering, Bioprocessing Technology Institute,
Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A(*)STAR), 20 Biopolis Way, #06-01
Centros, Singapore 138668, Singapore; Department of Microbiology, National
University of Singapore, Block MD4, 5 Science Drive 2, Singapore 117597,
Singapore. Electronic address: jimmy_chao@bti.a-star.edu.sg.

Expression of the human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) major immediate-early (MIE) genes 
is regulated by a strong enhancer-containing promoter with multiple binding sites
for various transcription factors, including cyclic AMP response element binding 
protein 1 (CREB1). Here we show that overexpression of CREB1 potently blocked MIE
transcription and HCMV replication. Surprisingly, CREB1 still exhibited strong
inhibition of the MIE promoter when all five CREB binding sites within the
enhancer were mutated, suggesting that CREB1 regulated the MIE gene expression
indirectly. Promoter deletion analysis and site-directed mutagenesis identified
the region between -130 and -50 upstream of the transcription start site of the
MIE gene as the "CREB1 responsive region". Mutations of SP1/3 and NF-<U+03BA>B binding
sites within this region interrupted the inhibitory effect induced by CREB1
overexpression. Our findings suggest that overexpression of CREB1 can cause
repression of HCMV replication and may contribute to the development of new
anti-HCMV strategies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24316029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 28;8(11):e82045. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082045.
eCollection 2013.

PKCe signalling activates ERK1/2, and regulates aggrecan, ADAMTS5, and miR377
gene expression in human nucleus pulposus cells.

Tsirimonaki E(1), Fedonidis C, Pneumaticos SG, Tragas AA, Michalopoulos I,
Mangoura D.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece.

The protein kinase C (PKC) signaling, a major regulator of chondrocytic
differentiation, has been also implicated in pathological extracellular matrix
remodeling, and here we investigate the mechanism of PKCe-dependent regulation of
the chondrocytic phenotype in human nucleus pulposus (NP) cells derived from
herniated disks. NP cells from each donor were successfully propagated for 25+
culture passages, with remarkable tolerance to repeated freeze-and-thaw cycles
throughout long-term culturing. More specifically, after an initial
downregulation of COL2A1, a stable chondrocytic phenotype was attested by the
levels of mRNA expression for aggrecan, biglycan, fibromodulin, and lumican,
while higher expression of SOX-trio and Patched-1 witnessed further
differentiation potential. NP cells in culture also exhibited a stable molecular 
profile of PKC isoforms: throughout patient samples and passages, mRNAs for PKC
a, d, e, <U+03B6>, <U+03B7>, <U+03B9>, and µ were steadily detected, whereas ß, <U+03B3>, and <U+03B8> were not.
Focusing on the signalling of PKCe, an isoform that may confer protection against
degeneration, we found that activation with the PKCe-specific activator small
peptide <U+03C8>eRACK led sequentially to a prolonged activation of ERK1/2, increased
abundance of the early gene products ATF, CREB1, and Fos with concurrent
silencing of transcription for Ki67, and increases in mRNA expression for
aggrecan. More importantly, <U+03C8>eRACK induced upregulation of hsa-miR-377
expression, coupled to decreases in ADAMTS5 and cleaved aggrecan. Therefore, PKCe
activation in late passage NP cells may represent a molecular basis for aggrecan 
availability, as part of an PKCe/ERK/CREB/AP-1-dependent transcriptional program 
that includes upregulation of both chondrogenic genes and microRNAs. Moreover,
this pathway should be considered as a target for understanding the molecular
mechanism of IVD degeneration and for therapeutic restoration of degenerated
disks.

PMCID: PMC3842981
PMID: 24312401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2014 Jul;19(4):541-8. doi: 10.1007/s12192-013-0480-5.
Epub 2013 Dec 1.

Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) promotes mitochondrial biogenesis in Hep G2 cells
by activating Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator 1a
(PGC-1a).

Shen Z(1), Liu C, Liu P, Zhao J, Xu W.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Hospital of Weifang Medical University, Weifang, China.

Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P), a potent bioactive phospholipid, has been reported
to regulate a broad spectrum of biological processes. However, little is known
regarding S1P's effects on mitochondrial function. In this study, we investigated
the S1P's effects on the Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator
1a (PGC-1a) signaling pathway and mitochondrial biogenesis in Hep G2 cells. Our
results indicate that administration of S1P leads to a significant upregulation
of mitochondrial DNA replication and transcription, increased mitochondrial mass,
and elevated adenosine triphosphate synthesis. In addition, we found that
treatment with S1P stimulates expression of PGC-1a, a master regulator of
mitochondrial biogenesis, as well as its downstream targets: nuclear respiratory 
factor 1 (NRF1) and mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM). Moreover, our
data demonstrate that S1P's effects on PGC-1a and mitochondrial biogenesis are
mediated by the protein kinase A/cAMP response element-binding protein (PKA/CREB)
pathway. Importantly, we also revealed that S1P's effects on mitochondrial
biogenesis are dependent on its type 2 receptor (S1P2), though not on either its 
type 1 (S1P1) or type 3 (S1P3) receptors. Based on these observations, we
concluded that S1P activates the PKA/CREB pathway through S1P2, which then
promotes expression of PGC-1a/NRF1/TFAM and subsequent mitochondrial biogenesis
in Hep G2 cells.

PMCID: PMC4041936
PMID: 24293320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Biomed Sci. 2013 Dec 1;20:87. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-20-87.

LncRNA DQ786243 affects Treg related CREB and Foxp3 expression in Crohn's
disease.

Qiao YQ(1), Huang ML, Xu AT, Zhao D, Ran ZH, Shen J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Ren Ji Hospital, School of
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai Institute of Digestive Disease,
Shanghai 200127, China. zhihuaran@vip.126.com.

BACKGROUND: Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have different functions in cells.
They work as signals, decoys, guides, and scaffolds. Altered lncRNA levels can
affect the expression of gene products. There are seldom studies on the role of
lncRNAs in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
RESULTS: Quantitative RT-PCR showed that DQ786243 was significantly overexpressed
in clinical active CD patients compared with clinical inactive CD patients
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0118) or healthy controls (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002). CREB was also more highly expressed
in active CD than in inactive CD (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0034) or controls (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0241). Foxp3 was
interestingly lower in inactive CD than in active CD (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0317) or controls
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0103), but there were no apparent differences between active CD and
controls. CRP was well correlated with DQ786243 (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.489, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.034), CREB
(r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.500, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.029) and Foxp3 (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.546, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.016). At 48 hours after
DQ786243 transfection, qRT-PCR showed both CREB (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.017) and Foxp3 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.046)
had an increased mRNA expression in Jurkat cells. Western blot showed the same
pattern. After DQ786243 transfection, CREB phosphorylation ratio (p-CREB/t-CREB) 
was increased (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0043).
CONCLUSION: DQ786243 can be related with severity of CD. It can affect the
expression of CREB and Foxp3 through which regulates the function of Treg. CREB
itself seems not the mediator of DQ786243 to up-regulate Foxp3. The
phosphorylation of CREB might play a more important role in the process.

PMCID: PMC4174896
PMID: 24289115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Int J Cancer. 2014 Jun 15;134(12):2808-19. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28638. Epub 2013 Dec 
7.

A mechanistic study on the metastasis inducing function of FUS-CHOP fusion
protein in liposarcoma.

Patil N(1), Ahmed Kabeer Rasheed S, Abba M, Hendrik Leupold J, Schwarzbach M,
Allgayer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Surgery and Molecular Oncology of Solid Tumors,
Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg and German Cancer Research
Center, Heidelberg, Germany.

The FUS-CHOP fusion protein has been found to be instrumental for specific
oncogenic processes in liposarcoma, but its ability to induce metastasis and the 
underlying mechanisms by which this can be achieved remain unknown. To dissect
its functional role in this context, we stably overexpressed this protein in
SW872 liposarcoma and HT1080 fibrosarcoma cell lines, and were able to
demonstrate that forced expression of FUS-CHOP significantly increases migration 
and invasion, as well as enhances lung and liver metastasis in the in vivo
chicken chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) model, that is proliferation independent. 
Additionally, FUS-CHOP enhances the expression of matrix-metalloproteinases -2
and -9, and transactivates their promoters in vitro. Mutational analysis showed
that C/EBP-ß- (-769/-755), NF-<U+03BA>B (-525/-516) and CREB/AP-1 (-218/-207) sites were
important for MMP-2 and NF-<U+03BA>B (-604/-598), AP-1 (-539/-532) and AP-1 (-81/-72)
for MMP-9 transactivation. Moreover, a direct in vivo interaction of FUS-CHOP was
observed in case of the MMP-2 promoter within region (-769/-207). siRNA data
revealed that MMP-2 expression is essential in the FUS-CHOP induced metastatic
phenotype. MMP-2-mRNA and protein expression correlated significantly with
FUS-CHOP positivity in 46 resected patient liposarcoma tissues. We have for the
first time provided substantial evidence for the FUS-CHOP oncoprotein as an
inducer of metastasis that is due to the transcriptional induction of specific
tumor-associated proteases. Insights gained from this study not only support a
deeper understanding of the mechanistic properties of FUS-CHOP, but also open up 
new avenues for targeted therapy.

© 2013 UICC.

PMID: 24285420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. BMB Rep. 2014 Apr;47(4):197-202.

Cyclic AMP response element binding (CREB) protein acts as a positive regulator
of SOX3 gene expression in NT2/D1 cells.

Kovacevic-Grujicic N(1), Mojsin M(1), Popovic J(1), Petrovic I(1), Topalovic
V(1), Stevanovic M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, University of
Belgrade, Vojvode Stepe 444a, PO BOX 23, 11010 Belgrade, Serbia.

SOX3 is one of the earliest neural markers in vertebrates, playing the role in
specifying neuronal fate. In this study we have established first functional link
between CREB and human SOX3 gene which both have important roles in the nervous
system throughout development and in the adulthood. Here we demonstrate both in
vitro and in vivo that CREB binds to CRE half-site located -195 to -191 within
the human SOX3 promoter. Overexpression studies with CREB or its
dominant-negative inhibitor A-CREB indicate that this transcription factor acts
as a positive regulator of basal SOX3 gene expression in NT2/D1 cells. This is
further confirmed by mutational analysis where mutation of CREB binding site
results in reduction of SOX3 promoter activity. Our results point at CREB as a
positive regulator of SOX3 gene transcription in NT2/D1 cells, while its
contribution to RA induction of SOX3 promoter is not prominent.

PMCID: PMC4163894
PMID: 24257117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 11;8(11):e78695. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078695.
eCollection 2013.

NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB are required for angiotensin II type 1 receptor upregulation in
neurons.

Haack KK(1), Mitra AK, Zucker IH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, United States of America.

Nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and the Ets like gene-1 (Elk-1) are two
transcription factors that have been previously established to contribute to the 
Angiotensin II mediated upregulation of Angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1R) in 
neurons. The cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) is another
transcription factor that has also been implicated in AT1R gene transcription.
The goal of the current study was to determine if NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB association was 
required for AT1R upregulation. We hypothesized that the transcription of the
AT1R gene occurs via an orchestration of transcription factor interactions
including NF-<U+03BA>B, CREB, and Elk-1. The synergistic role of CREB and NF<U+03BA>B in
promoting AT1R gene expression was determined using siRNA-mediated silencing of
CREB. Electrophorectic Mobility Shift Assay studies employing CREB and NF-<U+03BA>B
demonstrated increased protein - DNA binding as a result of Ang II stimulation
which was blunted by siRNA silencing of CREB. Upstream inhibition of p38 mitogen 
activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK) with SB203580 or inhibition of the calmodulin
kinase (CAMK) pathway using KN-62 blunted changes in CREB and NF-<U+03BA>B expression.
These findings suggest that Ang II may activate multiple signaling pathways
involving p38 MAPK leading to the activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB, which feed back
to upregulate the AT1R gene. This study provides insight into the molecular
mechanisms involving multiple transcription factor activation in a coordinated
fashion which may be partially responsible for sympathoexcitation in clinical
conditions associated with increased activation of the renin angiotensin system.

PMCID: PMC3823855
PMID: 24244341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 7;8(11):e78179. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078179. eCollection
2013.

Combinatorial recruitment of CREB, C/EBPß and c-Jun determines activation of
promoters upon keratinocyte differentiation.

Rozenberg JM(1), Bhattacharya P, Chatterjee R, Glass K, Vinson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Lab Medicine, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(12).
doi:10.1371/annotation/0cd737c6-949b-48f9-8bc8-ab36376c03e3.

BACKGROUND: Transcription factors CREB, C/EBPß and Jun regulate genes involved in
keratinocyte proliferation and differentiation. We questioned if specific
combinations of CREB, C/EBPß and c-Jun bound to promoters correlate with RNA
polymerase II binding, mRNA transcript levels and methylation of promoters in
proliferating and differentiating keratinocytes.
RESULTS: Induction of mRNA and RNA polymerase II by differentiation is highest
when promoters are bound by C/EBP ß alone, C/EBPß together with c-Jun, or by
CREB, C/EBPß and c-Jun, although in this case CREB binds with low affinity. In
contrast, RNA polymerase II binding and mRNA levels change the least upon
differentiation when promoters are bound by CREB either alone or in combination
with C/EBPß or c-Jun. Notably, promoters bound by CREB have relatively high
levels of RNA polymerase II binding irrespective of differentiation. Inhibition
of C/EBPß or c-Jun preferentially represses mRNA when gene promoters are bound by
corresponding transcription factors and not CREB. Methylated promoters have
relatively low CREB binding and, accordingly, those which are bound by C/EBPß are
induced by differentiation irrespective of CREB. Composite "Half and Half"
consensus motifs and co localizing consensus DNA binding motifs are
overrepresented in promoters bound by the combination of corresponding
transcription factors.
CONCLUSION: Correlational and functional data describes combinatorial mechanisms 
regulating the activation of promoters. Colocalization of C/EBPß and c-Jun on
promoters without strong CREB binding determines high probability of activation
upon keratinocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3820678
PMID: 24244291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Metabolism. 2014 Feb;63(2):272-82. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2013.10.004. Epub 2013 
Oct 24.

MiR-27 orchestrates the transcriptional regulation of brown adipogenesis.

Sun L(1), Trajkovski M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Duke-NUS Medical School Singapore, 8 College Rd, 169857, Singapore; Institute 
of Molecular and Cell Biology (IMCB), Agency for Science,Technology and Research,
61 Biopolis Drive, 138673, Singapore. (2)University of Geneva, Medical Faculty,
Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, Centre Médical Universitaire (CMU),
1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland; University College London (UCL), Division of
Biosciences, School of Life and Medical Sciences, Institute of Structural and
Molecular Biology, Darwin Building, Gower Street, WC1E 6BT, London, UK.
Electronic address: Mirko.Trajkovski@unige.ch.

OBJECTIVE: Brown adipose tissue (BAT) produces heat using chemical energy of
lipids and glucose, a function induced by cold exposure or diet. The brown
adipogenesis is tightly controlled in a coordinated interplay between several
transcriptional factors. It is not known what enables and coordinates this robust
program of concerted cooperation between the transcriptional factors and
co-regulators necessary for the brown adipogenesis.
MATERIALS/METHODS: A. In vivo studies--we investigated the expression levels of
miR-27a and b in mice after cold exposure. B. Using gene expression and
functional studies together with high throughput imaging in primary
preadipocytes, and cell culture models, we investigated the role of miR-27 in
beige and brown adipogenesis. C. Using gene silencing and rescue experiments we
dissected the molecular mechanisms of the miR-27 action.
RESULTS: After cold exposure, miR-27 is downregulated in BAT and subcutaneous
white adipose tissue (SAT). MiR-27 is also downregulated during brown
adipogenesis of primary preadipocytes in vitro, and it directly targets and
negatively regulates the essential components of the brown transcriptional
network: Prdm16, Ppara, Creb, and in part Pgc1ß. Together with its direct effect 
on Ppar<U+03B3>, and indirect on Pgc1a, mir-27 decreases brown differentiation of
cultured cells and of primary SAT preadipocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results point to miR-27 as a central upstream regulator of the
transcriptional network involved in beige and brown adipogenesis after cold
exposure, and suggest miR-27 inhibition as a novel therapeutic approach for
metabolic diseases aiming at increasing the beige/brown fat mass.

© 2014.

PMID: 24238035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014 Jan;34(1):136-45. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.113.302517. Epub 2013 Nov 14.

Cyclic adenosine monophosphate-response element-binding protein mediates the
proangiogenic or proinflammatory activity of gremlin.

Corsini M(1), Moroni E, Ravelli C, Andrés G, Grillo E, Ali IH, Brazil DP, Presta 
M, Mitola S.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of
Brescia, Brescia, Italy (M.C., E.M., C.R., E.G., M.P., S.M.); Electron Microscopy
Unit, Centro de Biologia Molecular Severo Ochoa, Campus Cantoblanco, Madrid,
Spain (G.A.); and Centre for Experimental Medicine, Queen's University Belfast,
ICS-A, Grosvenor Road, Belfast BT12 6BA, UK (I.H.A., D.P.B.).

OBJECTIVE: Angiogenesis and inflammation are closely related processes. Gremlin
is a novel noncanonical vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR2)
ligand that induces a proangiogenic response in endothelial cells (ECs). Here, we
investigated the role of the cyclic adenosine monophosphate-response element
(CRE)-binding protein (CREB) in mediating the proinflammatory and proangiogenic
responses of ECs to gremlin.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: Gremlin induces a proinflammatory response in ECs, leading 
to reactive oxygen species and cyclic adenosine monophosphate production and the 
upregulation of proinflammatory molecules involved in leukocyte extravasation,
including chemokine (C-C motif) ligand-2 (Ccl2) and Ccl7, chemokine (C-X-C motif)
ligand-1 (Cxcl1), vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), and intercellular
adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1). Accordingly, gremlin induces the VEGFR2-dependent
phosphorylation, nuclear translocation, and transactivating activity of CREB in
ECs. CREB activation mediates the early phases of the angiogenic response to
gremlin, including stimulation of EC motility and permeability, and leads to
monocyte/macrophage adhesion to ECs and their extravasation. All these effects
are inhibited by EC transfection with a dominant-negative CREB mutant or with a
CREB-binding protein-CREB interaction inhibitor that competes for CREB/CRE
binding. Also, both recombinant gremlin and gremlin-expressing tumor cells induce
proinflammatory/proangiogenic responses in vivo that are suppressed by the
anti-inflammatory drug hydrocortisone. Similar effects were induced by the
canonical VEGFR2 ligand VEGF-A165.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, the results underline the tight cross-talk between
angiogenesis and inflammation and demonstrate a crucial role of CREB activation
in the modulation of the VEGFR2-mediated proinflammatory/proangiogenic response
of ECs to gremlin.

PMID: 24233491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 5;8(11):e77773. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077773. eCollection
2013.

Intestinal DMBT1 expression is modulated by Crohn's disease-associated IL23R
variants and by a DMBT1 variant which influences binding of the transcription
factors CREB1 and ATF-2.

Diegelmann J(1), Czamara D, Le Bras E, Zimmermann E, Olszak T, Bedynek A, Göke B,
Franke A, Glas J, Brand S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II - Grosshadern, Ludwig-Maximilians-University (LMU), 
Munich, Germany ; Department of Preventive Dentistry and Periodontology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University (LMU), Munich, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: DMBT is an antibacterial pattern recognition and scavenger receptor. 
In this study, we analyzed the role of DMBT1 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) regarding inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) susceptibility and examined
their functional impact on transcription factor binding and downstream gene
expression.
METHODS: Seven SNPs in the DMBT1 gene region were analyzed in 2073 individuals
including 818 Crohn's disease (CD) patients and 972 healthy controls in two
independent case-control panels. Comprehensive epistasis analyses for the known
CD susceptibility genes NOD2, IL23R and IL27 were performed. The influence of
IL23R variants on DMBT1 expression was analyzed. Functional analysis included
siRNA transfection, quantitative PCR, western blot, electrophoretic mobility
shift and luciferase assays.
RESULTS: IL-22 induces DMBT1 protein expression in intestinal epithelial cells
dependent on STAT3, ATF-2 and CREB1. IL-22 expression-modulating, CD
risk-associated IL23R variants influence DMBT1 expression in CD patients and
DMBT1 levels are increased in the inflamed intestinal mucosa of CD patients.
Several DMBT1 SNPs were associated with CD susceptibility. SNP rs2981804 was most
strongly associated with CD in the combined panel (p = 3.0 × 10(-7), OR 1.42; 95%
CI 1.24-1.63). All haplotype groups tested showed highly significant associations
with CD (including omnibus P-values as low as 6.1 × 10(-18)). The most strongly
CD risk-associated, non-coding DMBT1 SNP rs2981804 modifies the DNA binding sites
for the transcription factors CREB1 and ATF-2 and the respective genomic region
comprising rs2981804 is able to act as a transcriptional regulator in vitro.
Intestinal DMBT1 expression is decreased in CD patients carrying the rs2981804 CD
risk allele.
CONCLUSION: We identified novel associations of DMBT1 variants with CD
susceptibility and discovered a novel functional role of rs2981804 in regulating 
DMBT1 expression. Our data suggest an important role of DMBT1 in CD pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3818382
PMID: 24223725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 6;8(11):e78253. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078253. eCollection
2013.

Regulation of G<U+03B3>-globin gene by ATF2 and its associated proteins through the
cAMP-response element.

Liu L(1), Karmakar S, Dhar R, Mahajan M, Choudhury A, Weissman S, Pace BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, The University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson, Texas, United States of America.

The upstream G<U+03B3>-globin cAMP-response element (G-CRE) plays an important role in
regulating G<U+03B3>-globin expression through binding of ATF2 and its DNA-binding
partners defined in this study. ATF2 knockdown resulted in a significant
reduction of <U+03B3>-globin expression accompanied by decreased ATF2 binding to the
G-CRE. By contrast, stable ATF2 expression in K562 cells increased <U+03B3>-globin
transcription which was reduced by ATF2 knockdown. Moreover, a similar effect of 
ATF2 on <U+03B3>-globin expression was observed in primary erythroid progenitors. To
understand the role of ATF2 in <U+03B3>-globin expression, chromatographically purified 
G-CRE/ATF2-interacting proteins were subjected to mass spectrometry analysis;
major binding partners included CREB1, cJun, Brg1, and histone deacetylases among
others. Immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated interaction of these proteins
with ATF2 and in vivo GCRE binding in CD34(+) cells undergoing erythroid
differentiation which was correlated with <U+03B3>-globin expression during development.
These results suggest synergism between developmental stage-specific recruitments
of the ATF2 protein complex and expression of <U+03B3>-globin during erythropoiesis.
Microarray studies in K562 cells support ATF2 plays diverse roles in
hematopoiesis and chromatin remodeling.

PMCID: PMC3819381
PMID: 24223142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Gene. 2014 Jan 25;534(2):256-64. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.10.048. Epub 2013 Nov
7.

Cloning, characterization, hypoxia and heat shock response of hypoxia inducible
factor-1 (HIF-1) from the small abalone Haliotis diversicolor.

Cai X(1), Huang Y(1), Zhang X(1), Wang S(1), Zou Z(1), Wang G(1), Wang Y(2),
Zhang Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Healthy Mariculture for the East China Sea, Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries College, Jimei University, Xiamen 361021, China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Healthy Mariculture for the East China Sea, Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries College, Jimei University, Xiamen 361021, China.
Electronic address: ylwang@jmu.edu.cn. (3)Department of Natural Sciences and
Mathematics, State University of New York at Cobleskill, NY 12043, USA.
Electronic address: zhangziping@hotmail.com.

In this study, hypoxia inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) and hypoxia inducible
factor-1ß (HIF-1ß) from small abalone Haliotis diversicolor were cloned. The cDNA
of H. diversicolor HIF-1a (HdHIF-1a) is 2,833 bp encoding a protein of 711aa and 
H. diversicolor HIF-1ß (HdHIF-1ß) is 1919 bp encoding a protein of 590aa. Similar
to other species' HIF-1, HdHIF-1 has one basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain and
two Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domains, and HdHIF-1a has a oxygen-dependent degradation
domain (ODDD) with two proline hydroxylation motifs and a C-terminal
transactivation domain (C-TAD) with an asparagine hydroxylation motif. Under
normoxic conditions, HdHIF-1a and HdHIF-1ß mRNAs were constitutively present in
all examined tissues. Under hypoxia (2.0mg/L DO at 25°C) stress, HdHIF-1a
expression was up-regulated in gills at 4h, 24h and 96 h, and in hemocytes at 24h
and 96 h, while HdHIF-1ß remained relatively constant. Under thermal stress
(31°C), HdHIF-1a expression was significantly increased in gills at 4h, and
hemocytes at 0 h and 4 h, while HdHIF-1ß expression still remained relatively
constant. These results suggested that HIF-1a may play an important role in
adaption to poor environment in H. diversicolor.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24211325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 21;8(10):e78317. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078317.
eCollection 2013.

Enhancement of behavioral sensitization, anxiety-like behavior, and hippocampal
and frontal cortical CREB levels following cocaine abstinence in mice exposed to 
cocaine during adolescence.

Valzachi MC(1), Teodorov E, Marcourakis T, Bailey A, Camarini R.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Farmacologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade
de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

Adolescence has been linked to greater risk-taking and novelty-seeking behavior
and a higher prevalence of drug abuse and risk of relapse. Decreases in cyclic
adenosine monophosphate response element binding protein (CREB) and
phosphorylated CREB (pCREB) have been reported after repeated cocaine
administration in animal models. We compared the behavioral effects of cocaine
and abstinence in adolescent and adult mice and investigated possible age-related
differences in CREB and pCREB levels. Adolescent and adult male Swiss mice
received one daily injection of saline or cocaine (10 mg/kg, i.p.) for 8 days. On
day 9, the mice received a saline injection to evaluate possible environmental
conditioning. After 9 days of withdrawal, the mice were tested in the elevated
plus maze to evaluate anxiety-like behavior. Twelve days after the last
saline/cocaine injection, the mice received a challenge injection of either
cocaine or saline, and locomotor activity was assessed. One hour after the last
injection, the brains were extracted, and CREB and pCREB levels were evaluated
using Western blot in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and hippocampus. The
cocaine-pretreated mice during adolescence exhibited a greater magnitude of the
expression of behavioral sensitization and greater cocaine withdrawal-induced
anxiety-like behavior compared with the control group. Significant increases in
CREB levels in the PFC and hippocampus and pCREB in the hippocampus were observed
in cocaine-abstinent animals compared with the animals treated with cocaine in
adulthood. Interestingly, significant negative correlations were observed between
cocaine sensitization and CREB levels in both regions. These results suggest that
the behavioral and neurochemical consequences of psychoactive substances in a
still-developing nervous system can be more severe than in an already mature
nervous system.

PMCID: PMC3804566
PMID: 24205196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 29;8(10):e77304. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077304.
eCollection 2013.

All-trans retinoic acid modulates ORMDL3 expression via transcriptional
regulation.

Zhuang LL(1), Huang BX, Feng J, Zhu LH, Jin R, Qiu LZ, Zhou GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China.

All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) is an active metabolite of Vitamin A, it shows
protective effects on asthma, including maintains airway epithelial integrity,
inhibits asthma effector cells differentiation, modulates immune response, et al.
However, the promoting effect of ATRA on Th2 response has restricted the clinical
application of ATRA in asthma treatment. ORMDL3 is a candidate gene of childhood 
onset asthma, and high-transcript of ORMDL3 is associated with the development of
asthma. Here we show that ATRA increases ORMDL3 production in vitro via inducing 
PKA-dependent CREB phosphorylation which in turn binds to the CRE element in
promoter region of ORMDL3 and initiates ORMDL3 transcription. This finding is in 
consistent with the previous reports that ATRA could regulate target genes
without the presence of retinoic acid response element (RARE) in promoter region 
but through other signals such as PKA/CREB. Nevertheless, in the present study,
the traditional signal pathway of ATRA, retinoic acid receptor (RAR) signal
transduction pathway, indirectly modulated ORMDL3 expression. RAR-a agonist
(Am-80) increased ORMDL3 production even though there was no RARE in ORMDL3
promoter, introns or 3'-downstream region. Besides, the signal of RAR might
differ from that of ATRA since Am-80 failed to induce CREB activation. In
conclusion, our data indicate that ATRA facilitates ORMDL3 production probable
through PKA/CREB, and this may be a starting point for more detailed mechanism
researches on ATRA and asthma.

PMCID: PMC3812219
PMID: 24204796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Autophagy. 2013 Dec;9(12):2069-86. doi: 10.4161/auto.26447. Epub 2013 Nov 1.

MTOR inhibition attenuates DNA damage and apoptosis through autophagy-mediated
suppression of CREB1.

Wang Y(1), Hu Z, Liu Z, Chen R, Peng H, Guo J, Chen X, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology; Department of Physiology;
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and School of Basic Medicine; Graduate School
of Peking Union Medical College; Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking
Union Medical College; Beijing, China.

Hyperactivation of mechanistic target of rapamycin (MTOR) is a common feature of 
human cancers, and MTOR inhibitors, such as rapamycin, are thus becoming
therapeutics in targeting certain cancers. However, rapamycin has also been found
to compromise the efficacy of chemotherapeutics to cells with hyperactive MTOR.
Here, we show that loss of TSC2 or PTEN enhanced etoposide-induced DNA damage and
apoptosis, which was blunted by suppression of MTOR with either rapamycin or RNA 
interference. cAMP response element-binding protein 1 (CREB1), a nuclear
transcription factor that regulates genes involved in survival and death, was
positively regulated by MTOR in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and cancer
cell lines. Silencing Creb1 expression with siRNA protected MTOR-hyperactive
cells from DNA damage-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, loss of TSC2 or PTEN
impaired either etoposide or nutrient starvation-induced autophagy, which in
turn, leads to CREB1 hyperactivation. We further elucidated an inverse
correlation between autophagy activity and CREB1 activity in the kidney tumor
tissue obtained from a TSC patient and the mouse livers with hepatocyte-specific 
knockout of PTEN. CREB1 induced DNA damage and subsequent apoptosis in response
to etoposide in autophagy-defective cells. Reactivation of CREB1 or inhibition of
autophagy not only improved the efficacy of rapamycin but also alleviated MTOR
inhibition-mediated chemoresistance. Therefore, autophagy suppression of CREB1
may underlie the MTOR inhibition-mediated chemoresistance. We suggest that
inhibition of MTOR in combination with CREB1 activation may be used in the
treatment of cancer caused by an abnormal PI3K-PTEN-AKT-TSC1/2-MTOR signaling
pathway. CREB1 activators should potentiate the efficacy of chemotherapeutics in 
treatment of these cancers.

PMID: 24189100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Plant Cell. 2013 Oct;25(10):4262-77. doi: 10.1105/tpc.113.115899. Epub 2013 Oct
31.

Crosstalk between the unfolded protein response and pathways that regulate
pathogenic development in Ustilago maydis.

Heimel K(1), Freitag J, Hampel M, Ast J, Bölker M, Kämper J.

Author information: 
(1)Georg-August-University Göttingen, Institute for Microbiology and Genetics,
Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics, 37077 Goettingen, Germany.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a conserved eukaryotic signaling pathway
regulating endoplasmic reticulum (ER) homeostasis during ER stress, which
results, for example, from an increased demand for protein secretion. Here, we
characterize the homologs of the central UPR regulatory proteins Hac1 (for
Homologous to ATF/CREB1) and Inositol Requiring Enzyme1 in the plant pathogenic
fungus Ustilago maydis and demonstrate that the UPR is tightly interlinked with
the b mating-type-dependent signaling pathway that regulates pathogenic
development. Exact timing of UPR is required for virulence, since premature
activation interferes with the b-dependent switch from budding to filamentous
growth. In addition, we found crosstalk between UPR and the b target Clampless1
(Clp1), which is essential for cell cycle release and proliferation in planta.
The unusual C-terminal extension of the U. maydis Hac1 homolog, Cib1 (for Clp1
interacting bZIP1), mediates direct interaction with Clp1. The interaction
between Clp1 and Cib1 promotes stabilization of Clp1, resulting in enhanced ER
stress tolerance that prevents deleterious UPR hyperactivation. Thus, the
interaction between Cib1 and Clp1 constitutes a checkpoint to time developmental 
progression and increased secretion of effector proteins at the onset of
biotrophic development. Crosstalk between UPR and the b mating-type regulated
developmental program adapts ER homeostasis to the changing demands during
biotrophy.

PMCID: PMC3877826
PMID: 24179126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Oct;19(10):1106-14. doi: 10.1038/mp.2013.144. Epub 2013 Oct 
29.

Serotonin 2C receptor antagonists induce fast-onset antidepressant effects.

Opal MD(1), Klenotich SC(1), Morais M(2), Bessa J(2), Winkle J(3), Doukas D(3),
Kay LJ(4), Sousa N(2), Dulawa SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Committee on Neurobiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA [2]
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurosciences, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA. (2)1] Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS),
School of Health Sciences, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal [2] ICVS/3B's, PT
Government Associate Laboratory, Braga/Guimarães, Portugal. (3)Department of
Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurosciences, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)1] Committee on Neurobiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA [2]
Institute for Mind and Body, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA [3]
Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

Current antidepressants must be administered for several weeks to produce
therapeutic effects. We show that selective serotonin 2C (5-HT2C) antagonists
exert antidepressant actions with a faster-onset (5 days) than that of current
antidepressants (14 days) in mice. Subchronic (5 days) treatment with 5-HT2C
antagonists induced antidepressant behavioral effects in the chronic forced swim 
test (cFST), chronic mild stress (CMS) paradigm and olfactory bulbectomy
paradigm. This treatment regimen also induced classical markers of antidepressant
action: activation of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) and induction 
of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in the medial prefrontal cortex
(mPFC). None of these effects were induced by subchronic treatment with
citalopram, a prototypical selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI). Local
infusion of 5-HT2C antagonists into the ventral tegmental area was sufficient to 
induce BDNF in the mPFC, and dopamine D1 receptor antagonist treatment blocked
the antidepressant behavioral effects of 5-HT2C antagonists. 5-HT2C antagonists
also activated mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and eukaryotic elongation
factor 2 (eEF2) in the mPFC, effects recently linked to rapid antidepressant
action. Furthermore, 5-HT2C antagonists reversed CMS-induced atrophy of mPFC
pyramidal neurons. Subchronic SSRI treatment, which does not induce
antidepressant behavioral effects, also activated mTOR and eEF2 and reversed
CMS-induced neuronal atrophy, indicating that these effects are not sufficient
for antidepressant onset. Our findings reveal that 5-HT2C antagonists are
putative fast-onset antidepressants, which act through enhancement of
mesocortical dopaminergic signaling.

PMID: 24166413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Neurosci. 2013 Oct 23;33(43):16930-44. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3513-12.2013.

Regulator of calcineurin 1 modulates expression of innate anxiety and anxiogenic 
responses to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor treatment.

Hoeffer CA(1), Wong H, Cain P, Levenga J, Cowansage KK, Choi Y, Davy C, Majmundar
N, McMillan DR, Rothermel BA, Klann E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience & Physiology, Druckenmiller Neuroscience Institute,
New York University School of Medicine, Langone Medical Center, New York, New
York 10016, Center for Neural Science, New York University, New York, New York
10003, Department of Psychology, Excelsior College, Albany, New York 12203, and
Departments of Internal Medicine and Molecular Biology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390.

Regulator of calcineurin 1 (RCAN1) controls the activity of
calcium/calmodulin-dependent phosphatase calcineurin (CaN), which has been
implicated in human anxiety disorders. Previously, we reported that RCAN1
functioned as an inhibitor of CaN activity in the brain. However, we now find
enhanced phosphorylation of a CaN substrate, cAMP response element-binding
protein (CREB), in the brains of Rcan1 knock-out (KO) mice. Consistent with
enhanced CREB activation, we also observe enhanced expression of a CREB
transcriptional target, brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in Rcan1 KO
mice. We also discovered that RCAN1 deletion or blockade of RCAN1-CaN interaction
reduced CaN and protein phosphatase-1 localization to nuclear-enriched protein
fractions and promoted CREB activation. Because of the potential links between
CREB, BDNF, and anxiety, we examined the role of RCAN1 in the expression of
innate anxiety. Rcan1 KO mice displayed reduced anxiety in several tests of
unconditioned anxiety. Acute pharmacological inhibition of CaN rescued these
deficits while transgenic overexpression of human RCAN1 increased anxiety.
Finally, we found that Rcan1 KO mice lacked the early anxiogenic response to the 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) fluoxetine and had improved latency
for its therapeutic anxiolytic effects. Together, our study suggests that RCAN1
plays an important role in the expression of anxiety-related and SSRI-related
behaviors through CaN-dependent signaling pathways. These results identify RCAN1 
as a mediator of innate emotional states and possible therapeutic target for
anxiety.

PMCID: PMC3807023
PMID: 24155299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Neurochem Res. 2013 Dec;38(12):2559-69. doi: 10.1007/s11064-013-1169-y. Epub 2013
Oct 23.

Effects of treadmill exercise on neural stem cells, cell proliferation, and
neuroblast differentiation in the subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus in
cyclooxygenase-2 knockout mice.

Nam SM(1), Kim JW, Yoo DY, Choi JH, Kim W, Jung HY, Won MH, Hwang IK, Seong JK,
Yoon YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Veterinary Medicine, and
Research Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University, Seoul,
151-742, South Korea.

Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) function has been implicated in a number of
physiological processes, including inflammatory responses, synaptic transmission,
and synaptic plasticity in the brain. However, the specific role of COX-2 in
exercise-induced neurogenesis is still debatable. Here, we assessed the role of
COX-2 in exercise-induced plasticity by comparing COX-2 knockout mice to
wild-type control littermates. We investigated the number of neural stem cells,
and the degree of cell proliferation and neuronal differentiation in COX-2
knockout and its wild-type mice that either exercised or remained inactive.
Wild-type and COX-2 knockout mice were put on a treadmill and were either
sedentary or were forced to run 1 h/day for five consecutive days at a pace of
10-12 m/min for 5 weeks. Loss of COX-2 expression in the knockout mice was
confirmed with two measures: (1) COX immunolabeling in the hippocampus, and (2)
the identification of abnormal kidney development using hematoxylin and eosin
staining, including subcapsular glomerular hypoplasia and hypertrophy of the
deeper cortical glomeruli. Compared to wild-type mice, COX-2 knockout mice
exhibited a significant reduction in the neural stem cells (nestin-positive
cells), cell proliferation (Ki67-positive cells), and neuroblast differentiation 
(doublecortin-positive cells). In contrast, exercise significantly increased the 
neural stem cells, cell proliferation, and neuroblast differentiation in both the
wild-type and COX-2 knockout mice although the NeuN-immunoreactive neurons were
similar in all groups. Expression of phosphorylated cAMP-response element binding
protein was decreased in knockout mice. Exercise increased its expression in the 
subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus in both wild-type and knockout mice. These 
results suggest that the COX-2 pathway is one of important factors on neural stem
cells, cell proliferation and neuroblast differentiation in sedentary mice. The
ability of exercise to increase these types of neural plasticity, regardless of
COX-2 signaling, suggests that the effects of exercise on neural stem cells, cell
proliferation, and neuroblast differentiation are induced via a pathway that is
independent of COX-2.

PMID: 24150751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Anal Chem. 2014 Jan 7;86(1):395-402. doi: 10.1021/ac401821d. Epub 2013 Dec 16.

Multiple reaction monitoring mass spectrometry for the discovery and
quantification of O-GlcNAc-modified proteins.

Maury JJ(1), Ng D, Bi X, Bardor M, Choo AB.

Author information: 
(1)Bioprocessing Technology Institute, Agency for Science, Technology and
Research (A*STAR) , 20 Biopolis Way, #06-01 Centros, Singapore 138668.

O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) is a post-translational modification
regulating proteins involved in a variety of cellular processes and diseases.
Unfortunately, O-GlcNAc remains challenging to detect and quantify by shotgun
mass spectrometry (MS) where it is time-consuming and tedious. Here, we
investigate the potential of Multiple Reaction Monitoring Mass Spectrometry
(MRM-MS), a targeted MS method, to detect and quantify native O-GlcNAc modified
peptides without extensive labeling and enrichment. We report the ability of
MRM-MS to detect a standard O-GlcNAcylated peptide and show that the method is
robust to quantify the amount of O-GlcNAcylated peptide with a method detection
limit of 3 fmol. In addition, when diluted by 100-fold in a trypsin-digested
whole cell lysate, the O-GlcNAcylated peptide remains detectable. Next, we apply 
this strategy to study glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK-3ß), a kinase able to
compete with O-GlcNAc transferase and modify identical site on proteins. We
demonstrate that GSK-3ß is itself modified by O-GlcNAc in human embryonic stem
cells (hESC). Indeed, by only using gel electrophoresis to grossly enrich GSK-3ß 
from whole cell lysate, we discover by MRM-MS a novel O-GlcNAcylated GSK-3ß
peptide, bearing 3 potential O-GlcNAcylation sites. We confirm our finding by
quantifying the increase of O-GlcNAcylation, following hESC treatment with an
O-GlcNAc hydrolase inhibitor. This novel O-GlcNAcylation could potentially be
involved in an autoinhibition mechanism. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first report utilizing MRM-MS to detect native O-GlcNAc modified peptides.
This could potentially facilitate rapid discovery and quantification of new
O-GlcNAcylated peptides/proteins.

PMID: 24144119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. BMC Psychiatry. 2013 Oct 21;13:273. doi: 10.1186/1471-244X-13-273.

Dysregulation of leukocyte gene expression in women with medication-refractory
depression versus healthy non-depressed controls.

Iacob E(1), Light KC, Tadler SC, Weeks HR, White AT, Hughen RW, Vanhaitsma TA,
Bushnell L, Light AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt 
Lake City, UT, USA. eli.iacob@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Depressive Disorders (DD) are a great financial and social burden.
Females display 70% higher rate of depression than males and more than 30% of
these patients do not respond to conventional medications. Thus
medication-refractory female patients are a large, under-served, group where new 
biological targets for intervention are greatly needed.
METHODS: We used real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) to
evaluate mRNA gene expression from peripheral blood leukocytes for 27 genes,
including immune, HPA-axis, ion channels, and growth and transcription factors.
Our sample included 23 females with medication refractory DD: 13 with major
depressive disorder (MDD), 10 with bipolar disorder (BPD). Our comparison group
was 19 healthy, non-depressed female controls. We examined differences in mRNA
expression in DD vs. controls, in MDD vs. BPD, and in patients with greater vs.
lesser depression severity.
RESULTS: DD patients showed increased expression for IL-10, IL-6, OXTR, P2RX7,
P2RY1, and TRPV1. BPD patients showed increased APP, CREB1, NFKB1, NR3C1, and
SPARC and decreased TNF expression. Depression severity was related to increased 
IL-10, P2RY1, P2RX1, and TRPV4 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These results support prior findings of dysregulation in immune
genes, and provide preliminary evidence of dysregulation in purinergic and other 
ion channels in females with medication-refractory depression, and in
transcription and growth factors in those with BPD. If replicated in future
research examining protein levels as well as mRNA, these pathways could
potentially be used to explore biological mechanisms of depression and to develop
new drug targets.

PMCID: PMC4015603
PMID: 24143878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Biotechnol. 2013 Dec;168(4):315-23. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2013.10.008. Epub
2013 Oct 16.

E. coli sabotages the in vivo production of O-linked
ß-N-acetylglucosamine-modified proteins.

Goodwin OY(1), Thomasson MS, Lin AJ, Sweeney MM, Macnaughtan MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803,
United States.

The O-linked ß-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) post-translational modification is 
an important, regulatory modification of cytosolic and nuclear enzymes. To date, 
no 3-dimensional structures of O-GlcNAc-modified proteins exist due to
difficulties in producing sufficient quantities with either in vitro or in vivo
techniques. Recombinant co-expression of substrate protein and O-GlcNAc
transferase in Escherichia coli was used to produce O-GlcNAc-modified domains of 
human cAMP responsive element-binding protein (CREB1) and Abelson tyrosine-kinase
2 (ABL2). Recombinant expression in E. coli is an advantageous approach, but only
small quantities of insoluble O-GlcNAc-modified protein were produced. Adding
ß-N-acetylglucosaminidase inhibitor,
O-(2-acetamido-2-dexoy-D-glucopyranosylidene)amino-N-phenylcarbamate (PUGNAc), to
the culture media provided the first evidence that an E. coli enzyme cleaves
O-GlcNAc from proteins in vivo. With the inhibitor present, the yields of
O-GlcNAc-modified protein increased. The E. coli ß-N-acetylglucosaminidase was
isolated and shown to cleave O-GlcNAc from a synthetic O-GlcNAc-peptide in vitro.
The identity of the interfering ß-N-acetylglucosaminidase was confirmed by
testing a nagZ knockout strain. In E. coli, NagZ natively cleaves the
GlcNAc-ß1,4-N-acetylmuramic acid linkage to recycle peptidoglycan in the
cytoplasm and cleaves the GlcNAc-ß-O-linkage of foreign O-GlcNAc-modified
proteins in vivo, sabotaging the recombinant co-expression system.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24140293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jan 15;23(2):95-106. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0346. Epub 2013
Oct 19.

Loss of aryl hydrocarbon receptor promotes gene changes associated with premature
hematopoietic stem cell exhaustion and development of a myeloproliferative
disorder in aging mice.

Singh KP(1), Bennett JA, Casado FL, Walrath JL, Welle SL, Gasiewicz TA.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Environmental Medicine, University of Rochester School of
Medicine , Rochester, New York.

Loss of immune function and increased hematopoietic disease are among the most
clinically significant consequences of aging. Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs)
from mice lacking aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) have high rates of cell
division. Studies were designed to test the hypothesis that aging AhR-null allele
(AhR-KO) mice develop premature HSC exhaustion, and changes leading to
hematological disease. Compared to wild-type, aging AhR-KO mice showed a
decreased survival rate, splenomegaly, increased circulating white blood cells,
hematopoietic cell accumulation in tissues, and anemia. Analysis of bone marrow
indicated increased numbers of stem/progenitor and lineage-committed cells, but
decreased erythroid progenitors. There was also decreased self-renewal capacity
of HSCs determined by competitive repopulation and serial transplantation. HSCs
also showed increased levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS), Ki-67, and
<U+03B3>-H2A.X, but decreased p16(Ink4a). Splenic cells from aging KO mice had abnormal 
expression of genes, including Gata-1, Sh2d3c, Gfi-1, p21, and c-myc, involved in
trafficking and associated with leukemia. HSCs from AhR-KO mice had gene changes 
related to HSC maintenance and consistent with phenotype observed. The most
prominent gene changes (overexpression of Srpk2, Creb1, Hes1, mtor, pdp1) have
been associated with HSC hyperproliferation, leukemia, and accelerated aging.
Pathway analyses also indicated an enrichment of genes associated with oxidative 
stress, acute myelogenous leukemia, aging, and heat shock response, and the
ß-catenin/Wnt pathways. These data indicate that loss of AhR and associated
changes in multiple signaling pathways promote premature HSC exhaustion and
development of a myeloproliferative disorder. They also implicate a critical role
of the AhR in the regulation of HSCs.

PMCID: PMC3887405
PMID: 24138668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Nov 5;110(45):18150-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1312414110. Epub 2013 Oct 14.

Reward-based hypertension control by a synthetic brain-dopamine interface.

Rössger K(1), Charpin-El Hamri G, Fussenegger M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, Eidgenössiche Technische
Hochschule Zurich, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland.

Synthetic biology has significantly advanced the design of synthetic
trigger-controlled devices that can reprogram mammalian cells to interface with
complex metabolic activities. In the brain, the neurotransmitter dopamine
coordinates communication with target neurons via a set of dopamine receptors
that control behavior associated with reward-driven learning. This dopamine
transmission has recently been suggested to increase central sympathetic outflow,
resulting in plasma dopamine levels that correlate with corresponding brain
activities. By functionally rewiring the human dopamine receptor D1 (DRD1) via
the second messenger cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) to synthetic promoters
containing cAMP response element-binding protein 1(CREB1)-specific
cAMP-responsive operator modules, we have designed a synthetic dopamine-sensitive
transcription controller that reversibly fine-tunes specific target gene
expression at physiologically relevant brain-derived plasma dopamine levels.
Following implantation of circuit-transgenic human cell lines insulated by
semipermeable immunoprotective microcontainers into mice, the designer device
interfaced with dopamine-specific brain activities and produced a systemic
expression response when the animal's reward system was stimulated by food,
sexual arousal, or addictive drugs. Reward-triggered brain activities were able
to remotely program peripheral therapeutic implants to produce sufficient amounts
of the atrial natriuretic peptide, which reduced the blood pressure of
hypertensive mice to the normal physiologic range. Seamless control of
therapeutic transgenes by subconscious behavior may provide opportunities for
treatment strategies of the future.

PMCID: PMC3831458
PMID: 24127594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Mar;54(3):216-28. doi: 10.1002/mc.22092. Epub 2013 Oct 11.

Silymarin suppresses the PGE2 -induced cell migration through inhibition of EP2
activation; G protein-dependent PKA-CREB and G protein-independent Src-STAT3
signal pathways.

Woo SM(1), Min KJ, Chae IG, Chun KS, Kwon TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Keimyung University, Daegu,
South Korea.

Silymarin has been known as a chemopreventive agent, and possesses multiple
anti-cancer activities including induction of apoptosis, inhibition of
proliferation and growth, and blockade of migration and invasion. However,
whether silymarin could inhibit prostaglandin (PG) E2 -induced renal cell
carcinoma (RCC) migration and what are the underlying mechanisms are not well
elucidated. Here, we found that silymarin markedly inhibited PGE2 -stimulated
migration. PGE2 induced G protein-dependent CREB phosphorylation via protein
kinase A (PKA) signaling, and PKA inhibitor (H89) inhibited PGE2 -mediated
migration. Silymarin reduced PGE2 -induced CREB phosphorylation and CRE-promoter 
activity. PGE2 also activated G protien-independent signaling pathways (Src and
STAT3) and silymarin reduced PGE2 -induced phosphorylation of Src and STAT3.
Inhibitor of Src (Saracatinib) markedly reduced PGE2 -mediated migration. We
found that EP2, a PGE2 receptor, is involved in PGE2 -mediated cell migration.
Down regulation of EP2 by EP2 siRNA and EP2 antagonist (AH6809) reduced PGE2
-inudced migration. In contrast, EP2 agonist (Butaprost) increased cell migration
and silymarin effectively reduced butaprost-mediated cell migration. Moreover,
PGE2 increased EP2 expression through activation of positive feedback mechanism, 
and PGE2 -induced EP2 expression, as well as basal EP2 levels, were reduced in
silymarin-treated cells. Taken together, our study demonstrates that silymarin
inhibited PGE2 -induced cell migration through inhibition of EP2 signaling
pathways (G protein dependent PKA-CREB and G protein-independent Src-STAT3).

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24127286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Mol Ecol. 2013 Nov;22(21):5430-40. doi: 10.1111/mec.12493. Epub 2013 Oct 7.

Variation at phenological candidate genes correlates with timing of dispersal and
plumage morph in a sedentary bird of prey.

Chakarov N(1), Jonker RM, Boerner M, Hoffman JI, Krüger O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Behaviour, Bielefeld University, PO Box 10 01 31, 33501, 
Bielefeld, Germany.

Polymorphic genes involved in the conserved molecular signalling of circadian and
circannual clocks may play important roles in governing the timing of breeding
and dispersal and thereby affect fitness in vertebrates. However, relatively few 
studies have explored associations between phenological candidate genes and
behaviour, and these are somewhat biased towards particular taxonomic groups such
as passerine birds and salmonid fish. Consequently, we assayed microsatellite
polymorphisms within the exonic and 3' untranslated regions of the regulatory
genes CLOCK, NPAS2, ADCYAP1 and CREB1 in the common buzzard (Buteo buteo), a
polymorphic raptor species with three plumage morphs that differ in key life
history traits including lifetime reproductive success. In contrast to studies of
passerines, CLOCK poly-glutamine (poly-Q) was found to be monomorphic in 976
common buzzard nestlings as well as in three other Buteo species. Moreover, none 
of the candidate genes were significantly associated with fledging dates,
although intermediately melanized females were found to lay earlier on average
than light or dark morph individuals, and their offspring carried longer ADCYAP1 
alleles. In contrast, all three candidate genes explained significant variation
in one or more measures of juvenile buzzard dispersal (resighting probability,
timing of dispersal and distance dispersed). Our findings contribute towards a
broader body of work on the adaptive significance of CLOCK polymorphism, while
also building upon previous studies that have documented links between ADCYAP1
variability and the timing of migration.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24118393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Br J Pharmacol. 2014 Jan;171(1):171-85. doi: 10.1111/bph.12429.

The expression and function of histamine H3 receptors in pancreatic beta cells.

Nakamura T(1), Yoshikawa T, Noguchi N, Sugawara A, Kasajima A, Sasano H, Yanai K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Histamine and its receptors in the CNS play important
roles in energy homeostasis. Here, we have investigated the expression and role
of histamine receptors in pancreatic beta cells, which secrete insulin.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: The expression of histamine receptors in pancreatic beta
cells was examined by RT-PCR, Western blotting and immunostaining. Insulin
secretion assay, ATP measurement and calcium imaging studies were performed to
determine the function and signalling pathway of histamine H3 receptors in
glucose-induced insulin secretion (GIIS) from MIN6 cells, a mouse pancreatic beta
cell line. The function and signalling pathway of H3 receptors in MIN6 cell
proliferation were examined using pharmacological assay and Western blotting.
KEY RESULTS: Histamine H3 receptors were expressed in pancreatic beta cells. A
selective H3 receptor agonist, imetit, and a selective inverse H3 receptor
agonist, JNJ-5207852, had inhibitory and facilitatory effects, respectively, on
GIIS in MIN6 cells. Neither imetit nor JNJ-5207852 altered intracellular ATP
concentration, or intracellular calcium concentration stimulated by glucose and
KCl, indicating that GIIS signalling was affected by H3 receptor signalling
downstream of the increase in intracellular calcium concentration. Moreover,
imetit attenuated bromodeoxyuridine incorporation in MIN6 cells. The
phosphorylation of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB), which
facilitated beta cell proliferation, was inhibited, though not significantly, by 
imetit, indicating that activated H3 receptors inhibited MIN6 cell proliferation,
possibly by decreasing CREB phosphorylation.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Histamine H3 receptors were expressed in mouse beta
cells and could play a role in insulin secretion and, possibly, beta cell
proliferation.

© 2013 The British Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC3874705
PMID: 24117016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Neuromolecular Med. 2014 Mar;16(1):161-74. doi: 10.1007/s12017-013-8270-x. Epub
2013 Oct 10.

BDNF and exercise enhance neuronal DNA repair by stimulating CREB-mediated
production of apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1.

Yang JL(1), Lin YT, Chuang PC, Bohr VA, Mattson MP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging Intramural Research
Program, 251 Bayview Boulevard, Baltimore, MD, 21224, USA.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) promotes the survival and growth of
neurons during brain development and mediates activity-dependent synaptic
plasticity and associated learning and memory in the adult. BDNF levels are
reduced in brain regions affected in Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and Huntington's
diseases, and elevation of BDNF levels can ameliorate neuronal dysfunction and
degeneration in experimental models of these diseases. Because neurons accumulate
oxidative lesions in their DNA during normal activity and in neurodegenerative
disorders, we determined whether and how BDNF affects the ability of neurons to
cope with oxidative DNA damage. We found that BDNF protects cerebral cortical
neurons against oxidative DNA damage-induced death by a mechanism involving
enhanced DNA repair. BDNF stimulates DNA repair by activating cyclic AMP response
element-binding protein (CREB), which, in turn, induces the expression of
apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1 (APE1), a key enzyme in the base excision
DNA repair pathway. Suppression of either APE1 or TrkB by RNA interference
abolishes the ability of BDNF to protect neurons against oxidized DNA
damage-induced death. The ability of BDNF to activate CREB and upregulate APE1
expression is abolished by shRNA of TrkB as well as inhibitors of TrkB, PI3
kinase, and Akt kinase. Voluntary running wheel exercise significantly increases 
levels of BDNF, activates CREB, and upregulates APE1 in the cerebral cortex and
hippocampus of mice, suggesting a novel mechanism whereby exercise may protect
neurons from oxidative DNA damage. Our findings reveal a previously unknown
ability of BDNF to enhance DNA repair by inducing the expression of the DNA
repair enzyme APE1.

PMCID: PMC3948322
PMID: 24114393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Exp Dermatol. 2013 Nov;22(11):762-4. doi: 10.1111/exd.12248.

A novel adamantyl benzylbenzamide derivative, AP736, suppresses melanogenesis
through the inhibition of cAMP-PKA-CREB-activated microphthalmia-associated
transcription factor and tyrosinase expression.

Lee CS(1), Jang WH, Park M, Jung K, Baek HS, Joo YH, Park YH, Lim KM.

Author information: 
(1)Amorepacific CO R&D Center, Yongin-si, Korea.

Melanogenesis is essential for the protection of skin against UV, but excessive
production of melanin causes unaesthetic hyperpigmentation. Much effort is being 
made to develop effective depigmenting agents. Here, we found that a tyrosinase
inhibitor, AP736
(5-adamantan-1-yl-N-(2,4-dihydroxy-benzyl)-2,4-dimethoxy-benzamide) potently
suppresses tyrosinase expression, and the mechanism underlying was elucidated.
AP736 attenuated the melanin production induced by diverse melanogenic stimuli in
murine and human melanocytes. It suppressed the expression of key melanogenic
enzymes; tyrosinase, tyrosinase-related protein-1 and tyrosinase-related
protein-2. The expression of microphthalmia-associated transcription factor
(MiTF), a major promoter of melanogenesis was also decreased. AP736 inhibited the
activation of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) and phosphokinase A
(PKA), and cAMP elevation, reflecting that cAMP-PKA-CREB signalling axis was
suppressed, resulting in the downregulation of MiTF and tyrosinase. Along with
the previously reported tyrosinase inhibitory activity, the suppression of
cAMP-PKA-CREB-mediated MiTF and tyrosinase expression by AP736 may be efficient
for the treatment for hyperpigmentation.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24107097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Neurochem Res. 2013 Dec;38(12):2516-23. doi: 10.1007/s11064-013-1164-3. Epub 2013
Oct 8.

Increased hippocampal CREB phosphorylation in dopamine D3 receptor knockout mice 
following passive avoidance conditioning.

D'Amico AG(1), Scuderi S, Leggio GM, Castorina A, Drago F, D'Agata V.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Anatomy and Histology, Department of Bio-Medical Sciences,
University of Catania, Via S. Sofia, 87, 95123, Catania, Italy.

Dopamine D3 receptors (D3Rs) are implicated in synaptic plasticity and memory
processes. Previously we have shown that D3Rs mediate inhibitory effects on
learning, since D3R knockout (D 3 (-/-) ) mice display enhanced performance in
the passive avoidance task (PA). Formation of new memories is known to require de
novo synthesis of proteins related to synaptic function through the activation of
signaling pathways including the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) and
activation of the nuclear transcription factor cAMP response element binding
protein (CREB). However, there are no clear indications regarding the specific
involvement of D3Rs in the activation of these signaling cascades after
acquisition of PA. Therefore, in this study we assessed whether phosphorylation
levels of several MAPKs, Akt and CREB were differentially affected by PA in both 
wild-type (WT) and D 3 (-/-) mice hippocampi. Animals were divided in Naïve,
unconditioned stimulus trained, conditioned stimulus trained and conditioned
animals. Phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK 1/2), 
c-Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38, as well as of Akt and CREB were
determined. Acquisition of PA significantly increased pCREB levels both in WT and
D 3 (-/-) mice. The extent of PA-driven increase in pCREB levels was
significantly higher in mice lacking D3Rs. Similarly, pERK 1/2 was further
augmented in trained D 3 (-/-) mice as compared to trained WTs, whereas JNK and
p38 phosphorylation was not affected neither by PA nor by genetic background.
Finally, Akt activation was observed in D 3 (-/-) mice, but not in response to
PA. In conclusion, these data supports the notion that D3Rs might modulate CREB
phosphorylation after acquisition of PA, probably via activation of ERK
signaling.

PMID: 24100927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2013 Dec;62(6):539-48. doi: 10.1097/FJC.0000000000000014.

Inhibition of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt signaling attenuates
hypoxia-induced pulmonary artery remodeling and suppresses CREB depletion in
arterial smooth muscle cells.

Garat CV(1), Crossno JT Jr, Sullivan TM, Reusch JE, Klemm DJ.

Author information: 
(1)*Cardiovascular Pulmonary Research Laboratory, University of Colorado Anschutz
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO; Divisions of Pulmonary Science and Critical Care
Medicine; and Endocrinology; University of Colorado Anschutz Medical campus,
Aurora, CO; and §Research and Endocrine Services, Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Denver, CO.

Hypoxia-induced pulmonary hypertension is characterized by progressive remodeling
of the pulmonary artery (PA) system and loss of the transcription factor, cAMP
response element binding protein (CREB) in PA smooth muscle cells (SMCs).
Previous in vitro studies suggested that platelet-derived growth factor, a
mitogen produced in the hypoxic arterial wall, elicits loss of CREB in medial
SMCs via the PI3K/Akt pathway. These events trigger switching of SMCs from a
quiescent, contractile phenotype to a proliferative, migratory, dedifferentiated,
and synthetic phenotype, which contributes to PA thickening. Here, we
investigated whether inhibition of PI3K or Akt could attenuate arterial
remodeling in the lung and prevent CREB loss in PA medial SMCs in rats subjected 
to chronic hypoxia. Inhibition of either enzyme-blunted hypoxia-induced PA
remodeling and SMC CREB depletion and diminished SMC proliferation and collagen
deposition. Inhibition of Akt, but not PI3K, suppressed muscularization of distal
arterioles and blunted right ventricular hypertrophy. Interestingly, mean PA
pressure was elevated equally by hypoxia in untreated and inhibitor-treated
groups but was normalized acutely by the Rho kinase inhibitor, Fasudil. We
conclude that PI3K and Akt inhibitors can attenuate hypoxia-induced PA remodeling
and SMC CREB depletion but fail to block the development of pulmonary
hypertension because of their inability to repress Rho kinase-mediated
vasoconstriction.

PMCID: PMC4143163
PMID: 24084215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Diabetologia. 2014 Jan;57(1):236-45.

Leptin resistance and obesity in mice with deletion of methyl-CpG-binding protein
2 (MeCP2) in hypothalamic pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) neurons.

Wang X, Lacza Z, Sun YE, Han W.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) neurons in the arcuate nucleus (ARC)
regulate energy homeostasis by secreting a-melanocyte-stimulating hormone
(a-MSH), derived from POMC precursor, in response to leptin signalling.
Expression of Pomc is subject to multiple modes of regulation, including
epigenetic regulation. Methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2), a nuclear protein
essential for neuronal function, interacts with promoters to influence gene
expression. We aim to address whether MeCP2 regulates hypothalamic Pomc
expression and to investigate the role of epigenetics, particularly DNA
methylation, in this process.
METHODS: We generated a mouse line with MeCP2 specifically deleted in POMC
neurons (Mecp2 flox/y /Pomc-Cre [PKO]) and characterised its metabolic
phenotypes. We examined the DNA methylation pattern of the Pomc promoter and its 
impact on hypothalamic gene expression. We also studied the requirement of MeCP2 
for, and the effects of, DNA methylation on Pomc promoter activity using
luciferase assays.
RESULTS: PKO mice are overweight, with increased fat mass resulting from
increased food intake and respiratory exchange ratio. PKO mice also exhibit
elevated plasma leptin. Deletion of MeCP2 in POMC neurons leads to increased DNA 
methylation of the hypothalamic Pomc promoter and reduced Pomc expression.
Furthermore, in vitro studies show that hypermethylation of the Pomc promoter
reduces its transcriptional activity and reveal a functional synergy between
MeCP2 and cAMP responsive element binding protein 1 (CREB1) in positively
regulating the Pomc promoter.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our results demonstrate that MeCP2 positively
regulates Pomc expression in the hypothalamus. Absence of MeCP2 in POMC neurons
leads to increased DNA methylation of the Pomc promoter, which, in turn,
downregulates Pomc expression, leading to obesity in mice with an accentuating
degree of leptin resistance.

PMID: 24078059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Obes. 2013;2013:764742. doi: 10.1155/2013/764742. Epub 2013 Aug 29.

Alterations in phosphorylated CREB expression in different brain regions
following short- and long-term morphine exposure: relationship to food intake.

Ren X(1), Lutfy K, Mangubat M, Ferrini MG, Lee ML, Liu Y, Friedman TC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Molecular Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Charles R. Drew University of Medicine and Science and UCLA School of
Medicine, 1731 E. 120th. Street, Los Angeles, CA 90059, USA.

BACKGROUND: Activation of the cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP)/phosphorylated CREB (P-CREB) system in different brain regions has been
implicated in mediating opioid tolerance and dependence, while alteration of this
system in the lateral hypothalamus (LH) has been suggested to have a role in food
intake and body weight.
METHODS: Given that opioids regulate food intake, we measured P-CREB in different
brain regions in mice exposed to morphine treatments designed to induce different
degrees of tolerance and dependence.
RESULTS: We found that a single morphine injection or daily morphine injections
for 8 days did not influence P-CREB levels, while the escalating dose of morphine
regimen raised P-CREB levels only in the ventral tegmental area (VTA). Chronic
morphine pellet implantation for 7 days raised P-CREB levels in the LH, VTA, and 
dorsomedial nucleus of the hypothalamus (DM) but not in the nucleus accumbens and
amygdala. Increased P-CREB levels in LH, VTA, and DM following 7-day treatment
with morphine pellets and increased P-CREB levels in the VTA following escalating
doses of morphine were associated with decreased food intake and body weight.
CONCLUSION: The morphine regulation of P-CREB may explain some of the
physiological sequelae of opioid exposure including altered food intake and body 
weight.

PMCID: PMC3773431
PMID: 24073333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Int Urol Nephrol. 2014 Mar;46(3):505-10. doi: 10.1007/s11255-013-0513-0. Epub
2013 Sep 21.

A pilot study of blood epinephrine levels and CREB phosphorylation in men
undergoing prostate biopsies.

Hassan S(1), Karpova Y, Flores A, D'Agostino R Jr, Danhauer SC, Hemal A, Kulik G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Medical Center
Blvd., Winston-Salem, NC, 27157, USA.

PURPOSE: In mouse models of prostate cancer, increased epinephrine levels
accelerated tumor growth via the beta2-adrenoreceptor/PKA signaling pathway. It
is unknown, however, whether men experience increased epinephrine levels
sufficient to activate the beta2-adrenoreceptor/PKA pathway in the prostate
gland. We measured epinephrine levels in blood samples collected immediately
prior to prostate biopsies and measured phosphorylation of S133CREB (PKA site),
S112BAD, T202/Y204ERK, and S473 Akt in prostate biopsy tissue samples.
METHODS: Tissue samples and 3 ml of blood were obtained from men (n = 20)
recruited from the patients scheduled for prostate biopsies. Epinephrine levels
were measured by ELISA. Proteins were extracted from biopsied tissue, and protein
phosphorylation was measured by Western blotting with phospho-specific
antibodies. Pearson and Spearman's rank correlations were analyzed to assess
relationships between blood epinephrine levels and phosphorylation of CREB, BAD, 
AKT, and ERK.
RESULTS: Epinephrine levels above 1 nM were detected in 5 of 20 patients. A
strong positive correlation was observed between increased epinephrine levels and
CREB phosphorylation. In contrast, no correlation was observed between
epinephrine levels and phosphorylation of ERK, BAD, or AKT.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that increased blood epinephrine levels activate 
the beta2-adrenoreceptor/PKA signaling pathway in human prostate glands. These
results will inform future studies to examine whether beta2-selective blockers
can inhibit activation of the epinephrine/ADRB2/PKA pathway in prostate tumors of
men with increased epinephrine levels and explore the use of beta2-selective
blockers as adjuvant therapy for prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3959255
PMID: 24057680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2013 Dec 1;305(11):H1646-57. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00365.2013. Epub 2013 Sep 20.

Inhibition of Orai1-mediated Ca(2+) entry is a key mechanism of the
antiproliferative action of sirolimus in human arterial smooth muscle.

König S(1), Browne S, Doleschal B, Schernthaner M, Poteser M, Mächler H, Wittchow
E, Braune M, Muik M, Romanin C, Groschner K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysics, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria;

Sirolimus (rapamycin) is used in drug-eluting stent strategies and proved clearly
superior in this application compared with other immunomodulators such as
pimecrolimus. The molecular basis of this action of sirolimus in the vascular
system is still incompletely understood. Measurements of cell proliferation in
human coronary artery smooth muscle cells (hCASM) demonstrated a higher
antiproliferative activity of sirolimus compared with pimecrolimus. Although
sirolimus lacks inhibitory effects on calcineurin, nuclear factor of activated
T-cell activation in hCASM was suppressed to a similar extent by both drugs at 10
µM. Sirolimus, but not pimecrolimus, inhibited agonist-induced and store-operated
Ca(2+) entry as well as cAMP response element binding protein (CREB)
phosphorylation in human arterial smooth muscle, suggesting the existence of an
as-yet unrecognized inhibitory effect of sirolimus on Ca(2+) signaling and
Ca(2+)-dependent gene transcription. Electrophysiological experiments revealed
that only sirolimus but not pimecrolimus significantly blocked the classical
stromal interaction molecule/Orai-mediated, store-operated Ca(2+) current
reconstituted in human embryonic kidney cells (HEK293). A link between Orai
function and proliferation was confirmed by dominant-negative knockout of Orai in
hCASM. Analysis of the effects of sirolimus on cell proliferation and CREB
activation in an in vitro model of arterial intervention using human aorta
corroborated the ability of sirolimus to suppress stent implantation-induced CREB
activation in human arteries. We suggest inhibition of store-operated Ca(2+)
entry based on Orai channels and the resulting suppression of Ca(2+)
transcription coupling as a key mechanism underlying the antiproliferative
activity of sirolimus in human arteries. This mechanism of action is specific for
sirolimus and not a general feature of drugs interacting with FK506-binding
proteins.

PMID: 24056904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Sci Signal. 2013 Sep 17;6(293):ra83. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2004214.

The transcription factor CREB enhances interleukin-17A production and
inflammation in a mouse model of atherosclerosis.

Kotla S(1), Singh NK, Heckle MR, Tigyi GJ, Rao GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 894
Union Avenue, Memphis, TN 38163, USA.

The enzyme 15-lipoxygenase (15-LO) plays a role in atherogenesis (also known as
atherosclerosis), but the underlying mechanisms are unclear. We found that
15(S)-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid [15(S)-HETE], the major 15-LO-dependent
metabolite of arachidonic acid, stimulated the production of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) by monocytes through the xanthine oxidase-mediated activation of
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase. ROS production led
to the Syk-, Pyk2-, and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-dependent
production of the proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-17A (IL-17A) in a manner
that required the transcription factor CREB (cyclic adenosine monophosphate
response element-binding protein). In addition, this pathway was required for the
15(S)-HETE-dependent migration and adhesion of monocytes to endothelial cells.
Consistent with these observations, we found that peritoneal macrophages from
apolipoprotein E-deficient (ApoE-/-) mice fed a high-fat diet (a mouse model of
atherosclerosis) exhibited increased xanthine oxidase and NADPH oxidase
activities; ROS production; phosphorylation of Syk, Pyk2, MAPK, and CREB; and
IL-17A production compared to those from similarly fed ApoE-/-:12/15-LO-/- mice. 
These events correlated with increased lipid deposits and numbers of monocytes
and macrophages in the aortic arches of ApoE-/- mice, which resulted in
atherosclerotic plaque formation. Together, these observations suggest that
15(S)-HETE exacerbates atherogenesis by enhancing CREB-dependent IL-17A
production and inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3931132
PMID: 24045154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. OMICS. 2013 Nov;17(11):584-93. doi: 10.1089/omi.2013.0007. Epub 2013 Sep 17.

A comprehensive metabolic modeling of thyroid pathway in relation to thyroid
pathophysiology and therapeutics.

Gupta MK(1), Singh DB, Shukla R, Misra K.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Bioinformatics, University Institute of Engineering and
Technology, Chhatrapati Shahu Ji Maharaj University, Kanpur, 208024, Uttar
Pradesh, India .

The thyroid pathway represents a complex interaction of different glands for
thyroid hormone synthesis. Thyrotropin releasing hormone is synthesized in the
hypothalamus and regulates thyrotropin stimulating hormone gene expression in the
pituitary gland. In order to understand the complexity of the thyroid pathways,
and using experimental data retrieved from the biomedical literature (e.g., NCBI,
HuGE Navigator, Protein Data Bank, and KEGG), we constructed a metabolic map of
the thyroid hormone pathway at a molecular level and analyzed it topologically. A
total of five hub nodes were predicted in regards to the transcription thyroid
receptor (TR), cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB), signal transducer
and activator of transcription 3 (STAT 3), nuclear factor
kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NFkB), and activator protein 1
(AP-1) as being potentially important in study of thyroid disorders and as novel 
putative therapeutic drug targets. Notably, the thyroid receptor is a highly
connected hub node and currently used as a therapeutic target in hypothyroidism. 
Our analysis represents the first comprehensive description of the thyroid
pathway, which pertains to understanding the function of the protein and gene
interaction networks. The findings from this study are therefore informative for 
pathophysiology and rational therapeutics of thyroid disorders.

PMID: 24044365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Clin Pathol. 2014 Mar;67(3):210-5. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2013-201857. Epub
2013 Sep 16.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma: clinicopathological and molecular
characterisation with emphasis on variant histomorphology.

Kao YC(1), Lan J, Tai HC, Li CF, Liu KW, Tsai JW, Fang FM, Yu SC, Huang HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei Medical University, ,
Taipei, Taiwan.

AIMS: Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is histologically typified by
nodules of histiocytoid spindle cells with pseudoangiomatoid spaces, fibrous
pseudocapsules and lymphocytic cuffs. The principal goal was to expand the
spectrum of AFHs through clinicopathological and molecular characterisation.
METHODS: Thirteen AFHs, including 11 with confirmed hallmark translocation, were 
reappraised for classic features, reactive osteoclasts, mitoses and stromal,
architectural and cytomorphological variations, with CD99, desmin and EMA stained
in available cases.
RESULTS: Seven male and six female patients ranged in age from 4 to 63 years
(median, 13), including 4 older than 20 years. Tumours were located on the
extremities (n=6), trunk (n=4) and scalp (n=3). Although fibrous pseudocapsules
were observed in all cases, four showed solid histology without pseudoangiomatoid
spaces and another one lacked peripheral lymphoid infiltrates. Nuclear
pleomorphism was striking in two cases, moderate in seven and absent in four,
with osteoclasts seen in two cases. In three AFHs with sclerotic matrix, one
exhibited perivascular hyalinisation and nuclear palisading, reminiscent of a
schwannoma. In three varyingly myxoid tumours, one closely resembled a
myoepithelioma with prominent reticular arrangement of spindle cells in an
abundant myxoid stroma. Besides EWSR1 gene rearrangement detected in four cases
by fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH), EWSR1-CREB1 fusion was confirmed in
nine cases, including a schwannoma-like AFH, and EWSR1-ATF1 fusion detected in a 
myoepithelioma-like AFH. Immunohistochemically, 56% of AFHs were positive for
EMA, 78% for desmin and 100% for CD99.
CONCLUSIONS: Molecular testing is diagnostic of variant AFHs displaying diverse
histomorphological alterations in the architectural patterns, cytomorphology and 
extracellular matrix.

PMID: 24043718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Mol Biol. 2014 Jan 9;426(1):116-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2013.09.008. Epub 2013
Sep 14.

Coordinated transcriptional regulation of Hspa1a gene by multiple transcription
factors: crucial roles for HSF-1, NF-Y, NF-<U+03BA>B, and CREB.

Sasi BK(1), Sonawane PJ(1), Gupta V(1), Sahu BS(1), Mahapatra NR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Genetics Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology, Indian
Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 600036, India. (2)Cardiovascular Genetics
Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Madras,
Chennai 600036, India. Electronic address: nmahapatra@iitm.ac.in.

Although the transcript level of inducible heat shock protein 70.3 (Hsp70.3, also
known as Hspa1a) is altered in various disease states, its transcriptional
regulation remains incompletely understood. Here, we systematically analyzed the 
Hspa1a promoter to identify major cis elements and transcription factors that may
govern the constitutive/inducible gene expression. Computational analyses coupled
with extensive in vitro (promoter-reporter activity and electrophoretic mobility 
shift assays) and in vivo (chromatin immunoprecipitation assays) revealed
interaction of several transcription factors with Hspa1a promoter motifs: HSF-1
(heat shock factor 1) at -114/-97 bp and -788/-777bp, NF-Y (nuclear transcription
factor Y) at -73/-58 bp, NF-<U+03BA>B (nuclear factor kappa B) at -133/-124 bp, and CREB
(cAMP response element binding protein) at -483/-476 bp. Consistently, siRNA
(small interfering RNA)-mediated down-regulation of each of these transcription
factors caused substantial reduction of endogenous Hspa1a expression.
Heat-shock-induced activation of Hspa1a was coordinately regulated by HSF-1 and
NF-Y/NF-<U+03BA>B. The Hspa1a expression was augmented by TNF-a (tumor necrosis
factor-alpha) and forskolin in NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB-dependent manners, respectively.
NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB also activated Hspa1a transcription in cardiac myoblasts upon
exposure to ischemia-like conditions. Taken together, this study discovered
previously unknown roles for NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB to regulate Hspa1a expression and a
coordinated action by several transcription factors for Hspa1a transactivation
under heat-shock/ischemia-like conditions and thereby provided new insights into 
the mechanism of Hspa1a regulation.

© 2013.

PMID: 24041570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2013 Nov;12(7):941-53.

Signal transduction abnormalities in suicide: focus on phosphoinositide signaling
system.

Pandey GN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry University of Illinois at Chicago,(MC 912), 1601 W.
Taylor Street, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. Gpandey@psych.uic.edu.

Suicide is a major public health concern and each year about one million people
die by suicide worldwide. Recent studies suggest that suicide may be associated
with specific neurobiological abnormalities. Earlier studies of neurobiology of
suicide focused on abnormalities of the serotonergic mechanism. These studies
suggested that some serotonin receptor subtypes may be abnormal in the postmortem
brain of suicide victims. Since these receptors are linked to signal transduction
pathways, abnormalities of signaling mechanisms have been recently studied in the
postmortem brain of suicide victims. Of particular interest is the
5-hydroxytryptamine2A receptor-linked phosphoinositide signaling system. Several 
studies have focused on the abnormalities on the component of this signaling
system and these studies suggest the abnormalities of G proteins, the effectors
phospholipase C and the second or the third messenger systems, such as protein
kinase A. Further studies revealed abnormalities in the downstream transcription 
factors such as the cyclic AMP response element binding protein and some of the
targeted genes of these transcription factors. The most important gene in this
aspect which has been studied in the suicide is the brain-derived neurotrophic
factor. Here we critically review the studies focusing on these components of the
phosphoinositide signaling system in the postmortem brain of both adult and
teenage suicide victims. These studies provide a better understanding of the
signal transduction abnormalities in suicide focusing on the phosphoinositide
signaling pathway. These studies may lead to new therapeutic agents targeting
specific sites in this signaling cascade.

PMID: 24040801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Dec;41(22):10185-98. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt821. Epub 2013
Sep 12.

E2F2 and CREB cooperatively regulate transcriptional activity of cell cycle
genes.

Laresgoiti U(1), Apraiz A, Olea M, Mitxelena J, Osinalde N, Rodriguez JA,
Fullaondo A, Zubiaga AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology,
University of the Basque Country, UPV/EHU, Bilbao 48940, Spain and Department of 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of the Basque Country, UPV/EHU,
Bilbao 48940, Spain.

E2F2 is essential for the maintenance of T lymphocyte quiescence. To identify the
full set of E2F2 target genes, and to gain further understanding of the role of
E2F2 in transcriptional regulation, we have performed ChIP-chip analyses across
the genome of lymph node-derived T lymphocytes. Here we show that during
quiescence, E2F2 binds the promoters of a large number of genes involved in DNA
metabolism and cell cycle regulation, concomitant with their transcriptional
silencing. A comparison of ChIP-chip data with expression profiling data on
resting E2f2(-)(/)(-) T lymphocytes identified a subset of 51 E2F2-specific
target genes, most of which are upregulated on E2F2 loss. Luciferase reporter
assays showed a retinoblastoma-independent role for E2F2 in the negative
regulation of these target genes. Importantly, we show that the DNA binding
activity of the transcription factor CREB contributes to E2F2-mediated repression
of Mcm5 and Chk1 promoters. siRNA-mediated CREB knockdown, expression of a
dominant negative KCREB mutant or disruption of CREB binding by mutating a CRE
motif on Mcm5 promoter, relieved E2F2-mediated transcriptional repression. Taken 
together, our data uncover a new regulatory mechanism for E2F-mediated
transcriptional control, whereby E2F2 and CREB cooperate in the transcriptional
repression of a subset of E2F2 target genes.

PMCID: PMC3905855
PMID: 24038359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Immunol. 2013 Oct 15;191(8):4299-307. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301117. Epub 2013 
Sep 13.

The p38-MSK1 signaling cascade influences cytokine production through CREB and
C/EBP factors in human neutrophils.

Mayer TZ(1), Simard FA, Cloutier A, Vardhan H, Dubois CM, McDonald PP.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pneumologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, Québec J1H 5N4, Canada;

Neutrophils influence innate and adaptative immunity by generating numerous
cytokines and chemokines whose regulation largely depends on transcriptional
activators such as NF-<U+03BA>B and C/EBP factors. In this study, we describe the
critical involvement of CREB transcription factors (CREB1 and activating
transcription factor-1) in this functional response as well as relevant upstream 
signaling components. Neutrophil stimulation with LPS or TNF led to the
phosphorylation, DNA binding activity, and chemokine promoter association of
CREB1 and activating transcription factor-1. These responses occurred downstream 
of the p38-MSK1 signaling axis, as did the phosphorylation and promoter
association of another bZIP factor, C/EBPß. Conversely, inhibition of RSK1 failed
to alter the phosphorylation of either CREB1 or C/EBPß in neutrophils. From a
more functional standpoint, the inhibition of p38 MAPK or MSK1 interfered with
cytokine generation in neutrophils. Likewise, overexpression of a
dominant-negative CREB1 mutant (K-CREB) or of a point mutant (S133A) resulted in 
a decreased ability of human neutrophil-like PLB-985 cells to generate
inflammatory cytokines (CXCL8, CCL3, CCL4, and TNF-a). Collectively, our data
show the involvement of CREB1 in neutrophil cytokine production, the key role of 
its S133 residue, important upstream signaling events, and the parallel
activation of another bZIP factor. These are all potential molecular targets that
could be exploited in the context of several chronic inflammatory diseases that
prominently feature neutrophils and their products.

PMID: 24038085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Science. 2013 Sep 6;341(6150):1120-3. doi: 10.1126/science.1240405.

A causative link between inner ear defects and long-term striatal dysfunction.

Antoine MW(1), Hübner CA, Arezzo JC, Hébert JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
10461, USA.

There is a high prevalence of behavioral disorders that feature hyperactivity in 
individuals with severe inner ear dysfunction. What remains unknown is whether
inner ear dysfunction can alter the brain to promote pathological behavior. Using
molecular and behavioral assessments of mice that carry null or tissue-specific
mutations of Slc12a2, we found that inner ear dysfunction causes motor
hyperactivity by increasing in the nucleus accumbens the levels of phosphorylated
adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate response element-binding protein (pCREB) and
phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (pERK), key mediators of
neurotransmitter signaling and plasticity. Hyperactivity was remedied by local
administration of the pERK inhibitor SL327. These findings reveal that a sensory 
impairment, such as inner ear dysfunction, can induce specific molecular changes 
in the brain that cause maladaptive behaviors, such as hyperactivity, that have
been traditionally considered exclusively of cerebral origin.

PMCID: PMC4731229
PMID: 24009395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2014 Jan;165B(1):1-8. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32198. Epub 2013 Sep 4.

Alterations of brain anatomy in mouse model of MDD created by replacement of
homologous mouse DNA sequence with an illness-associated 6-base human CREB1
promoter sequence.

Zubenko GS(1), Hughes HB, Hitchens TK, Cohen BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

We have recently reported the creation and initial characterization of an
etiology-based recombinant mouse model of a severe and inherited form of Major
Depressive Disorder (MDD). This was achieved by replacing the corresponding mouse
DNA sequence with a 6-base DNA sequence from the human CREB1 promoter that is
associated with the development of MDD in men and women from families identified 
by probands with recurrent, early-onset MDD (RE-MDD). Individuals in these
families are also at increased risk for childhood developmental disorders and
late life neurodegenerative disorders. The current study used three-dimensional
magnetic resonance microscopy (3D-MRM) to determine the effect of the resulting
humanized mutation of the mouse Creb1 gene on the anatomy of the mouse brain.
Homozygous mutant mice manifested prominent increases in the volume and surface
area of the lateral ventricles, as well as reduced volume of the anterior corpus 
callosum, compared to age/sex-matched wild-type mice. No significant genotype
effects were observed on the volume or surface area of total brain, or several
brain regions sometimes observed to be abnormal in human depression, including
hippocampus, amygdala, or striatum. These findings suggest that at least some
forms of MDD result from abnormal brain development produced by inherited genetic
variants.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24006268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2014 Jan;50(1):201-11. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2013-0057OC.

Reduced expression level of the cyclic adenosine monophosphate response
element-binding protein contributes to lung aging.

Rolewska P(1), Simm A, Silber RE, Bartling B.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Cardio-Thoracic Surgery, University Hospital Halle/Saale,
Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle/Saale, Germany.

Lung aging is associated with morphological and physiological changes in which
alterations in transcription factors, including the cyclic adenosine
monophosphate response element-binding protein (CREB), could play a role. We
studied CREB in lung tissue from mice at different ages and in response to known 
age-related factors (e.g., cellular senescence and matrix modifications with
advanced glycation end-products [AGEs]). Our study shows that protein but not
mRNA levels of CREB are reduced in the lungs of old mice. CREB reduction was also
observed in senescent human lung fibroblasts (WI-38, LuFi) and human lung
epithelial cells (A549) cultured on AGE-modified collagen matrix. Reduction of
CREB protein is partially based on pre- and posttranslational modifications as
exhibited by an increase in the CREB-regulating microRNA 34b and CREB
ubiquitination. Permanent down-regulation of CREB in lung cells impaired cell
proliferation and viability and increased the number of cells with
senescence-associated ß-galactosidase activity. CREB down-regulation was
accompanied by the reduced expression of 165 genes in WI-38 fibroblasts and A549 
epithelial cells, of which 15 genes showed a reduced expression in lung tissues
of old mice. The CREB-dependent reduction in RAB27A coding for the Ras-related
protein Rab27A and IGFBP3 coding for the insulin-like growth factor-binding
protein 3 has been confirmed for aged lung tissue, senescent fibroblasts, and
lung epithelial cells on AGE-modified collagen. Our data demonstrate that the
reduced protein expression of CREB might play a significant role in lung aging by
modifying the transcription of RAB27A, IGFBP3, and other target genes.

PMID: 23991634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Leukoc Biol. 2013 Dec;94(6):1253-64. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0812396. Epub 2013 Aug
29.

Bile acids PKA-dependently induce a switch of the IL-10/IL-12 ratio and reduce
proinflammatory capability of human macrophages.

Haselow K(1), Bode JG, Wammers M, Ehlting C, Keitel V, Kleinebrecht L, Schupp AK,
Häussinger D, Graf D.

Author information: 
(1)1.Hepatology und Infectious Diseases, Heinrich-Heine-University, Moorenstrasse
5, D-40225 Düsseldorf, Germany. dirk.graf@med.uni-duesseldorf.de.

That cholestatic conditions are accompanied by an enhanced susceptibility to
bacterial infection in human and animal models is a known phenomenon. This
correlates with the observation that bile acids have suppressive effects on cells
of innate and adaptive immunity. The present study provides evidence that in
human macrophages, bile acids inhibit the LPS-induced expression of
proinflammatory cytokines without affecting the expression of the
anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. This results in a macrophage phenotype that is 
characterized by an increased IL-10/IL-12 ratio. Correspondingly, bile acids
suppress basal phagocytic activity of human macrophages. These effects of bile
acids can be mimicked by cAMP, which is presumably induced TGR5-dependently. The 
data provided further suggest that in primary human macrophages, modulation of
the macrophage response toward LPS by bile acids involves activation of CREB,
disturbed nuclear translocation of NF-<U+03BA>B, and PKA-dependent enhancement of
LPS-induced cFos expression. The increase in cFos expression is paralleled by an 
enhanced formation of a protein complex comprising cFos and the p65 subunit of
NF-<U+03BA>B. In summary, the data provided suggest that in human macrophages, bile
acids induce an anti-inflammatory phenotype characterized by an increased
IL-10/IL-12 ratio via activation of PKA and thereby, prevent their activation as 
classically activated macrophages. This bile acid-induced modulation of
macrophage function may also be responsible for the experimentally and clinically
observed anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects of bile acids.

PMID: 23990628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Biol Chem. 2013 Oct 18;288(42):30064-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.478750. Epub
2013 Aug 29.

Steap4 plays a critical role in osteoclastogenesis in vitro by regulating
cellular iron/reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels and cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB) activation.

Zhou J(1), Ye S, Fujiwara T, Manolagas SC, Zhao H.

Author information: 
(1)From the Center for Osteoporosis and Metabolic Bone Diseases, Division of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Arkansas for Medical Sciences and the Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare
System, Little Rock, Arkansas 72205.

Iron is essential for osteoclast differentiation, and iron overload in a variety 
of hematologic diseases is associated with excessive bone resorption. Iron uptake
by osteoclast precursors via the transferrin cycle increases mitochondrial
biogenesis, reactive oxygen species production, and activation of cAMP response
element-binding protein, a critical transcription factor downstream of receptor
activator of NF-<U+03BA>B-ligand-induced calcium signaling. These changes are required
for the differentiation of osteoclast precursors to mature bone-resorbing
osteoclasts. However, the molecular mechanisms regulating cellular iron
metabolism in osteoclasts remain largely unknown. In this report, we provide
evidence that Steap4, a member of the six-transmembrane epithelial antigen of
prostate (Steap) family proteins, is an endosomal ferrireductase with a critical 
role in cellular iron utilization in osteoclasts. Specifically, we show that
Steap4 is the only Steap family protein that is up-regulated during osteoclast
differentiation. Knocking down Steap4 expression in vitro by lentivirus-mediated 
short hairpin RNAs inhibits osteoclast formation and decreases cellular ferrous
iron, reactive oxygen species, and the activation of cAMP response
element-binding protein. These results demonstrate that Steap4 is a critical
enzyme for cellular iron uptake and utilization in osteoclasts and, thus,
indispensable for osteoclast development and function.

PMCID: PMC3798475
PMID: 23990467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact. 2013 Sep;13(3):368-71.

Impact of exercise training on neuroplasticity-related growth factors in
adolescents.

Pareja-Galeano H(1), Brioche T, Sanchis-Gomar F, Montal A, Jovaní C,
Martínez-Costa C, Gomez-Cabrera MC, Viña J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine and Fundacion Investigacion
Hospital Clinico Universitario/INCLIVA, University of Valencia, Av. Blasco Ibañez
15, Valencia, Spain. helios.pareja@uv.es.

OBJECTIVES: We aimed to determine the effect of exercise training on plasma
levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), and serum insulin-like growth
factor-1 (IGF-1) as well as cAMP response element-binding (CREB) activation in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in adolescents.
METHODS: Nine trained and seven sedentary male adolescents, matched in age
(14.0±2.2 years), were recruited for the study. Trained boys performed higher
physical activity levels (expressed both as total energy expenditure and as
physical activity energy expenditure) and showed significant bradycardia when
compared with sedentary ones.
RESULTS: We found that BDNF and IGF-1 levels were significantly higher in trained
adolescents than in sedentary ones. However, no effect of training was found in
the activation of CREB in PBMCs.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated the increase of neuroplasticity-related proteins due
to exercise training in adolescents. Our results emphasize the significance and
impact of exercise in this developmental period.

PMID: 23989258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2013 Sep;91(9):750-8. doi: 10.1139/cjpp-2012-0399. Epub 
2013 May 1.

Elevated dopamine D2 receptor in prefrontal cortex of CUMS rats is associated
with downregulated cAMP-independent signaling pathway.

Chen C(1), Yang JM, Hu TT, Xu TJ, Xu WP, Wei W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology of Anhui Medical University, Key Laboratory
of Anti-inflammatory and Immunopharmacology of Education Ministry, Hefei 230032, 
Anhui, China.

Because depression is associated with significant morbidity and functional
disability, it is important to reveal the mechanism of action. A variety of
studies have suggested the involvement of dopaminergic receptors in the
pathophysiological mechanism of non-stress-associated depression-like behavior in
rodents. Nevertheless, controversy exists about whether chronic stress acts on
dopaminergic receptors in the prefrontal cortex. Thus, we investigated the level 
of dopamine D2 receptors (DRD2) and the possible mechanisms involved in a chronic
unpredictable mild stress (CUMS) rat model of depression. The results showed
CUMS-induced, depression-like symptoms in the rat, characterized by reduced
sucrose consumption and body mass, and increased duration of immobility in a
forced swimming test. Moreover, chronic stress upregulated the expression of DRD2
but downregulated protein kinase A (PKA), transcription factor cAMP response
element binding protein (CREB), and phospho-CREB (p-CREB) in the prefrontal
cortex, as demonstrated by Western blot. Notably, in the rat model of depression,
decreased cyclic adenine monophosphate (cAMP) levels and PKA activity were
present at the same time, which is consistent with clinical findings in depressed
patients. Our findings suggested that dopaminergic system dysfunction could play 
a central role in stress-related disorders such as depression.

PMID: 23984873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Biol Chem. 2013 Oct 4;288(40):28893-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.502682. Epub 2013 
Aug 26.

MicroRNA-433 inhibits liver cancer cell migration by repressing the protein
expression and function of cAMP response element-binding protein.

Yang Z(1), Tsuchiya H, Zhang Y, Hartnett ME, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Medicine and Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer
Institute, University of Utah School of Medicine, and.

We show for the first time that potent microRNA-433 (miR-433) inhibition of
expression of the cAMP response element-binding protein CREB1 represses
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell migration. We identified a miR-433 seed match
region in human and mouse CREB1 3'-UTRs. Overexpression of miR-433 markedly
decreased human CREB1 3'-UTR reporter activity, and the inhibitory effect of
miR-433 was alleviated upon mutation of its binding site. Ectopic expression of
miR-433 reduced CREB1 protein levels in a variety of human and mouse cancer
cells, including HeLa, Hepa1, Huh7, and HepG2. Human CREB1 protein levels in
highly invasive MHCC97H cells were diminished by expression of miR-433 but were
induced by miR-433 antagomir (anti-miR-433). The expression of mouse CREB1
protein negatively correlated with miR-433 levels in nuclear receptor Shp(-/-)
liver tissues and liver tumors compared with wild-type mice. miR-433 exhibited a 
significant repression of MHCC97H cell migration, which was reversed by
anti-miR-433. Overexpressing miR-433 inhibited focus formation dramatically,
demonstrating that miR-433 may exert a tumor suppressor function. Knockdown of
CREB1 by siRNAs impeded MHCC97H cell migration and invasion and antagonized the
effect of anti-miR-433. Interestingly, CREB1 siRNA decreased MHCC97H cell
proliferation, which was not influenced by anti-miR-433. Overexpressing CREB1
decreased the inhibitory activity of miR-433. The CpG islands surrounding miR-433
were hypermethylated, and the DNA methylation agent 5'-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, but 
not the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A, drastically stimulated the 
expression of miR-433 and miR-127 in HCC cells. The latter is clustered with
miR-433. The results reveal a critical role of miR-433 in mediating HCC cell
migration via CREB1.

PMCID: PMC3789984
PMID: 23979134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Ethnopharmacol. 2013 Oct 28;150(1):108-15. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2013.08.014. Epub
2013 Aug 22.

Neuroprotective effects of Polygonum multiflorum extract against
glutamate-induced oxidative toxicity in HT22 hippocampal cells.

Kim HN(1), Kim YR, Jang JY, Choi YW, Baek JU, Hong JW, Choi YH, Shin HK, Choi BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Korean Medical Science, School of Korean Medicine, Pusan
National University, Yangsan 626-870, Republic of Korea.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Dried roots of Polygonum multiflorum have
traditionally been used in the retarding of aging process in East Asian countries
and its extracts exhibit anti-oxidative activities.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Neuroprotective effects of ethyl acetate extract from
Polygonum multiflorum (EEPM) were investigated against glutamate-induced
oxidative cell death in HT22 hippocampal cells. Cell viability, cytotoxicity,
morphological, flow cytometry, and Western blot assays were performed in order to
observe alterations of neuronal cell survival or death related pathways.
RESULTS: Pretreatment with EEPM resulted in significantly decreased
glutamate-induced neurotoxicity and also resulted in drastically inhibited
glutamate-induced apoptotic and necrotic neuronal death. To elucidate possible
pathways of neuroprotection by EEPM, we explored the activation of mitogen
activated protein kinases (MAPKs), phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase, and cAMP
responsive element binding protein (CREB). Treatment with glutamate alone led to 
activation of extracellular regulated kinase (ERK), Jun N-terminal kinase, and
p38 during the late phase after glutamate exposure, but pretreatment with EEPM
resulted in significantly attenuated activation of these proteins. Pretreatment
with EEPM resulted in increased activation of CREB. The specific inhibitors of
ERK and p38, PD98059 and SB203580, abrogated the neuroprotective effects of EEPM.
When we evaluated calpain I and striatal-enriched protein tyrosine phosphatase
(STEP), active form of calpain I was significantly increased after glutamate
exposure, and, along with this, active form of STEP showed a decrease.
Pretreatment with EEPM resulted in significant recovery of pro-calpain I and
active form of STEP caused by glutamate. Co-treatment with calpain inhibitor ALLN
and EEPM had a synergistic effect on neuronal death and contributed to blockade
of activation of both ERK and p38 with increased activation of CREB.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that Polygonum multiflorum extract may have
neuroprotective effects through both alleviation of ERK and p38 activation with
increased activation of CREB under oxidative stress and has potential as a
therapeutic intervention for treatment of oxidative neuronal death.

© 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23973786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Pathol Res Pract. 2013 Dec;209(12):803-7. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2013.07.001. Epub
2013 Jul 26.

A rare case of clear cell sarcoma with 4 types of EWSR1-ATF1 fusions detected not
in primary site but in metastatic site.

Tsukamoto Y(1), Nakata Y, Futani H, Fukunaga S, Kajimoto K, Hirota S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Pathology, Hyogo College of Medicine, 1-1 Mukogawa-cho,
Nishinomiya, Hyogo 663-8501, Japan. Electronic address: tsuka-y@hyo-med.ac.jp.

Clear cell sarcoma is a unique tumor which has EWSR1-ATF1 or EWSR1-CREB1 fusion. 
Several patterns of EWSR1-ATF1 fusion are observed in clear cell sarcoma. Since
type 5-7 fusions were reported recently, they are classified as type 1-7. We
examined EWSR1-ATF1 and EWSR1-CREB1 fusions in a single case of clear cell
sarcoma with lung metastasis in a 36-year-old Japanese man. As a result, we found
only type 1 EWSR1-ATF1 fusion in the primary site, but 4 types of EWS-ATF1 fusion
(type 1, 2, 5, 6) were detected in the metastatic site. These 4 types of fusion
were completely identical to the recent report, but the case had the same fusion 
patterns in both primary and metastatic sites. In our case, increased splicing
activity in the EWSR1-ATF1 fusion might be acquired at the metastatic site. There
is another possibility that metastasis might develop through the increased
splicing activity in the fusion.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23953591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Jul 31;14(8):15959-76. doi: 10.3390/ijms140815959.

Effect of d-opioid receptor activation on BDNF-TrkB vs. TNF-a in the mouse cortex
exposed to prolonged hypoxia.

Tian X(1), Hua F, Sandhu HK, Chao D, Balboni G, Salvadori S, He X, Xia Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Vivan L. Smith Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas Medical
School at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA. xuesong.tian@uth.tmc.edu

We investigated whether d-opioid receptor (DOR)-induced neuroprotection involves 
the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) pathway. We studied the effect of
DOR activation on the expression of BDNF and other proteins in the cortex of
C57BL/6 mice exposed to hypoxia (10% of oxygen) for 1-10 days. The results showed
that: (1) 1-day hypoxia had no appreciable effect on BDNF expression, while 3-
and 10-day hypoxia progressively decreased BDNF expression, resulting in 37.3%
reduction (p < 0.05) after 10-day exposure; (2) DOR activation with UFP-512 (1
mg/kg, i.p., daily) partially reversed the hypoxia-induced reduction of BDNF
expression in the 3- or 10-day exposed cortex; (3) DOR activation partially
reversed the hypoxia-induced reduction in functional TrkB (140-kDa) and
attenuated hypoxia-induced increase in truncated TrkB (90-kDa) in the 3- or
10-day hypoxic cortex; and (4) prolonged hypoxia (10 days) significantly
increased TNF-a level and decreased CD11b expression in the cortex, which was
completely reversed following DOR activation; and (5) there was no significant
change in pCREB and pATF-1 levels in the hypoxic cortex. We conclude that
prolonged hypoxia down-regulates BDNF-TrkB signaling leading to an increase in
TNF-a in the cortex, while DOR activation up-regulates BDNF-TrkB signaling
thereby decreasing TNF-a levels in the hypoxic cortex.

PMCID: PMC3759895
PMID: 23912236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Mol Immunol. 2013 Dec;56(4):619-29. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2013.06.016. Epub 2013 
Aug 1.

IVIG immunotherapy protects against synaptic dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease
through complement anaphylatoxin C5a-mediated AMPA-CREB-C/EBP signaling pathway.

Gong B(1), Pan Y, Zhao W, Knable L, Vempati P, Begum S, Ho L, Wang J, Yemul S,
Barnum S, Bilski A, Gong BY, Pasinetti GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Center of Excellence for Novel Approaches to
Neurotherapeutics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, United
States.

BACKGROUND: Complement component C5-derived C5a locally generated in the brain
has been shown to protect against glutamate-induced neuronal apoptosis and
beta-amyloid (Aß) toxicity, but the mechanism is not clear. In this study, we
tested the hypothesis that C5a influences upstream signal transduction pathways
associated with cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) activation, in which
alterations of CREB levels are associated with cognitive deterioration in AD.
METHODS: CREB signaling pathway, synaptic plasticity and cognitive function were 
studied in C5a receptor knockout mice (C5aR(-/-)), C5a over expressing mice
(C5a/GFAP) and in Tg2576 mice, an AD mouse model.
RESULTS: (1) Cognitive function is severely impaired in C5aR(-/-) mice,
coincident with the down-regulated CREB/CEBP pathway in brain. (2) Either the
application of recombinant-human-C5a (hrC5a) or exogenous expression of C5a in
the brain of a mouse model (C5a/GFAP) enhances this pathway. (3) Application of
hrC5a in brain slices from Tg2576 mice significantly improves deficits in
long-term potentiation (LTP), while this effect is blocked by a specific AMPA
receptor antagonist. (4) Searching for a pharmacological approach to locally
mediate C5a responses in the brain, we found that low-dose human intravenous
immunoglobulin (IVIG) treatment improves synaptic plasticity and cognitive
function through C5a-mediated induction of the CREB/CEBP pathway, while the
levels of Aß in the brain are not significantly affected.
CONCLUSION: This study for the first time provides novel evidence suggesting that
C5a may beneficially influence cognitive function in AD through an up-regulation 
of AMPA-CREB signaling pathway. IVIG may systematically improve cognitive
function in AD brain by passing Aß toxicity.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 23911420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Invest Dermatol. 2014 Feb;134(2):461-9. doi: 10.1038/jid.2013.310. Epub 2013
Jul 22.

MicroRNA-203 regulates melanosome transport and tyrosinase expression in melanoma
cells by targeting kinesin superfamily protein 5b.

Noguchi S(1), Kumazaki M(2), Yasui Y(2), Mori T(3), Yamada N(4), Akao Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)United Graduate School of Drug Discovery and Medical Information Sciences,
Gifu University, Gifu, Japan. (2)1] United Graduate School of Drug Discovery and 
Medical Information Sciences, Gifu University, Gifu, Japan [2] Graduate School of
Engineering, Gifu University, Gifu, Japan. (3)Department of Veterinary Clinical
Oncology, Faculty of Applied Biological Sciences, Gifu University, Gifu, Japan.
(4)United Graduate School of Veterinary Medical Sciences, Gifu University, Gifu, 
Japan.

MicroRNA (miR)-203 is known to be downregulated and to act as an anti-oncomir in 
melanoma cells. At present, we found that exogenous miR-203 increased
pigmentation and protein expression levels of the melanoma antigen recognized by 
T cells (Melan-As/MART1s) and/or tyrosinase (TYR) in the human melanoma cells
tested. Inversely, treatment with an inhibitor of miR-203 downregulated the
expression level of TYR. The target gene of miR-203 involved in the mechanism was
kinesin superfamily protein 5b (kif5b), which was revealed by gene silencing
using short interfering RNA and luciferase activity assay. Furthermore,
immunocytochemistry showed obvious accumulation of melanosomes around nuclei of
human melanoma Mewo cells transfected with miR-203 or siR-kif5b. Importantly,
treatment with the miR-203 inhibitor, but not miR-203, exhibited effects on human
epidermal melanocytes isolated from lightly pigmented adult skin similar to those
on melanoma cells. In addition, the data indicated that exogenous miR-203 also
negatively regulated the cAMP response element-binding protein 1
(CREB1)/microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF)/Rab27a pathway,
which is one of the main pathways active in melanoma cells. In conclusion, our
data indicated that anti-oncogenic miR-203 had a pivotal role in melanoma through
reducing melanosome transport and promoting melanogenesis by targeting kif5b and 
through negative regulation of the CREB1/MITF/Rab27a pathway.

PMID: 23884313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Neurochem. 2013 Sep;126(6):771-80. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12370. Epub 2013 Aug 6.

microRNA-181a is involved in insulin-like growth factor-1-mediated regulation of 
the transcription factor CREB1.

Liu Y(1), Zhao Z, Yang F, Gao Y, Song J, Wan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, Hubei, China.

microRNAs are a class of small non-coding RNA molecules negatively regulating
gene expression at post-transcriptional level in many tissues including the
central nervous system. cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) is a key
nuclear factor highly expressed in hippocampal neurons on which many signal
pathways converge. Recent studies have found that microRNA-181a is rich in mature
nerve cells, and bioinformatics analysis shows that the CREB1 mRNA
3'-untranslated region (3'UTR) contains complementary sequence to the miR-181a
seed region. In this study, we investigated whether miR-181a is a negative
regulator for CREB1 expression in neurons. It was found that the expression of
miR-181a was negatively correlated with Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and 
CREB1 in the Lewis rat hippocampus. miR-181a bound to CREB1 mRNA through a
specific binding site in the 3'UTR sequence. The expression of CREB1 in PC12
cells was down-regulated by transfection with a miR-181a mimic and up-regulated
by a miR-181a inhibitor. A down-regulated miR-181a and an up-regulated CREB1 were
observed in IGF-1-stimulated PC12 cells. And miR-181a inhibited dendritic growth 
of cultured hippocampus neurons. These suggest that miR-181a is involved in
IGF-1-regulated CREB1 expression by targeting its mRNA 3'UTR. microRNAs (miRNAs) 
regulate gene expression at the post-transcriptional level and are involved in
the central nervous system development. Here, we demonstrate that miR-181a can
inhibit the expression of the transcription factor CREB1 by specifically
targeting its mRNA 3'UTR and inhibit the development of hippocampus neurons.
Repressed expression of miR-181a is involved in IGF-1-mediated up-regulation of
CREB1 in vivo and in vitro. These findings indicate that miR-181a could be a
potential target for preventing neurodegenerative diseases.

© 2013 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMID: 23865718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Endocrinology. 2013 Oct;154(10):3589-98. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1251. Epub 2013 Jul
16.

The orexigenic effect of orexin-A revisited: dependence of an intact growth
hormone axis.

Álvarez-Crespo M(1), Martínez-Sánchez N, Ruíz-Pino F, Garcia-Lavandeira M,
Alvarez CV, Tena-Sempere M, Nogueiras R, Diéguez C, López M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, CIMUS, University of Santiago de
Compostela-Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria, Santiago de Compostela, 15782,
Spain and CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn), 15706,
Spain. m.lopez@usc.es.

Fifteen years ago orexins were identified as central regulators of energy
homeostasis. Since then, that concept has evolved considerably and orexins are
currently considered, besides orexigenic neuropeptides, key modulators of
sleep-wake cycle and neuroendocrine function. Little is known, however, about the
effect of the neuroendocrine milieu on orexins' effects on energy balance. We
therefore investigated whether hypothalamic-pituitary axes have a role in the
central orexigenic action of orexin A (OX-A) by centrally injecting
hypophysectomized, adrenalectomized, gonadectomized (male and female),
hypothyroid, and GH-deficient dwarf rats with OX-A. Our data showed that the
orexigenic effect of OX-A is fully maintained in adrenalectomized and
gonadectomized (females and males) rats, slightly reduced in hypothyroid rats,
and totally abolished in hypophysectomized and dwarf rats when compared with
their respective vehicle-treated controls. Of note, loss of the OX-A effect on
feeding was associated with a blunted OX-A-induced increase in the expression of 
either neuropeptide Y or its putative regulator, the transcription factor cAMP
response-element binding protein, as well as its phosphorylated form, in the
arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus of hypophysectomized and dwarf rats. Overall,
this evidence suggests that the orexigenic action of OX-A depends on an intact GH
axis and that this neuroendocrine feedback loop may be of interest in the
understanding of orexins action on energy balance and GH deficiency.

PMID: 23861376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. EMBO Mol Med. 2013 Sep;5(9):1322-34. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201302507. Epub 2013 Jul
16.

A novel epigenetic CREB-miR-373 axis mediates ZIP4-induced pancreatic cancer
growth.

Zhang Y(1), Yang J, Cui X, Chen Y, Zhu VF, Hagan JP, Wang H, Yu X, Hodges SE,
Fang J, Chiao PJ, Logsdon CD, Fisher WE, Brunicardi FC, Chen C, Yao Q,
Fernandez-Zapico ME, Li M.

Author information: 
(1)Michael E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
TX, USA.

Changes in the intracellular levels of the essential micronutrient zinc have been
implicated in multiple diseases including pancreatic cancer; however, the
molecular mechanism is poorly understood. Here, we report a novel mechanism where
increased zinc mediated by the zinc importer ZIP4 transcriptionally induces
miR-373 in pancreatic cancer to promote tumour growth. Reporter, expression and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrate that ZIP4 activates the
zinc-dependent transcription factor CREB and requires this transcription factor
to increase miR-373 expression through the regulation of its promoter. miR-373
induction is necessary for efficient ZIP4-dependent enhancement of cell
proliferation, invasion, and tumour growth. Further analysis of miR-373 in vivo
oncogenic function reveals that it is mediated through its negative regulation of
TP53INP1, LATS2 and CD44. These results define a novel ZIP4-CREB-miR-373
signalling axis promoting pancreatic cancer growth, providing mechanistic
insights explaining in part how a zinc transporter functions in cancer cells and 
may have broader implications as inappropriate regulation of intracellular zinc
levels plays an important role in many other diseases.

© 2013 The Authors. Published by John Wiley and Sons, Ltd on behalf of EMBO.

PMCID: PMC3799489
PMID: 23857777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Neuromolecular Med. 2013 Sep;15(3):570-92. doi: 10.1007/s12017-013-8243-0. Epub
2013 Jul 12.

3-methylcholanthrene induces neurotoxicity in developing neurons derived from
human CD34+Thy1+ stem cells by activation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor.

Singh AK(1), Kashyap MP, Kumar V, Tripathi VK, Yadav DK, Khan F, Jahan S, Khanna 
VK, Yadav S, Pant AB.

Author information: 
(1)In Vitro Toxicology Laboratory, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, 
Post Box: 80, MG Marg, Lucknow, 226001, India.

Developing neurons, derived from the human umbilical cord blood stem cells
(hUCBSCs), were investigated for their stage-specific responses against
3-methylcholanthrene (MC), a well-known polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon.
Three-dimensional (3D) molecular docking demonstrates the strong hydrogen bonding
and hydrophobic interactions of MC with amino acids of aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
(AHR) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) within 4 Å and
subsequent inhibition of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB),
a-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors. Protein-protein docking also confirms that
induced levels of AHR inhibit the neurogenesis-related transcription factor
(CREB) with maximum docking scores. In concurrence with in silico data, MC
exposure significantly up regulates the expression and activity of AHR, CYP1A1
and glutathione S-transferase P1-1 (GSTP1-1) and down regulates the expression of
CREB, AMPA and NMDA receptors in hUCBSC-derived neuronal cells at various
maturity (0, 2, 4, 8 days of differentiation). MC-mediated significant down
regulation in the expression of stage-specific neuronal markers (Nestin, neural
cell adhesion molecule-NCAM, synaptophysin-SYP, CREB, AMPA and
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunit 2A-NR2A) was also noticed in cells all
through the differentiation. Data identify the possible interference of MC in
neuronal transmission and neurogenesis.

PMID: 23846855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Int J Neurosci. 2014 Jan;124(1):22-9. doi: 10.3109/00207454.2013.816956. Epub
2013 Jul 24.

Preliminary investigation of the influence of CREB1 gene polymorphisms on
cognitive dysfunction in Chinese patients with major depression.

Guo J(1), Liu Z, Dai H, Zhu Z, Wang H, Yang C, Xiao L, Huang Y, Wang G.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of 1Psychiatry and 2Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Renmin
Hospital, Wuhan University Wuhan, PR China , and 3Institute of Neuropsychiatry,
Wuhan University Wuhan, PR China.

Research has increasingly focused on the role of the cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) response element binding (CREB) protein in learning and
memory, particularly its role in cognitive disorders and neurodegeneration, such 
as Huntington's disease, Alzheimer's disease, Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, and
Coffin-Lowry syndrome. The cognitive dysfunction of patients with major
depressive disorder (MDD), which is widely recognized, is not completely in
accordance with depressive severity, and the dysfunction persists upon clinical
remission in some patients. However, few studies have focused on the role of CREB
on cognitive function in patients with MDD. This study aimed to investigate the
influence of CREB1 polymorphism on cognitive function in patients with MDD. The
current study comprised 113 patients with MDD. The severity of depression was
measured using the 17-item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale, and cognitive
function was assessed using the Stroop Neuropsychological Screening Test, verbal 
fluency test, and tests of immediate logical memory and visual reproduction. All 
subjects were genotyped with regard to CREB1 polymorphisms (rs10932201,
rs2551645, rs2254137, rs6740584, and rs2551640). For the verbal fluency test, the
results showed significant differences for all single-nucleotide polymorphism
genotypic groups. For the Stroop color-word task, a significant difference was
found only for rs6740584. No significant differences were found for the Stroop
color task, the immediate logical memory test or the visual reproduction test. In
conclusion, there was an effect of CREB1 polymorphism on selective attention and 
retrieval of long-term memory, but not on immediate memory.

PMID: 23844928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 28;8(6):e65661. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065661. Print 2013.

Cyclic AMP-response element regulated cell cycle arrests in cancer cells.

Wang P(1), Huang S, Wang F, Ren Y, Hehir M, Wang X, Cai J.

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathophysiology, Medical School, Ningbo 
University, Ningbo, China. pinoav@hotmail.com

Recently, we have demonstrated that trichosanthin (TCS), a promising agent for
the treatment of cervical adenocarcinoma, inhibited HeLa cell proliferation
through the PKC/MAPK/CREB signal pathway. Furthermore, TCS down-regulated Bcl-2
expression was abrogated by a decoy oligonucleotide (OGN) to the cyclic
AMP-responsive element (CRE). The decoy OGN blocked the binding of CRE-binding
protein (CREB) to Bcl-2. These results suggested that CRE-mediated gene
expression may play a pivotal role in HeLa cell proliferation. However, little is
known about the effect of TCS on cell cycle arrests, particularly, whether the
genes involved in cell cycle were regulated by CRE. Our present study shows that 
the arrests of S, G1 and G2/M phases were accompanied by the significant
down-regulation of cyclin A, D1 and CDK 2, 4 in HeLa cells, cyclin D1, E and CDK 
2, 4 in Caski and C33a cells, and cyclin A, B1, E and CDK 2 in SW1990 cells.
However, the cell cycle arrests were reversed via the significant up-regulation
of cyclin A and D1, by the combined treatment of TCS and CRE. In conclusion,
these data demonstrate for the first time that specific cell cycle arrests in
cancer cells can be induced by TCS by inhibiting the binding of CREB to CRE on
genes related to cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3696002
PMID: 23840351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Ophthalmic Res. 2013;50(2):99-107. doi: 10.1159/000347124. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

Expression of CREB in primary pterygium and correlation with cyclin D1, ki-67,
MMP7, p53, p63, Survivin and Vimentin.

Nubile M(1), Curcio C, Lanzini M, Calienno R, Iezzi M, Mastropasqua A, Di Nicola 
M, Mastropasqua L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Ageing Science, Opthalmology Clinic, University 'G.
d'Annunzio' of Chieti-Pescara, Chieti/Pescara, Italy.

AIM: Ultraviolet (UV) B irradiation induces gene expression that leads to skin
cancer. Among the transcription factors induced by UVB radiation exposure, the
cyclic AMP response element-binding protein (CREB) is significant. Since several 
factors downstream of CREB signaling are known to be involved in pterygium
pathogenesis, we investigated CREB expression in pterygial and human conjunctival
tissues to evaluate if a similar expression pattern is present. Moreover, we
analyzed the correlation with CREB expression and other known pterygium markers.
METHODS: Primary pterygium samples and normal bulbar conjunctivas surgically
removed were analyzed. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues were stained by 
immunohistochemistry with anti-CREB, anti-vimentin, anti-ki-67, anti-survivin,
anti-MMP7, anti-p63, anti-cyclin D1, or anti-p53 antibodies.
RESULTS: 94.4% of pterygium samples were positive for CREB with a significant
difference compared to the control group (p = 0.002). The staining was localized 
in the epithelium and absent in the stroma. An increased expression was found for
cyclin D1 (p = 0.019), ki-67 (p = 0.005), vimentin (p = 0.003), survivin (p <
0.001), p63 (p = 0.003), and MMP7 (p = 0.002). CREB expression showed a
significant correlation with cyclin D1 (<U+03C1> = 0.49; p = 0.035), ki-67 (<U+03C1> = 0.61; p 
= 0.007), and p53 (<U+03C1> = 0.57; p = 0.013) in pterygium.
CONCLUSIONS: These results permit to hypothesize that CREB is involved in
pterygium pathogenesis. Since various molecules have been discovered to inhibit
CREB, these data could be of interest for pterygium treatment.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23838680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Transplantation. 2013 Aug 15;96(3):258-66. doi: 10.1097/TP.0b013e3182985504.

Anti-donor HLA class I antibodies: pathways to endothelial cell activation and
cell-mediated allograft rejection.

Naemi FM(1), Carter V, Kirby JA, Ali S.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Immunobiology and Transplantation Group, Institute of Cellular
Medicine, Medical School, University of Newcastle Upon Tyne, Newcastle Upon Tyne,
UK.

BACKGROUND: The development of donor-specific human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class
I antibodies after organ transplantation is associated with subsequent acute and 
chronic rejection. The aim of this study was to examine the role of anti-HLA
class I antibody in modulating endothelium-leukocyte interaction.
METHODS: Human microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC-1) stimulated with HLA class
I antibody (W6/32) or allospecific antibodies from sensitized patients (n=6) were
examined for activation of transcription factor CREB by Western blotting.
Up-regulation of endothelial adhesion molecules and chemokines was measured by
flow cytometry and quantitative polymerase chain reaction, respectively.
Leukocyte adhesion was evaluated by chemotaxis and in vitro flow-based assays.
RESULTS: Treatment of HMEC-1 cells with HLA class I antibody resulted in the
phosphorylation of CREB in protein kinase A-dependent pathway. Furthermore, there
was a significant increase in the expression of cell surface VCAM-1
(Akt-dependent) and ICAM-1 in Akt-dependent and extracellular signal-regulated
kinase-dependent manner (P<0.001). Additionally, exposure to W6/32 antibody
induced significant expression of interleukin-6, CXCL8, CXCL10, and CCL5.
Knockdown of CREB produced a reduction in W6/32-induced CXCL8 expression
(P<0.001). Media from W6/32-treated endothelial cells induced a significant
monocyte chemotaxis (P<0.001) and flow-based adhesion assay demonstrated an
increase in monocyte adhesion to endothelial cells compared with the control
group (P<0.001). Importantly, allospecific antibodies from sensitized patients
also activated endothelial CREB and significantly up-regulated VCAM-1, ICAM-1,
and CXCL8.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that donor-specific HLA class I antibodies
directly activate endothelial cells leading to an increase in their potential to 
recruit and bind recipient leukocytes, thereby increasing the potential for
allograft inflammation.

PMID: 23823649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Pain. 2013 Oct;14(10):1162-72. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2013.04.015. Epub 2013 Jun 
29.

Long-term antidepressant treatment inhibits neuropathic pain-induced CREB and
PLC<U+03B3>-1 phosphorylation in the mouse spinal cord dorsal horn.

Kusuda R(1), Ravanelli MI, Cadetti F, Franciosi A, Previdelli K, Zanon S, Lucas
G.

Author information: 
(1)Pain Neurobiology Laboratory, Department of Physiology, Ribeirão Preto School 
of Medicine, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

The effect of long-term administration of imipramine, a tricyclic antidepressant,
on the phosphorylation status of cyclic adenosine monophosphate-responsive
element-binding protein (CREB), mitogen-activated protein kinase family members, 
and phospholipase <U+03B3>-1 (PLC<U+03B3>-1) was investigated in the dorsal horn of the spinal 
cord following peripheral nerve lesion. Nerve injury induced an ipsilateral
long-lasting increased phosphorylation of CREB and PLC<U+03B3>-1 but not extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK1,2), p38, and c-Jun N-terminal kinase. Daily
administration of imipramine (5, 10, or 30 mg/kg) for 21 days progressively
reduced both tactile-induced neuropathic pain hypersensitivity and thermal
hyperalgesia. After withdrawal of treatment, the antinociceptive effect of
imipramine was gradually abolished but still remained for at least 3 weeks.
Conversely, no analgesic effect was observed with short-term imipramine
treatment. Moreover, imipramine therapy reversed nerve injury-induced CREB and
PLC<U+03B3>-1 phosphorylation but had no effect on ERK1,2, p38, and c-Jun N-terminal
kinase activity. These results indicate that long-term administration of
imipramine may prevent some of the harmful changes in the spinal cord dorsal horn
following nerve injury. However, imipramine analgesic effect takes time to
develop and mature, which might explain in part why the clinical analgesic effect
of tricyclic antidepressants develops with a delay after the beginning of
treatment. Our data also provide evidence that prolonged imipramine treatment may
induce antinociception in neuropathic pain conditions because of its action on
the PLC<U+03B3>-1/CREB-signaling pathway.PERSPECTIVE: This article demonstrates that
long-term treatment with imipramine reverses some of the marked effects induced
by peripheral nerve injury in the spinal dorsal horn that contribute to long-term
maintenance of sensory disorder, providing a new view to the mechanisms of action
of these drugs.

Copyright © 2013 American Pain Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 23816950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. BMC Med Genomics. 2013 Jun 28;6:23. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-6-23.

Alteration of human blood cell transcriptome in uremia.

Scherer A(1), Günther OP, Balshaw RF, Hollander Z, Wilson-McManus J, Ng R,
McMaster WR, McManus BM, Keown PA.

Author information: 
(1)PROOF Centre of Excellence, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

BACKGROUND: End-stage renal failure is associated with profound changes in
physiology and health, but the molecular causation of these pleomorphic effects
termed "uremia" is poorly understood. The genomic changes of uremia were explored
in a whole genome microarray case-control comparison of 95 subjects with
end-stage renal failure (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>75) or healthy controls (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>20).
METHODS: RNA was separated from blood drawn in PAXgene tubes and gene expression 
analyzed using Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 arrays. Quality control and 
normalization was performed, and statistical significance determined with
multiple test corrections (qFDR). Biological interpretation was aided by
knowledge mining using NIH DAVID, MetaCore and PubGene
RESULTS: Over 9,000 genes were differentially expressed in uremic subjects
compared to normal controls (fold change: -5.3 to +6.8), and more than 65% were
lower in uremia. Changes appeared to be regulated through key gene networks
involving cMYC, SP1, P53, AP1, NFkB, HNF4 alpha, HIF1A, c-Jun, STAT1, STAT3 and
CREB1. Gene set enrichment analysis showed that mRNA processing and transport,
protein transport, chaperone functions, the unfolded protein response and genes
involved in tumor genesis were prominently lower in uremia, while insulin-like
growth factor activity, neuroactive receptor interaction, the complement system, 
lipoprotein metabolism and lipid transport were higher in uremia. Pathways
involving cytoskeletal remodeling, the clathrin-coated endosomal pathway, T-cell 
receptor signaling and CD28 pathways, and many immune and biological mechanisms
were significantly down-regulated, while the ubiquitin pathway and certain others
were up-regulated.
CONCLUSIONS: End-stage renal failure is associated with profound changes in human
gene expression which appears to be mediated through key transcription factors.
Dialysis and primary kidney disease had minor effects on gene regulation, but
uremia was the dominant influence in the changes observed. This data provides
important insight into the changes in cellular biology and function,
opportunities for biomarkers of disease progression and therapy, and potential
targets for intervention in uremia.

PMCID: PMC3706221
PMID: 23809614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 9;288(32):23368-79. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.460394. Epub 2013
Jun 26.

Calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II/cAMP response element-binding
protein/Wnt/ß-catenin signaling cascade regulates angiotensin II-induced podocyte
injury and albuminuria.

Jiang L(1), Xu L, Song Y, Li J, Mao J, Zhao AZ, He W, Yang J, Dai C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Kidney Disease, 2nd Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, 262 North Zhongshan Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210003, USA.

Angiotensin II (Ang II) plays a pivotal role in promoting podocyte dysfunction
and albuminuria, however, the underlying mechanisms have not been fully
delineated. In this study, we found that Ang II induced Wnt1 expression and
ß-catenin nuclear translocation in cultured mouse podocytes. Blocking Wnt
signaling with Dickkopf-1 (Dkk1) or ß-catenin siRNA attenuated Ang II-induced
podocyte injury. Ang II could also induce the phosphorylation of
calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaMK) II and cAMP response element-binding
protein (CREB) in cultured podocytes. Blockade of this pathway with CK59 or CREB 
siRNA could significantly inhibit Ang II-induced Wnt/ß-catenin signaling and
podocyte injury. In in vivo studies, administration of Ang II promoted
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, aggregated podocyte damage, and albuminuria in mice.
CK59 could remarkably ameliorate Ang II-induced podocyte injury and albuminuria. 
Furthermore, ectopic expression of exogenous Dkk1 also attenuated Ang II-induced 
podocytopathy in mice. Taken together, this study demonstrates that the CaMK
II/CREB/Wnt/ß-catenin signaling cascade plays an important role in regulating Ang
II-induced podocytopathy. Targeting this signaling pathway may offer renal
protection against the development of proteinuric kidney diseases.

PMCID: PMC3743506
PMID: 23803607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 14;8(6):e65860. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065860. Print 2013.

Dopamine receptors modulate cytotoxicity of natural killer cells via
cAMP-PKA-CREB signaling pathway.

Zhao W(1), Huang Y, Liu Z, Cao BB, Peng YP, Qiu YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Nantong University, Nantong,
Jiangsu Province, China.

Dopamine (DA), a neurotransmitter in the nervous system, has been shown to
modulate immune function. We have previously reported that five subtypes of DA
receptors, including D1R, D2R, D3R, D4R and D5R, are expressed in T lymphocytes
and they are involved in regulation of T cells. However, roles of these DA
receptor subtypes and their coupled signal-transduction pathway in modulation of 
natural killer (NK) cells still remain to be clarified. The spleen of mice was
harvested and NK cells were isolated and purified by negative selection using
magnetic activated cell sorting. After NK cells were incubated with various drugs
for 4 h, flow cytometry measured cytotoxicity of NK cells against YAC-1 lymphoma 
cells. NK cells expressed the five subtypes of DA receptors at mRNA and protein
levels. Activation of D1-like receptors (including D1R and D5R) with agonist
SKF38393 enhanced NK cell cytotoxicity, but activation of D2-like receptors
(including D2R, D3R and D4R) with agonist quinpirole attenuated NK cells.
Simultaneously, SKF38393 elevated D1R and D5R expression, cAMP content, and
phosphorylated cAMP-response element-binding (CREB) level in NK cells, while
quinpirole reduced D3R and D4R expression, cAMP content, and phosphorylated CREB 
level in NK cells. These effects of SKF38393 were blocked by SCH23390, an
antagonist of D1-like receptors, and quinpirole effects were abolished by
haloperidol, an antagonist of D2-like receptors. In support these results, H89,
an inhibitor of phosphokinase A (PKA), prevented the SKF38393-dependent
enhancement of NK cells and forskolin, an activator of adenylyl cyclase (AC),
counteracted the quinpirole-dependent suppression of NK cells. These findings
show that DA receptor subtypes are involved in modulation of NK cells and suggest
that D1-like receptors facilitate NK cells by stimulating D1R/D5R-cAMP-PKA-CREB
signaling pathway and D2-like receptors suppress NK cells by inhibiting
D3R/D4R-cAMP-PKA-CREB signaling pathway. The results may provide more targets of 
therapeutic strategy for neuroimmune diseases.

PMCID: PMC3683046
PMID: 23799052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Exerc Sport Sci Rev. 2013 Jul;41(3):174-81. doi: 10.1097/JES.0b013e3182956803.

Unraveling the complexities of SIRT1-mediated mitochondrial regulation in
skeletal muscle.

Philp A(1), Schenk S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Sport and Exercise Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham,
UK.

Sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) is a purported central regulator of skeletal muscle
mitochondrial biogenesis. Herein, we discuss our recent work using conditional
mouse models, which highlight the complexities of SIRT1 biology in vivo, and
question the role of SIRT1 in regulating mitochondrial function and mitochondrial
adaptations to endurance exercise. Furthermore, we discuss the possible
contribution of proposed SIRT1 substrates to muscle mitochondrial biogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3707796
PMID: 23792490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Drug Res (Stuttg). 2013 Oct;63(10):532-9. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1347237. Epub 2013 
Jun 18.

The effects of tianeptine, olanzapine and fluoxetine on the cognitive behaviors
of unpredictable chronic mild stress-exposed mice.

Gumuslu E(1), Mutlu O, Sunnetci D, Ulak G, Celikyurt IK, Cine N, Akar F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Kocaeli University Medical Faculty, Kocaeli,
Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Strong evidence indicates that impaired cognition is a core element
of depression, and antidepressant treatment may ameliorate cognitive impairments 
experienced by depressive patients. Present study was performed to investigate
effects of chronic tianeptine (5 mg/kg) or olanzapine (2.5 mg/kg) administration 
on cognitive behaviors of unpredictable chronic mild stress (UCMS)-exposed mice
and to compare these effects to those induced by widely used SSRI antidepressant 
fluoxetine (15 mg/kg) in mice.
METHODS: To investigate effects of these drugs, the Morris water maze test (MWM),
elevated plus maze test (EPM) and radial arm maze test (RAM) were used. The
effects of stress and drugs on gene expression in the hippocampus was determined 
by quantitative Real Time-PCR.
RESULTS: In MWM test, fluoxetine significantly increased escape latency of
non-stressed mice in acquisition sessions and decreased time spent in escape
platform quadrant in probe trial; tianeptine and olanzapine decreased enhancement
in escape latency, and only olanzapine significantly enhanced attenuation in time
spent in the escape platform quadrant in UCMS-exposed mice. In EPM test, all
drugs significantly decreased enhancement in transfer latency in UCMS-exposed
mice. In RAM test, fluoxetine significantly increased number of errors made by
both non-stressed and UCMS-exposed mice.
CONCLUSION: Quantitative real-time PCR revealed that CREB and BDNF gene
expression levels were significantly decreased in UCMS-exposed group, and this
effect was significantly reversed by each of drugs tested. Our results seem to be
test dependent and should be further investigated using different learning and
memory tasks.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 23780498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Pharm Biol. 2013 Sep;51(9):1188-95. doi: 10.3109/13880209.2013.784341. Epub 2013 
Jun 14.

Oral administration of docosahexaenoic acid activates the GDNF-MAPK-CERB pathway 
in hippocampus of natural aged rat.

Jiang LH(1), Yan S, Wang J, Liang QY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Development and Planning, Guangxi University, Nanning, P.R. China.
au72191@gmail.com

CONTEXT: Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) is one of the critical fatty acids for
optimal health, which affect the expression of nerve growth factor and
brain-derived neurotrophic factor in brain.
OBJECTIVE: This study investigates whether DHA supplementation affects lipid
peroxidation and activates the glial-derived neurotrophic factor
(GDNF)-mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway (MAPK pathway) in hippocampus of 
natural aged rat.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Rats were randomly divided into four groups; DHA was
orally administered at 80 and 160<U+2009>mg/kg/day to 24-month female rats for 50 days. 
The antioxidant parameters and GDNF-GDNF family receptor a-1
(GFRa1)-tyrosine-protein kinase receptor (RET)-MAPK-cyclic AMP response
element-binding protein (CERB) pathway were assayed in natural aged rat's
hippocampus.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: The results demonstrated that DHA supplementation
significantly increased the activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD) by 37.39 and
57.69%, glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px) by 27.62 and 32.57% decreased TBARS level
by 28.49 and 49.05%, respectively, but did not significantly affect catalase
(CAT), in hippocampus, when compared with the aged group. DHA supplementation in 
diet resulted in an increase of DHA level in hippocampus. Furthermore, we found
that DHA supplementation markedly increased the levels of GDNF and GFRa1 and the 
phosphorylation of RET, and led to the activation of the MAPK pathway in
hippocampus tissue.
CONCLUSION: DHA supplementation can change fatty acids composition, improve
antioxidant parameters and activate the GDNF-MAPK pathway in natural aged rat's
hippocampus.

PMID: 23767459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jul 5;436(3):377-81. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.05.108. Epub 2013 Jun 4.

Activation of type 2 cannabinoid receptors (CB2R) promotes fatty acid oxidation
through the SIRT1/PGC-1a pathway.

Zheng X(1), Sun T, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210029, China.

Abnormal fatty acid oxidation has been associated with obesity and type 2
diabetes. At the transcriptional level, peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma coactivator 1a (PGC-1a) has been reported to strongly increase the
ability of hormone nuclear receptors PPARa and ERRa to drive transcription of
fatty acid oxidation enzymes. In this study, we report that a specific agonist of
the type 2 cannabinoid receptor (CB2R) can lead to fatty acid oxidation through
the PGC-1a pathway. We have found that CB2R is expressed in differentiated C2C12 
myotubes, and that use of the specific agonist trans-caryophyllene (TC)
stimulates sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) deacetylase activity by increasing the
phosphorylation of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB), thus leading to 
increased levels of PGC-1a deacetylation. This use of TC treatment increases the 
expression of genes linked to the fatty acid oxidation pathway in a
SIRT1/PGC-1a-dependent mechanism and also drastically accelerates the rate of
complete fatty acid oxidation in C2C12 myotubes, neither of which occur when CB2R
mRNA is knocked down using siRNA. These results reveal that activation of CB2R by
a selective agonist promotes lipid oxidation through a signaling/transcriptional 
pathway. Our findings imply that pharmacological manipulation of CB2R may provide
therapeutic possibilities to treat metabolic diseases associated with lipid
dysregulation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23747418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2013 Oct;16(9):1999-2011. doi:
10.1017/S1461145713000588. Epub 2013 Jun 10.

Brain stress system response after morphine-conditioned place preference.

García-Carmona JA(1), Milanés MV, Laorden ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Murcia, Spain.

This study examined the involvement of the brain stress system in the reinforcing
effects of morphine. One group of mice was conditioned to morphine using the
conditioned place preference (CPP) paradigm and the other group received morphine
in a home-cage (non-conditioned). Adrenocorticotropic hormone and corticosterone 
levels were measured by radioimmunoassay; phospho (p) CREB expression and the
number of corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) neurons and fibres were measured
by immunohistochemistry in different brain areas. We observed that the number of 
CRF neurons in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) was increased after
morphine-induced CPP, which was paralleled with enhanced CRF-immunoreactivity
fibres in the nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS) and ventral tegmental area (VTA)
vs. home-cage group injected with morphine. Morphine exposure induced an increase
in CREB phosphorylated at Ser133 in the PVN and central amygdale (CeA), whereas
mice exhibiting morphine CPP had higher levels of pCREB in the PVN, CeA and bed
nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST). We also found that most of the
CRF-positive neurons in the PVN, CeA and BNST co-express pCREB after morphine CPP
expression, suggesting that the drug-associated environmental contexts can elicit
neuronal activity in the brain stress system. From the present results it is
clear that exposure to a drug-associated context remains a potent activator of
signalling pathways leading to CRF activation in the brain stress system.

PMID: 23745716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Leukoc Biol. 2013 Aug;94(2):315-23. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1012520. Epub 2013 Jun 6.

MGL signaling augments TLR2-mediated responses for enhanced IL-10 and TNF-a
secretion.

van Vliet SJ(1), Bay S, Vuist IM, Kalay H, García-Vallejo JJ, Leclerc C, van
Kooyk Y.

Author information: 
(1)VU University Medical Center, P.O. Box 7057, 1007 MB, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands. s.vanvliet@vumc.nl

DCs orchestrate immune responses to infectious pathogens and disturbances in
tissue integrity. Equipped with C-type lectins, DCs can respond to environmental 
changes in glycosylation. Many C-type lectins are capable of modulating TLR
activation, thereby facilitating tailor-made immune reactions. Here, we
investigated the signaling properties of the C-type lectin MGL and show that MGL 
engagement by agonistic antibodies or carbohydrate ligands couples to TLR signal 
transduction for increased IL-10 and TNF-a secretion by human monocyte-derived
DCs. MGL triggering especially synergized with TLR2-induced pathways, leading to 
elevated IL-10 mRNA levels and enhanced TNF-a mRNA stability. In addition, MGL
signaling promoted phosphorylation of the MAPK ERK and the transcription factor
CREB. Whereas specific inhibitors of p90RSK blocked the MGL-induced cytokine
secretion, AP-1 was not involved. Strikingly, NF-<U+03BA>B was only crucial for the
IL-10 response and dispensable for TNF-a production. Together, our results
demonstrate that MGL activation of the ERK-p90RSK-CREB axis converges with
TLR2-induced pathways, thereby fine-tuning the DC maturation phenotype.

PMID: 23744646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Hypertension. 2013 Aug;62(2):317-23. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.113.01324. Epub
2013 Jun 3.

Targeted deletion of murine CEACAM 1 activates PI3K-Akt signaling and contributes
to the expression of (Pro)renin receptor via CREB family and NF-<U+03BA>B transcription 
factors.

Huang J(1), Ledford KJ, Pitkin WB, Russo L, Najjar SM, Siragy HM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Virginia Health
System, P.O. Box 801409, Charlottesville, VA 22908-1409, USA.

The carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 1 regulates insulin
sensitivity by promoting hepatic insulin clearance. Mice bearing a null mutation 
of Ceacam1 gene (Cc1(-/-)) develop impaired insulin clearance followed by
hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance, in addition to visceral obesity and
increased plasma fatty acids. Because insulin resistance is associated with
increased blood pressure, we investigated whether they develop higher blood
pressure with activated renal renin-angiotensin system and whether this is
mediated, in part, by the upregulation of renal (pro)renin receptor (PRR)
expression. Compared with age-matched wild-type littermates, Cc1(-/-) mice
exhibited increased blood pressure with increased activation of renal
renin-angiotensin systems and renal PRR expression. Cytoplasmic and nuclear
immunostaining of phospho-PI3K p85a and phospho-Akt was enhanced in the kidney of
Cc1(-/-) mice. In murine renal inner medullary collecting duct epithelial cells
with lentiviral-mediated small hairpin RNA knockdown of carcinoembryonic
antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 1, PRR expression was upregulated and
phosphorylation of PI3K (Tyr508), Akt (Ser473), NF-<U+03BA>B p65 (Ser276), cAMP response
element-binding protein/activated transcription factor (ATF)-1 (Ser133), and
ATF-2 (Thr71) was enhanced. Inhibiting PI3K with LY294002 or Akt with Akt
inhibitor VIII attenuated PRR expression. In conclusion, global null deletion of 
Ceacam1 caused an increase in blood pressure with increased renin-angiotensin
system activation together with upregulation of PRR via PI3K-Akt activation of
cAMP response element-binding protein 1, ATF-1, ATF-2, and NF-<U+03BA>B p65
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3793251
PMID: 23734002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Neuroscience. 2013 Sep 5;247:164-74. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.05.033.
Epub 2013 May 28.

Human endogenous retrovirus W family envelope gene activates the small
conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channel in human neuroblastoma cells through CREB.

Li S(1), Liu ZC, Yin SJ, Chen YT, Yu HL, Zeng J, Zhang Q, Zhu F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, School of Medicine, Wuhan University,
Wuhan 430071, PR China.

Numerous studies have shown that human endogenous retrovirus W family (HERV-W)
envelope gene (env) is related to various diseases but the underlying mechanism
has remained poorly understood. Our previous study showed that there was abnormal
expression of HERV-W env in sera of patients with schizophrenia. In this paper,
we reported that overexpression of the HERV-W env elevated the levels of small
conductance Ca(2+)-activated K(+) channel protein 3 (SK3) in human neuroblastoma 
cells. Using a luciferase reporter system and RNA interference method, we found
that functional cAMP response element site was required for the expression of SK3
triggered by HERV-W env. In addition, it was also found that the SK3 channel was 
activated by HERV-W env. Further study indicated that cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB) was required for the activation of the SK3
channel. Thus, a novel signaling mechanism of how HERV-W env influences neuronal 
activity and contributes to mental illnesses such as schizophrenia was proposed.

Copyright © 2013 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23727510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Feb;42(2):134-7. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2013.02.017.

[Fibrohistiocytic tumor of skin].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang J.

PMID: 23710926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Oncol Rep. 2013 Aug;30(2):739-44. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2491. Epub 2013 May 23.

Differentiation of immature DCs into endothelial-like cells in human esophageal
carcinoma tissue homogenates.

Lu J(1), Bai R, Qin Z, Zhang Y, Zhang X, Jiang Y, Yang H, Huang Y, Li G, Zhao M, 
Dong Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou 450001, PR China.

We previously reported endothelial-like differentiation (ELD) of immature
dendritic cells (iDCs) in the microenvironment derived from EC9706 human
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma conditioned medium (CM). However, the CM is
far different from the esophageal carcinoma tissue of patients. In addition, the 
potential role of peri-esophageal carcinoma in the ELD of iDCs is also unknown.
In the present study, we showed that the tumor microenvironment derived from
esophageal carcinoma homogenate promoted iDCs to differentiate from the DC
pathway toward endothelial cells, while the peri-esophageal carcinoma homogenate 
did not have this function. During the course of ELD, ERK signaling pathway and
CREB were activated. Blocking MEK, both the phosphorylation of ERK and CREB, and 
the ELD of iDCs were inhibited. These data suggest that esophageal carcinoma
tissue, not peri-esophageal carcinoma tissue, can drive iDCs to differentiate
into endothelial-like cells, instead of differentiation into mature DCs, thereby 
losing the ability of antigen presentation.

PMID: 23708958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. PLoS One. 2013 May 20;8(5):e64037. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064037. Print 2013.

Systemic delivery of recombinant brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in the 
R6/2 mouse model of Huntington's disease.

Giampà C(1), Montagna E, Dato C, Melone MA, Bernardi G, Fusco FR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuroanatomy, Santa Lucia Foundation IRCCS Hospital at the
European Center for Brain Research, Rome, Italy.

Loss of huntingtin-mediated BDNF gene transcription has been shown to occur in HD
and thus contribute to the degeneration of the striatum. Several studies have
indicated that an increase in BDNF levels is associated with neuroprotection and 
amelioration of neurological signs in animal models of HD. In a recent study, an 
increase in BDNF mRNA and protein levels was recorded in mice administered
recombinant BDNF peripherally. Chronic, indwelling osmotic mini-pumps containing 
either recombinant BDNF or saline were surgically placed in R6/2 or wild-type
mice from 4 weeks of age until euthanasia. Neurological evaluation (paw clasping,
rotarod performance, locomotor activity in an open field) was performed. After
transcardial perfusion, histological and immunohistochemical studies were
performed. We found that BDNF- treated R6/2 mice survived longer and displayed
less severe signs of neurological dysfunction than the vehicle treated ones.
Primary outcome measures such as brain volume, striatal atrophy, size and
morphology of striatal neurons, neuronal intranuclear inclusions and microglial
reaction confirmed a neuroprotective effect of the compound. BDNF was effective
in increasing significantly the levels of activated CREB and of BDNF the striatal
spiny neurons. Moreover, systemically administered BDNF increased the synthesis
of BDNF as demonstrated by RT-PCR, and this might account for the beneficial
effects observed in this model.

PMCID: PMC3659095
PMID: 23700454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Jul 15;305(2):E194-204. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00100.2013. Epub 2013 May 21.

Sustained in vivo blockade of a1-adrenergic receptors prevented some of
stress-triggered effects on steroidogenic machinery in Leydig cells.

Stojkov NJ(1), Janjic MM, Baburski AZ, Mihajlovic AI, Drljaca DM, Sokanovic SJ,
Bjelic MM, Kostic TS, Andric SA.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Endocrinology and Signaling Group, Department of Biology and
Ecology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia.

This study was designed to systematically analyze and evaluate the effects of in 
vivo blockade of a1-adrenergic receptors (a1-ADRs) on the stress-induced
disturbance of steroidogenic machinery in Leydig cells. Parameters followed 1)
steroidogenic enzymes/proteins, transcription factors, and cAMP/testosterone
production; 2) the main hallmarks of stress (epinephrine, glucocorticoids); and
3) transcription profiles of ADRs and oxidases with high affinity to inactivate
glucocorticoids. Results showed that sustained blockade of a1-ADRs prevented
stress-induced 1) decrease of the transcripts/proteins for main steroidogenic
CYPs (CYP11A1, CYP17A1); 2) decrease of Scarb1 and Hsd3b1 transcripts; 3)
decrease of transcript for Nur77, one of the main activator of the steroidogenic 
expression; and 4) increase of Dax1 and Arr19, the main steroidogenic repressors 
in Leydig cells. In the same cells, the expression of steroidogenic stimulatory
factor Creb1, StAR, and androgen receptor increased. In this signaling scenario, 
stress-induced stimulation of Adra1a/Adra1b/Adrbk1 and Hsd11b2 (the
unidirectional oxidase with high affinity to inactivate glucocorticoids) was not 
changed. Blockade additionally stimulated stress-increased transcription of the
most abundantly expressed ADRs Adra1d/Adrb1/Adrb2 in Leydig cells. In the same
cells, stress-decreased testosterone production, the main marker of Leydig cells 
functionality, was completely prevented, while reduction of cAMP, the main
regulator of androgenesis, was partially prevented. Accordingly, the presented
data provide a new molecular/transcriptional base for "fight/adaptation" of
steroidogenic cells and new molecular insights into the role of a1-ADRs in
stress-impaired Leydig cell steroidogenesis. The results are important in term of
wide use of a1-ADR selective antagonists, alone/in combination, to treat high
blood pressure, nightmares associated with posttraumatic stress disorder, and
disrupted sexual health.

PMID: 23695211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jun 14;435(4):597-602. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.05.025. Epub 2013 May 16.

Resveratrol improves learning and memory in normally aged mice through
microRNA-CREB pathway.

Zhao YN(1), Li WF, Li F, Zhang Z, Dai YD, Xu AL, Qi C, Gao JM, Gao J.

Author information: 
(1)Model Animal Research Center of Nanjing University and MOE Key Laboratory of
Model Animals for Disease Study, 12 Xuefu Road, Pukou High-Tech Zone, Nanjing
210061, China.

Resveratrol (RSV) is a natural compound found in grapes and red wine. It has been
well known for its beneficial effects as a dietary supplement in prevention of
cardiovascular diseases and cancer. Recently, in vitro studies have reported the 
neuroprotective role of RSV in neurodegenerative process in Alzheimer's disease
(AD). However, in vivo effects of RSV on the decline of brain function
accompanying the aging process, especially those on cognitive loss, have not been
not investigated. Here we report that, after intraventricular injection of RSV
for one week in 8-9 month-old mice, the long-term memory formation and the LTP
induction from hippocampus CA1 were improved. The RSV enhancement effects were
blocked in SIRT1 mutant mice. Additional experiments suggest that RSV effects are
likely to be mediated through reduced expressions of miR-134 and miR-124, which
may in turn up-regulate CREB levels to subsequently promote BDNF synthesis. These
findings demonstrate a role for RSV in cognition and a microRNA-CREB-BDNF
mechanism by which RSV regulates these processes, demonstrating its value as a
potential therapeutic target against CNS disorders in aging.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23685142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jul;33(14):2718-31. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01254-12. Epub 2013 May 
13.

Tumor necrosis factor a-induced hypoxia-inducible factor 1a-ß-catenin axis
regulates major histocompatibility complex class I gene activation through
chromatin remodeling.

Ghosh S(1), Paul A, Sen E.

Author information: 
(1)National Brain Research Centre, Manesar, Haryana, India.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1a (HIF-1a) plays a crucial role in the progression of
glioblastoma multiforme tumors, which are characterized by their effective immune
escape mechanisms. As major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I) is
involved in glioma immune evasion and since HIF-1a is a pivotal link between
inflammation and glioma progression, the role of tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNF-a)-induced inflammation in MHC-I gene regulation was investigated. A
TNF-a-induced increase in MHC-I expression and transcriptional activation was
concurrent with increased HIF-1a, <U+039D>F-<U+03BA><U+0392>, and ß-catenin activities. While
knockdown of HIF-1a and ß-catenin abrogated TNF-a-induced MHC-I activation, NF-<U+03BA>B
had no effect. ß-Catenin inhibition abrogated HIF-1a activation and vice versa,
and this HIF-1a-ß-catenin axis positively regulated CREB phosphorylation.
Increased CREB activation was accompanied by its increased association with
ß-catenin and CBP. Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed increased CREB
enrichment at CRE/site a on the MHC-I promoter in a ß-catenin-dependent manner.
ß-Catenin replaced human Brahma (hBrm) with Brg1 as the binding partner for CREB 
at the CRE site. The hBrm-to-Brg1 switch is crucial for MHC-I regulation, as
ATPase-deficient Brg1 abolished TNF-a-induced MHC-I expression. ß-Catenin also
increased the association of MHC-I enhanceosome components RFX5 and NF-YB at the 
SXY module. CREB acts as a platform for assembling coactivators and chromatin
remodelers required for MHC-I activation in a HIF-1a/ß-catenin-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC3700138
PMID: 23671189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 28;110(22):8870-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1304602110. Epub 2013 May 13.

PRMT5 modulates the metabolic response to fasting signals.

Tsai WW(1), Niessen S, Goebel N, Yates JR 3rd, Guccione E, Montminy M.

Author information: 
(1)The Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology, Salk Institute, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Under fasting conditions, increases in circulating glucagon maintain glucose
balance by promoting hepatic gluconeogenesis. Triggering of the cAMP pathway
stimulates gluconeogenic gene expression through the PKA-mediated phosphorylation
of the cAMP response element binding (CREB) protein and via the dephosphorylation
of the latent cytoplasmic CREB regulated transcriptional coactivator 2 (CRTC2).
CREB and CRTC2 activities are increased in insulin resistance, in which they
promote hyperglycemia because of constitutive induction of the gluconeogenic
program. The extent to which CREB and CRTC2 are coordinately up-regulated in
response to glucagon, however, remains unclear. Here we show that, following its 
activation, CRTC2 enhances CREB phosphorylation through an association with the
protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5). In turn, PRMT5 was found to
stimulate CREB phosphorylation via increases in histone H3 Arg2 methylation that 
enhanced chromatin accessibility at gluconeogenic promoters. Because depletion of
PRMT5 lowers hepatic glucose production and gluconeogenic gene expression, these 
results demonstrate how a chromatin-modifying enzyme regulates a metabolic
program through epigenetic changes that impact the phosphorylation of a
transcription factor in response to hormonal stimuli.

PMCID: PMC3670393
PMID: 23671120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 28;110(22):E2019-27. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1222115110. Epub 2013 May 13.

Dynamic CREB family activity drives segmentation and posterior polarity
specification in mammalian somitogenesis.

Lopez TP(1), Fan CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.

The segmented body plan of vertebrates is prefigured by reiterated embryonic
mesodermal structures called somites. In the mouse embryo, timely somite
formation from the presomitic mesoderm (PSM) is controlled by the "segmentation
clock," a molecular oscillator that triggers progressive waves of Notch activity 
throughout the PSM. Notch clock activity is suppressed in the posterior PSM by
FGF signaling until it crosses a determination front at which its net activity is
sufficiently high to effect segmentation. Here, Notch and Wnt signaling directs
somite anterior/posterior (A/P) polarity specification and boundary formation via
regulation of the segmentation effector gene Mesoderm posterior 2. How Notch and 
Wnt signaling becomes coordinated at this front is incompletely defined. Here we 
show that the activity of the cAMP responsive element binding protein (CREB)
family of transcription factors exhibits Wnt3a-dependent oscillatory behavior
near the determination front and is in unison with Notch activity. Inhibition of 
CREB family in the mesoderm causes defects in somite segmentation and a loss in
somite posterior polarity leading to fusions of vertebrae and ribs. Among the
CREB family downstream genes, several are known to be regulated by Wnt3a. Of
those, we show that the CREB family occupies a conserved binding site in the
promoter region of Delta-like 1, encoding a Notch ligand, in the anterior PSM as 
a mechanism to specify posterior identity of somites. Together, these data
support that the CREB family acts at the determination front to modulate Wnt
signaling and strengthen Notch signaling as a means to orchestrate cells for
somite segmentation and anterior/posterior patterning.

PMCID: PMC3670316
PMID: 23671110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Endocr J. 2013;60(8):941-50. Epub 2013 May 10.

Decreased fasting blood glucose is associated with impaired hepatic glucose
production in thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor knockout mice.

Wang T(1), Xu J, Bo T, Zhou X, Jiang X, Gao L, Zhao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University, Jinan, China.

Our previous study reported that thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) promotes
cholesterol synthesis via the cyclic adenosine monophosphate/protein kinase
A/cAMP regulatory element-binding protein (cAMP/PKA/CREB) pathway after binding
to TSH receptors (TSHR) in the liver. The hepatic cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway also
plays an important role in maintaining fasting glucose homeostasis. These
findings implied a possible role for TSH in hepatic glucose metabolism. In this
study, we used TSH receptor knockout mice (Tshr-ko mice) to clarify the effect of
Tshr deletion on hepatic glucose metabolism, and investigated whether the effects
of TSH directly regulate hepatic gluconeogenesis in HepG2 cells. Tshr-ko mice
exhibited decreased fasting blood glucose levels, increased insulin sensitivity
but normal level of fasting plasma insulin. Tshr deletion impaired hepatic
glucose production by down-regulating the expression of glucose-6-phosphatase
(G6P) and phosphoenolpyruvate pyruvate carboxylase (PEPCK) mRNA, two
rate-limiting enzymes in hepatic gluconeogenesis, and enhancing the abundance of 
hepatic glucokinase (GK), the first enzyme regulating glycogen synthesis.
Moreover, Tshr deletion inhibited the protein expression of hepatic phospho-CREB 
and increased the protein expression of hepatic phospho-AMP-activated protein
kinase (p-AMPK), two up-stream regulators of PEPCK and G6P mRNA. In HepG2 cells, 
TSH increased the expression of G6P and PEPCK at mRNA level. These results
indicated the simulative effects of TSH on hepatic glucose production in vivo and
in vitro, suggesting a novel role for TSH in hepatic glucose metabolism.

PMID: 23665701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Cancer Lett. 2013 Sep 1;337(2):276-84. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.04.028. Epub
2013 May 2.

Angiopoietin2 enhances doxorubin resistance in HepG2 cells by upregulating
survivin and Ref-1 via MSK1 activation.

Li T(1), Liu Z, Jiang K, Ruan Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Chemistry and Life Sciences, Zhejiang Normal
University, Jinhua, Zhejiang 321004, China. litao@zjnu.cn

Angiopoietin2 (Ang2) and its Tie2 receptor have extensive effects on tumor
malignancy including angiogenesis and metastasis. In this study, we evaluated the
protective effect of Ang2 on doxorubicin-induced apoptosis in HepG2 cells. Ang2
(400 ng/ml) attenuated doxorubicin-mediated cytotoxicity by upregulating the
expression of Survivin and Ref-1, which was reversed by a soluble extracellular
domain of Tie2. Mechanistic study showed Ang2 activated ERK-MSK cascade to induce
histone H3 phosphorylation and inducible gene expression. The stimulatory effect 
of Ang2 on anti-apoptotic genes was attenuated by either MSK inhibitor (H89) or
by overexpression of a kinase-deficient MSK1. Activated MSK1 phosphorylated the
CREB at Ser133 and phosho-CREB was recruited to Ref-1 promoter rapidly to
initiate the gene expression. Moreover, knockdown of MSK1 by specific siRNA also 
attenuated the pro-survival activity of Ang2 and CREB phosphorylation. Hence, our
study suggests the existence of an Ang2-ERK-MSK signaling axis mediating survival
responses and drug resistance of tumor cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23643942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Sep;1833(9):2083-91. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.04.012. Epub 2013 Apr 29.

p27 suppresses cyclooxygenase-2 expression by inhibiting p38ß and p38d-mediated
CREB phosphorylation upon arsenite exposure.

Che X(1), Liu J, Huang H, Mi X, Xia Q, Li J, Zhang D, Ke Q, Gao J, Huang C.

Author information: 
(1)Nelson Institute of Environmental Medicine, New York University, School of
Medicine, 57 Old Forge Road, Tuxedo, NY 10987, USA.

p27 is a cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor that suppresses a cell's
transition from G0 to S phase, therefore acting as a tumor suppressor. Our most
recent studies demonstrate that upon arsenite exposure, p27 suppresses Hsp27 and 
Hsp70 expressions through the JNK2/c-Jun- and HSF-1-dependent pathways,
suggesting a novel molecular mechanism underlying the tumor suppressive function 
of p27 in a CDK-independent manner. We found that p27-deficiency (p27-/-)
resulted in the elevation of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression at
transcriptional level, whereas the introduction of p27 brought back COX-2
expression to a level similar to that of p27+/+ cells, suggesting that p27
exhibits an inhibitory effect on COX-2 expression. Further studies identified
that p27 inhibition of COX-2 expression was specifically due to phosphorylation
of transcription factor cAMP response element binding (CREB) phosphorylation
mediated by p38ß and p38d. These results demonstrate a novel mechanism underlying
tumor suppression effect of p27 and will contribute to the understanding of the
overall mechanism of p27 tumor suppression in a CDK-independent manner.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3686879
PMID: 23639288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 18;8(4):e59763. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059763. Print 2013.

cAMP response element binding protein1 is essential for activation of steroyl
co-enzyme a desaturase 1 (Scd1) in mouse lung type II epithelial cells.

Antony N(1), Weir JR, McDougall AR, Mantamadiotis T, Meikle PJ, Cole TJ, Bird AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, 
Victoria, Australia.

Cyclic AMP Response Element-Binding Protein 1 (Creb1) is a transcription factor
that mediates cyclic adenosine 3', 5'-monophosphate (cAMP) signalling in many
tissues. Creb1(-/-) mice die at birth due to respiratory failure and previous
genome-wide microarray analysis of E17.5 Creb1(-/-) fetal mouse lung identified
important Creb1-regulated gene targets during lung development. The lipogenic
enzymes stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 (Scd1) and fatty acid synthase (Fasn) showed
highly reduced gene expression in Creb1(-/-) lungs. We therefore hypothesized
that Creb1 plays a crucial role in the transcriptional regulation of genes
involved in pulmonary lipid biosynthetic pathways during lung development. In
this study we confirmed that Scd1 and Fasn mRNA levels were down regulated in the
E17.5 Creb1(-/-) mouse lung while the lipogenic-associated transcription factors 
SrebpF1, C/ebpa and Ppar<U+03B3> were increased. In vivo studies using germline
(Creb1(-/-) ) and lung epithelial-specific (Creb1(Epi<U+0394>/<U+0394>) ) Creb1 knockout mice
showed strongly reduced Scd1, but not Fasn gene expression and protein levels in 
lung epithelial cells. In vitro studies using mouse MLE-15 epithelial cells
showed that forskolin-mediated activation of Creb1 increased both Scd1 gene
expression and protein synthesis. Additionally, MLE15 cells transfected with a
dominant-negative ACreb vector blocked forskolin-mediated stimulation of Scd1
gene expression. Lipid profiling in MLE15 cells showed that dominant-negative
ACreb suppressed forskolin-induced desaturation of ether linked lipids to produce
plasmalogens, as well as levels of phosphatidylethanolamine, ceramide and
lysophosphatidylcholine. Taken together these results demonstrate that Creb1 is
essential for the induction and maintenance of Scd1 in developing fetal mouse
lung epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC3630165
PMID: 23637738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 23;8(4):e61758. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061758. Print 2013.

An alkylphenol mix promotes seminoma derived cell proliferation through an
ERalpha36-mediated mechanism.

Ajj H(1), Chesnel A, Pinel S, Plenat F, Flament S, Dumond H.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-Université de Lorraine, UMR 7039, Centre de Recherches en Automatique de 
Nancy, Vandoeuvre lès Nancy, France.

Long chain alkylphenols are man-made compounds still present in industrial and
agricultural processes. Their main use is domestic and they are widespread in
household products, cleansers and cosmetics, leading to a global environmental
and human contamination. These molecules are known to exert estrogen-like
activities through binding to classical estrogen receptors. In vitro, they can
also interact with the G-protein coupled estrogen receptor. Testicular germ cell 
tumor etiology and progression are proposed to be stimulated by lifelong
estrogeno-mimetic exposure. We studied the transduction signaling pathways
through which an alkyphenol mixture triggers testicular cancer cell proliferation
in vitro and in vivo. Proliferation assays were monitored after exposure to a
realistic mixture of 4-tert-octylphenol and 4-nonylphenol of either TCam-2
seminoma derived cells, NT2/D1 embryonal carcinoma cells or testis tumor in
xenografted nude mice. Specific pharmacological inhibitors and gene-silencing
strategies were used in TCam-2 cells in order to demonstrate that the alkylphenol
mix triggers CREB-phosphorylation through a rapid, ERa36-PI3kinase non genomic
pathway. Microarray analysis of the mixture target genes revealed that this
pathway can modulate the expression of the DNA-methyltransferase-3 (Dnmt3) gene
family which is involved in DNA methylation control. Our results highlight a key 
role for ERa36 in alkylphenol non genomic signaling in testicular germ cell
tumors. Hence, ERa36-dependent control of the epigenetic status opens the way for
the understanding of the link between endocrine disruptor exposure and the burden
of hormone sensitive cancers.

PMCID: PMC3634018
PMID: 23626723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2013 Jun;23(6):301-13. doi: 10.1097/FPC.0b013e328360b175.

BDNF and CREB1 genetic variants interact to affect antidepressant treatment
outcomes in geriatric depression.

Murphy GM Jr(1), Sarginson JE, Ryan HS, O'Hara R, Schatzberg AF, Lazzeroni LC.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Laboratories, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA.
gmurphy@stanford.edu

AIM: Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is associated with antidepressant
response on the cellular level, in animal models, and in clinical studies. A
common variant in the BDNF gene results in a substitution of a methionine (Met)
for a valine at the amino acid position 66. Previous studies reported that the
Met variant results in enhanced response to antidepressant medications. These
findings may be at odds with studies indicating that on a cellular level the Met 
variant impairs the secretion of BDNF.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We examined the effects of BDNF single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in response to the antidepressants paroxetine and
mirtazapine in a sample of 246 geriatric patients with major depression, treated 
in a double-blind, randomized, 8-week clinical trial. We also examined the
effects of genetic variation at the BDNF-related loci neurotrophic tyrosine
kinase receptor 2, cyclic AMP responsive element binding protein 1 (CREB1), and
CREB binding protein. A total of 53 SNPs were genotyped.
RESULTS: BDNF genetic variation had a significant effect on the efficacy of
paroxetine, with patients carrying the Met allele showing impaired response. SNPs
at the CREB1 locus, which encodes a transcription factor important in BDNF
signaling, also predicted response to paroxetine. Furthermore, we found a
significant gene-gene interaction between BDNF and CREB1 that affected response
to paroxetine. Because BDNF has been associated with cognitive function, we
tested the effects of BDNF SNPs on change in a wide variety of cognitive tests
over the 8-week trial, but there were no significant effects of genotype on
cognition.
CONCLUSION: These results provide new evidence for the importance of the BDNF
pathway in antidepressant response in geriatric patients. The negative effect of 
the Met66 allele on antidepressant outcomes is consistent with basic science
findings indicating a negative effect of this variant on BDNF activity in the
brain. Further, the effect of BDNF genetic variation on antidepressant treatment 
is modified by variation in the gene encoding the downstream effector CREB1.

PMID: 23619509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Biol Chem. 2013 May 31;288(22):15843-53. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.427187. Epub
2013 Apr 22.

The intermediate conductance calcium-activated potassium channel KCa3.1 regulates
vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation via controlling calcium-dependent
signaling.

Bi D(1), Toyama K, Lemaître V, Takai J, Fan F, Jenkins DP, Wulff H, Gutterman DD,
Park F, Miura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, University of Nevada School of
Medicine, Reno, Nevada 89557, USA.

The intermediate conductance calcium-activated potassium channel KCa3.1
contributes to a variety of cell activation processes in pathologies such as
inflammation, carcinogenesis, and vascular remodeling. We examined the
electrophysiological and transcriptional mechanisms by which KCa3.1 regulates
vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) proliferation. Platelet-derived growth
factor-BB (PDGF)-induced proliferation of human coronary artery VSMCs was
attenuated by lowering intracellular Ca(2+) concentration ([Ca(2+)]i) and was
enhanced by elevating [Ca(2+)]i. KCa3.1 blockade or knockdown inhibited
proliferation by suppressing the rise in [Ca(2+)]i and attenuating the expression
of phosphorylated cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB), c-Fos, and
neuron-derived orphan receptor-1 (NOR-1). This antiproliferative effect was
abolished by elevating [Ca(2+)]i. KCa3.1 overexpression induced VSMC
proliferation, and potentiated PDGF-induced proliferation, by inducing CREB
phosphorylation, c-Fos, and NOR-1. Pharmacological stimulation of KCa3.1
unexpectedly suppressed proliferation by abolishing the expression and activity
of KCa3.1 and PDGF ß-receptors and inhibiting the rise in [Ca(2+)]i. The
stimulation also attenuated the levels of phosphorylated CREB, c-Fos, and cyclin 
expression. After KCa3.1 blockade, the characteristic round shape of VSMCs
expressing high l-caldesmon and low calponin-1 (dedifferentiation state) was
maintained, whereas KCa3.1 stimulation induced a spindle-shaped cellular
appearance, with low l-caldesmon and high calponin-1. In conclusion, KCa3.1 plays
an important role in VSMC proliferation via controlling Ca(2+)-dependent
signaling pathways, and its modulation may therefore constitute a new therapeutic
target for cell proliferative diseases such as atherosclerosis.

PMCID: PMC3668741
PMID: 23609438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jul;33(13):2574-85. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01677-12. Epub 2013 Apr 
22.

p90 RSK2 mediates antianoikis signals by both transcription-dependent and
-independent mechanisms.

Jin L(1), Li D, Lee JS, Elf S, Alesi GN, Fan J, Kang HB, Wang D, Fu H, Taunton J,
Boggon TJ, Tucker M, Gu TL, Chen ZG, Shin DM, Khuri FR, Kang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

How invasive and metastatic tumor cells evade anoikis induction remains unclear. 
We found that knockdown of RSK2 sensitizes diverse cancer cells to anoikis
induction, which is mediated through phosphorylation targets including apoptosis 
signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1) and cyclic AMP (cAMP) response element-binding 
protein (CREB). We provide evidence to show that RSK2 inhibits ASK1 by
phosphorylating S83, T1109, and T1326 through a novel mechanism in which
phospho-T1109/T1326 inhibits ATP binding to ASK1, while phospho-S83 attenuates
ASK1 substrate MKK6 binding. Moreover, the RSK2<U+2192>CREB signaling pathway provides
antianoikis protection by regulating gene expression of protein effectors that
are involved in cell death regulation, including the antiapoptotic factor protein
tyrosine kinase 6 (PTK6) and the proapoptotic factor inhibitor-of-growth protein 
3 (ING3). PTK6 overexpression or ING3 knockdown in addition to ASK1 knockdown
further rescued the increased sensitivity to anoikis induction in RSK2 knockdown 
cells. These data together suggest that RSK2 functions as a signal integrator to 
provide antianoikis protection to cancer cells in both transcription-independent 
and -dependent manners, in part by signaling through ASK1 and CREB, and
contributes to cancer cell invasion and tumor metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3700113
PMID: 23608533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Int J Oncol. 2013 Jun;42(6):1890-6. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.1908. Epub 2013 Apr 17.

Effects of the Smad4 C324Y mutation on thyroid cell proliferation.

D'Inzeo S(1), Nicolussi A, Nardi F, Coppa A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, I-324-00161 
Rome, Italy.

Smad4 is a key mediator of the transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) superfamily
that is involved in the control of cell proliferation and differentiation. We
recently demonstrated that a Smad4 mutation, Smad4 C324Y, isolated from nodal
metastases of papillary thyroid carcinoma, causes an increase of TGF-ß signaling,
responsible for the acquisition of transformed phenotype and invasive behaviour
in thyroid cells stably expressing this mutation. In this paper, we demonstrate
that the stable expression of Smad4 C324Y mutation in FRTL-5 cells is responsible
for TSH-independent growth ability. Our data show that the Smad4 C324Y mutation
interacts with P-Smad3 more strongly than Smad4 wt, already in basal condition;
this interaction is responsible for TGF-ß signaling and PKA activation that, in
turn, determines an increased phosphorylation of CREB, necessary for the
mitogenic actions of TSH. The expression of cyclin D1 also increases in all cells
overexpressing the Smad4 C324Y mutation. All together, these data demonstrate
that Smad4 C324Y mutation, interacting with the PKA pathway, gives cells the
ability to proliferate independently from TSH.

PMCID: PMC3699576
PMID: 23591524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 May;37(5):710-8. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182772bba.

Cutaneous syncytial myoepithelioma: clinicopathologic characterization in a
series of 38 cases.

Jo VY(1), Antonescu CR, Zhang L, Dal Cin P, Hornick JL, Fletcher CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.

Cutaneous myoepithelial tumors demonstrate heterogenous morphologic and
immunophenotypic features. We previously described, in brief, 7 cases of
cutaneous myoepithelioma showing solid syncytial growth of ovoid, spindled, or
histiocytoid cells. We now present the clinicopathologic features in a series of 
38 cases of this distinctive syncytial variant, which were diagnosed between 1997
and 2012 (mostly seen in consultation). There were 27 men and 11 women, with a
median age of 39 years (range, 2 mo to 74 y). Primary anatomic sites were the
upper extremity (11, including 2 on the hand), upper limb girdle (3), lower
extremity (14; 3 on the foot), back (6), face (2), chest (1), and buttock (1);
the typical presentation was as either a polypoid or papular lesion. Tumors were 
well circumscribed and centered in the dermis and ranged in size from 0.3 to 2.7 
cm (median 0.8 cm). Microscopically all tumors showed a solid sheet-like growth
of uniformly sized ovoid to spindled or histiocytoid cells with palely
eosinophilic syncytial cytoplasm. Nuclei were vesicular with fine chromatin and
small or inconspicuous nucleoli and exhibited minimal to no atypia. Mitoses
ranged from 0 to 4 per 10 HPF; 28 tumors showed no mitoses. Necrosis and
lymphovascular invasion were consistently absent. Adipocytic metaplasia,
appearing as superficial fat entrapped within the tumor, was seen in 12 cases.
Chondro-osseous differentiation was seen in 1 tumor. All tumors examined were
diffusely positive for EMA, and the majority showed diffuse staining for S-100
protein (5 showing focal staining). Keratin staining was focal in 1 of 33 tumors 
and seen in rare cells in 3 other cases. There was also positivity for GFAP
(14/33), SMA (9/13), and p63 (6/11). Most lesions were treated by local excision.
The majority of tumors tested (14/17; 82%) were positive by fluorescence in situ 
hybridization for EWSR1 gene rearrangement; testing for potential fusion partners
(PBX1, ZNF444, POU5F1, DUX4, ATF1, CREB1, NR4A3, DDIT3, and NFATc2) was negative 
in all EWSR1-rearranged tumors. No FUS gene rearrangement was detected in 2
tumors lacking EWSR1 rearrangement. Follow-up information is available for 21
patients (mean follow-up 15 mo). One patient with a positive deep margin
developed a local recurrence 51 months after initial biopsy. All other patients
with available follow-up information, including 11 who had positive deep margins,
are alive with no evidence of disease and no reported metastases. In summary,
cutaneous syncytial myoepithelioma is a morphologically distinct variant that
more frequently affects men, occurs over a wide age range, and usually presents
on the extremities. Tumors are positive for S-100 protein and EMA, and, unlike
most myoepithelial neoplasms, keratin staining is infrequent. EWSR1 gene
rearrangement is present in nearly all tumors tested and likely involves a novel 
fusion partner. Prior reports describe some risk of recurrence and metastasis for
cutaneous myoepithelial tumors; however, the syncytial variant appears to behave 
in a benign manner and only rarely recurs locally.

PMCID: PMC3628558
PMID: 23588365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Horm Cancer. 2013 Aug;4(4):233-41. doi: 10.1007/s12672-013-0142-1. Epub 2013 Apr 
13.

CREB-regulated transcription co-activator family stimulates promoter II-driven
aromatase expression in preadipocytes.

Samarajeewa NU(1), Docanto MM, Simpson ER, Brown KA.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism and Cancer Laboratory, Prince Henry's Institute, Block E level 4,
246 Clayton Rd, Clayton, P.O. Box 5152, Melbourne, VIC, 3168, Australia.

The dramatically increased prevalence of breast cancer after menopause is of
great concern and is correlated with elevated local levels of estrogens. This is 
mainly due to an increase in aromatase expression driven by its proximal promoter
II (PII). We have previously demonstrated that the CREB co-activator CRTC2 binds 
directly to PII and stimulates its activity via mechanisms involving LKB1-AMPK in
response to prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)). There are three members of the CRTC
family (CRTC1-3) and this study aimed to characterize the role of other CRTCs in 
the activation of aromatase PII. The expression and subcellular localization of
CRTCs were examined in preadipocytes using qPCR and immunofluorescence. Under
basal conditions, CRTC1 expression was the lowest, whereas CRTC3 transcripts were
present at higher levels. Basally, CRTC2 and CRTC3 were mainly cytoplasmic and
PGE(2) caused their nuclear translocation. Reporter assays and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) were performed to assess the effect of CRTCs on PII
activity and binding. Basal PII activity was significantly increased with all
CRTCs. Forskolin (FSK)/phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), to mimic PGE(2),
resulted in a further significant increase in PII activity with all CRTCs, with
CRTC2 and CRTC3 having greater effects. This was consistent with ChIP data
showing an increased binding of CRTCs to PII with FSK/PMA. Moreover, gene
silencing of CRTC2 and CRTC3 significantly reduced the FSK/PMA-mediated
stimulation of aromatase activity. Interestingly, CRTCs acted cooperatively with 
CREB1 to increase PII activity, and both CREs were found to be essential for the 
maximal induction of PII activity by CRTCs. Phosphorylation of CRTC2 at its AMPK 
target site, Ser 171, dictated its subcellular localization, and the activation
of aromatase PII in preadipocytes. In conclusion, this study demonstrates that
aromatase regulation in primary human breast preadipocytes involves more than one
CRTC.

PMID: 23584792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Apr;19(4):452-61. doi: 10.1038/mp.2013.37. Epub 2013 Apr 9.

Allelic differences between Europeans and Chinese for CREB1 SNPs and their
implications in gene expression regulation, hippocampal structure and function,
and bipolar disorder susceptibility.

Li M(1), Luo XJ(2), Rietschel M(3), Lewis CM(4), Mattheisen M(5), Müller-Myhsok
B(6), Jamain S(7), Leboyer M(8), Landén M(9), Thompson PM(10), Cichon S(11),
Nöthen MM(12), Schulze TG(13), Sullivan PF(14), Bergen SE(15), Donohoe G(16),
Morris DW(16), Hargreaves A(16), Gill M(16), Corvin A(16), Hultman C(17), Toga
AW(10), Shi L(18), Lin Q(18), Shi H(18), Gan L(19), Meyer-Lindenberg A(20),
Czamara D(6), Henry C(8), Etain B(21), Bis JC(22), Ikram MA(23), Fornage M(24),
Debette S(25), Launer LJ(26), Seshadri S(27), Erk S(28), Walter H(29), Heinz
A(30), Bellivier F(31), Stein JL(32), Medland SE(33), Arias Vasquez A(34), Hibar 
DP(10), Franke B(34), Martin NG(35), Wright MJ(35); MooDS Bipolar Consortium;
Swedish Bipolar Study Group; Alzheimers Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; ENIGMA 
Consortium; CHARGE Consortium, Su B(18).

Author information: 
(1)1] State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute 
of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China [2] University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. (2)University of Rochester Flaum Eye
Institute, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA. (3)1] Department of
Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical
Faculty Mannheim/University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany [2] Department of
Psychiatry, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (4)MRC SGDP Centre, Institute of
Psychiatry, King's College London, London, UK. (5)Channing Laboratory, Brigham
and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (6)Max Planck
Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany. (7)1] Inserm U 955, IMRB, Psychiatrie
Génétique, Créteil, France [2] Fondation Fondamental, Créteil, France. (8)1]
Inserm U 955, IMRB, Psychiatrie Génétique, Créteil, France [2] Fondation
Fondamental, Créteil, France [3] Pôle de Psychiatrie, AP-HP, Hôpital H. Mondor-A.
Chenevier, Créteil, France [4] Faculté de Médecine, Université Paris Est,
Créteil, France. (9)1] Section of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Sahlgrenska
Academy at Gothenburg University, Gothenburg, Sweden [2] Department of Medical
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(10)Imaging Genetics Center, Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, Department of
Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA. (11)1] Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research
Center Juelich, Juelich, Germany [2] Department of Genomics, Life and Brain
Center and Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (12)1]
Department of Genomics, Life and Brain Center and Institute of Human Genetics,
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany [2] German Center for Neurodegenerative
Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany. (13)1] Department of Genetic Epidemiology in
Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty
Mannheim/University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany [2] Section on Psychiatric
Genetics, Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center, 
Georg-August-University, Göttingen, Germany. (14)Departments of Genetics,
Psychiatry and Epidemiology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. 
(15)1] Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA [2] Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad
Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. (16)Neuropsychiatric Genetics
Group and Department of Psychiatry, Institute of Molecular Medicine and Trinity
College Institute of Neuroscience, Trinity College Dublin, St James Hospital,
Dublin, Ireland. (17)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. (18)State Key Laboratory of Genetic
Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China. (19)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing, China. (20)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Central Institute
of Mental Health, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany. (21)1] Inserm U
955, IMRB, Psychiatrie Génétique, Créteil, France [2] Fondation Fondamental,
Créteil, France [3] Pôle de Psychiatrie, AP-HP, Hôpital H. Mondor-A. Chenevier,
Créteil, France. (22)Cardiovascular Health Research Unit, Department of Medicine,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. (23)1] Department of Radiology and
Epidemiology, Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
[2] The Netherlands Consortium of Healthy Aging, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(24)Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular Medicine and Human Genetics Center
School of Public Health, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston,
Houston, TX, USA. (25)1] Department of Neurology, Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston, MA, USA [2] Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale (INSERM), U708, Neuroepidemiology, Paris, France [3] Department of
Epidemiology, University of Versailles Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines, Paris, France. 
(26)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Intramural Research Program, National Institute 
of Aging, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA. (27)1] Department of Neurology, Boston
University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA [2] The National, Heart, Lung and 
Blood Institute's Framingham Heart Study, Framingham, MA, USA. (28)1] Department 
of Psychiatry, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany [2] Division
of Mind and Brain Research, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 
(29)1] Department of Psychiatry, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany [2] Department
of Psychiatry, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany [3] Division
of Mind and Brain Research, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 
(30)Department of Psychiatry, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,
Germany. (31)1] Inserm U 955, IMRB, Psychiatrie Génétique, Créteil, France [2]
Fondation Fondamental, Créteil, France [3] AP-HP, Hôpital St-Louis-Lariboisière-F
Widal, Service Universitaire de Psychiatrie, Paris, France [4] Faculté de
Médecine, Université Denis Diderot, Paris, France. (32)1] Imaging Genetics
Center, Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, Department of Neurology, David Geffen School
of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA [2] Neurogenetics
Program, Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (33)1] Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory,
Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, QLD, Australia [2]
Quantitative Genetics Laboratory, Queensland Institute of Medical Research,
Brisbane, QLD, Australia [3] Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Boston, MA, USA.
(34)1] Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands [2] Department of Psychiatry, Donders Institute for
Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (35)Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory, Queensland
Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.

Erratum in
    Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Apr;19(4):527.

Bipolar disorder (BD) is a polygenic disorder that shares substantial genetic
risk factors with major depressive disorder (MDD). Genetic analyses have reported
numerous BD susceptibility genes, while some variants, such as single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in CACNA1C have been successfully replicated, many others
have not and subsequently their effects on the intermediate phenotypes cannot be 
verified. Here, we studied the MDD-related gene CREB1 in a set of independent BD 
sample groups of European ancestry (a total of 64,888 subjects) and identified
multiple SNPs significantly associated with BD (the most significant being SNP
rs6785[A], P=6.32 × 10(-5), odds ratio (OR)=1.090). Risk SNPs were then subjected
to further analyses in healthy Europeans for intermediate phenotypes of BD,
including hippocampal volume, hippocampal function and cognitive performance. Our
results showed that the risk SNPs were significantly associated with hippocampal 
volume and hippocampal function, with the risk alleles showing a decreased
hippocampal volume and diminished activation of the left hippocampus, adding
further evidence for their involvement in BD susceptibility. We also found the
risk SNPs were strongly associated with CREB1 expression in lymphoblastoid cells 
(P<0.005) and the prefrontal cortex (P<1.0 × 10(-6)). Remarkably, population
genetic analysis indicated that CREB1 displayed striking differences in allele
frequencies between continental populations, and the risk alleles were completely
absent in East Asian populations. We demonstrated that the regional prevalence of
the CREB1 risk alleles in Europeans is likely caused by genetic hitchhiking due
to natural selection acting on a nearby gene. Our results suggest that
differential population histories due to natural selection on regional
populations may lead to genetic heterogeneity of susceptibility to complex
diseases, such as BD, and explain inconsistencies in detecting the genetic
markers of these diseases among different ethnic populations.

PMCID: PMC3937299
PMID: 23568192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Breast Cancer Res. 2013 Apr 8;15(2):R30. doi: 10.1186/bcr3410.

HIF-1a stimulates aromatase expression driven by prostaglandin E2 in breast
adipose stroma.

Samarajeewa NU, Yang F, Docanto MM, Sakurai M, McNamara KM, Sasano H, Fox SB,
Simpson ER, Brown KA.

INTRODUCTION: The majority of postmenopausal breast cancers are
estrogen-dependent. Tumor-derived factors, such as prostaglandin E2 (PGE2),
stimulate CREB1 binding to cAMP response elements (CREs) on aromatase promoter II
(PII), leading to the increased expression of aromatase and biosynthesis of
estrogens within human breast adipose stromal cells (ASCs). Hypoxia inducible
factor-1a (HIF-1a), a key mediator of cellular adaptation to low oxygen levels,
is emerging as a novel prognostic marker in breast cancer. We have identified the
presence of a consensus HIF-1a binding motif overlapping with the proximal CRE of
aromatase PII. However, the regulation of aromatase expression by HIF-1a in
breast cancer has not been characterized. This study aimed to characterize the
role of HIF-1a in the activation of aromatase PII.
METHODS: HIF-1a expression and localization were examined in human breast ASCs
using quantitative PCR (QPCR), Western blotting, immunofluorescence and high
content screening. QPCR and tritiated water-release assays were performed to
assess the effect of HIF-1a on aromatase expression and activity. Reporter assays
and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) were performed to assess the effect of
HIF-1a on PII activity and binding. Treatments included PGE2 or DMOG
((dimethyloxalglycine), HIF-1a stabilizer). Double immunohistochemistry for
HIF-1a and aromatase was performed on tissues obtained from breast cancer and
cancer-free patients.
RESULTS: Results indicate that PGE2 increases HIF-1a transcript and protein
expression, nuclear localization and binding to aromatase PII in human breast
ASCs. Results also demonstrate that HIF-1a significantly increases PII activity, 
and aromatase transcript expression and activity, in the presence of DMOG and/or 
PGE2, and that HIF-1a and CREB1 act co-operatively on PII. There is a significant
increase in HIF-1a positive ASCs in breast cancer patients compared to
cancer-free women, and a positive association between HIF-1a and aromatase
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to identify HIF-1a as a modulator of
PII-driven aromatase expression in human breast tumor-associated stroma and
provides a novel mechanism for estrogen regulation in obesity-related,
post-menopausal breast cancer. Together with our on-going studies on the role of 
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) in the regulation of breast aromatase, this
work provides another link between disregulated metabolism and breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3672802
PMID: 23566437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 Jul;379(1-2):51-8. doi: 10.1007/s11010-013-1626-6. Epub
2013 Mar 30.

MicroRNA-200b targets CREB1 and suppresses cell growth in human malignant glioma.

Peng B(1), Hu S, Jun Q, Luo D, Zhang X, Zhao H, Li D.

Author information: 
(1)Affiliated Cancer Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, People's Republic of China. pengbiaopengbiao@msn.com

MicroRNAs can coordinately repress multiple target genes and interfere with the
biological functions of the cell, such as proliferation and apoptosis. In the
present study, we report that miR-200b was downregulated in malignant glioma cell
lines and specimens. Overexpression of miR-200b suppressed the proliferation and 
colony formation of glioma cells. An oncogene encoding cAMP responsive
element-binding protein 1 (CREB1), which has been shown to be an important
transcription factor involved in the proliferation, survival, and metastasis of
tumor cells, was here confirmed as a direct target gene of miR-200b. CREB1 was
also found to be present at a high level in human glioma tissues. This was
inversely correlated with miR-200b expression. Ectopic expression of CREB1
attenuated the growth suppressive phenotypes of glioma cells caused by miR-200b. 
These results indicate that miR-200b targets the CREB1 gene and suppresses glioma
cell growth, suggesting that miR-200b shows tumor-suppressive activity in human
malignant glioma.

PMID: 23543137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2013 Jul 1;44:271-8. doi:
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2013.03.005. Epub 2013 Mar 26.

Evaluation of the role of MAPK1 and CREB1 polymorphisms on treatment resistance, 
response and remission in mood disorder patients.

Calati R(1), Crisafulli C, Balestri M, Serretti A, Spina E, Calabrò M, Sidoti A, 
Albani D, Massat I, Höfer P, Amital D, Juven-Wetzler A, Kasper S, Zohar J, Souery
D, Montgomery S, Mendlewicz J.

Author information: 
(1)IRCCS Centro S. Giovanni di Dio, Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy.

Treatment resistant depression (TRD) is a significant clinical and public health 
problem. Among others, neuroplasticity and inflammatory pathways seem to play a
crucial role in the pathomechanisms of antidepressant efficacy. The primary aim
of this study was to investigate whether a set of single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) within two genes implicated in neuroplasticity and inflammatory processes 
(the mitogen activated protein kinase 1, MAPK1 (rs3810608, rs6928, rs13515 and
rs8136867), and the cyclic AMP responsive element binding protein 1, CREB1
(rs889895, rs6740584, rs2551922 and rs2254137)) was associated with
antidepressant treatment resistance (according to two different definitions), in 
285 Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) patients. As secondary aims, we investigated 
the genetic modulation of the same SNPs on response, remission and other clinical
features both in MDD patients and in a larger sample including 82 Bipolar
Disorder (BD) patients as well. All patients were screened in the context of a
European multicenter project. No association between both the investigated genes 
and treatment resistance and response was found in MDD patients. However,
considering remission, higher rates of CREB1 rs889895 GG genotype were reported
in MDD patients. Moreover, MAPK1 rs8136867 AG genotype was found to be associated
with remission in the whole sample (MDD and BD). Present results suggest that
some genetic polymorphisms in both CREB1 and MAPK1 could be associated with
treatment remission. Although further research is needed to draw more definitive 
conclusions, such results are intriguing since suggest a potential role of two
genes implicated in neuroplasticity and inflammatory processes in symptom
remission after antidepressant treatment.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23537502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Hepatology. 2013 Sep;58(3):1011-20. doi: 10.1002/hep.26420. Epub 2013 Jul 16.

Mutual interaction between YAP and CREB promotes tumorigenesis in liver cancer.

Wang J(1), Ma L, Weng W, Qiao Y, Zhang Y, He J, Wang H, Xiao W, Li L, Chu Q, Pan 
Q, Yu Y, Sun F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital
of Tongji University, Shanghai, China.

Yes-associated protein (YAP), the downstream effecter of the Hippo-signaling
pathway as well as cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element-binding
protein (CREB), has been linked to hepatocarcinogenesis. However, little is known
about whether and how YAP and CREB interact with each other. In this study, we
found that YAP-CREB interaction is critical for liver cancer cell survival and
maintenance of transformative phenotypes, both in vitro and in vivo. Moreover,
both CREB and YAP proteins are highly expressed in a subset of human liver cancer
samples and are closely correlated. Mechanistically, CREB promotes YAP
transcriptional output through binding to -608/-439, a novel region from the YAP 
promoter. By contrast, YAP promotes protein stabilization of CREB through
interaction with mitogen-activated protein kinase 14 (MAPK14/p38) and
beta-transducin repeat containing E3 ubiquitin protein ligase (BTRC).
Gain-of-function and loss-of-function studies demonstrated that phosphorylation
of CREB by MAPK14/p38 at ser133 ultimately leads to its degradation. Such effects
can be enhanced by BTRC through phosphorylation of MAPK14/p38 at Thr180/Tyr182.
However, YAP negatively controls phosphorylation of MAPK14/p38 through inhibition
of BTRC expression.CONCLUSION: There is a novel positive autoregulatory feedback 
loop underlying the interaction between YAP and CREB in liver cancer, suggesting 
that YAP and CREB form a nexus to integrate the protein kinase A, Hippo/YAP, and 
MAPK14/p38 pathways in cancer cells and thus may be helpful in the development of
effective diagnosis and treatment strategies against liver cancer.

© 2013 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 23532963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2013 Jul;49(1):105-13. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2012-0297OC.

Role of hypoxia-inducible factor 1, a subunit and cAMP-response element binding
protein 1 in synergistic release of interleukin 8 by prostaglandin E2 and nickel 
in lung fibroblasts.

Brant KA(1), Fabisiak JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, University of Pittsburgh 
Graduate School of Public Health, Pittsburgh, PA 15219, USA. kab124@pitt.edu

Numerous epidemiological studies have linked exposure to particulate matter (PM) 
air pollution with acute respiratory infection and chronic respiratory and
cardiovascular diseases. We have previously shown that soluble nickel (Ni), a
common component of PM, alters the release of CXC chemokines from cultured human 
lung fibroblasts (HLF) in response to microbial stimuli via a pathway dependent
on disrupted prostaglandin (PG)E2 signaling. The current study sought to identify
the molecular events underlying Ni-induced alterations in PGE2 signaling and its 
effects on IL-8 production. PGE2 synergistically enhances Ni-induced IL-8 release
from HLF in a concentration-dependent manner. The effects of PGE2 were mimicked
by butaprost and PGE1-alcohol and inhibited with antagonists AH6809 and
L-161,982, indicating PGE2 signals via PGE2 receptors 2 and 4. PGE2 and forskolin
stimulated cAMP, but it was only in the presence of Ni-induced hypoxia-inducible 
factor 1, a subunit (HIF1A) that these agents stimulated IL-8 release. The
Ni-induced HIF1A DNA binding was enhanced by PGE2 and mediated, in part, by
activation of p38 MAPK. Negation of cAMP-response element binding protein 1 or
HIF1A using short interfering RNA blocked the synergistic interactions between Ni
and PGE2. The results of the current study provide novel information on the
ability of atmospheric hypoxia-mimetic metals to disrupt the release of
immune-modulating chemokines by HLF in response to PGE2. Moreover, in the
presence of HIF1A, cAMP-mediated signaling pathways may be altered to exacerbate 
inflammatory-like processes in lung tissue, imparting a susceptibility of
PM-exposed populations to adverse respiratory health effects.

PMCID: PMC3727881
PMID: 23526216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. DNA Cell Biol. 2013 Apr;32(4):199-205. doi: 10.1089/dna.2012.1835. Epub 2013 Mar 
21.

CREB is required for cAMP/PKA signals upregulating neuropathy target esterase
expression.

Chen JX(1), Wu YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Toxicology, State Key Laboratory of Integrated
Management of Pest Insects and Rodents, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Neuropathy target esterase (NTE), which has been proposed as the primary target
of organophosphorus compounds that cause delayed neuropathy with degeneration of 
nerve axons, is expressed primarily in neural cells but is also detected in
non-neural cells. However, little is known about the regulation of NTE gene in
cells. We found that a cyclic-AMP (cAMP)-response element (CRE) exists in the 5' 
flanking sequence of NTE gene in HeLa cells, which implies that NTE may be
regulated by the transcription factor cAMP-response element-binding protein
(CREB). In the study, knockdown of CREB decreased the protein and mRNA levels of 
NTE and inhibited the upregulation by cAMP/PKA signaling. Moreover, we observed
that knockdown of CREB significantly decreased luciferase activity of the NTE
gene promoter, while it had no effect on that of the CREB binding sites of
mutated NTE gene promoter and truncated NTE gene promoter lacking the CREB
binding site. cAMP/PKA signals could increase NTE reporter gene activity, while
knockdown of CREB inhibited the increase. We found that the transcription factor 
CREB can bind to the promoter sequence of NTE by chromatin immunoprecipitation.
In conclusion, we provided evidence that CREB is required for cAMP/PKA signals
upregulating NTE expression in HeLa cells.

PMCID: PMC3624699
PMID: 23517531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Br J Pharmacol. 2013 Jun;169(4):860-74. doi: 10.1111/bph.12177.

Angiotensin II causes imbalance between pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines by
modulating GSK-3ß in neuronal culture.

Agarwal D(1), Dange RB, Raizada MK, Francis J.

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Biomedical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, Louisiana
State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Emerging evidence indicates that the balance between
pro-inflammatory cytokines (PICs) and anti-inflammatory cytokines (AICs) within
the brain is an important determinant in the outcome of hypertension. However,
the mechanism by which this dysregulation occurs is not known. We aimed to
investigate whether AngII induces imbalance between PIC and AIC by modulating
downstream transcription factors, NF<U+03BA>B and cyclic AMP response element-binding
protein (CREB), and whether AngII-induced effects are mediated by glycogen
synthase kinase-3ß (GSK-3ß).
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: CATH.a neurons were exposed to AngII (10 nM-1 µM) over a
preset time course. In another set of experiments, GSK-3ß was knock down by using
lentivirus containing short hairpin RNA targeting GSK-3ß (L-sh-GSK3ß) before
AngII exposure. Cell extracts were subjected to RT-PCR, immunoblot and
immunoprecipitation.
KEY RESULTS: AngII caused time-dependent increase in PICs (TNF-a and IL-1ß) and
reduction in AIC (IL-10). AngII exposure caused reduced phosphorylated
CREB(Ser-133) and increased p-NF<U+03BA>B(Ser-276) levels, leading to reduced CREB-CBP
and increased NF<U+03BA>B-CBP binding. These results were accompanied by increased
activation of GSK-3ß, as indicated by increased p-GSK3(Tyr-216) to p-GSK3(Ser-9) 
ratio. In a subsequent study, pretreatment with L-sh-GSK3ß attenuated
AngII-induced alterations in PICs and IL-10 by augmenting CREB-CBP and
attenuating NF<U+03BA>B-CBP binding.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Collectively, these findings are the first to
provide direct evidence that AngII-induced dysregulation in cytokines is mediated
by GSK-3ß-mediated alterations in downstream transcription factors in neuronal
cells. Our data also reveal that AngII-induced effects could be alleviated by
GSK-3ß inhibition, suggesting GSK-3ß as an important therapeutic target for
hypertension that is characterized by increased PICs and NF<U+03BA>B activation.

© 2013 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2013 The British
Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC3687666
PMID: 23516971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Neurosci. 2013 Mar 20;33(12):5275-84. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3200-12.2013.

Hypocretin/orexin neurons contribute to hippocampus-dependent social memory and
synaptic plasticity in mice.

Yang L(1), Zou B, Xiong X, Pascual C, Xie J, Malik A, Xie J, Sakurai T, Xie XS.

Author information: 
(1)AfaSci Research Laboratories, Redwood City, CA 94063, USA.

Hypocretin/orexin (Hcrt)-producing neurons in the lateral hypothalamus project
throughout the brain, including to the hippocampus, where Hcrt receptors are
widely expressed. Hcrt neurons activate these targets to orchestrate global
arousal state, wake-sleep architecture, energy homeostasis, stress adaptation,
and reward behaviors. Recently, Hcrt has been implicated in cognitive functions
and social interaction. In the present study, we tested the hypothesis that Hcrt 
neurons are critical to social interaction, particularly social memory, using
neurobehavioral assessment and electrophysiological approaches. The validated
"two-enclosure homecage test" devices and procedure were used to test
sociability, preference for social novelty (social novelty), and recognition
memory. A conventional direct contact social test was conducted to corroborate
the findings. We found that adult orexin/ataxin-3-transgenic (AT) mice, in which 
Hcrt neurons degenerate by 3 months of age, displayed normal sociability and
social novelty with respect to their wild-type littermates. However, AT mice
displayed deficits in long-term social memory. Nasal administration of exogenous 
Hcrt-1 restored social memory to an extent in AT mice. Hippocampal slices taken
from AT mice exhibited decreases in degree of paired-pulse facilitation and
magnitude of long-term potentiation, despite displaying normal basal synaptic
neurotransmission in the CA1 area compared to wild-type hippocampal slices. AT
hippocampi had lower levels of phosphorylated cAMP response element-binding
protein (pCREB), an activity-dependent transcription factor important for
synaptic plasticity and long-term memory storage. Our studies demonstrate that
Hcrt neurons play an important role in the consolidation of social recognition
memory, at least in part through enhancements of hippocampal synaptic plasticity 
and cAMP response element-binding protein phosphorylation.

PMCID: PMC3640412
PMID: 23516292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Neurosci. 2013 Mar 20;33(12):5216-26. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5133-12.2013.

Phosphodiesterase inhibition rescues chronic cognitive deficits induced by
traumatic brain injury.

Titus DJ(1), Sakurai A, Kang Y, Furones C, Jergova S, Santos R, Sick TJ, Atkins
CM.

Author information: 
(1)Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, Department of Neurological Surgery,
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) modulates several cell signaling pathways in the
hippocampus critical for memory formation. Previous studies have found that the
cAMP-protein kinase A signaling pathway is downregulated after TBI and that
treatment with a phosphodiesterase (PDE) 4 inhibitor rolipram rescues the
decrease in cAMP. In the present study, we examined the effect of rolipram on
TBI-induced cognitive impairments. At 2 weeks after moderate fluid-percussion
brain injury or sham surgery, adult male Sprague Dawley rats received vehicle or 
rolipram (0.03 mg/kg) 30 min before water maze acquisition or cue and contextual 
fear conditioning. TBI animals treated with rolipram showed a significant
improvement in water maze acquisition and retention of both cue and contextual
fear conditioning compared with vehicle-treated TBI animals. Cue and contextual
fear conditioning significantly increased phosphorylated CREB levels in the
hippocampus of sham animals, but not in TBI animals. This deficit in CREB
activation during learning was rescued in TBI animals treated with rolipram.
Hippocampal long-term potentiation was reduced in TBI animals, and this was also 
rescued with rolipram treatment. These results indicate that the PDE4 inhibitor
rolipram rescues cognitive impairments after TBI, and this may be mediated
through increased CREB activation during learning.

PMCID: PMC3655415
PMID: 23516287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Dec;1842(12 Pt A):2517-27. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.03.004. Epub 2013 Mar 16.

Cyclophilin D deficiency rescues Aß-impaired PKA/CREB signaling and alleviates
synaptic degeneration.

Du H(1), Guo L(1), Wu X(2), Sosunov AA(2), McKhann GM(2), Chen JX(3), Yan SS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, and Higuchi Bioscience Center,
School of Pharmacy, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66047, USA. (2)Department 
of Neurosurgery, Physicians & Surgeons College of Columbia University, New York, 
NY 10032, USA. (3)Department of Neurology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 1003, USA. (4)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, and
Higuchi Bioscience Center, School of Pharmacy, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS
66047, USA. Electronic address: shidu@ku.edu.

The coexistence of neuronal mitochondrial pathology and synaptic dysfunction is
an early pathological feature of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Cyclophilin D (CypD), 
an integral part of mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP), is
involved in amyloid beta (Aß)-instigated mitochondrial dysfunction. Blockade of
CypD prevents Aß-induced mitochondrial malfunction and the consequent cognitive
impairments. Here, we showed the elimination of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by 
antioxidants probucol or superoxide dismutase (SOD)/catalase blocks Aß-mediated
inactivation of protein kinase A (PKA)/cAMP regulatory-element-binding (CREB)
signal transduction pathway and loss of synapse, suggesting the detrimental
effects of oxidative stress on neuronal PKA/CREB activity. Notably, neurons
lacking CypD significantly attenuate Aß-induced ROS. Consequently, CypD-deficient
neurons are resistant to Aß-disrupted PKA/CREB signaling by increased PKA
activity, phosphorylation of PKA catalytic subunit (PKA C), and CREB. In
parallel, lack of CypD protects neurons from Aß-induced loss of synapses and
synaptic dysfunction. Furthermore, compared to the mAPP mice, CypD-deficient mAPP
mice reveal less inactivation of PKA-CREB activity and increased synaptic
density, attenuate abnormalities in dendritic spine maturation, and improve
spontaneous synaptic activity. These findings provide new insights into a
mechanism in the crosstalk between the CypD-dependent mitochondrial oxidative
stress and signaling cascade, leading to synaptic injury, functioning through the
PKA/CREB signal transduction pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3868643
PMID: 23507145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Hippocampus. 2013 Jun;23(6):488-99. doi: 10.1002/hipo.22108. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

CREB is necessary for synaptic maintenance and learning-induced changes of the
AMPA receptor GluA1 subunit.

Middei S(1), Houeland G, Cavallucci V, Ammassari-Teule M, D'Amelio M, Marie H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular Biology and Neurobiology, National Research Council,
IRCCS, Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy. s.middei@hsantalucia.it.

The transcription factor cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) is a key
protein implicated in memory, synaptic plasticity and structural plasticity in
mammals. Whether CREB regulates the synaptic incorporation of hippocampal
glutamatergic receptors under basal and learning-induced conditions remains,
however, mostly unknown. Using double-transgenic mice conditionally expressing a 
dominant negative form of CREB (CREBS133A, mCREB), we analyzed how chronic loss
of CREB function in adult hippocampal glutamatergic neurons impacts the levels of
the AMPA and NMDA receptors subunits within the post-synaptic densities (PSD). In
basal (naïve) conditions, we report that inhibition of CREB function was
associated with a specific reduction of the AMPAR subunit GluA1 and a
proportional increase in its Ser845 phosphorylated form within the PSD. These
molecular alterations correlated with a reduction in AMPA receptors mEPSC
frequency, with a decrease in long-term potentiation (LTP), and with an increase 
in long-term depression (LTD). The basal levels other major synaptic proteins
(GluA2/3, GluN1, GluN2A, and PSD95) within the PSD were not affected by CREB
inhibition. Blocking CREB function also impaired contextual fear conditioning
(CFC) and selectively blocked the CFC-driven enhancement of GluA1 and its Ser845 
phosphorylated form within the PSD, molecular changes normally observed in
wild-type mice. CFC-driven enhancement of other synaptic proteins (GluA2/3,
GluN1, GluN2A, and PSD95) within the PSD was not significantly perturbed by the
loss of CREB function. These findings provide the first evidence that, in vivo,
CREB is necessary for the specific maintenance of the GluA1 subunit within the
PSD of hippocampal neurons in basal conditions and for its trafficking within the
PSD during the occurrence of learning.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23504989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 Jun;378(1-2):195-203. doi: 10.1007/s11010-013-1610-1. Epub
2013 Mar 15.

Prostaglandin E2 receptor EP1 phosphorylate CREB and mediates MMP2 expression in 
human cholangiocarcinoma cells.

Sun B(1), Rong R, Jiang H, Zhang H, Wang Y, Bai X, Zhang M, Ma J, Xia S, Shu W,
Zhang L, Leng J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu,
People's Republic of China.

Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and COX-2-induced prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) have been
implicated in all stages of malignant tumorigenesis. Although many aspects of
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP2) on tumor invasion have been studied, the exact
mechanism of PGE2-induced MMP2 overproduction has not been clearly defined. We
have previously demonstrated that PGE2-enhanced extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (Erk) phosphorylation via EP1 signaling pathway involved in PGE2-induced
cell proliferation. Based on the identification of the transcription factor
cyclic AMP response element-binding protein (CREB) as an important regulator of
MMP2 and Erk phosphorylate CREB at ser133, we hypothesize that CREB may be
implicated in the signaling of PGE2 stimulation to MMP2 overproduction via EP1
receptor. In the study, we investigated the role of EP1 receptor on PGE2-induced 
MMP2 expression and delineated the signaling pathway that contributes to EP1
receptor modulation of MMP2 in human cholangiocarcinoma cells. We found PGE2 or
selective EP1 receptor agonist 17-P-T-PGE2-stimulated MMP2 expression and
selective EP1 receptor antagonist SC-51322 or EP1 receptor siRNA abrogated
PGE2-induced MMP2 expression. Intracellular calcium chelator BAPTA-AM, the
selective inhibitor of EGFR AG1478 and the selective inhibitor of Erk PD98059
blocked EP1 receptor activation-induced CREB phosphorylation and MMP2 expression.
A novel dominant-negative (D-N) inhibitor protein of the CREB, termed A-CREB,
attenuated EP1 receptor activation-induced MMP2 expression. Our findings suggest 
that PGE2-enhanced MMP2 expression is, at least in part, mediated through EP1
receptors and calcium signaling pathway-induced CREB phosphorylation in human
cholangiocarcinoma cells.

PMID: 23494562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Endocrinology. 2013 Apr;154(4):1598-611. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-2076. Epub 2013 Mar
14.

Creb1-Mecp2-(m)CpG complex transactivates postnatal murine neuronal glucose
transporter isoform 3 expression.

Chen Y(1), Shin BC, Thamotharan S, Devaskar SU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology and Developmental Biology,
Neonatal Research Center, David Geffen School of Medicine University of
California LosAngeles, Los Angeles, California 90095-1752, USA.

The murine neuronal facilitative glucose transporter isoform 3 (Glut3) is
developmentally regulated, peaking in expression at postnatal day (PN)14. In the 
present study, we characterized a canonical CpG island spanning the 5'-flanking
region of the glut3 gene. Methylation-specific PCR and bisulfite sequencing
identified methylation of this CpG ((m)CpG) island of the glut3 gene, frequency
of methylation increasing 2.5-fold with a 1.6-fold increase in DNA methyl
transferase 3a concentrations noted with advancing postnatal age (PN14 vs PN3).
5'-flanking region of glut3-luciferase reporter transient transfection in HT22
hippocampal neurons demonstrated that (m)CpGs inhibit glut3 transcription.
Contrary to this biological function, glut3 expression rises synchronously with
(m)CpGs in PN14 vs PN3 neurons. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (IP) revealed that 
methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (Mecp2) bound the glut3-(m)CpGs. Depending on
association with specific coregulators, Mecp2, a dual regulator of gene
transcription, may repress or activate a downstream gene. Sequential chromatin IP
uncovered the glut3-(m)CpGs to bind Mecp2 exponentially upon recruitment of Creb1
rather than histone deacetylase 1. Co-IP and coimmunolocalization confirmed that 
Creb1 associated with Mecp2 and cotransfection with glut3-(m)CpG in HT22 cells
enhanced glut3 transcription. Separate 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine pretreatment or in 
combination with trichostatin A reduced (m)CpG and specific small interference
RNAs targeting Mecp2 and Creb1 separately or together depleting Mecp2 and/or
Creb1 binding of glut3-(m)CpGs reduced glut3 expression in HT22 cells. We
conclude that Glut3 is a methylation-sensitive neuronal gene that recruits Mecp2.
Recruitment of Creb1-Mecp2 by glut3-(m)CpG contributes towards transactivation,
formulating an escape from (m)CpG-induced gene suppression, and thereby promoting
developmental neuronal glut3 gene transcription and expression.

PMCID: PMC3602632
PMID: 23493374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Oral Sci. 2013 Mar;55(1):63-70.

Transcriptional regulation of the human bone sialoprotein gene by fibroblast
growth factor 2.

Zhou L(1), Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Matsudo, Japan.

Fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2), a member of the FGF family, positively
regulates bone formation and osteoblast differentiation. Bone sialoprotein (BSP) 
is highly expressed during early bone formation and may play a role in primary
mineralization of bone. In the present study, FGF2 (10 ng/mL) was found to
increase the levels of Runx2 and BSP mRNA at 3 and 12 h in human osteoblast-like 
Saos2 cells. Transient transfection assays were performed using chimeric
constructs of the human BSP gene promoter ligated with a luciferase reporter
gene. FGF2 (10 ng/mL, 12 h) induced the luciferase activities of the -84LUC and
-927LUC constructs in Saos2 cells. The results of gel shift assays showed that
FGF2 (10 ng/mL) increased the binding of nuclear protein to the FGF2 response
element (FRE) and the activator protein 1 (AP1) binding site. Antibodies against 
Dlx5, Msx2, Runx2 and Smad1 blocked FRE-protein complex formation, and antibodies
against CREB1, c-Jun and Fra2 interrupted AP1-protein complex formation. These
results indicate that FGF2 increases BSP transcription by targeting the FRE and
AP1 elements in the proximal promoter of the human BSP gene. Moreover, the
transcription factors Dlx5, Msx2, Runx2, Smad1, CREB1, c-Jun and Fra2 could be
key regulators of the effects of FGF2 on human BSP transcription.

PMID: 23485603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Nutr Neurosci. 2014 Jan;17(1):21-30. doi: 10.1179/1476830513Y.0000000062. Epub
2013 Nov 26.

Daily rhythms of catalase and glutathione peroxidase expression and activity are 
endogenously driven in the hippocampus and are modified by a vitamin A-free diet.

Navigatore-Fonzo LS, Delgado SM, Gimenez MS, Anzulovich AC.

OBJECTIVES: Alterations in enzymatic antioxidant defense systems lead to a
deficit of cognitive functions and altered hippocampal synaptic plasticity. The
objectives of this study were to investigate endogenous rhythms of catalase (CAT)
and glutathione peroxidase (GPx) expression and activity, as well as CREB1 mRNA, 
in the rat hippocampus, and to evaluate to which extent the vitamin A deficiency 
could affect those temporal patterns.
METHODS: Rats from control and vitamin A-deficient (VAD) groups received a diet
containing 4000 IU of vitamin A/kg diet, or the same diet devoid of vitamin A,
respectively, during 3 months. Rats were maintained under 12-hour-dark
conditions, during 10 days before the sacrifice. Circadian rhythms of CAT, GPx,
RXR<U+03B3>, and CREB1 mRNA levels were determined by reverse transcriptrase polymerase 
chain reaction in hippocampus samples isolated every 4 hours during a 24-hour
period. CAT and GPx enzymatic activities were also determined by kinetic assays. 
Regulatory regions of clock and antioxidant enzymes genes were scanned for E-box,
RXRE, and CRE sites.
RESULTS: E-box, RXRE, and CRE sites were found on regulatory regions of GPx and
CAT genes, which display a circadian expression in the rat hippocampus. VAD phase
shifted CAT, GPx, and RXR<U+03B3> endogenous rhythms without affecting circadian
expression of CREB1.
DISCUSSION: CAT and GPx expression and enzymatic activity are circadian in the
rat hippocampus. The VAD affected the temporal patterns antioxidant genes
expression, probably by altering circadian rhythms of its RXR receptors and clock
factors; thus, it would impair the temporal orchestration of hippocampal daily
cognitive performance.

PMID: 23485553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Mar 29;433(1):52-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.02.068. Epub 2013 Feb 26.

Cilostazol promotes mitochondrial biogenesis in human umbilical vein endothelial 
cells through activating the expression of PGC-1a.

Zuo L(1), Li Q, Sun B, Xu Z, Ge Z.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong University, 44# Wenhua Xi Road, Jinan, Shandong 250012, PR China.

Mitochondrial dysfunction is frequently observed in vascular diseases. Cilostazol
is a drug approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of
intermittent claudication. Cilostazol increases intracellular cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) levels through inhibition of type III phosphodiesterase. The
effects of cilostazol in mitochondrial biogenesis in human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVECs) were investigated in this study. Cilostazol treated
HUVECs displayed increased levels of ATP, mitochondrial DNA/nuclear DNA ratio,
expressions of cytochrome B, and mitochondrial mass, suggesting an enhanced
mitochondrial biogenesis induced by cilostazol. The promoted mitochondrial
biogenesis could be abolished by Protein kinase A (PKA) specific inhibitor H-89, 
implying that PKA pathway played a critical role in increased mitochondrial
biogenesis after cilostazol treatment. Indeed, expression levels of peroxisome
proliferator activator receptor gamma-coactivator 1a (PGC-1a), NRF 1 and
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) were significantly increased in
HUVECs after incubation with cilostazol at both mRNA levels and protein levels.
Importantly, knockdown of PGC-1a could abolish cilostazol-induced mitochondrial
biogenesis. Enhanced expression of p-CREB and PGC-1a induced by cilostazol could 
be inhibited by H-89. Moreover, the increased expression of PGC-1a induced by
cilostazol could be inhibited by downregulation of CREB using CREB siRNA at both 
mRNA and protein levels. All the results indicated that cilostazol promoted
mitochondrial biogenesis through activating the expression of PGC-1a in HUVECs,
which was mediated by PKA/CREB pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23485471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 May 6;370(1-2):130-7. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.02.017.
Epub 2013 Mar 7.

The ERK1/2 pathway regulates testosterone synthesis by coordinately regulating
the expression of steroidogenic genes in Leydig cells.

Matzkin ME(1), Yamashita S, Ascoli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Carver College of Medicine, The University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States.

Adult mice with a Leydig cell specific deletion of MAPK kinase (MEK) 1 and 2
(Mek1(f)(/)(f);Mek2(-/-);Cre(+)) mice display Leydig cell hypoplasia and
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. We used radioimmunoassays and quantitative PCR to
evaluate the function and expression of the Leydig cell genes involved in the
conversion of cholesterol to testosterone (Star, Cyp11a1, Hsd3b6, Cyp17a1 and
Hsd17b3), androgen metabolism (Srda1 and Dhrs9), and four transcription factors
(Creb1, Nr5a1, Nr4a1 and Nr0b1) that regulate the expression of steroidogenic
genes. We show that Star, Hsd3b6, Cyp17a1 and Hsd17b3 are downregulated in Ledyig
cells of adult Mek1(f)(/)(f);Mek2(-/-);Cre(+) mice whereas Srda1 and Dhrs9 are
upregulated and Creb1, Nr5a1, Nr4a1 and Nr0b1 are unchanged or upregulated.
Functionally, all the downregulated genes but none of the upregulated genes
contribute to the decrease in testosterone synthesis in Leydig cells of adult
Mek1(f)(/)(f);Mek2(-/-);Cre(+) mice because they produce low testosterone and
dihydrotestosterone when stimulated with hCG or when incubated with testosterone 
precursors such as progesterone or androstenedione.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3631444
PMID: 23480967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Jul;34(7):1644-52. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt089. Epub 2013 Mar
7.

Hepatitis B virus X protein upregulates oncogene Rab18 to result in the
dysregulation of lipogenesis and proliferation of hepatoma cells.

You X(1), Liu F, Zhang T, Li Y, Ye L, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research, Key Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and
Technology of Ministry of Education, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University,
Tianjin 300071, China.

Hepatitis B virus X protein (HBx) contributes to the development of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) through inducing dysregulation of lipogenesis.
However, the mechanism by which HBx induces the abnormal lipogenesis is not well 
known. In this study, we report that the oncogene Rab18, a member of Ras family, 
enhances the HBx-induced hepatocarcinogenesis through inducing dysregulation of
lipogenesis and proliferation. Our data showed that the expression levels of
Rab18 were positively associated with those of HBx in clinical HCC tissues. HBx
was able to upregulate the expression of Rab18 in p21-HBx transgenic mice and
hepatoma cell lines. Next, we identified the mechanism by which HBx upregulated
Rab18. The results demonstrated that cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and 5-lipoxygenase 
(5-LOX) were able to stimulate Rab18 promoter through activating transcription
factor activator protein 1 (AP-1) and cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate
response element-binding (CREB). In addition, we identified another pathway that 
HBx activated Rab18. We found that miR-429 was able to directly target the 3'
untranslated region of Rab18, suggesting that Rab18 is one of the target genes of
miR-429. Then, we found that HBx was able to downregulate miR-429 in hepatoma
cells. The oil red O staining showed that HBx resulted in the dysregulation of
lipogenesis through Rab18. Moreover, Rab18 contributed to the HBx-enhanced
proliferation of hepatoma cells in vitro and in vivo. HBx enhances
hepatocarcinogenesis through leading to the dysregulation of lipogenesis and
proliferation of hepatoma cells, involving two pathways such as
HBx/COX-2/5-LOX/AP-1/CREB/Rab18 and HBx/miR-429/Rab18.

PMID: 23471881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2013 May;45(5):824-31. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e31828b28a3.

Advances in exercise, fitness, and performance genomics in 2012.

Pérusse L(1), Rankinen T, Hagberg JM, Loos RJ, Roth SM, Sarzynski MA, Wolfarth B,
Bouchard C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kinesiology, Laval University, Ste-Foy, Québec, Canada.

A small number of excellent articles on exercise genomics issues were published
in 2012. A new PYGM knock-in mouse model will provide opportunities to
investigate the exercise intolerance and very low activity level of people with
McArdle disease. New reports on variants in ACTN3 and ACE have increased the
level of uncertainty regarding their true role in skeletal muscle metabolism and 
strength traits. The evidence continues to accumulate on the positive effects of 
regular physical activity on body mass index or adiposity in individuals at risk 
of obesity as assessed by their FTO genotype or by the number of risk alleles
they carry at multiple obesity-susceptibility loci. The serum levels of
triglycerides and the risk of hypertriglyceridemia were shown to be influenced by
the interactions between a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the NOS3 gene 
and physical activity level. Allelic variation at nine SNPs was shown to account 
for the heritable component of the changes in submaximal exercise heart rate
induced by the HERITAGE Family Study exercise program. SNPs at the RBPMS, YWHAQ, 
and CREB1 loci were found to be particularly strong predictors of the changes in 
submaximal exercise heart rate. The 2012 review ends with comments on the
importance of relying more on experimental data, the urgency of identifying
panels of genomic predictors of the response to regular exercise and particularly
of adverse responses, and the exciting opportunities offered by recent advances
in our understanding of the global architecture of the human genome as reported
by the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements project.

PMCID: PMC3640622
PMID: 23470294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57520. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057520. Epub 2013 Feb 28.

cAMP responsive element binding protein-1 is a transcription factor of
lysosomal-associated protein transmembrane-4 Beta in human breast cancer cells.

Zhang M(1), Xu JJ, Zhou RL, Zhang QY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical laboratory, Key laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Peking University Cancer Hospital
& Institute, Beijing, China.

Lysosomal-associated protein transmembrane-4 beta (LAPTM4B) is a potential
proto-oncogene, whose overexpression is involved in cancer occurrence and
progression. Its transcript is up-regulated in various types of solid tumors
including breast cancer. However, its transcriptional regulation mechanism is
still unclear. To investigate the mechanism of transcriptional regulation of
LAPTM4B in human breast cancer cells, a series of luciferase reporter constructs 
and construct with mutated binding site for cAMP responsive element binding
protein-1 (CREB1) were generated by PCR amplification and transiently transfected
into breast cancer cells to determine the transcriptional activities of different
promoter regions. The +10+292 promoter region was possessed the highest
transcriptional activity. The ability of CREB1 to bind the LAPMT4B promoter was
confirmed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay, super-shift and RNA
interference experiments. Our study identified the core promoter region
responsible for constitutive expression of LAPTM4B and clarified that CREB1
played an important role in LAPTM4B transcriptional regulation in human breast
cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3585361
PMID: 23469012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Phytomedicine. 2013 May 15;20(7):622-31. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2013.01.014. Epub 
2013 Mar 7.

Reversal of P-glycoprotein-mediated multidrug resistance is induced by mollugin
in MCF-7/adriamycin cells.

Tran TP(1), Kim HG, Choi JH, Na MK, Jeong HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, Chungnam National University,
Daejeon 305-764, South Korea.

P-glycoprotein (P-gp), an important efflux transporter, is encoded by the MDR1
class of genes and is a central element of the multidrug resistance (MDR)
phenomenon in cancer cells. In the present study, we investigated whether
mollugin, purified from roots of Rubica cordifolia L., down-regulated MDR1
expression in MCF-7/adriamycin (MCF-7/adr) cells, a human breast
multidrug-resistant cancer cell line. Mollugin treatment significantly inhibited 
MDR1 expression by blocking MDR1 transcription. Mollugin treatment also
significantly increased intracellular accumulation of the fluorescently-tagged
P-gp substrate, rhodamine-123. The suppression of MDR1 promoter activity and
protein expression was mediated through mollugin-induced activation of
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). Furthermore, mollugin inhibited MDR1
expression through the suppression of NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB activation. Interestingly,
mollugin also inhibited COX-2 expression. These results suggest that mollugin
treatment enhanced suppression of P-gp expression by inhibiting the NF-<U+03BA>B
signaling pathway and COX-2 expression, as well as attenuating CRE
transcriptional activity through AMPK activation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23466342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Eur J Pharmacol. 2013 Apr 5;705(1-3):42-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2013.01.065.
Epub 2013 Feb 27.

Design and functional evaluation of an optically active µ-opioid receptor.

Barish PA(1), Xu Y, Li J, Sun J, Jarajapu YP, Ogle WO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida 32607, USA.

The use of opioids, which achieve therapeutic analgesia through activation of
µ-opioid receptors, are limited in the management of chronic pain by adverse
effects including tolerance and addiction. Optogenetics is an emerging approach
of designing molecular targets that can produce cell-specific receptor-mediated
analgesia with minimal side effects. Here we report the design and functional
characterization of a chimeric µ-opioid receptor that could be photoactivated to 
trigger intracellular signaling. A prototype optoactive µ-opioid receptor
(optoMOR) was designed by replacing the intracellular domains from rhodopsin with
those of the native µ-opioid receptor and was transiently expressed in human
embryonic kidney (HEK293) cells. Expression and distribution of the protein were 
confirmed by immunocytochemistry. The signal-transduction mechanisms induced by
photoactivation of the optoMOR were evaluated and compared with the native
µ-opioid receptor stimulation by an agonist, D-Ala(2), N-MePhe(4),
Gly-ol-enkephalin (DAMGO). Cells were depolarized by extracellular potassium and 
the depolarization-induced calcium (Ca(2+)) influx was quantified by using Fura-2
imaging. The forskolin-stimulated adenylate cyclase/cAMP cascade was evaluated by
ELISA or western blotting of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and the
phosphorylation of cAMP response element binding protein (CREB). The optoMOR
protein distribution was observed intracellularly and on the plasma membrane
similar to the native µ-opioid receptor in HEK293 cells. Photoactivation of
optoMOR decreased the Ca(2+) influx and inhibited the forskolin-induced cAMP
generation, activation of CREB, and BDNF levels in optoMOR-expressing cells
similar to the activation of native µ-opioid receptor by DAMGO. Thus the current 
study has accomplished the design of a prototype optoMOR and characterized the
cellular signaling mechanisms activated by light stimulation of this receptor.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 23454521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Methods Mol Biol. 2013;977:229-41. doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-284-1_18.

Fluorescence Cross-correlation Spectroscopy (FCCS) to Observe Dimerization of
Transcription Factors in Living Cells.

Sadamoto H(1), Muto H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Functional Biology, Tokushima Bunri University, Sanuki, Kagawa, 
Japan.

Fluorescence cross-correlation spectroscopy (FCCS) is an established
spectroscopic method to observe the interaction between the different fluorescent
molecules. Using FCCS, researchers can assess the interaction of target molecules
in the aqueous condition, and can apply the technique in cultured cells. Here, we
describe the method of FCCS to demonstrate direct observation of dimerization
between transcription factors in a living cell.

PMID: 23436366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Nutr Neurosci. 2013 Nov;16(6):282-7. doi: 10.1179/1476830513Y.0000000057. Epub
2013 Feb 19.

Antenatal taurine supplementation improves cerebral neurogenesis in fetal rats
with intrauterine growth restriction through the PKA-CREB signal pathway.

Liu J(1), Liu Y, Wang XF, Chen H, Yang N.

Author information: 
(1)General Hospital of Beijing Military Command, Beijing 100700, China.

OBJECTIVE: This study seeks to explore whether antenatal supplement of taurine
may improve the brain development of fetal rats with intrauterine growth
restriction (IUGR) via the protein kinase A-cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)
response element protein (PKA-CREB) pathway.
METHODS: Fifteen pregnant rats were randomly divided into control group, IUGR
model, and IUGR with antenatal taurine supplement group. Brain tissues were
obtained immediately after rats were born. PKA-CREB signal pathway activity and
glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) mRNA and protein levels were
measured by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction and
immunohistochemistry stains, whereas immunoreactive cells of neuron-specific
enolase (NSE) and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) were detected by
immunohistochemistry stains.
RESULTS: The results showed that: (1) In the IUGR group, a greater number of PCNA
and NSE immunoreactive cells were found in brain tissues compared with controls, 
and prenatal taurine supplementation led to a further increase. (2) Expression of
PKA, CREB, and GDNF were increased in mRNA and protein levels due to taurine
supplementation.
DISCUSSION: Antenatal taurine supplementation shows effects of promotion of cell 
proliferation and activation of neurotrophic factors on fetal rat brain in a
model of IUGR by activating the PKA-CREB signal pathway, increasing expression of
neurotrophic factors, and promoting cell proliferation to counteract neuron loss 
caused by IUGR.

PMID: 23433181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Food Chem Toxicol. 2013 Jun;56:93-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2013.02.017. Epub 2013
Feb 19.

Inhibitory effect of dihydroartemisinin against phorbol ester-induced
cyclooxygenase-2 expression in macrophages.

Kim HG(1), Yang JH, Han EH, Choi JH, Khanal T, Jeong MH, Jeong TC, Jeong HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, Chungnam National University,
Daejeon 305-764, South Korea.

Dihydroartemisinin (DHA), a semi-synthetic derivative of artemisinin isolated
from the traditional Chinese herb Artemisia annua L., has recently been shown to 
possess antitumor activity in various cancer cells. However, the effect of
anti-inflammatory potentials of DHA in murine macrophage RAW 264.7 cells has not 
been studied. The present study investigated the effect of COX-2 and molecular
mechanisms by DHA in PMA stimulated RAW 264.7 cells. DHA dose-dependently
decreased PMA-induced COX-2 expression and PGE2 production, as well as COX-2
promoter-driven luciferase activity. Additionally, DHA decreased luciferase
activity of COX-2 regulation-related transcription factors including NF-<U+03BA>B, AP-1,
C/EBP and CREB. DHA also remarkably reduced PMA-induced p65, C/EBPß, c-jun and
CREB nuclear translocation. Furthermore, DHA evidently inhibited PMA-induced
phosphorylation of AKT and the MAP Kinases, such as ERK, JNK and p38. Taken
together, our data indicated that DHA effectively attenuates COX-2 production via
down-regulation of AKT and MAPK pathway, revealing partial molecular basis for
the anti-inflammatory properties of DHA.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23429041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Phytother Res. 2013 Dec;27(12):1829-33. doi: 10.1002/ptr.4938. Epub 2013 Feb 18.

Anti-depressant effects of aqueous extract from Acanthopanax senticosus in mice.

Jin L(1), Wu F, Li X, Li H, Du C, Jiang Q, You J, Li S, Xu Y.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Dalian University of Technology,
Dalian, 116024, P. R. China; Ministry of Education Center for Food Safety of
Animal Origin, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, 116620, P. R. China.

In this paper, the anti-depressant effects of Acanthopanax senticosus extract
(ASE) were studied using animal models of depression including the forced
swimming and tail suspension tests. The anti-depressive mechanism of ASE was
explored by monitoring the levels of monoamine neurotransmitters including
5-hydroxytrylamine (5-HT), norepinephrine (NE), and dopamine (DA), as well as
cAMP response element-binding (CREB) protein expression in the whole brain of
mice following the tail suspension test. Our results showed that intragastric
administration of ASE at a dose of 2000<U+2009>mg/kg for seven days significantly
reduced the duration of immobility in both the forced swimming test and the tail 
suspension test. These results indicate that ASE possesses antidepressant-like
properties. Pre-treatment with 2000<U+2009>mg/kg of ASE for seven days significantly
elevated the levels of 5-HT, NE, and DA in the whole brain of mice. Moreover, ASE
at doses of 1000 and 2000<U+2009>mg/kg significantly up-regulated the level of CREB
protein. Taken together, these findings suggest that the anti-depressive
mechanism of ASE may be mediated via the central monoaminergic neurotransmitter
system and CREB protein expression. Therefore, administration of ASE may be
beneficial for patients with depressive disorders.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 23418105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Leukemia. 2013 Jul;27(7):1585-8. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.49. Epub 2013 Feb 18.

Deficiency of CREB and over expression of miR-183 in juvenile myelomonocytic
leukemia.

Liu YL, Lensing SY, Yan Y, Cooper TM, Loh ML, Emanuel PD.

PMCID: PMC3715750
PMID: 23417028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Neurochem Int. 2013 Mar;62(4):418-24. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2013.02.002. Epub
2013 Feb 11.

Electromagnetic fields induce neural differentiation of human bone marrow derived
mesenchymal stem cells via ROS mediated EGFR activation.

Park JE(1), Seo YK, Yoon HH, Kim CW, Park JK, Jeon S.

Author information: 
(1)Dongguk University Research Institute of Biotechnology, Dongguk University,
3-26, Pil Dong, Choong-Gu, Seoul 100-715, Republic of Korea.

Even though the inducing effect of electromagnetic fields (EMF) on the neural
differentiation of human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (hBM-MSCs) is a
distinctive, the underlying mechanism of differentiation remains unclear. To find
out the signaling pathways involved in the neural differentiation of BM-MSCs by
EMF, we examined the CREB phosphorylation and Akt or ERK activation as an
upstream of CREB. In hBM-MSCs treated with ELF-EMF (50 Hz, 1 mT), the expression 
of neural markers such as NF-L, MAP2, and NeuroD1 increased at 6 days and
phosphorylation of Akt and CREB but not ERK increased at 90 min in BM-MSCs.
Moreover, EMF increased phosphorylation of epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) as an upstream receptor tyrosine kinase of PI3K/Akt at 90 min. It has been
well documented that ELF-MF exposure may alter cellular processes by increasing
intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) concentrations. Thus, we examined
EMF-induced ROS production in BM-MSCs. Moreover, pretreatment with a ROS
scavenger, N-acetylcystein, and an EGFR inhibitor, AG-1478, prevented the
phosphorylation of EGFR and downstream molecules. These results suggest that EMF 
induce neural differentiation through activation of EGFR signaling and mild
generation of ROS.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23411410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Psychopathology. 2013;46(6):384-9. doi: 10.1159/000345358. Epub 2013 Feb 13.

The impact of adverse life events on clinical features and interaction with gene 
variants in mood disorder patients.

Serretti A(1), Souery D, Antypa N, Calati R, Sentissi O, Amital D, Moser U,
Kasper S, Zohar J, Mendlewicz J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and NeuroMotor Sciences, University of Bologna,
Bologna, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Adverse life events are precipitating and maintenance factors for
mood and anxiety disorders. However, the impact of such events on clinical
features and treatment response is still unclear.
SAMPLING AND METHODS: The aim of this study was to investigate whether specific
adverse events (early parental loss and physical abuse) influence clinical
features in a sample of 1,336 mood disorder patients, and whether genetic
parameters interact with adverse events to influence treatment outcomes in a
subsample of 252 subjects. Participants were collected in the context of a
European multicenter study and treated with antidepressants at adequate doses for
at least 4 weeks. We focused on two genes (BDNF and CREB1) due to prior evidence 
of association with treatment outcomes in the same sample.
RESULTS: Patients with a history of physical abuse had higher suicidal risk
(including history of attempts), comorbid panic disorder, posttraumatic stress
disorder and alcohol dependence compared to non-abused patients. Experience of
early parental loss was a less detrimental type of life stressor. Treatment
response was not affected by adverse events. No gene-environment interaction was 
found with genetic variations, using a corrected significance level.
CONCLUSIONS: A limitation of the present study is that the subsample is too small
for detecting gene-environment interactions. The clinical message of our findings
is that mood disorder patients with a history of physical abuse showed a worse
clinical profile, characterized by higher comorbid Axis I psychopathology and
increased suicidal behavior.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23407025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55866. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055866. Epub 2013 Feb 6.

Increased abscess formation and defective chemokine regulation in CREB transgenic
mice.

Wen AY(1), Landaw EM, Ochoa R, Cho M, Chao A, Lawson G, Sakamoto KM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Critical Care, Department of Pediatrics, David Geffen School of
Medicine at University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United
States of America.

Cyclic AMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) is a transcription factor
implicated in growth factor-dependent cell proliferation and survival, glucose
homeostasis, spermatogenesis, circadian rhythms, and synaptic plasticity
associated with memory. To study the phenotype of CREB overexpression in vivo, we
generated CREB transgenic (TG) mice in which a myeloid specific hMRP8 promoter
drives CREB expression. CREB TG mice developed spontaneous skin abscesses more
frequently than wild type (WT) mice. To understand the role of CREB in myeloid
function and innate immunity, chemokine expression in bone marrow derived
macrophages (BMDMs) from CREB TG mice were compared with BMDMs from WT mice. Our 
results demonstrated decreased Keratinocyte-derived cytokine (KC) in CREB TG
BMDMs but not TNFa protein production in response to lipid A (LPA). In addition, 
mRNA expression of KC and IL-1ß (Interleukin)-1ß was decreased in CREB TG BMDMs; 
however, there was no difference in the mRNA expression of TNFa, MCP-1, IL-6 and 
IL-12p40. The mRNA expression of IL-1RA and IL-10 was decreased in response to
LPA. Nuclear factor kappa B (NF<U+03BA>B) expression and a subset of its target genes
were upregulated in CREB TG mouse BMDMs. Although neutrophil migration was the
same in both CREB TG and WT mice, Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
(NADPH) oxidase activity was significantly increased in neutrophils from CREB TG 
mice. Taken together, CREB overexpression in myeloid cells results in increased
abscess formation in vivo and aberrant cytokine and chemokine response, and
neutrophil function in vitro.

PMCID: PMC3566130
PMID: 23405224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 22;288(12):8299-312. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.426536. Epub
2013 Feb 12.

Sodium phenylbutyrate enhances astrocytic neurotrophin synthesis via protein
kinase C (PKC)-mediated activation of cAMP-response element-binding protein
(CREB): implications for Alzheimer disease therapy.

Corbett GT(1), Roy A, Pahan K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Neuroscience, Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush
University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

Neurotrophins, such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and
neurotrophin-3 (NT-3), are believed to be genuine molecular mediators of neuronal
growth and homeostatic synapse activity. However, levels of these neurotrophic
factors decrease in different brain regions of patients with Alzheimer disease
(AD). Induction of astrocytic neurotrophin synthesis is a poorly understood
phenomenon but represents a plausible therapeutic target because neuronal
neurotrophin production is aberrant in AD and other neurodegenerative diseases.
Here, we delineate that sodium phenylbutyrate (NaPB), a Food and Drug
Administration-approved oral medication for hyperammonemia, induces astrocytic
BDNF and NT-3 expression via the protein kinase C (PKC)-cAMP-response
element-binding protein (CREB) pathway. NaPB treatment increased the direct
association between PKC and CREB followed by phosphorylation of CREB (Ser(133))
and induction of DNA binding and transcriptional activation of CREB.
Up-regulation of markers for synaptic function and plasticity in cultured
hippocampal neurons by NaPB-treated astroglial supernatants and its abrogation by
anti-TrkB blocking antibody suggest that NaPB-induced astroglial neurotrophins
are functionally active. Moreover, oral administration of NaPB increased the
levels of BDNF and NT-3 in the CNS and improved spatial learning and memory in a 
mouse model of AD. Our results highlight a novel neurotrophic property of NaPB
that may be used to augment neurotrophins in the CNS and improve synaptic
function in disease states such as AD.

PMCID: PMC3605648
PMID: 23404502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2013 Apr;45(4):259-67. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmt002. Epub 2013 Feb 11.

Rapamycin increases pCREB, Bcl-2, and VEGF-A through ERK under normoxia.

Liu Y(1), Zheng Q, Wu H, Guo X, Li J, Hao S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430022, China.

Rapamycin may serve as a new anti-osteosarcoma (OSA) agent due to its ability to 
inhibit the metastatic behavior of OSA. However, only limited benefit is observed
in rodent studies and clinical trials using rapamycin as a single agent in the
treatment of OSA. The target of rapamycin, mammalian target of rapamycin has
multiple biological functions and may be linked with the kinases that mediate the
phosphorylation of cyclic AMP-responsive element-binding (CREB) protein, an
import factor in tumor progression. By employing an OSA cell line MG-63, we
investigated how rapamycin regulates the phosphorylation of CREB (pCREB) at
Ser133 and the expressions of two putative CREB targets, B-cell lymphoma 2
(Bcl-2) and vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A). Under normoxia, we
found that rapamycin (100 nM) induced an increase of pCREB that was prevented by 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MEK)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK) inhibitor U0126 or cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) inhibitor H89.
However, H89 enhanced Akt phosphorylation and did not decrease the cell viability
upon rapamycin treatment. In contrast, U0126 did not enhance Akt phosphorylation 
and decreased the cell viability upon rapamycin treatment. Moreover, U0126
prevented the rapamycin-induced increase of Bcl-2 and VEGF-A levels. Under
hypoxia, rapamycin effectively prevented the hypoxia-induced increase of pCREB,
Bcl-2, and VEGF-A. Our study demonstrated that rapamycin might be less effective 
in treating OSA cells under normoxia and provided the rationale for a combination
of rapamycin and MEK/ERK inhibitor in the treatment of OSA.

PMID: 23403511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2013 Mar;35(2):335-46. doi:
10.1016/j.etap.2013.01.004. Epub 2013 Jan 14.

Acanthopanax senticosus exerts neuroprotective effects through HO-1 signaling in 
hippocampal and microglial cells.

Jin ML(1), Park SY, Kim YH, Park G, Lee SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Pusan National University, Busan 609-735, Republic
of Korea.

Extracts of Acanthopanax senticosus, a traditional herb commonly found in
Northeastern Asia, are used for treating neurodegenerative disorders such as
ischemia and depression. However, the mechanisms of its neuroinflammatory and
cytoprotective effects have not been investigated. We examined the mechanism of
A. senticosus activity in anti-neuroinflammatory and neuroprotective processes.
HO-1 is an inducible enzyme present in most cell lines. ASE increased HO-1
expression, which reduced LPS-induced nitric oxide/ROS production in BV2 cells.
Moreover, the induction of HO-1 expression protected cells against
glutamate-induced neuronal cell death. Activation of the p38-CREB pathway and
translocation of Nrf2 are strongly involved in ASE-induced HO-1 expression. Our
results showed that ASE-induced HO-1 expression through the p38-CREB pathway
plays an important role in the generation of anti-neuroinflammatory and
neuroprotective responses. ASE also increases the translocation of Nrf2 to
regulate HO-1 expression. Furthermore, our results indicate that ASE serves as a 
potential therapeutic agent for neuronal disorders.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23395777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. FEBS Lett. 2013 Mar 18;587(6):645-51. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.01.019. Epub
2013 Feb 4.

Hepatitis B virus X protein protects hepatoma and hepatic cells from
complement-dependent cytotoxicity by up-regulation of CD46.

Zhang S(1), Shan C, Cui W, You X, Du Y, Kong G, Gao F, Ye L, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research, Key Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and
Technology of Ministry of Education, Institute for Molecular Biology and
Biochemistry, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, PR China.

The involvement of hepatitis B virus X protein (HBx) in anti-complement-dependent
cytotoxicity (CDC) activity during hepatocarcinogenesis is poorly understood.
Here, we report that HBx is able to up-regulate membrane-bound complement
regulatory protein CD46 in hepatoma cells and human immortalized liver cells
through activating the promoter activity involving cAMP response element-binding 
protein (CREB)/cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)/prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)/signal
transducers and activators of transcription 3 (STAT3) signaling pathway. In
contrast, the down-regulation of CD46 abolishes the resistance capability of
hepatoma cells to CDC. Thus, we conclude that HBx contributes to the protection
of hepatoma and hepatic cells from CDC by up-regulation of CD46.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23391762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Jun;34(6):1315-22. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt042. Epub 2013 Feb
5.

Peracetylated (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (AcEGCG) potently prevents skin
carcinogenesis by suppressing the PKD1-dependent signaling pathway in CD34+ skin 
stem cells and skin tumors.

Chiou YS(1), Sang S, Cheng KH, Ho CT, Wang YJ, Pan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Seafood Science, National Kaohsiung Marine University, Kaohsiung
811, Taiwan.

During the process of skin tumor promotion, expression of the cutaneous cancer
stem cell (CSC) marker CD34(+) is required for stem cell activation and tumor
formation. A previous study has shown that activation of protein kinase D1 (PKD1)
is involved in epidermal tumor promotion; however, the signals that regulate CSCs
in skin carcinogenesis have not been characterized. This study was designed to
investigate the chemopreventive potential of peracetylated
(-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (AcEGCG) on 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]-anthracene
(DMBA)-initiated and 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)-promoted skin
tumorigenesis in ICR mice and to elucidate the possible mechanisms involved in
the inhibitory action of PKD1 on CSCs. We demonstrated that topical application
of AcEGCG before TPA treatment can be more effective than EGCG in reducing
DMBA/TPA-induced tumor incidence and multiplicity. Notably, AcEGCG not only
inhibited the expression of p53, p21, c-Myc, cyclin B, p-CDK1 and Cdc25A but also
restored the activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2),
which decreased DMBA/TPA-induced increases in tumor proliferation and mitotic
index. To clarify the role of PKD1 in cell proliferation and tumorigenesis, we
studied the expression and activation of PKD1 in CD34(+) skin stem cells and skin
tumors. We found that PKD1 was strongly expressed in CD34(+) cells and that
pretreatment with AcEGCG markedly inhibited PKD1 activation and CD34(+)
expression. More importantly, pretreatment with AcEGCG remarkably suppressed
nuclear factor-kappaB, cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate-responsive
element-binding protein (CREB) and CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein (C/EBPs)
activation by inhibiting the phosphorylation of c-Jun-N-terminal kinase 1/2, p38 
and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt and by attenuating downstream target
gene expression, including inducible nitric oxide synthase, cyclooxygenase-2,
ornithine decarboxylase and vascular endothelial growth factor. Moreover, this is
the first study to demonstrate that AcEGCG is a CD34(+) and PKD1 inhibitor in the
multistage mouse skin carcinogenesis model. Overall, our results powerfully
suggest that AcEGCG could be developed into a novel chemopreventive agent and
that PKD1 may be a preventive and therapeutic target for skin cancer in clinical 
settings.

PMID: 23385063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53848. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053848. Epub 2013 Jan 31.

Enrichment of conserved synaptic activity-responsive element in neuronal genes
predicts a coordinated response of MEF2, CREB and SRF.

Rodríguez-Tornos FM(1), San Aniceto I, Cubelos B, Nieto M.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CNB-CSIC), Darwin 3, Campus de Cantoblanco, 
Madrid, Spain.

A unique synaptic activity-responsive element (SARE) sequence, composed of the
consensus binding sites for SRF, MEF2 and CREB, is necessary for control of
transcriptional upregulation of the Arc gene in response to synaptic activity. We
hypothesize that this sequence is a broad mechanism that regulates gene
expression in response to synaptic activation and during plasticity; and that
analysis of SARE-containing genes could identify molecular mechanisms involved in
brain disorders. To search for conserved SARE sequences in the mammalian genome, 
we used the SynoR in silico tool, and found the SARE cluster predominantly in the
regulatory regions of genes expressed specifically in the nervous system; most
were related to neural development and homeostatic maintenance. Two of these SARE
sequences were tested in luciferase assays and proved to promote transcription in
response to neuronal activation. Supporting the predictive capacity of our
candidate list, up-regulation of several SARE containing genes in response to
neuronal activity was validated using external data and also experimentally using
primary cortical neurons and quantitative real time RT-PCR. The list of
SARE-containing genes includes several linked to mental retardation and cognitive
disorders, and is significantly enriched in genes that encode mRNA targeted by
FMRP (fragile X mental retardation protein). Our study thus supports the idea
that SARE sequences are relevant transcriptional regulatory elements that
participate in plasticity. In addition, it offers a comprehensive view of how
activity-responsive transcription factors coordinate their actions and increase
the selectivity of their targets. Our data suggest that analysis of
SARE-containing genes will reveal yet-undescribed pathways of synaptic plasticity
and additional candidate genes disrupted in mental disease.

PMCID: PMC3561385
PMID: 23382855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Cancer Lett. 2013 Jul 10;335(1):31-40. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.01.047. Epub
2013 Feb 1.

Pin1 is required for ultraviolet A-stimulated cyclooxygenase-2 induction in mouse
epidermal cells.

Quyen BT(1), Choi HK, Kang KW.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul
National University, Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea.

Ultraviolet A (UVA) radiation (320-400 nm) is considered a major cause of human
skin photoaging and skin cancer. Overexpression of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) leads
to prostanoid formation in skin tissue, disturbs the balance between
proliferation and apoptosis, and subsequently promotes tumorigenesis. The
peptidyl-prolyl isomerase Pin1 is known to be overexpressed in most cancer cell
types and plays an important role in oncogenesis. Here, we studied whether
exposure of JB6 Cl41 mouse epidermal cells to UVA affects COX-2 expression and
the possible involvement of Pin1 activation. UVA increased COX-2 protein
expression and prostaglandin E2 production in an energy-dependent manner.
Pre-exposure of JB6 Cl41 cells to UVA potentiated epidermal growth factor-induced
anchorage-independent growth; this effect was significantly suppressed by
inhibition of COX-2. UVA-stimulated COX-2 expression was significantly decreased 
by inhibition of Pin1. The increased COX-2 gene transcription in response to UVA 
was preceded by activation of the transcription factors nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B
(NF-<U+03BA>B), cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB), CCAAT/enhancer-binding
proteins a and ß (C/EBPa and C/EBPß) and c-Jun/activator protein-1 (AP-1). Pin1
inhibitor treatment suppressed the activation of NF-<U+03BA>B, CREB, and C/EBP by UVA
irradiation. Conversely, JB6 C141 cells overexpressing Pin1 showed increased
basal COX-2 expression and NF-<U+03BA>B, CREB, C/EBP, and AP-1 activities. These results
suggest that UVA-induced COX-2 expression is mediated by Pin1 activation and this
is associated with malignant transformation of epidermal cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23380442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 Apr 30;369(1-2):15-26. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.01.016. 
Epub 2013 Jan 31.

Characterization of the mouse promoter region of the acyl-CoA synthetase 4 gene: 
role of Sp1 and CREB.

Orlando U(1), Cooke M, Cornejo Maciel F, Papadopoulos V, Podestá EJ, Maloberti P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Investigations (INBIOMED), Department of Biochemistry,
School of Medicine, University of Buenos Aires, National Research Council, Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

Acyl-CoA synthetase 4 (Acsl4) is involved in several cellular functions including
steroidogenesis, synaptic development and cancer metastasis. Although the
expression of Acsl4 seems to be regulated by tissue- and cell-specific factors as
well as pituitary hormones and growth factors, the transcriptional mechanisms
involved remain unknown. We demonstrated hCG and cAMP regulation of Acsl4 mRNA in
mouse steroidogenic MA-10 Leydig cells. We characterized the transcription
initiation site and promoter of the Acsl4 mouse gene and identified three
alternative splice variants present in MA-10 cells. Sequence analysis of a 1.5-kb
fragment of the Acsl4 promoter revealed the absence of a TATA box and the
presence of many putative binding sites for transcription factors including Sp1
and CREB. Functional characterization revealed that the specificity
protein/Krüppel-like factor Sp1 binding site in the proximal promoter is involved
in basal activity and that the cAMP response element-binding site is involved in 
cAMP stimulation of Acsl4 transcription.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23376217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Blood. 2013 Apr 11;121(15):2923-33. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-07-446054. Epub 2013 
Jan 30.

Neurokinin-1 receptor agonists bias therapeutic dendritic cells to induce type 1 
immunity by licensing host dendritic cells to produce IL-12.

Janelsins BM(1), Sumpter TL, Tkacheva OA, Rojas-Canales DM, Erdos G, Mathers AR, 
Shufesky WJ, Storkus WJ, Falo LD Jr, Morelli AE, Larregina AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pittsburgh, 200 Lothrop St,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Apr 11;121(15):2815-6.

Substance-P and hemokinin-1 are proinflammatory neuropeptides with potential to
promote type 1 immunity through agonistic binding to neurokinin-1 receptor
(NK1R). Dendritic cells (DCs) are professional antigen-presenting cells that
initiate and regulate the outcome of innate and adaptive immune responses.
Immunostimulatory DCs are highly desired for the development of positive
immunization techniques. DCs express functional NK1R; however, regardless of
their potential DC-stimulatory function, the ability of NK1R agonists to promote 
immunostimulatory DCs remains unexplored. Here, we demonstrate that NK1R
signaling activates therapeutic DCs capable of biasing type 1 immunity by
inhibition of interleukin-10 (IL-10) synthesis and secretion, without affecting
their low levels of IL-12 production. The potent type 1 effector immune response 
observed following cutaneous administration of NK1R-signaled DCs required their
homing in skin-draining lymph nodes (sDLNs) where they induced inflammation and
licensed endogenous-conventional sDLN-resident and -recruited inflammatory DCs to
secrete IL-12. Our data demonstrate that NK1R signaling promotes
immunostimulatory DCs, and provide relevant insight into the mechanisms used by
neuromediators to regulate innate and adaptive immune responses.

PMCID: PMC3624938
PMID: 23365459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Virol. 2013 Apr;87(7):3885-902. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02520-12. Epub 2013 Jan 30.

Release of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nuclear import block
enhances host transcription in human lung cells.

Sims AC(1), Tilton SC, Menachery VD, Gralinski LE, Schäfer A, Matzke MM,
Webb-Robertson BJ, Chang J, Luna ML, Long CE, Shukla AK, Bankhead AR 3rd, Burkett
SE, Zornetzer G, Tseng CT, Metz TO, Pickles R, McWeeney S, Smith RD, Katze MG,
Waters KM, Baric RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA. sims0018@ad.unc.edu

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus accessory protein ORF6
antagonizes interferon signaling by blocking karyopherin-mediated nuclear import 
processes. Viral nuclear import antagonists, expressed by several highly
pathogenic RNA viruses, likely mediate pleiotropic effects on host gene
expression, presumably interfering with transcription factors, cytokines,
hormones, and/or signaling cascades that occur in response to infection. By
bioinformatic and systems biology approaches, we evaluated the impact of nuclear 
import antagonism on host expression networks by using human lung epithelial
cells infected with either wild-type virus or a mutant that does not express ORF6
protein. Microarray analysis revealed significant changes in differential gene
expression, with approximately twice as many upregulated genes in the mutant
virus samples by 48 h postinfection, despite identical viral titers. Our data
demonstrated that ORF6 protein expression attenuates the activity of numerous
karyopherin-dependent host transcription factors (VDR, CREB1, SMAD4, p53, EpasI, 
and Oct3/4) that are critical for establishing antiviral responses and regulating
key host responses during virus infection. Results were confirmed by proteomic
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay analyses and in parallel microarray
studies using infected primary human airway epithelial cell cultures. The data
strongly support the hypothesis that viral antagonists of nuclear import actively
manipulate host responses in specific hierarchical patterns, contributing to the 
viral pathogenic potential in vivo. Importantly, these studies and modeling
approaches not only provide templates for evaluating virus antagonism of nuclear 
import processes but also can reveal candidate cellular genes and pathways that
may significantly influence disease outcomes following severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus infection in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3624188
PMID: 23365422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 22;288(12):8737-49. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.455675. Epub 2013
Jan 28.

Protein kinase A modulates transforming growth factor-ß signaling through a
direct interaction with Smad4 protein.

Yang H(1), Li G, Wu JJ, Wang L, Uhler M, Simeone DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Transforming growth factor ß (TGFß) signaling normally functions to regulate
embryonic development and cellular homeostasis. It is increasingly recognized
that TGFß signaling is regulated by cross-talk with other signaling pathways. We 
previously reported that TGFß activates protein kinase A (PKA) independent of
cAMP through an interaction of an activated Smad3-Smad4 complex and the
regulatory subunit of the PKA holoenzyme (PKA-R). Here we define the interaction 
domains of Smad4 and PKA-R and the functional consequences of this interaction.
Using a series of Smad4 and PKA-R truncation mutants, we identified amino acids
290-300 of the Smad4 linker region as critical for the specific interaction of
Smad4 and PKA-R. Co-immunoprecipitation assays showed that the B cAMP binding
domain of PKA-R was sufficient for interaction with Smad4. Targeting of B domain 
regions conserved among all PKA-R isoforms and exposed on the molecular surface
demonstrated that amino acids 281-285 and 320-329 were required for complex
formation with Smad4. Interactions of these specific regions of Smad4 and PKA-R
were necessary for TGFß-mediated increases in PKA activity, CREB (cAMP-response
element-binding protein) phosphorylation, induction of p21, and growth
inhibition. Moreover, this Smad4-PKA interaction was required for TGFß-induced
epithelial mesenchymal transition, invasion of pancreatic tumor cells, and
regulation of tumor growth in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3605691
PMID: 23362281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Neurobiol Aging. 2013 Jun;34(6):1599-609. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.10.006. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

Working memory deficits and related disinhibition of the cAMP/PKA/CREB are
alleviated by prefrontal a4ß2*-nAChRs stimulation in aged mice.

Vandesquille M(1), Baudonnat M, Decorte L, Louis C, Lestage P, Béracochéa D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, Univ. Bordeaux, INCIA UMR 5287, Bordeaux, France.

The present study investigates in aged mice the working memory (WM) enhancing
potential of the selective a4ß2* nicotinic receptor agonist S 38232 as compared
with the cholinesterase inhibitor donepezil, and their effect on cAMP response
element binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation (pCREB) as a marker of neuronal
activity. We first showed that aged mice exhibit a WM deficit and an increase of 
pCREB in the prelimbic cortex (PL) as compared with young mice, whereas no
modification appears in the CA1. Further, we showed that systemic administration 
of S 38232 restored WM in aged mice and alleviated PL CREB overphosphorylation.
Donepezil alleviated age-related memory deficits, however, by increasing pCREB in
the CA1, while pCREB in PL remained unaffected. Finally, whereas neuronal
inhibition by lidocaine infusion in the PL appeared deleterious in young mice,
the infusion of Rp-cAMPS (a compound known to inhibit CREB phosphorylation) or S 
38232 rescued WM in aged animals. Thus, by targeting the a4ß2*-nicotinic receptor
of the PL, S 38232 alleviates PL CREB overphosphorylation and restores WM in aged
mice, which opens new pharmacologic perspectives of therapeutic strategy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23352115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Mar 1;41(5):3240-56. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1227. Epub 2013 
Jan 22.

CREB regulates the expression of neuronal glucose transporter 3: a possible
mechanism related to impaired brain glucose uptake in Alzheimer's disease.

Jin N(1), Qian W, Yin X, Zhang L, Iqbal K, Grundke-Iqbal I, Gong CX, Liu F.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Neuroregeneration, Department of Neurochemistry, New
York State Institute for Basic Research in Developmental Disabilities, Staten
Island, NY 10314, USA.

Impaired brain glucose uptake and metabolism precede the appearance of clinical
symptoms in Alzheimer disease (AD). Neuronal glucose transporter 3 (GLUT3) is
decreased in AD brain and correlates with tau pathology. However, what leads to
the decreased GLUT3 is yet unknown. In this study, we found that the promoter of 
human GLUT3 contains three potential cAMP response element (CRE)-like elements,
CRE1, CRE2 and CRE3. Overexpression of CRE-binding protein (CREB) or activation
of cAMP-dependent protein kinase significantly increased GLUT3 expression. CREB
bound to the CREs and promoted luciferase expression driven by human
GLUT3-promoter. Among the CREs, CRE2 and CRE3 were required for the promotion of 
GLUT3 expression. Full-length CREB was decreased and truncation of CREB was
increased in AD brain. This truncation was correlated with calpain I activation
in human brain. Further study demonstrated that calpain I proteolysed CREB at
Gln28-Ala29 and generated a 41-kDa truncated CREB, which had less activity to
promote GLUT3 expression. Importantly, human brain GLUT3 was correlated with
full-length CREB positively and with activation of calpain I negatively. These
findings suggest that overactivation of calpain I caused by calcium overload
proteolyses CREB, resulting in a reduction of GLUT3 expression and consequently
impairing glucose uptake and metabolism in AD brain.

PMCID: PMC3597642
PMID: 23341039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. BMC Syst Biol. 2013 Jan 22;7:9. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-7-9.

Signaling dynamics of palmitate-induced ER stress responses mediated by ATF4 in
HepG2 cells.

Cho H(1), Wu M, Zhang L, Thompson R, Nath A, Chan C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, East Lansing, MI
48824, USA.

BACKGROUND: Palmitic acid, the most common saturated free fatty acid, has been
implicated in ER (endoplasmic reticulum) stress-mediated apoptosis. This
lipoapotosis is dependent, in part, on the upregulation of the activating
transcription factor-4 (ATF4). To better understand the mechanisms by which
palmitate upregulates the expression level of ATF4, we integrated literature
information on palmitate-induced ER stress signaling into a discrete dynamic
model. The model provides an in silico framework that enables simulations and
predictions. The model predictions were confirmed through further experiments in 
human hepatocellular carcinoma (HepG2) cells and the results were used to update 
the model and our current understanding of the signaling induced by palmitate.
RESULTS: The three key things from the in silico simulation and experimental
results are: 1) palmitate induces different signaling pathways (PKR
(double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase), PERK (PKR-like ER kinase), PKA
(cyclic AMP (cAMP)-dependent protein kinase A) in a time dependent-manner, 2)
both ATF4 and CREB1 (cAMP-responsive element-binding protein 1) interact with the
Atf4 promoter to contribute to a prolonged accumulation of ATF4, and 3) CREB1 is 
involved in ER-stress induced apoptosis upon palmitate treatment, by regulating
ATF4 expression and possibly Ca2+ dependent-CaM (calmodulin) signaling pathway.
CONCLUSION: The in silico model helped to delineate the essential signaling
pathways in palmitate-mediated apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3557202
PMID: 23339444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Exp Cell Res. 2013 Apr 1;319(6):897-907. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.12.029. Epub
2013 Jan 16.

Requirement for protein kinase A in the phosphorylation of the TGFß
receptor-interacting protein km23-1 as a component of TGFß downstream effects.

Jin Q(1), Zhong Y, Mulder KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Penn State Hershey, College 
of Medicine, PA 17033, USA.

Erratum in
    Exp Cell Res. 2013 Aug 15;319(14):2307-8.

km23-1 was previously identified as a TGFß-receptor interacting protein that was 
phosphorylated on serines after TGFß stimulation. In the current report, we
examined the role of km23-1 phosphorylation in the downstream effects of
TGFß/protein kinase A (PKA) signaling. Using phosphorylation site prediction
software, we found that km23-1 has two potential PKA consensus phosphorylation
sites. In vitro kinase assays further demonstrated that PKA directly
phosphorylates km23-1 on serine 73 (S73). Moreover, our results show that the
PKA-specific inhibitor H89 diminishes phosphorylation of km23-1 on S73 after TGFß
stimulation. Taken together, our results demonstrate that TGFß induction of PKA
activity results in phosphorylation of km23-1 on S73. In order to assess the
mechanisms underlying PKA phosphorylation of km23-1 on S73 (S73-km23-1) after
TGFß stimulation, immunoprecipitation (IP)/blot analyses were performed, which
demonstrate that TGFß regulates complex formation between the PKA regulatory
subunit RIß and km23-1 in vivo. In addition, an S73A mutant of km23-1
(S73A-km23-1), which could not be phosphorylated by PKA, inhibited TGFß induction
of the km23-1-dynein complex and transcriptional activation of the
activin-responsive element (ARE). Furthermore, our results show that km23-1 is
required for cAMP-responsive element (CRE) transcriptional activation by TGFß,
with S73-km23-1 being required for the CRE-dependent TGFß stimulation of
fibronectin (FN) transcription. Collectively, our results demonstrate for the
first time that TGFß/PKA phosphorylation of km23-1 on S73 is required for ARE-
and CRE-mediated downstream events that include FN induction.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3723345
PMID: 23333499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2012 Nov;154(1):115-7.

Immunohistochemical detection of two neuronal populations involved in two
different episodes of animal cognitive activity.

Chekhov SA(1), Bezriadnov DV, Ivashkina OI, Amelchenko EM, Anokhin KV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurobiology of Memory, P. K. Anokhin Institute of Normal
Physiology, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russia.
chekhov_sergey@yahoo.co.uk

We developed a method to detect and superimpose neuronal populations involved in 
two different episodes of activity in the brain of single animal. This method is 
based on usage of two transcriptional factors with different accumulation curves,
c-Fos and pCREB, as the markers. The overlap of neuronal populations involved in 
performance of spatial and nonspatial tasks in Morris water maze has been shown
to occur at "chance" level.

PMID: 23330105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Mar 15;304(6):E583-98. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00513.2012. Epub 2013 Jan 15.

Hypoxic adaptation engages the CBP/CREST-induced coactivator complex of
Creb-HIF-1a in transactivating murine neuroblastic glucose transporter.

Thamotharan S(1), Raychaudhuri N, Tomi M, Shin BC, Devaskar SU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology and Developmental Biology,
Neonatal Research Center, David Geffen School of Medicine at University of
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

We have shown in vitro a hypoxia-induced time-dependent increase in facilitative 
glucose transporter isoform 3 (GLUT3) expression in N2A murine neuroblasts. This 
increase in GLUT3 expression is partially reliant on a transcriptional increase
noted in actinomycin D and cycloheximide pretreatment experiments. Transient
transfection assays in N2A neuroblasts using murine glut3-luciferase reporter
constructs mapped the hypoxia-induced enhancer activities to -857- to -573-bp and
-203- to -177-bp regions. Hypoxia-exposed N2A nuclear extracts demonstrated an
increase in HIF-1a and p-Creb binding to HRE (-828 to -824 bp) and AP-1 (-187 to 
-180 bp) cis-elements, respectively, in electromobility shift and supershift
assays, which was confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. In addition,
the interaction of CBP with Creb and HIF-1a and CREST with CBP in hypoxia was
detected by coimmunoprecipitation. Furthermore, small interference (si)RNA
targeting Creb in these cells decreased endogenous Creb concentrations that
reduced by twofold hypoxia-induced glut3 gene transcription. Thus, in N2A
neuroblasts, phosphorylated HIF-1a and Creb mediated the hypoxia-induced increase
in glut3 transcription. Coactivation by the Ca<U+207A><U+207A>-dependent CREST and CBP proteins
may enhance cross-talk between p-Creb-AP-1 and HIF-1a/HRE of the glut3 gene.
Collectively, these processes can facilitate an adaptive response to hypoxic
energy depletion targeted at enhancing glucose transport and minimizing injury
while fueling the proliferative potential of neuroblasts.

PMCID: PMC3602690
PMID: 23321477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Mar 15;304(6):E640-50. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00448.2012. Epub 2013 Jan 15.

Mechanisms by which the orexigen NPY regulates anorexigenic a-MSH and TRH.

Cyr NE(1), Toorie AM, Steger JS, Sochat MM, Hyner S, Perello M, Stuart R, Nillni 
EA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, The Warren Alpert Medical
School of Brown University/Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI 02903, USA.

Protein posttranslational processing is a cellular mechanism fundamental to the
generation of bioactive peptides, including the anorectic
a-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (a-MSH) and thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) 
peptides produced in the hypothalamic arcuate (ARC) and paraventricular (PVN)
nuclei, respectively. Neuropeptide Y (NPY) promotes positive energy balance in
part by suppressing a-MSH and TRH. The mechanism by which NPY regulates a-MSH
output, however, is not well understood. Our results reveal that NPY inhibited
the posttranslational processing of a-MSH's inactive precursor
proopiomelanocortin (POMC) by decreasing the prohormone convertase-2 (PC2). We
also found that early growth response protein-1 (Egr-1) and NPY-Y1 receptors
mediated the NPY-induced decrease in PC2. NPY given intra-PVN also decreased PC2 
in PVN samples, suggesting a reduction in PC2-mediated pro-TRH processing. In
addition, NPY attenuated the a-MSH-induced increase in TRH production by two
mechanisms. First, NPY decreased a-MSH-induced CREB phosphorylation, which
normally enhances TRH transcription. Second, NPY decreased the amount of a-MSH in
the PVN. Collectively, these results underscore the significance of the
interaction between NPY and a-MSH in the central regulation of energy balance and
indicate that posttranslational processing is a mechanism that plays a specific
role in this interaction.

PMCID: PMC3602689
PMID: 23321476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Case Rep Pathol. 2012;2012:291623. doi: 10.1155/2012/291623. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Subcutaneous angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma mimicking metastatic melanoma.

Sparreboom E(1), Wetzels C, Verdijk M, Mulder S, Blokx W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, P.O. Box 
9100, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma is an uncommon soft-tissue tumor of intermediate
malignancy that is often misdiagnosed initially. As there is not one
immunohistochemical marker that consequently stains positive or negative for
angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma, molecular diagnostics are becoming more widely 
used. So far three translocations have been reported to arise in angiomatoid
fibrous histiocytoma: FUS-ATF1, EWSR1-CREB1, or EWSR1-ATF1. We present a case of 
angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma on the upper arm of a 40-year-old female, which 
was initially misdiagnosed as metastatic melanoma in a lymph node. Revision of
the pathology revealed an angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma, which was later
confirmed by a EWSR1-CREB1 translocation with molecular diagnostics. Furthermore,
we review the relevant literature and provide an overview of all available case
reports in the past ten years. This case report illustrates the importance for
pathologists of knowing the typical pathology features of AFH and integrating
immunohistochemical and molecular findings in order to prevent overdiagnosis of
lymph node metastasis of a malignancy.

PMCID: PMC3539338
PMID: 23320232  [PubMed]


462. J Ethnopharmacol. 2013 Mar 7;146(1):294-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2012.12.047. Epub
2013 Jan 9.

Ginsenosides Rg5 and Rh3 protect scopolamine-induced memory deficits in mice.

Kim EJ(1), Jung IH, Van Le TK, Jeong JJ, Kim NJ, Kim DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee University, 1,
Hoegi, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Panax ginseng (family Araliaceae) is
traditionally used as a remedy for cancer, inflammation, stress and aging.
AIM OF STUDY: To explore whether ginsenosides Rg5 and Rh3, the main constituents 
of heat-processed ginseng (the root of Panax ginseng), could protect memory
deficit.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We isolated ginsenosides Rh3 and Rg5 from heated-processed
ginseng treated with and without human feces, respectively. Then we investigated 
their protective effects on memory impairment using the passive avoidance, Y-maze
and Morris water maze tasks in mice. Memory deficit was induced in mice by the
intraperitoneal injection of scopolamine.
RESULTS: Ginsenosides Rg5 or Rh3 increased the latency time reduced by
scopolamine in passive avoidance test. Treatment with ginsenoside Rg5 or Rh3
significantly reversed the lowered spontaneous alteration induced by scopolamine 
in Y-maze task. Ginsenoisde Rg5 or Rh3 (10 mg/kg) significantly shortened the
escape latencies prolonged by treatment with scopolamine on the last day of
training trial sessions in Morris water maze task. Furthermore, ginsenosides Rg5 
and Rh3 inhibited acetylcholinesterase activity in a dose-dependent manner, with 
IC50 values of 18.4 and 10.2 µM, respectively. The inhibitory potency of
ginsenoside Rh3 is comparable with that of donepezil (IC50=9.9 µM). These
ginsenosides also reversed hippocampal brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)
expression and cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation
reduced by scopolamine. Of them, ginsenoside Rh3 more potently protected memory
deficit.
CONCLUSIONS: Ginsenoside Rg5 and its metabolite ginsenoside Rh3 may protect
memory deficit by inhibiting AChE activity and increasing BDNF expression and
CREB activation.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 23313392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Hepatology. 2013 Aug;58(2):564-75. doi: 10.1002/hep.26227. Epub 2013 Jun 14.

Retinol binding protein 4 stimulates hepatic sterol regulatory element-binding
protein 1 and increases lipogenesis through the peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator 1ß-dependent pathway.

Xia M(1), Liu Y, Guo H, Wang D, Wang Y, Ling W.

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Food, Nutrition and Health, Guangzhou, 
Guangdong Province, China.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2013 Aug;58(2):477-9.
    Hepatology. 2014 Jun;59(6):2422.

Recent studies have revealed the essential role of retinol binding protein 4
(RBP4) in insulin resistance. However, the impact of RBP4 on aberrant
lipogenesis, the common hepatic manifestation in insulin resistance states, and
the underlying mechanism remain elusive. The present study was designed to
examine the effect of RBP4 on sterol regulatory element-binding protein (SREBP-1)
and hepatic lipogenesis. Treatment with human retinol-bound RBP4 (holo-RBP4)
significantly induced intracellular triglyceride (TAG) synthesis in HepG2 cells
and this effect is retinol-independent. Furthermore, RBP4 treatment enhanced the 
levels of mature SREBP-1 and its nuclear translocation, thereby increasing the
expression of lipogenic genes, including fatty acid synthase (FAS), acetyl
coenzyme A carboxylase-1 (ACC-1), and diacylglycerol O-acyltransferase 2
(DGAT-2). Stimulation of HepG2 cells with RBP4 strongly up-regulated the
expression of transcriptional coactivator peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator 1ß (PGC-1ß) at both the messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein
levels. The transcriptional activation of PGC-1ß is necessary and sufficient for 
the transcriptional activation of SREBP-1 in response to RBP4. The cyclic
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-response element binding protein (CREB) was
identified as the target transcription factor involved in the RBP4-mediated
up-regulation of PGC-1ß transcription as a result of phosphorylation on Ser133.
Furthermore, in vivo RBP4 infusion induced SREBP-1c activation and consequently
accelerated hepatic lipogenesis and plasma TAG in C57BL/6J mice, a phenomenon not
observed in Ppargc1b knockout mice.CONCLUSION: These findings reveal a novel
mechanism by which RBP4 achieves its effects on hepatic lipid metabolism.

Copyright © 2013 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 23300015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Br J Pharmacol. 2013 Jun;169(3):590-603. doi: 10.1111/bph.12098.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) regulates TGF-ß1-induced differentiation of
pulmonary fibroblasts.

Baarsma HA(1), Engelbertink LH, van Hees LJ, Menzen MH, Meurs H, Timens W, Postma
DS, Kerstjens HA, Gosens R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, GRIAC Research Institute, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. h.a.baarsma@rug.nl

BACKGROUND: Chronic lung diseases such as asthma, COPD and pulmonary fibrosis are
characterized by abnormal extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover. TGF-ß is a key
mediator stimulating ECM production by recruiting and activating lung fibroblasts
and initiating their differentiation process into more active myofibroblasts.
Glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) regulates various intracellular signalling
pathways; its role in TGF-ß1-induced myofibroblast differentiation is currently
largely unknown.
PURPOSE: To determine the contribution of GSK-3 signalling in TGF-ß1-induced
myofibroblast differentiation.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: We used MRC5 human lung fibroblasts and primary pulmonary 
fibroblasts of individuals with and without COPD. Protein and mRNA expression
were determined by immunoblotting and RT-PCR analysis respectively.
RESULTS: Stimulation of MRC5 and primary human lung fibroblasts with TGF-ß1
resulted in time- and dose-dependent increases of a-sm-actin and fibronectin
expression, indicative of myofibroblast differentiation. Pharmacological
inhibition of GSK-3 by SB216763 dose-dependently attenuated TGF-ß1-induced
expression of these myofibroblasts markers. Moreover, silencing of GSK-3 by siRNA
or pharmacological inhibition by CT/CHIR99021 fully inhibited the TGF-ß1-induced 
expression of a-sm-actin and fibronectin. The effect of GSK-3 inhibition on
a-sm-actin expression was similar in fibroblasts from individuals with and
without COPD. Neither smad, NF-<U+03BA>B nor ERK1/2 were involved in the inhibitory
actions of GSK-3 inhibition by SB126763 on myofibroblast differentiation. Rather,
SB216763 increased the phosphorylation of CREB, which in its phosphorylated form 
acts as a functional antagonist of TGF-ß/smad signalling.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATION: We demonstrate that GSK-3 signalling regulates
TGF-ß1-induced myofibroblast differentiation by regulating CREB phosphorylation. 
GSK-3 may constitute a useful target for treatment of chronic lung diseases.

© 2013 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2013 The British
Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC3682707
PMID: 23297769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Clin Rheumatol. 2013 May;32(5):609-15. doi: 10.1007/s10067-012-2143-9. Epub 2013 
Jan 8.

Identification of transcription regulatory relationships in rheumatoid arthritis 
and osteoarthritis.

Li G(1), Han N, Li Z, Lu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traumatology, East Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Number 150 Jimo Road, Pudong New District, Shanghai 200120, China.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is recognized as the most crippling or disabling type
of arthritis, and osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common form of arthritis. These
diseases severely reduce the quality of life, and cause high socioeconomic
burdens. However, the molecular mechanisms of RA and OA development remain
elusive despite intensive research efforts. In this study, we aimed to identify
the potential transcription regulatory relationships between transcription
factors (TFs) and differentially co-expressed genes (DCGs) in RA and OA,
respectively. We downloaded the gene expression profiles of RA and OA from the
Gene Expression Omnibus and analyzed the gene expression using computational
methods. We identified a set of 4,076 DCGs in pairwise comparisons between RA and
OA patients, RA and normal donors (NDs), or OA and ND. After regulatory network
construction and regulatory impact factor analysis, we found that EGR1, NFE2L1,
and NFYA were crucial TFs in the regulatory network of RA and NFYA, CBFB, CREB1, 
YY1 and PATZ1 were crucial TFs in the regulatory network of OA. These TFs could
regulate the DCGs expression to involve RA and OA by promoting or inhibiting
their expression. Altogether, our work may extend our understanding of disease
mechanisms and may lead to an improved diagnosis. However, further experiments
are still needed to confirm these observations.

PMID: 23296645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Exp Med. 2013 Jan 14;210(1):157-72. doi: 10.1084/jem.20120412. Epub 2013 Jan 7.

Colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF1R) signaling in injured neurons
facilitates protection and survival.

Luo J(1), Elwood F, Britschgi M, Villeda S, Zhang H, Ding Z, Zhu L, Alabsi H,
Getachew R, Narasimhan R, Wabl R, Fainberg N, James ML, Wong G, Relton J, Gambhir
SS, Pollard JW, Wyss-Coray T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Colony-stimulating factor 1 (CSF1) and interleukin-34 (IL-34) are functional
ligands of the CSF1 receptor (CSF1R) and thus are key regulators of the
monocyte/macrophage lineage. We discovered that systemic administration of human 
recombinant CSF1 ameliorates memory deficits in a transgenic mouse model of
Alzheimer's disease. CSF1 and IL-34 strongly reduced excitotoxin-induced neuronal
cell loss and gliosis in wild-type mice when administered systemically before or 
up to 6 h after injury. These effects were accompanied by maintenance of cAMP
responsive element-binding protein (CREB) signaling in neurons rather than in
microglia. Using lineage-tracing experiments, we discovered that a small number
of neurons in the hippocampus and cortex express CSF1R under physiological
conditions and that kainic acid-induced excitotoxic injury results in a profound 
increase in neuronal receptor expression. Selective deletion of CSF1R in
forebrain neurons in mice exacerbated excitotoxin-induced death and
neurodegeneration. We conclude that CSF1 and IL-34 provide powerful
neuroprotective and survival signals in brain injury and neurodegeneration
involving CSF1R expression on neurons.

PMCID: PMC3549715
PMID: 23296467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Molecules. 2013 Jan 4;18(1):666-81. doi: 10.3390/molecules18010666.

The combination of mitragynine and morphine prevents the development of morphine 
tolerance in mice.

Fakurazi S(1), Rahman SA, Hidayat MT, Ithnin H, Moklas MA, Arulselvan P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 UPM Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
sharida@medic.upm.edu.my

Mitragynine (MG) is the major active alkaloid found in Mitragyna speciosa Korth. 
In the present study, we investigated the enhancement of analgesic action of MG
when combined with morphine and the effect of the combination on the development 
of tolerance towards morphine. Mice were administered intraperitoneally with a
dose of MG (15 and 25 mg/kg b.wt) combined with morphine (5 mg/kg b.wt)
respectively for 9 days. The antinociceptive effect was evaluated by a hot plate 
test. The protein expression of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and cAMP
response element binding (CREB) was analyzed by immunoblot. Toxicological
parameters especially liver and kidney function tests were assessed after the
combination treatment with MG and morphine. The concurrent administration of MG
and morphine showed significant (p < 0.05) increase in latency time when compared
to morphine alone group and the outstanding analgesic effects in the combination 
regimens were maintained until day 9. For the protein expression, there was a
significant increment of cAMP and CREB levels (p < 0.05) in group treated with 5 
mg/kg morphine but there was no significant change of these protein expressions
when MG was combined with morphine. There was a significant changes in
toxicological parameters of various treated groups. The combination treatment of 
MG and morphine effectively reduce the tolerance due to the chronic
administration of morphine.

PMID: 23292329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Chin J Physiol. 2012 Aug 31;55(4):284-93. doi: 10.4077/CJP.2012.BAA041.

Antidepressant-Like Effects of Central BDNF Administration in Mice of
Antidepressant Sensitive Catalepsy (ASC) Strain.

Tikhonova M(1), Kulikov AV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of
Sciences, Lavrentyev Ave., 10, Novosibirsk 630090, Russia.

Although numerous data evidence the implication of brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF) in the pathophysiology of depression, the potential for BDNF to
correct genetically defined depressive-like states is poorly studied. This study 
was aimed to reveal antidepressant-like effects of BDNF (300 ng, 2×, i.c.v.) on
behavior and mRNA expression of genes associated with depression-like state in
the brain in mice of antidepressant sensitive catalepsy (ASC) strain
characterized by high hereditary predisposition to catalepsy and depressive-like 
features. Behavioral tests were held on the 7th-16th days after the first
(4th-13th after the second) BDNF injection. Results showed that BDNF normalized
impaired sexual motivation in the ASC males, and this BDNF effect differed, with 
advantageous effects, from that of widely used antidepressants. The
anticataleptic effect of two BDNF injections was enhanced compared with a single 
administration. A tendency to decrease the immobility duration in tail-suspension
test was observed in BDNF-treated ASC mice. The effects on catalepsy and sexual
motivation were specific since BDNF did not alter locomotor and exploratory
activity or social interest in the ASC mice. Along with behavioral
antidepressant-like effects on the ASC mice, BDNF increased hippocampal mRNA
levels of Bdnf and Creb1 (cAMP response element-binding protein gene). BDNF also 
augmented mRNA levels of Arc gene encoding Arc (Activity-regulated
cytoskeleton-associated) protein involved in BDNF-induced processes of neuronal
and synaptic plasticity in hippocampus and prefrontal cortex. The data suggest
that: [1] BDNF is effective in the treatment of some genetically defined
behavioral disturbances; [2] BDNF influences sexually-motivated behavior; [3] Arc
mRNA levels may serve as a molecular marker of BDNF physiological activity
associated with its long-lasting behavioral effects; [4] ASC mouse strain can be 
used as a suitable model to study mechanisms of BDNF effects on
hereditary-dependent behavioral disorders.

PMID: 23282170  [PubMed - in process]


469. Eur J Pharmacol. 2013 Mar 5;703(1-3):53-61. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2012.12.023.
Epub 2012 Dec 28.

Characterization of cognitive deficits in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer's
disease and effects of donepezil and memantine.

Nagakura A(1), Shitaka Y, Yarimizu J, Matsuoka N.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Research Laboratories, Drug Discovery Research, Astellas Pharma
Inc., Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8585, Japan. akira.nagakura@astellas.com

Alzheimer's disease is characterized by a progressive decline in cognitive
function and involves ß-amyloid (Aß) in its pathogenesis. To characterize
cognitive deficits associated with Aß accumulation, we analyzed PS1/APP mice
overexpressing mutant presenilin-1 (PS1, M146L; line 6.2) and amyloid precursor
protein (APP, K670N/M671L; line Tg2576), a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease
with accelerated Aß production. Age-dependent changes in working and spatial
memory behaviors were investigated using Y-maze and Morris water maze tasks,
respectively, in female PS1/APP mice at ages of 2, 4, 6, and 12 months.
Significant deficits in working and spatial memory were observed from 4 and 6
months of age, respectively. Acute single-dose administrations of memantine, a
low-to-moderate-affinity N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) antagonist, showed
improvements in working memory deficits at 4 months of age, whereas donepezil, an
acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitor, did not. However, both drugs improved
spatial memory dysfunction at 6 months of age at therapeutically relevant doses. 
No age-related dramatic changes were observed in expression levels of several
proteins relating to memory dysfunction and also the mechanisms of donepezil and 
memantine in the cerebral cortex of PS1/APP mice until 6 months of age. Taken
together, these results suggest dysfunctions in cholinergic and/or glutamatergic 
transmissions may be involved in the cognitive deficits associated with Aß
toxicity. Since donepezil and memantine have been widely used for treating
patients of Alzheimer's disease, these results also suggest that cognitive
deficits in PS1/APP mice assessed in the Y-maze and Morris water maze tasks are a
useful animal model for evaluating novel Alzheimer's disease therapeutics.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23276665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Neuropsychopharmacol Hung. 2012 Dec;14(4):213-20.

A new clinical evidence-based gene-environment interaction model of depression.

Bagdy G(1), Juhasz G, Gonda X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacodynamics, Semmelweis University, 1089 Budapest, Hungary.
bag13638@iif.hu

In our current understanding of mood disorders, the role of genes is diverse
including the mediation of the effects of provoking and protective factors.
Different or partially overlapping gene sets play a major role in the development
of personality traits including also affective temperaments, in the mediation of 
the effects of environmental factors, and in the interaction of these elements in
the development of depression. Certain genes are associated with personality
traits and temperaments including e.g., neuroticism, impulsivity, openness,
rumination and extroversion. Environmental factors consist of external (early and
provoking life events, seasonal changes, social support etc.) and internal
factors (hormones, biological rhythm generators, comorbid disorders etc). Some of
these environmental factors, such as early life events and some prenatal events
directly influence the development of personality traits and temperaments. In the
NEWMOOD cohort polymorphisms of the genes of the serotonin transporter, 5-HT1A,
5-HT1B and 5-HT2A and endocannabinoid CB1 receptors, tryptophan hydroxylase,
CREB1, BDNF and GIRK provide evidence for the involvement of these genes in the
development of depression. Based on their role in this process they could be
assigned to different gene sets. The role of certain genes, such as promoter
polymorphisms of the serotonin transporter (5-HTTLPR) and CB1 receptor has been
shown in more than one of the above factors. Furthermore, gene-gene interactions 
of these promoters associated with anxiety suggest the application of these
polymorphisms in personalized medicine. In this review we introduce a new model
including environmental factors, genes, trait and temperament markers based on
human genetic studies.

PMID: 23269207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Immunol. 2013 Feb 1;190(3):1250-63. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103060. Epub 2012
Dec 21.

Regulation of TLR2-mediated tolerance and cross-tolerance through IRAK4
modulation by miR-132 and miR-212.

Nahid MA(1), Yao B, Dominguez-Gutierrez PR, Kesavalu L, Satoh M, Chan EK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Innate immune response is the first defense against pathogens via recognition by 
various conserved pattern recognition receptors, such as TLRs, to initiate a
rapid and strong cytokine alarm. TLR signaling-mediated cytokine production must 
be properly regulated to prevent pathological conditions deriving from
overproduction of cytokines. In this study, the role of specific microRNAs in
TLR-signaling pathway was investigated to reveal the cross-interaction and
-regulation in the MyD88 pathway. In peptidoglycan (PGN)/TLR2-stimulated THP-1
monocytes, PBMCs, and primary macrophages showed rapid and dramatic miR-132 and
miR-212 (miR-132/-212) upregulation. This newly identified response appeared
earlier in time than the characteristic miR-146a response in LPS-TLR4
stimulation. The rapid induction of miR-132/-212 was transcription factor CREB
dependent, and the sustained expression of miR-132/-212 was responsible for
inducing tolerance to subsequent PGN challenge. Cross-tolerance was observed by
TLR5 ligand flagellin and heat-killed or live bacteria resulting from
miR-132/-212 upregulation. Mechanistically, IRAK4 was identified and validated as
a target of miR-132/-212 by luciferase reporter assay and seed-sequence
mutagenesis of the reporter. Transfection of miR-132 or miR-212 alone mimicked
PGN tolerance in monocytes, whereas transfected specific miRNA inhibitors
tampered the tolerance effect. During bacterial infection, PGN-mediated TLR2
signaling induces miR-132/-212 to downregulate IRAK4, an early component in the
MyD88-dependent pathway, whereas LPS/TLR4-induced miR-146a downregulates
downstream components of the same MyD88-dependent pathway. The identification of 
miR-132/-212 and miR-146a together to prevent damaging consequences from the
overproduction of proinflammatory cytokines by targeting a common signaling
pathway is significant and will provide insights into future design and
development of therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3552145
PMID: 23264652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Neurotoxicology. 2013 Mar;35:50-61. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2012.12.005. Epub 2012
Dec 21.

Salsolinol induced apoptotic changes in neural stem cells: amelioration by
neurotrophin support.

Shukla A(1), Mohapatra TM, Agrawal AK, Parmar D, Seth K.

Author information: 
(1)Indian Institute of Toxicology Research (CSIR), Developmental Toxicology
Division, Mahatma Gandhi Marg, Post Box 80, Lucknow 226 001, India; Department of
Microbiology, IMS, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi 221 005, India.

Salsolinol (SAL), a catechol isoquinoline has invited considerable attention due 
to its structural similarity with dopaminergic neurotoxin
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP). Its high endogenous presence
in Parkinsonian brain implicated its possible association with the disease
process. SAL is also present in alcohol beverages and certain food materials and 
can get access to brain especially in conditions of immature or impaired BBB.
Besides this, the effect of SAL on neural stem cells (NSCs) which are potential
candidates for adult neurogenesis and transplantation mediated rejuvenating
attempts for Parkinson's disease (PD) brain has not been known so far. NSCs in
both the cases have to overcome suppressive cues of diseased brain for their
survival and function. In this study we explored the toxicity of SAL toward NSCs 
focusing on apoptosis and status of PI3K survival signaling. NSCs cultured from
embryonic day 11 rat fetal brain including those differentiated to TH(+ve)
colonies, when challenged with SAL (1-100µM), elicited a concentration and time
dependent cell death/loss of mitochondrial viability. 10µM SAL on which
significant mitochondrial impairment initiated was further used to study
mechanism of toxicity. Morphological impairment, enhanced TUNEL positivity,
cleaved caspase-3 and decreased Bcl-2:Bax suggested apoptosis. Sal toxicity
coincided with reduced pAkt level and its downstream effectors: pCREB, pGSK-3ß,
Bcl-2 and neurotrophins GDNF, BDNF suggesting repressed PI3K/Akt signaling.
Multiple neurotrophic factor support in the form of Olfactory Ensheathing Cell's 
Conditioned Media (OEC CM) potentially protected NSCs against SAL through
activating PI3K/Akt pathway. This was confirmed on adding LY294002 the PI3K
inhibitor which abolished the protection. We inferred that SAL exerts substantial
toxicity toward NSCs. These findings will lead to better understanding of
endogenous threats that might affect the fate of transplanted NSCs and their
probable antidotes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23261589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Pathol Int. 2012 Dec;62(12):817-22. doi: 10.1111/pin.12014.

Primary pulmonary myxoid sarcoma with EWSR1-CREB1 fusion, resembling
extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma: Case report with a review of Literature.

Matsukuma S(1), Hisaoka M, Obara K, Kono T, Takeo H, Sato K, Hata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Japan Self Defense Forces Central Hospital, Tokyo,
Japan. skuma@cocoa.plala.or.jp

Reported herein is an extremely rare case of primary pulmonary myxoid sarcoma
(PPMS). A 31-year-old man presented with a 2.7<U+2009>cm-sized pulmonary tumor
surrounded by capsule-like fibrosis. The patient has been free of disease for 5.8
years after surgery. This tumor focally showed endobronchial features, and
consisted of reticular cords of oval, short spindle, or polygonal cells with
swollen vesicular nuclei accompanied by an abundant myxoid stroma, closely
resembling extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma. Tumor cells were diffusely
positive for vimentin and focally positive for epithelial membrane antigen, but
were negative for cytokeratin, TTF-1, Napsin A, S-100 protein, CD34, desmin,
smooth-muscle actin, CD10, p63, calponin, h-caldesmon, c-kit, HMB-45,
synaptophysin, or glial fibrillary acid protein. Our reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction using the formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tumor tissues detected EWSR1-CREB1 fusion transcript, but could
not demonstrate EWSR1-ATF1 fusion or EWSR1/TAF15/TFG-NR4A3 fusion. These findings
indicate that the current tumor is an additional case of PPMS with EESR1-CREB1
fusion, recently reported by Thway et<U+2009>al. Some cases of PPMS can behave in an
indolent manner.

© 2012 The Authors. Pathology International © 2012 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 23252871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jan 2;110(1):141-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1216801110. 
Epub 2012 Dec 17.

Pharmaceutically controlled designer circuit for the treatment of the metabolic
syndrome.

Ye H(1), Charpin-El Hamri G, Zwicky K, Christen M, Folcher M, Fussenegger M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology Zurich, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland.

Synthetic biology has significantly advanced the design of genetic devices that
can reprogram cellular activities and provide novel treatment strategies for
future gene- and cell-based therapies. However, many metabolic disorders are
functionally linked while developing distinct diseases that are difficult to
treat using a classic one-drug-one-disease intervention scheme. For example,
hypertension, hyperglycemia, obesity, and dyslipidemia are interdependent
pathologies that are collectively known as the metabolic syndrome, the prime
epidemic of the 21st century. We have designed a unique therapeutic strategy in
which the clinically licensed antihypertensive drug guanabenz (Wytensin)
activates a synthetic signal cascade that stimulates the secretion of
metabolically active peptides GLP-1 and leptin. Therefore, the signal
transduction of a chimeric trace-amine-associated receptor 1 (cTAAR1) was
functionally rewired via cAMP and cAMP-dependent phosphokinase A (PKA)-mediated
activation of the cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB1) to transcription 
of synthetic promoters containing CREB1-specific cAMP response elements. Based on
this designer signaling cascade, it was possible to use guanabenz to
dose-dependently control expression of GLP-1-Fc(mIgG)-Leptin, a bifunctional
therapeutic peptide hormone that combines the glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) and
leptin via an IgG-Fc linker. In mice developing symptoms of the metabolic
syndrome, this three-in-one treatment strategy was able to simultaneously
attenuate hypertension and hyperglycemia as well as obesity and dyslipidemia.
Using a clinically licensed drug to coordinate expression of therapeutic
transgenes combines drug- and gene-based therapies for coordinated treatment of
functionally related metabolic disorders.

PMCID: PMC3538262
PMID: 23248313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2012 Dec;16(14):1974-82.

Exogenous sodium hydrosulfide can attenuate naloxone-precipitated withdrawal
syndromes and affect cAMP signaling pathway in heroin-dependent rat's nucleus
accumbens.

Jiang LH(1), Wang J, Wei XL, Liang QY, Cheng TT.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Guangxi University, Nanning,
People's Republic of China. au72191@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: H2S is a novel type of endogenous neural regulatory factor and
gaseous mediator. Exogenous H2S can increase heroin-induced learning and memory
damage in rat and alleviates heroin-induced rat hippocampus damage through
antioxidant and anti-apoptosis effects.
OBJECTIVE: Aim of this study was to identify whether hydrogen sulfide (H2S)
protects heroin withdrawal rat is related with adenylate cyclase
(AC)-cAMP-protein kinase A (PKA)-cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB)
signaling pathway in heroin-dependent rat's nucleus accumbens or not.
METHODS: Male Spragne-Dawley rats were randomly divided into Saline + Saline
group, Saline + sodium hydrosulfide (NaHS) group, Saline + Heroin group, NaHS +
Heroin group according to the principle of increasing heroin dosage day by day,
with the establishment of heroin-naloxone-induced withdrawal symptoms determined 
at day 10. Then the levels of H2S and cAMP and AC and PKA activities were
assayed, and the level of phosphorylated CREB (p-CREB), the levels of
phosphorylated N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor 1 subunit (p-NR1), phosphorylated
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor 2a subunit (p-NR2A) and phosphorylated
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor 2b subunit (p-NR2B) were assayed in nucleus
accumbens.
RESULTS: Exogenous H2S can alleviate heroin withdrawal symptoms by increasing the
level of H2S level in nucleus accumbens. Exogenous H2S can decrease the high
activities of AC, PKA and the high levels of cAMP, p-CREB caused by heroin.
Furthermore, exogenous H2S can decrease the high level of p-NR1 and can increase 
the low levels of p-NR2A and p-NR2B caused by heroin. It is surprising that
exogenous H2S treatment alone was able to raise the activities of AC and PKA as
well as the levels of cAMP, p-CREB, p-NR1, p-NR2A and p-NR2B.
CONCLUSIONS: Exogenous H2S decreases naloxone-precipitated withdrawal signs,
maybe through decreasing AC/cAMP/PKA/CREB/NMDR signaling pathway in
heroin-dependent rats' nucleus accumbens.

PMID: 23242725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2013;961:137-45. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-4756-6_12.

Transcriptional regulation of ncx1 gene in the brain.

Valsecchi V(1), Pignataro G, Sirabella R, Matrone C, Boscia F, Scorziello A,
Sisalli MJ, Esposito E, Zambrano N, Cataldi M, Di Renzo G, Annunziato L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Federico II University of Naples, Naples, Italy.

The ubiquitous sodium-calcium exchanger isoform 1 (NCX1) is a -bidirectional
transporter that plays a relevant role under physiological and pathophysiological
conditions including brain ischemia by regulating intraneuronal Ca(2+) and Na(+) 
homeostasis. Although changes in ncx1 protein and transcript expression have been
detected during stroke, its transcriptional regulation is still largely
unexplored. Here, we reviewed our recent findings on several transcription
factors including cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB), nuclear factor
kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B), and hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) in the control of the
ncx1 gene expression in neuronal cells.

PMID: 23224876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Neurosci. 2012 Dec 5;32(49):17857-68. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1419-12.2012.

Increasing CRTC1 function in the dentate gyrus during memory formation or
reactivation increases memory strength without compromising memory quality.

Sekeres MJ(1), Mercaldo V, Richards B, Sargin D, Mahadevan V, Woodin MA,
Frankland PW, Josselyn SA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neurosciences and Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Memory stabilization following encoding (synaptic consolidation) or memory
reactivation (reconsolidation) requires gene expression and protein synthesis
(Dudai and Eisenberg, 2004; Tronson and Taylor, 2007; Nader and Einarsson, 2010; 
Alberini, 2011). Although consolidation and reconsolidation may be mediated by
distinct molecular mechanisms (Lee et al., 2004), disrupting the function of the 
transcription factor CREB impairs both processes (Kida et al., 2002; Mamiya et
al., 2009). Phosphorylation of CREB at Ser133 recruits CREB binding protein
(CBP)/p300 coactivators to activate transcription (Chrivia et al., 1993; Parker
et al., 1996). In addition to this well known mechanism, CREB regulated
transcription coactivators (CRTCs), previously called transducers of regulated
CREB (TORC) activity, stimulate CREB-mediated transcription, even in the absence 
of CREB phosphorylation. Recently, CRTC1 has been shown to undergo
activity-dependent trafficking from synapses and dendrites to the nucleus in
excitatory hippocampal neurons (Ch'ng et al., 2012). Despite being a powerful and
specific coactivator of CREB, the role of CRTC in memory is virtually unexplored.
To examine the effects of increasing CRTC levels, we used viral vectors to
locally and acutely increase CRTC1 in the dorsal hippocampus dentate gyrus region
of mice before training or memory reactivation in context fear conditioning.
Overexpressing CRTC1 enhanced both memory consolidation and reconsolidation;
CRTC1-mediated memory facilitation was context specific (did not generalize to
nontrained context) and long lasting (observed after virally expressed CRTC1
dissipated). CREB overexpression produced strikingly similar effects. Therefore, 
increasing CRTC1 or CREB function is sufficient to enhance the strength of new,
as well as established reactivated, memories without compromising memory quality.

PMID: 23223304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Mutat Res. 2013 Mar-Apr;743-744:151-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2012.10.003. Epub
2012 Dec 1.

Zebrafish as a model system to study DNA damage and repair.

Pei DS(1), Strauss PR.

Author information: 
(1)Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Chongqing, China. deshengpei@gmail.com

Zebrafish (Danio rerio) have become a popular vertebrate model to study
embryological development, because of unique advantages not found in other model 
systems. Zebrafish share many gene functions with other vertebrates including
humans, making zebrafish a useful system for studying cancer etiology. However,
systematic studies of DNA damage and repair pathways using adult or embryonic
zebrafish have not been extensively reported. The zebrafish genome contains
nearly all the genes involved in different DNA repair pathways in eukaryotes,
including direct reversal (DR), mismatch repair (MMR) nucleotide excision repair 
(NER), base excision repair (BER), homologous recombination (HR), non-homologous 
end joining (NHEJ) and translesion synthesis (TLS). It also includes the genes of
the p53-mediated damage recognition pathway. Therefore, zebrafish provide an
ideal model for gaining fundamental insights into mechanisms of DNA damage and
repair, especially during embryological development. This review introduces
recent work on different DNA damage and repair studies in zebrafish, with special
emphasis on the role of BER in zebrafish early embryological development. AP
endonuclease 1 (Apex1), a critical protein in the BER pathway, not only regulates
BER but also controls cyclic AMP response binding protein (Creb1), which itself
regulates ~25% of eukaryotic coding sequences. In addition, Apex1 indirectly
regulates levels of p53. As these findings also occur in murine B cells, they
illustrate the usefulness of the zebrafish system in elucidating fundamental
mechanisms.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 23211879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2012 Nov;20(11):822-7. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1007-3418.2012.11.005.

[Effects of cAMP-response element binding protein-1 (CREB-1) on transforming
growth factor-b3 (TGFb3) mRNA expression and promoter activity in hepatic
stellate cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou GY(1), Huang JM, Deng L, Liu KH, Li Q, Qian W, Xu KS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Huazhong University of Sicence and Technology,
Wuhan, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of cAMP-response element binding protein-1 
(CREB-1) on transforming growth factor-b3 (TGF b3) mRNA expression and promoter
activity in hepatic stellate cells (HSCs).
METHODS: Freshly isolated HSCs from rats were divided into six groups: CREB-1
expression plasmid transfected group (C), siRNA-CREB-1 plasmid transfected group 
(S), negative control group (N), forskolin treated group (F), H-89 treated group 
(H), and blank group (B). Rats in each group were further sub-divided according
to whether (+) or not (-) they were exposed to exogenous TGF b3. TGF b3 mRNA
expression was measured by real time quantitative PCR. HSCs of the C, S, N, F, H 
and B groups were transfected with the TGF b3 promoter luciferase reporter
plasmid (PGL3-TGF b3-P; W group), the TGF b3 promoter luciferase reporter plasmid
with CRE mutation (PGL3-basic-TGF b3P-mCRE; M group) and the renilla luciferase
control plasmid (pRL-SV40; control group). TGF b3 promoter activity was assessed 
by luciferase reporter assays.
RESULTS: Compared to N(-), the TGF b3 mRNA expression was reduced to 0.69+/-0.15 
in S(-) (P less than 0.05) and increased to 4.68+/-2.76 in C(-) (P more than
0.05). Compared to B(-), the TGF b3 mRNA expression was reduced to 0.57+/-0.08 in
H(-) (P less than 0.05). The differences between N(+) and N(-), S(+) and S(-),
B(+) and B(-), and H(+) and H(-) were all significant (P less than 0.05). The
values of TGF b3 promoter activity in S(W), N(W), and C(W) were 0.062+/-0.013,
0.122+/-0.011, and 0.165+/-0.016 (P less than 0.05), but the changes of TGF b3
promoter activity in S(M), N(M), and C(M) were not significant (P more than
0.05). The values of TGF b3 promoter activity in H(W), B(W), and F(W) were
0.154+/-0.010, 0.188+/-0.016, and 0.276+/-0.031 (P less than 0.05), but the
changes of TGF b3 promoter activity in H(M), B(M), and F(M) were not significant 
(P more than 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Increased levels of CREB-1 mRNA or p-CREB-1 up-regulate the TGF b3
mRNA expression and promoter activity in rat HSCs. The CRE site in the TGF b3
promoter is critical for this effect, and the gene's activity becomes
significantly decreased when the site is missing. Exogenous TGF b3 enhances
expression of endogenous TGF b3 in rat HSCs.

PMID: 23206300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Exp Gerontol. 2013 Feb;48(2):115-27. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2012.11.010. Epub 2012 
Nov 30.

Epinephrine and glucose modulate training-related CREB phosphorylation in old
rats: relationships to age-related memory impairments.

Morris KA(1), Gold PE.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Program and College of Medicine, University of Illinois at
Urbana, Champaign, IL 61801, United States.

Epinephrine enhances memory in young adult rats, in part, by increasing blood
glucose levels needed to modulate memory. In old rats, epinephrine is deficient
at raising blood glucose levels and thus is only moderately effective at
enhancing memory. In contrast, systemic glucose injections improve memory in old 
rats, with resulting memory performance equal to that of young rats. The
diminished response of glucose to training in old rats may blunt downstream
neurochemical and molecular mechanisms needed to upregulate memory processes. In 
the first experiment, young adult and old rats were trained on an inhibitory
avoidance task with immediate post-training injections of aCSF or glucose into
the dorsal hippocampus. Old rats had significant memory impairments compared to
young rats 7 days after training. Intrahippocampal injections of glucose reversed
age-related deficits, improving memory scores in old rats to values seen in young
rats. A second experiment examined age-related changes in activation of the
transcription factor CREB, which is widely implicated in memory formation and may
act downstream of hormonal and metabolic signals. Activation was assessed in
response to training with systemic injections of epinephrine and glucose at doses
known to enhance memory. Young adult and old rats were trained on inhibitory
avoidance with immediate post-training systemic injections of saline,
epinephrine, or glucose. After training, old rats had significant impairments in 
CREB phosphorylation in area CA1 and the dentate gyrus region of the hippocampus,
and in the basolateral and lateral amygdala. Epinephrine and glucose attenuated
age-related deficits in CREB phosphorylation, but were more effective in the
amygdala and hippocampus, respectively. Together, these results support the view 
that age-related changes in blood glucose responses to epinephrine contribute to 
memory impairments, which may be related to alterations in regional patterns of
CREB phosphorylation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3557608
PMID: 23201424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Hum Pathol. 2013 Feb;44(2):289-93. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.08.008. Epub 2012 
Nov 27.

Metastatic angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma of the scalp, with EWSR1-CREB1 gene
fusions in primary tumor and nodal metastasis.

Thway K(1), Stefanaki K, Papadakis V, Fisher C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Royal Marsden Hospital, SW3 6JJ London, UK.
khin.thway@rmh.nhs.uk

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma is a rare soft tissue tumor of intermediate
biologic potential, predominantly arising in superficial extremities of children 
and young adults. Less than 5% metastasize. We describe a case of angiomatoid
fibrous histiocytoma in the scalp of an 8-year-old boy, which metastasized to a
postauricular lymph node 3 years after primary tumor excision. Histologically,
primary and metastasis comprised nodules of bland ovoid cells, with primary
additionally showing hemorrhagic cavities, fibrous capsule, and lymphoplasmacytic
inflammation. Both strongly expressed desmin, with focal epithelial membrane
antigen. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction showed EWSR1-CREB1
fusion transcripts in both primary and metastasis. This is, to our knowledge, the
first description of genetically proven metastatic angiomatoid fibrous
histiocytoma. Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma can mimic both benign and
malignant lesions, and although most behave indolently, it is important to
recognize their metastatic potential.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23199525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Pharmacol Sci. 2012;120(4):280-7. Epub 2012 Nov 29.

Antidepressant-like effect of Fuzi total alkaloid on ovariectomized mice.

Liu L(1), Li B, Zhou Y, Wang L, Tang F, Shao D, Jiang X, Zhao H, Cui R, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuroscience, Physiology, School of Life Sciences, Northeast
Normal University, Changchun, China.

Recent studies in vivo and vitro have shown that Fuzi polysaccharide has an
antidepressant-like effect. Polysaccharide and total alkaloid are the two most
important components of Fuzi. However, little is known about the
antidepressant-like effect of Fuzi total alkaloid. To investigate the
antidepressant-like effect of Fuzi total alkaloid, behavioral studies were
performed in the open field test and forced swimming test. Repeated intragastric 
administration of Fuzi total alkaloid for 7 days (10 mg/kg) to normal mice
decreased immobility time compared to the vehicle group. Furthermore, repeated
administration of Fuzi total alkaloid (10 or 30 mg/kg) to ovariectomized mice
also decreased immobility time in a dose-dependent manner. However, these
antidepressant-like behavioral effects were not simply due to locomotor
hyperactivity. Further experiments showed that Fuzi total alkaloid enhanced the
ratio of phospho-CREB/CREB (cAMP response element-binding) and BDNF
(brain-derived neurotrophic factor) protein level in the frontal cortex and
hippocampus in ovariectomized mice but not in normal mice. These results indicate
that the CREB-BDNF pathway may be involved in the antidepressant-like effect of
Fuzi total alkaloid in ovariectomized mice.

PMID: 23196901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e50103. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050103. Epub 2012 Nov 19.

VEGF/Flk1 signaling cascade transactivates Etv2 gene expression.

Rasmussen TL(1), Shi X, Wallis A, Kweon J, Zirbes KM, Koyano-Nakagawa N, Garry
DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota,
United States of America.

Previous reports regarding the genetic hierarchy between Ets related protein 71
(Er71/Etv2) and Flk1 is unclear. In the present study, we pursued a genetic
approach to define the molecular cascade between Etv2 and Flk1. Using a
transgenic Etv2-EYFP reporter mouse, we examined the expression pattern of Etv2
relative to Flk1 in the early conceptus. Etv2-EYFP was expressed in subset of
Flk1 positive cells during primitive streak stages, suggesting that Flk1 is
upstream of Etv2 during gastrulation. Analysis of reporter gene expression in
Flk1 and Etv2 mutant mice further supports the hypothesis that Flk1 is necessary 
for Etv2 expression. The frequency of cells expressing Flk1 in Etv2 mutants is
only modestly altered (21% decrease), whereas expression of the Etv2-EYFP
transgenic reporter was severely reduced in the Flk1 null background. We further 
demonstrate using transcriptional assays that, in the presence of Flk1, the Etv2 
promoter is activated by VEGF, the Flk1 ligand. Pharmacological inhibition
studies demonstrate that VEGF mediated activation is dependent on p38 MAPK, which
activates Creb. We identify the VEGF response element in the Etv2 promoter and
demonstrate that Creb binds to this motif by EMSA and ChIP assays. In summary, we
provide new evidence that VEGF activates Etv2 by signaling through Flk1, which
activates Creb through the p38 MAPK signaling cascade.

PMCID: PMC3501484
PMID: 23185546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49926. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049926. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

RCAN1 is an important mediator of glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis in human
leukemic cells.

Nagao K(1), Iwai Y, Miyashita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kitasato University, Sagamihara, Japan.

Glucocorticoid (GC) is a major therapeutic agent for the treatment of leukemia
because of its ability to induce apoptosis in lymphoid cells. The mechanism
causing apoptosis, however, is still controversial. Since the glucocorticoid
receptor is a transcription factor, some of its target genes are expected to be
implicated in apoptosis. In this study, using a GC-sensitive human pre-B leukemia
cell line, Nalm-6, the FK506 binding protein 51 (FKBP5) and regulator of
calcineurin 1 (RCAN1) genes were disrupted by homologous recombination, since the
expression of both is up-regulated by GC in GC-sensitive but not in GC-resistant 
leukemic cell lines. While the disruption of FKBP5 had a marginal effect on
GC-induced apoptosis, that of RCAN1 resulted in marked resistance to GC. In
addition, overexpression of RCAN1 rendered cells more sensitive to DEX. In
RCAN1-disrupted cells, levels of some pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2
family proteins were decreased and increased, respectively. Finally,
phosphorylation of cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB) and up-regulation
of CREB target genes by GC were inhibited by RCAN1 disruption, and treatment with
a cAMP-inducing agent, forskolin, restored the sensitivity to GC in
RCAN1-disrupted Nalm-6 cells. These findings suggest that up-regulation of RCAN1 
expression followed by activation of the CREB pathway is required in GC-induced
apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3503877
PMID: 23185487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Jan;19(1):55-62. doi: 10.1038/mp.2012.164. Epub 2012 Nov 27.

Genome-wide association study identifies a potent locus associated with human
opioid sensitivity.

Nishizawa D(1), Fukuda K(2), Kasai S(1), Hasegawa J(1), Aoki Y(3), Nishi A(1),
Saita N(2), Koukita Y(2), Nagashima M(4), Katoh R(4), Satoh Y(5), Tagami M(5),
Higuchi S(6), Ujike H(7), Ozaki N(8), Inada T(9), Iwata N(10), Sora I(11), Iyo
M(12), Kondo N(13), Won MJ(14), Naruse N(15), Uehara-Aoyama K(16), Itokawa M(17),
Koga M(18), Arinami T(18), Kaneko Y(2), Hayashida M(19), Ikeda K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Addictive Substance Project, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, 
Tokyo, Japan. (2)Division of Dental Anesthesiology, Department of Oral Health and
Clinical Science, Orofacial Pain Center Suidoubashi Hospital, Tokyo Dental
College, Tokyo, Japan. (3)1] Addictive Substance Project, Tokyo Metropolitan
Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo, Japan [2] Division of Dental Anesthesiology,
Department of Oral Health and Clinical Science, Orofacial Pain Center Suidoubashi
Hospital, Tokyo Dental College, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Surgery, Toho
University Sakura Medical Center, Sakura, Japan. (5)Department of Anesthesiology,
Toho University Sakura Medical Center, Sakura, Japan. (6)National Hospital
Organization, Kurihama Alcoholism Center, Yokosuka, Japan. (7)Ujike Nishiguchi
Clinic, Okayama, Japan. (8)Department of Psychiatry, Nagoya University Graduate
School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan. (9)Department of Psychiatry, Seiwa Hospital,
Institute of Neuropsychiatry, Tokyo, Japan. (10)Department of Psychiatry, Fujita 
Health University School of Medicine, Toyoake, Japan. (11)1] Addictive Substance 
Project, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo, Japan [2]
Department of Psychobiology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan. (12)Department of Psychiatry, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan. (13)Seimei Hospital, Fuji City, Japan. (14)Koujin
Hospital, Nagoya, Japan. (15)Saitama Seishin-iryo Center, Kita-adachi, Saitama,
Japan. (16)Kanagawa-Kenritsu Seisin Iryo Senta Serigaya Byoin, Yokohama, Japan.
(17)Schizophrenia and Depression Project, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical
Science, Tokyo, Japan. (18)Departrnent of Medical Genetics, Graduate School of
Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.
(19)Department of Anesthesiology & Pain Medicine, Juntendo University School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Opioids, such as morphine and fentanyl, are widely used as effective analgesics
for the treatment of acute and chronic pain. In addition, the opioid system has a
key role in the rewarding effects of morphine, ethanol, cocaine and various other
drugs. Although opioid sensitivity is well known to vary widely among individual 
subjects, several candidate genetic polymorphisms reported so far are not
sufficient for fully understanding the wide range of interindividual differences 
in human opioid sensitivity. By conducting a multistage genome-wide association
study (GWAS) in healthy subjects, we found that genetic polymorphisms within a
linkage disequilibrium block that spans 2q33.3-2q34 were strongly associated with
the requirements for postoperative opioid analgesics after painful cosmetic
surgery. The C allele of the best candidate single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP),
rs2952768, was associated with more analgesic requirements, and consistent
results were obtained in patients who underwent abdominal surgery. In addition,
carriers of the C allele in this SNP exhibited less vulnerability to severe drug 
dependence in patients with methamphetamine dependence, alcohol dependence, and
eating disorders and a lower 'Reward Dependence' score on a personality
questionnaire in healthy subjects. Furthermore, the C/C genotype of this SNP was 
significantly associated with the elevated expression of a neighboring gene,
CREB1. These results show that SNPs in this locus are the most potent genetic
factors associated with human opioid sensitivity known to date, affecting both
the efficacy of opioid analgesics and liability to severe substance dependence.
Our findings provide valuable information for the personalized treatment of pain 
and drug dependence.

PMCID: PMC3873034
PMID: 23183491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Neurosci Lett. 2013 Feb 8;534:333-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.11.025. Epub 2012
Nov 23.

Transcriptional regulation of mouse neuroglobin gene by cyclic AMP responsive
element binding protein (CREB) in N2a cells.

Liu N(1), Yu Z, Li Y, Yuan J, Zhang J, Xiang S, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroprotection Research Laboratory, Department of Neurology, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Neuroglobin (Ngb) has been demonstrated to be a novel neuroprotective protein
that protects against hypoxia/ischemia and oxidative stress-induced injury in the
nervous system. However, the regulation mechanisms of Ngb gene expression under
both normal resting and stress conditions have not been fully elucidated. The
cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CREB) is a key transcription factor 
that regulates a variety of pro-survival genes, but its role in regulating the
neuroprotective gene Ngb has not been studied. In this study we investigated the 
transcriptional regulation of mouse Ngb gene by CREB in mouse neuroblastoma cell 
line N2a. Our results showed that CREB knockdown decreased Ngb gene expression,
and overexpression of the wild-type CREB, but not the mutant CREB, significantly 
increased Ngb gene expression in N2a cells. Moreover, a cAMP response element
(CRE) site located at -854 in the promoter region of mouse Ngb gene was found to 
be responsible for both basal and CREB-induced Ngb promoter activity. Using
chromatin immunopreciptation (ChIP) assays, we found that CREB could bind to the 
Ngb promoter region spanning from -1016 to -793 that harbors the CRE site. Taken 
together, our results suggested that transcription factor CREB participates in
the transcriptional regulation of mouse Ngb gene.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3558625
PMID: 23182882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Behav Brain Res. 2013 Mar 1;240:11-20. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2012.10.060. Epub 2012 
Nov 19.

Inhibition of phosphodiesterase-5 rescues age-related impairment of synaptic
plasticity and memory.

Palmeri A(1), Privitera L, Giunta S, Loreto C, Puzzo D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bio-Medical Sciences - Section of Physiology, University of
Catania, Catania, 95125, Italy.

Aging is characterized by a progressive cognitive decline that leads to memory
impairment. Because the cyclic nucleotide cascade is essential for the integrity 
of synaptic function and memory, and it is down-regulated during aging and in
neurodegenerative disorders, we investigated whether an increase in cGMP levels
might rescue age-related synaptic and memory deficits in mice. We demonstrated
that acute perfusion with the phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor sildenafil (50 nM)
ameliorated long-term potentiation in hippocampal slices from 26-30-month-old
mice. Moreover, chronic intraperitoneal injection of sildenafil (3mg/kg for 3
weeks) improved age-related spatial learning and reference memory as tested by
the Morris Water Maze, and recognition memory as tested by the Object Recognition
Test. Finally, sildenafil restored central cAMP responsive element-binding
protein (CREB) phosphorylation, which is crucial for synaptic plasticity and
memory. Our data suggest that inhibition of phosphodiesterase-5 may be beneficial
to treat age-related cognitive dysfunction in a physiological mouse model of
aging.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23174209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Transl Psychiatry. 2012 Nov 20;2:e192. doi: 10.1038/tp.2012.119.

Integrated copy number and gene expression analysis detects a CREB1 association
with Alzheimer's disease.

Li Y(1), Shaw CA, Sheffer I, Sule N, Powell SZ, Dawson B, Zaidi SN, Bucasas KL,
Lupski JR, Wilhelmsen KC, Doody R, Szigeti K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Alzheimer's Disease and Memory Disorders Center,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Genetic variation, both single-nucleotide variations and copy number variations
(CNV), contribute to changes in gene expression. In some cases these variations
are meaningfully correlated with disease states. We hypothesized that in a
genetically heterogeneous disorder such as sporadic Alzheimer's disease (AD),
utilizing gene expression as a quantitative trait and CNVs as a genetic marker
map within the same individuals in the context of case-control status may
increase the power to detect relevant loci. Using this approach an 8-kb deletion 
was identified that contains a PAX6-binding site on chr2q33.3 upstream of CREB1
encoding the cAMP responsive element-binding protein1 transcription factor. The
association of the CNV to AD was confirmed by a case-control association study
consisting of the Texas Alzheimer Research and Care Consortium and NIA-LOAD
Family Study data sets.

PMCID: PMC3565761
PMID: 23168992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49298. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049298. Epub 2012 Nov 7.

Identification of sumoylation sites in CCDC6, the first identified RET partner
gene in papillary thyroid carcinoma, uncovers a mode of regulating CCDC6 function
on CREB1 transcriptional activity.

Luise C(1), Merolla F, Leone V, Paladino S, Sarnataro D, Fusco A, Celetti A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale, CNR, Università Federico
II, Naples, Italy.

CCDC6 was originally identified in chimeric genes as caused by chromosomal
translocation involving the RET protooncogene in some thyroid tumors. Recognised 
as a 65 kDa pro-apoptotic phosphoprotein, CCDC6 has been enrolled as an ATM
substrate that contribute to protect genome integrity by modulating PP4c activity
in response to genotoxic stress. Recently, CCDC6 has been identified as a
repressor of CREB1-dependent transcription. Sumoylation has emerged as an
important mechanism in transcriptional control. Here, we report the
identification and characterization of three sites of sumoylation in CCDC6 (K74, 
K266 and K424) which are highly conserved in vertebrates. We demonstrate that the
post-translational modifications by SUMO2 constrain most of the CCDC6 protein in 
the cytosol and affect its functional interaction with CREB1 with a decrease of
CCDC6 repressive function on CREB1 transcriptional activity. Indeed, the
impairment of functional outcome of sumoylated CCDC6 is obtained knocking down
all three the sumoylation sites. Interestingly, in thyroid cells the
SUMO2-mediated CCDC6 post-translational modifications are induced by Forskolin, a
cAMP analog. Signal transduction via the cAMP pathway is known to be ubiquitous
and represents a major line of communication between many organisms and their
environment. We believe that CCDC6 could be an important player in the dynamics
of cAMP signaling by fine regulating CREB1 transcriptional activity in normal and
transformed thyroid cells.

PMCID: PMC3492267
PMID: 23145146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Histochem Cell Biol. 2013 Apr;139(4):615-20. doi: 10.1007/s00418-012-1047-8. Epub
2012 Nov 10.

Transcription factor CREB is phosphorylated in human molar odontoblasts and
cementoblasts in vivo.

Klinz FJ(1), Korkmaz Y, Cho B, Raab WH, Addicks K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy I, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9,
50931, Cologne, Germany. franzjosef.klinz@uni-koeln.de

A wide variety of stimuli can trigger activation of the transcription factor CREB
(cAMP-responsive element binding protein), pointing toward a central role for
CREB in the integration of various signaling inputs. No data are available on the
expression and phosphorylation of CREB in mammalian teeth. Using
immunohistochemical analysis of free-floating sections, we show here that CREB
was strongly expressed and phosphorylated at Ser-133 within the nucleus of a
subpopulation of adult human molar odontoblasts. Many dental pulp stromal cells
and periodontal ligament fibroblasts expressed CREB and showed phosphorylation of
CREB at Ser-133. In addition, cementoblasts displayed nuclear expression and
phosphorylation of CREB at Ser-133. The epithelial rests of Malassez revealed
strong nuclear expression of CREB, but phosphorylation at Ser-133 was variable.
Our results provide the first evidence that the constitutively phosphorylated
transcription factor CREB is involved in the biomineralization process of adult
human molar odontoblasts and cementoblasts.

PMID: 23143030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 May 22;371(1-2):62-70. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2012.10.011. 
Epub 2012 Nov 5.

Transcriptional regulation of episodic glucocorticoid secretion.

Liu Y(1), Smith LI, Huang V, Poon V, Coello A, Olah M, Spiga F, Lightman SL,
Aguilera G.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Endocrine Physiology, National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Circadian and ultradian variations of basal glucocorticoid secretion and
transient elevations during stress are essential for homeostasis. Using intronic 
qRT-PCR to measure changes in primary transcript (hnRNA) we have shown that
secretory events induced by stress or ACTH injection are followed by episodic
increases in transcription of rate limiting steroidogenic proteins, such as
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR), cytochrome P450 side chain
cleavage and melanocortin receptor associated protein. These transcriptional
episodes imply rapid turnover of steroidogenic proteins and the need of de novo
synthesis following each secretory event. In addition to episodic ACTH secretion,
it is likely that intracellular feedback mechanisms at the adrenal fasciculata
level contribute to the generation of episodes of transcription. The time
relationship between activation and translocation of the CREB co-activator,
transducer of regulated CREB activity (TORC) to the nucleus preceding
transcriptional episodes suggest the involvement of TORC in the transcriptional
activation of StAR and other steroidogenic proteins.

Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3582781
PMID: 23138111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Biol Pharm Bull. 2013;36(1):82-8. Epub 2012 Nov 5.

Angelica keiskei ameliorates scopolamine-induced memory impairments in mice.

Oh SR(1), Kim SJ, Kim DH, Ryu JH, Ahn EM, Jung JW.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Keimyung University, Sindang-dong, Dalseo-gu, Dae-gu
704701, Republic of Korea.

Memory impairment is the most common symptom in patients with Alzheimer's disease
(AD). Angelica keiskei (AK) has traditionally been used as a diuretic, laxative, 
analeptic and galactagogue. However, the anti-amnesic effects of AK and its
molecular mechanisms have yet to be clearly elucidated. The aim of the present
study is to evaluate the effects of AK on scopolamine-induced memory impairments 
in mice. The regulatory effect of AK on memory impairment was investigated using 
passive avoidance, Y-maze and the Morris water maze tasks. Acetylcholinesterase
(AChE) activity assay was performed to investigate the cholinergic antagonistic
effect of AK in the hippocampus. The effect of AK on phosphorylation of cAMP
response element-binding protein (CREB) and expression of brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) were evaluated by Western blot assays and
immunohistochemistry. The findings showed that AK significantly attenuated
scopolamine-induced cognitive impairment in mice. Increase of AChE activity
caused by scopolamine was significantly attenuated by AK. Additionally, AK
significantly recovered the phosphorylation of CREB and expression of BDNF
reduced by scopolamine in the hippocampus. Taken together, these results provide 
experimental evidence that AK might be a useful agent in preventing deficit of
learning and memory caused by AD and aging.

PMID: 23132631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Vasc Surg. 2013 Jan;57(1):182-93, 193.e1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2012.06.082.
Epub 2012 Nov 3.

Cyclic adenosine monophosphate response-element binding protein activation by
mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated protein kinase 3 and four-and-a-half
LIM domains 5 plays a key role for vein graft intimal hyperplasia.

Nakanishi K(1), Saito Y, Azuma N, Sasajima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Asahikawa Medical University, Hokkaido, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Intimal hyperplasia (IH) is the main cause of vein graft stenosis or
failure after bypass surgery. Basic investigations are proceeding in an animal
model of mechanically desquamated arteries, and numerous molecules for potential 
IH treatments have been identified; however, neither insights into the mechanism 
of IH nor substantially effective treatments for its suppression have been
developed. The goals of the present study are to use human vein graft samples to 
identify therapeutic target genes that control IH and to investigate the
therapeutic efficacy of these candidate molecules in animal models.
METHODS: Using microarray analysis of human vein graft samples, we identified two
previously unrecognized IH-related genes, mitogen-activated protein
kinase-activated protein kinase 3 (MAPKAPK3) and four-and-a-half LIM domains 5
(FHL5).
RESULTS: Transfer of either candidate gene resulted in significantly elevated
vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) proliferation and migration. Interestingly,
cotransfection of both genes increased VSMC proliferation in an additive manner. 
These genes activated cyclic adenosine monophosphate response-element (CRE)
binding protein (CREB), but their mechanisms of activation were different.
MAPKAPK3 phosphorylated CREB, but FHL5 bound directly to CREB. A CREB
dominant-negative protein, KCREB, which blocks its ability to bind CRE, repressed
VSMC proliferation and migration. In a wire-injury mouse model, gene transfer of 
KCREB plasmid significantly repressed IH. In this vessel tissue, CRE-activated
gene expression was repressed. Furthermore, we confirmed the changes in MAPKAPK3 
and FHL5 expression using vein graft samples from eight patients.
CONCLUSIONS: We successively identified two previously unrecognized IH
activators, MAPKAPK3 and FHL5, using human vein graft samples. Gene transfer of
KCREB repressed IH in an animal model. Inhibition of CREB function is a promising
gene therapy strategy for IH.

Copyright © 2013 Society for Vascular Surgery. Published by Mosby, Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 23127979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Eur J Neurosci. 2013 Jan;37(1):130-40. doi: 10.1111/ejn.12028. Epub 2012 Nov 6.

Mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase 1 modulates photic entrainment of
the suprachiasmatic circadian clock.

Cao R(1), Butcher GQ, Karelina K, Arthur JS, Obrietan K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.

The master circadian clock in mammals, the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), is
under the entraining influence of the external light cycle. At a mechanistic
level, intracellular signaling via the p42/44 mitogen-activated protein kinase
pathway appears to play a central role in light-evoked clock entrainment;
however, the precise downstream mechanisms by which this pathway influences clock
timing are not known. Within this context, we have previously reported that light
stimulates activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase effector
mitogen-stress-activated kinase 1 (MSK1) in the SCN. In this study, we utilised
MSK1(-/-) mice to further investigate the potential role of MSK1 in circadian
clock timing and entrainment. Locomotor activity analysis revealed that MSK1 null
mice entrained to a 12 h light/dark cycle and exhibited circadian free-running
rhythms in constant darkness. Interestingly, the free-running period in MSK1 null
mice was significantly longer than in wild-type control animals, and MSK1 null
mice exhibited a significantly greater variance in activity onset. Further, MSK1 
null mice exhibited a significant reduction in the phase-delaying response to an 
early night light pulse (100 lux, 15 min), and, using an 8 h phase-advancing
'jet-lag' experimental paradigm, MSK1 knockout animals exhibited a significantly 
delayed rate of re-entrainment. At the molecular level, early night light-evoked 
cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation, histone
phosphorylation and Period1 gene expression were markedly attenuated in MSK1(-/-)
animals relative to wild-type mice. Together, these data provide key new insights
into the molecular mechanisms by which MSK1 affects the SCN clock.

© 2012 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing
Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3575747
PMID: 23127194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Nov 30;428(4):475-81. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.10.083. Epub 2012 Oct 30.

Hypothermia-dependent and -independent effects of forced swim on the
phosphorylation states of signaling molecules in mouse hippocampus.

Hayashi Y(1), Kusakari S, Sato-Hashimoto M, Urano E, Shigeno M, Sekijima T,
Kotani T, Murata Y, Murakami H, Matozaki T, Ohnishi H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biosignal Sciences, Institute for Molecular and Cellular
Regulation, Gunma University, 3-39-15 Showa-Machi, Maebashi, Gunma 371-8512,
Japan.

Forced swim (FS) stress induces diverse biochemical responses in the brain of
rodents. Here, we examined the effect of hypothermia induced by FS in cold water 
on the phosphorylation of FS-sensitive signaling molecules in the mouse brain. As
we have shown previously, FS in cold water induced a significant increase in the 
level of tyrosine phosphorylation of SIRPa, a neuronal membrane protein, in mouse
hippocampus, while such effect of FS was markedly reduced in mice subjected to FS
in warm water. FS in cold water also induced phosphorylation of mitogen-activated
protein kinase kinase (MEK) as well as of cAMP response element-binding protein
(CREB), or dephosphorylation of a isoform of Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein 
kinase II (aCaMKII) in the hippocampus. These effects of FS on the
phosphorylation of these molecules were also lost in mice subjected to FS in warm
water. Genetic ablation of SIRPa did not change the phosphorylation states of
these molecules in the brain. Forced cooling of anesthetized mice, which induced 
a marked increase in the phosphorylation of SIRPa, induced dephosphorylation of
aCaMKII in the brain, while the same treatment did not affect the phosphorylation
level of MEK and CREB. Hibernation also induced an increase and a decrease of the
phosphorylation of SIRPa and aCaMKII, respectively, in the brain of chipmunk.
These results suggest that hypothermia is a major element that determines the
levels of phosphorylation of aCaMKII and SIRPa during the FS in cold water, while
it is not for the phosphorylation levels of MEK and CREB.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23122813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2013 Jan;99:10-6. doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2012.10.008. Epub 2012 
Oct 27.

Lentivirus-mediated chronic expression of dominant-negative CREB in the dorsal
hippocampus impairs memory for place learning and contextual fear conditioning.

Kathirvelu B(1), East BS, Hill AR, Smith CA, Colombo PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70118, USA.
bkathirv@tulane.edu

Extensive research has shown that the transcription factor CREB has an important 
role during memory formation. In the present study, we tested a new method for
chronic, stable expression of a dominant-negative form of CREB (mCREB) in the
dorsal hippocampus using lentiviral vectors. In specific, we tested whether
lentivirus-mediated chronic expression of mutant CREB impairs memory for two
hippocampus-dependent tasks - place training in the water maze and contextual
fear conditioning. Two weeks following intra-hippocampal infusion, experimental
(mCREB) and control (LacZ and saline) rats were trained for 30 trials in one
session on a place task in a water plus-maze and tested for an additional 30
trials on day 2 and on day 7. On day 8, all rats were trained on a contextual
fear conditioning task and tested 24h later. For place learning, there was no
difference between treatment groups on day 1, indicating that treatment with the 
lentiviral vectors did not alter performance or acquisition of the task. In
comparisons with controls, mCREB-treated rats were not significantly impaired on 
day 2, overall, but they showed significant impairment on day 7. Contextual fear 
memory was impaired in mCREB-infused rats in comparison with controls. At the end
of the experiment, total CREB and phosphorylated CREB protein were measured by
western blot. Levels of total CREB were increased by approximately 40% among
mCREB-treated rats in comparisons with controls, whereas levels of pCREB did not 
differ between groups, suggesting that the treatment caused significant
expression of mCREB. In addition, mCREB infused rats showed a significant
reduction in the pCREB to CREB ratio in comparison with controls, suggesting that
the memory deficit seen in mCREB rats is most likely due to disruption of gene
regulation caused by expression of mutant CREB. Taken together, the present
results show that lentivirus expressing mCREB can be used to effectively alter
CREB function within the hippocampus and that the treatment impairs memory for
hippocampus-dependent tasks.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23110949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Bioorg Med Chem. 2012 Dec 1;20(23):6811-20. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2012.09.056. Epub 
2012 Oct 4.

Structure-activity relationship studies of naphthol AS-E and its derivatives as
anticancer agents by inhibiting CREB-mediated gene transcription.

Li BX(1), Yamanaka K, Xiao X.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Chemical Biology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR,
USA.

CREB (cyclic AMP-response element binding protein) is a downstream transcription 
factor of a multitude of signaling pathways emanating from receptor tyrosine
kinases or G-protein coupled receptors. CREB is not activated until it is
phosphorylated at Ser133 and its subsequent binding to CREB-binding protein (CBP)
through kinase-inducible domain (KID) in CREB and KID-interacting (KIX) domain in
CBP. Tumor tissues from various organs present higher level of expression and
activation of CREB. Thus CREB has been proposed as a promising cancer drug
target. We previously described naphthol AS-E (1a) as a small molecule inhibitor 
of CREB-mediated gene transcription in living cells. Here we report the
structure-activity relationship (SAR) studies of 1a by modifying the appendant
phenyl ring. All the compounds were evaluated for in vitro inhibition of KIX-KID 
interaction, cellular inhibition of CREB-mediated gene transcription and
inhibition of proliferation of four cancer cell lines (A549, MCF-7, MDA-MB-231
and MDA-MB-468). SAR indicated that a small and electron-withdrawing group was
preferred at the para-position for KIX-KID interaction inhibition. Compound 1a
was selected for further biological characterization and it was found that 1a
down-regulated the expression of endogenous CREB target genes. Expression of a
constitutively active CREB mutant, VP16-CREB in MCF-7 cells rendered the cells
resistant to 1a, suggesting that CREB was critical in mediating its anticancer
activity. Furthermore, 1a was not toxic to normal human cells. Collectively,
these data support that 1a represents a structural template for further
development into potential cancer therapeutics with a novel mechanism of action.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3587690
PMID: 23102993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Haematologica. 2013 Apr;98(4):602-10. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.070664. Epub
2012 Oct 25.

MicroRNA-34b promoter hypermethylation induces CREB overexpression and
contributes to myeloid transformation.

Pigazzi M(1), Manara E, Bresolin S, Tregnago C, Beghin A, Baron E, Giarin E, Cho 
EC, Masetti R, Rao DS, Sakamoto KM, Basso G.

Author information: 
(1)Women and Child Health Department, Hematology-Oncology Laboratory, University 
of Padova, Padova, Italy. martina.pigazzi@unipd.it

MicroRNA-34b down-regulation in acute myeloid leukemia was previously shown to
induce CREB overexpression, thereby causing leukemia proliferation in vitro and
in vivo. The role of microRNA-34b and CREB in patients with myeloid malignancies 
has never been evaluated. We examined microRNA-34b expression and the methylation
status of its promoter in cells from patients diagnosed with myeloid
malignancies. We used gene expression profiling to identify signatures of myeloid
transformation. We established that microRNA-34b has suppressor ability and that 
CREB has oncogenic potential in primary bone marrow cell cultures and in vivo.
MicroRNA-34b was found to be up-regulated in pediatric patients with juvenile
myelomonocytic leukemia (n=17) and myelodysplastic syndromes (n=28), but was
down-regulated in acute myeloid leukemia patients at diagnosis (n=112). Our
results showed that hypermethylation of the microRNA-34b promoter occurred in 66%
of cases of acute myeloid leukemia explaining the low microRNA-34b levels and
CREB overexpression, whereas preleukemic myelodysplastic syndromes and juvenile
myelomonocytic leukemia were not associated with hypermethylation or CREB
overexpression. In paired samples taken from the same patients when they had
myelodysplastic syndrome and again during the subsequent acute myeloid leukemia, 
we confirmed microRNA-34b promoter hypermethylation at leukemia onset, with 103
CREB target genes differentially expressed between the two disease stages. This
subset of CREB targets was confirmed to associate with high-risk myelodysplastic 
syndromes in a separate cohort of patients (n=20). Seventy-eight of these 103
CREB targets were also differentially expressed between healthy samples (n=11)
and de novo acute myeloid leukemia (n=72). Further, low microRNA-34b and high
CREB expression levels induced aberrant myelopoiesis through CREB-dependent
pathways in vitro and in vivo. In conclusion, we suggest that microRNA-34b
controls CREB expression and contributes to myeloid transformation from both
healthy bone marrow and myelodysplastic syndromes. We identified a subset of CREB
target genes that represents a novel transcriptional network that may control
myeloid transformation.

PMCID: PMC3659992
PMID: 23100280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Neurotoxicology. 2013 Jan;34:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2012.10.010. Epub 2012 Oct
22.

Sex differences in effects of low level domoic acid exposure.

Baron AW(1), Rushton SP, Rens N, Morris CM, Blain PG, Judge SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Toxicology Centre, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4AA, 
UK. andrew.baron@ncl.ac.uk

Consumption of seafood containing the phytoplankton-derived toxin domoic acid
(DOM) causes neurotoxicity in humans and in animals. It has been reported that
DOM-induced symptoms may be more severe in men than women, but to date the effect
of sex on DOM-induced effects in adults is not known. We investigated sex
differences in DOM-induced effects in adult rats. Since low level exposure is of 
greatest relevance to human health (due to DOM regulatory limit), we examined the
effects of low level exposure. Adult male and female Sprague Dawley rats were
administered a single intraperitoneal injection of DOM (0, 1.0, 1.8 mg/kg).
Behaviour was monitored for 3h and immunohistochemistry in the dorsal hippocampus
and olfactory bulb was also examined. DOM increased locomotor and grooming
activity, compared to vehicle group. DOM exposure also significantly increased
stereotypic behaviours and decreased phosphorylated cAMP response element-binding
protein immunoreactivity (pCREB-IR). There was no effect of sex on the magnitude 
of the behavioural responses, but the onset of DOM-induced locomotor activity and
ear scratches was quicker in females than in males. Mixed effect modelling
revealed the predicted peak in locomotor activity in response to DOM was also
quicker in females than in males. Severe toxicity was evident in 2/7 male rats
and 0/8 female rats dosed with 1.8 mg/kg DOM. These data suggest that males
exposed to low level DOM may be more susceptible to severe neurotoxicity, whereas
females are affected more quickly. Understanding sex differences in DOM-induced
neurotoxicity may contribute to future protective strategies and treatments.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23099319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Genes Immun. 2013 Jan;14(1):19-34. doi: 10.1038/gene.2012.49. Epub 2012 Oct 25.

Transcriptome characterization of immune suppression from battlefield-like
stress.

Muhie S(1), Hammamieh R, Cummings C, Yang D, Jett M.

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Systems Biology Program, US Army Center for Environmental Health
Research, Fort Detrick, MD 21702-5010, USA.

Transcriptome alterations of leukocytes from soldiers who underwent 8 weeks of
Army Ranger training (RASP, Ranger Assessment and Selection Program) were
analyzed to evaluate impacts of battlefield-like stress on the immune response.
About 1400 transcripts were differentially expressed between pre- and post-RASP
leukocytes. Upon functional analysis, immune response was the most enriched
biological process, and most of the transcripts associated with the immune
response were downregulated. Microbial pattern recognition, chemotaxis, antigen
presentation and T-cell activation were among the most downregulated immune
processes. Transcription factors predicted to be stress-inhibited (IRF7, RELA,
NF<U+03BA>B1, CREB1, IRF1 and HMGB) regulated genes involved in inflammation, maturation
of dendritic cells and glucocorticoid receptor signaling. Many altered
transcripts were predicted to be targets of stress-regulated microRNAs. Post-RASP
leukocytes exposed ex vivo to Staphylococcal enterotoxin B showed a markedly
impaired immune response to this superantigen compared with pre-RASP leukocytes, 
consistent with the suppression of the immune response revealed by transcriptome 
analyses. Our results suggest that suppression of antigen presentation and
lymphocyte activation pathways, in the setting of normal blood cell counts, most 
likely contribute to the poor vaccine response, impaired wound healing and
infection susceptibility associated with chronic intense stress.

PMCID: PMC3564018
PMID: 23096155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Dec 14;287(51):42574-87. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.376590. Epub
2012 Oct 18.

Neuron-restrictive silencer factor (NRSF) represses cocaine- and
amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART) transcription and antagonizes
cAMP-response element-binding protein signaling through a dual NRSE mechanism.

Zhang J(1), Wang S, Yuan L, Yang Y, Zhang B, Liu Q, Chen L, Yue W, Li Y, Pei X.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine Laboratory, Beijing Institute of
Transfusion Medicine, Beijing 100850, China.

Cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART) peptide plays a pivotal role
in neuroprotection against stroke-related brain injury. However, the regulatory
mechanism on CART transcription, especially the repression mechanism, is not
fully understood. Here, we show that the transcriptional repressor
neuron-restrictive silencer elements (NRSF, also known as REST) represses CART
expression through direct binding to two NRSF-binding elements (NRSEs) in the
CART promoter and intron 1 (named pNRSE and iNRSE, respectively). EMSA show that 
NRSF binds to pNRSE and iNRSE directly in vitro. ChIP assays show that NRSF
recruits differential co-repressor complexes including CoREST and HDAC1 to these 
NRSEs. The presence of both NRSEs is required for efficient repression of CART
transcription as indicated by reporter gene assays. NRSF overexpression
antagonizes forskolin-mediated up-regulation of CART mRNA and protein. Ischemia
insult triggered by oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD) enhances NRSF mRNA levels
and then NRSF antagonizes the CREB signaling on CART activation, leading to
augmented cell death. Depletion of NRSF in combination with forskolin treatment
increases neuronal survival after ischemic insult. These findings reveal a novel 
dual NRSE mechanism by which NRSF represses CART expression and suggest that NRSF
may serve as a therapeutic target for stroke treatment.

PMCID: PMC3522259
PMID: 23086924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012 Dec 15;53(12):2318-26. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.10.528. Epub 2012 Oct 16.

Expression of the a-tocopherol transfer protein gene is regulated by oxidative
stress and common single-nucleotide polymorphisms.

Ulatowski L(1), Dreussi C(1), Noy N(2), Barnholtz-Sloan J(3), Klein E(4), Manor
D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. (3)Department of
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. (4)Glickman Urological Institute, Cleveland
Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. (5)Department of Nutrition, School
of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA;
Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. Electronic address: dxm178@case.edu.

Vitamin E (a-tocopherol) is the major lipid-soluble antioxidant in most animal
species. By controlling the secretion of vitamin E from the liver, the
a-tocopherol transfer protein regulates whole-body distribution and levels of
this vital nutrient. However, the mechanism(s) that regulates the expression of
this protein is poorly understood. Here we report that transcription of the TTPA 
gene in immortalized human hepatocytes is induced by oxidative stress and by
hypoxia, by agonists of the nuclear receptors PPARa and RXR, and by increased
cAMP levels. The data show further that induction of TTPA transcription by
oxidative stress is mediated by an already-present transcription factor and does 
not require de novo protein synthesis. Silencing of the cAMP response
element-binding (CREB) transcription factor attenuated transcriptional responses 
of the TTPA gene to added peroxide, suggesting that CREB mediates responses of
this gene to oxidative stress. Using a 1.9-kb proximal segment of the human TTPA 
promoter together with a site-directed mutagenesis approach, we found that
single-nucleotide polymorphisms that are commonly found in healthy humans
dramatically affect promoter activity. These observations suggest that oxidative 
stress and individual genetic makeup contribute to vitamin E homeostasis in
humans. These findings may explain the variable responses to vitamin E
supplementation observed in human clinical trials.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3612136
PMID: 23079030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Pharmacol Sci. 2012;120(3):176-86. Epub 2012 Oct 16.

Imipramine induces brain-derived neurotrophic factor mRNA expression in cultured 
astrocytes.

Takano K(1), Yamasaki H, Kawabe K, Moriyama M, Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Integrative Physiology in Veterinary Sciences, Osaka Prefecture 
University, Izumisano, Osaka, Japan. takano@vet.osakafu-u.ac.jp

Depression is one of the most prevalent and livelihood-threatening forms of
mental illnesses and the neural circuitry underlying depression remains
incompletely understood. Recent studies suggest that the neuronal plasticity
involved with brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) plays an important role in
the recovery from depression. Some antidepressants are reported to induce BDNF
expression in vivo; however, the mechanisms have been considered solely in
neurons and not fully elucidated. In the present study, we evaluated the effects 
of imipramine, a classic tricyclic antidepressant drug, on BDNF expression in
cultured rat brain astrocytes. Imipramine dose-dependently increased BDNF mRNA
expression in astrocytes. The imipramine-induced BDNF increase was suppressed
with inhibitors for protein kinase A (PKA) or MEK/ERK. Moreover, imipramine
exposure activated transcription factor cAMP response element binding protein
(CREB) in a dose-dependent manner. These results suggested that imipramine
induced BDNF expression through CREB activation via PKA and/or ERK pathways.
Imipramine treatment in depression might exert antidepressant action through BDNF
production from astrocytes, and glial BDNF expression might be a target of
developing novel antidepressants.

PMID: 23076128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Neurochem Int. 2012 Dec;61(8):1404-16. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2012.10.005. Epub
2012 Oct 13.

Potentiation of dopamine D1-like receptor signaling by concomitant activation of 
d- and µ-opioid receptors in mouse medial prefrontal cortex.

Olianas MC(1), Dedoni S, Onali P.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Neurosciences, Department of Biomedical Sciences University of
Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.

Opioid receptors located in the ventral tegmental area are known to regulate
dopamine (DA) release from mesocortical afferents to medial prefrontal cortex
(mPFC) but little is known on whether in this cortical region activation of
opioid receptors affect DA receptor signaling. In the present study we show that 
in mouse mPFC concomitant activation of either d- or µ-opioid receptors, but not 
<U+03BA>-opioid receptors, potentiated DA D1-like receptor-induced stimulation of
adenylyl cyclase activity through a G protein ß<U+03B3> subunit-dependent mechanism. In 
tissue slices of mPFC, the combined addition of the opioid agonist leu-enkephalin
and the DA D1-like receptor agonist SKF 81297 produced more than additive
increase in the phosphorylation state of AMPA and NMDA receptor subunits GluR1
and NR1, respectively. Moreover, in primary cultures of mouse frontal cortex
neurons, DA D1-like receptor-induced Ser133 phosphorylation of the transcription 
factor cyclic AMP responsive element binding protein was potentiated by
concurrent stimulation of opioid receptors. Double immunofluorescence analysis of
cultured cortical cells indicated that a large percentage of DA D1 receptor
positive cells expressed either d- or µ-opioid receptor immunoreactivity. These
data indicate that in mouse mPFC activation of µ- and d-opioid receptors enhances
DA D1-like receptor signaling likely through converging regulatory inputs on
ß<U+03B3>-stimulated adenylyl cyclase isoforms. This previously unrecognized synergistic
interaction may selectively affect DA D1 transmission at specific postsynaptic
sites where the receptors are co-localized and may play a role in prefrontal DA
D1 regulation of opioid addiction.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23073238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47522. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047522. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

Evidence for a developmental role for TLR4 in learning and memory.

Okun E(1), Barak B, Saada-Madar R, Rothman SM, Griffioen KJ, Roberts N, Castro K,
Mughal MR, Pita MA, Stranahan AM, Arumugam TV, Mattson MP.

Author information: 
(1)The Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, The Leslie and Susan
Gonda Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan,
Israel. eitan.okun@biu.ac.il

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play essential roles in innate immunity and increasing
evidence indicates that these receptors are expressed in neurons, astrocytes and 
microglia in the brain where they mediate responses to infection, stress and
injury. Very little is known about the roles of TLRs in cognition. To test the
hypothesis that TLR4 has a role in hippocampus-dependent spatial learning and
memory, we used mice deficient for TLR4 and mice receiving chronic TLR4
antagonist infusion to the lateral ventricles in the brain. We found that
developmental TLR4 deficiency enhances spatial reference memory acquisition and
memory retention, impairs contextual fear-learning and enhances motor functions, 
traits that were correlated with CREB up-regulation in the hippocampus. TLR4
antagonist infusion into the cerebral ventricles of adult mice did not affect
cognitive behavior, but instead affected anxiety responses. Our findings indicate
a developmental role for TLR4 in shaping spatial reference memory, and fear
learning and memory. Moreover, we show that central TLR4 inhibition using a TLR4 
antagonist has no discernible physiological role in regulating spatial and
contextual hippocampus-dependent cognitive behavior.

PMCID: PMC3469493
PMID: 23071817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47378. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047378. Epub 2012 Oct 9.

Transcriptional changes following long-term sensitization training and in vivo
serotonin exposure in Aplysia californica.

Bonnick K(1), Bayas K, Belchenko D, Cyriac A, Dove M, Lass J, McBride B,
Calin-Jageman IE, Calin-Jageman RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Program, Dominican University, River Forest, Illinois, United
States of America.

We used Aplysia californica to compare the transcriptional changes evoked by
long-term sensitization training and by a treatment meant to mimic this training,
in vivo exposure to serotonin. We focused on 5 candidate plasticity genes which
are rapidly up-regulated in the Aplysia genus by in vivo serotonin treatment, but
which have not yet been tested for regulation during sensitization: CREB1,
matrilin, antistasin, eIF3e, and BAT1 homolog. CREB1 was rapidly up-regulated by 
both treatments, but the regulation following training was transient, falling
back to control levels 24 hours after training. This suggests some caution in
interpreting the proposed role of CREB1 in consolidating long-term sensitization 
memory. Both matrilin and eIF3e were up-regulated by in vivo serotonin but not by
long-term sensitization training. This suggests that in vivo serotonin may
produce generalized transcriptional effects that are not specific to long-term
sensitization learning. Finally, neither treatment produced regulation of
antistasin or BAT1 homolog, transcripts regulated by in vivo serotonin in the
closely related Aplysia kurodai. This suggests either that these transcripts are 
not regulated by experience, or that transcriptional mechanisms of memory may
vary within the Aplysia genus.

PMCID: PMC3467254
PMID: 23056638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Neurosci. 2012 Oct 10;32(41):14389-401. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3408-12.2012.

Layer-specific CREB target gene induction in human neocortical epilepsy.

Beaumont TL(1), Yao B, Shah A, Kapatos G, Loeb JA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

Epilepsy is a disorder of recurrent seizures that affects 1% of the population.
To understand why some areas of cerebral cortex produce seizures and others do
not, we identified differentially expressed genes in human epileptic neocortex
compared with nearby regions that did not produce seizures. The transcriptome
that emerged strongly implicates MAPK signaling and CREB-dependent transcription,
with 74% of differentially expressed genes containing a cAMP response element
(CRE) in their proximal promoter, more than half of which are conserved. Despite 
the absence of recent seizures in these patients, epileptic brain regions prone
to seizures showed persistent activation of ERK and CREB. Persistent CREB
activation was directly linked to CREB-dependent gene transcription by chromatin 
immunoprecipitation that showed phosphorylated CREB constitutively associated
with the proximal promoters of many of the induced target genes involved in
neuronal signaling, excitability, and synaptic plasticity. A distinct spatial
pattern of ERK activation was seen in superficial axodendritic processes of
epileptic neocortex that colocalized with both CREB phosphorylation and CREB
target gene induction in well demarcated populations of layer 2/3 neurons. These 
same neuronal lamina showed a marked increase in synaptic density. The findings
generated in this study generate a robust and spatially restricted pattern of
epileptic biomarkers and associated synaptic changes that could lead to new
mechanistic insights and potential therapeutic targets for human epilepsy.

PMCID: PMC3478758
PMID: 23055509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Arch Toxicol. 2013 Mar;87(3):469-79. doi: 10.1007/s00204-012-0947-7. Epub 2012
Oct 4.

Neuropeptide Y Y1 receptor knockdown can modify glutathione peroxidase and c-AMP 
response element-binding protein in phenylpropanolamine-treated rats.

Hsieh YS(1), Chen PN, Kuo MH, Kuo DY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Chung Shan Medical University and
Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung City, 40201, Taiwan, ROC.

It has been reported that antioxidative enzymes, neuropeptide Y (NPY), and c-AMP 
response element-binding protein (CREB) are involved in regulating
phenylpropanolamine (PPA)-mediated appetite suppression. Here, we investigated
whether Y1 receptor (Y1R) might be involved in this regulation. Rats were daily
treated with PPA for 4 days. Changes in the contents of NPY, Y1R, glutathione
peroxidase (GP), and CREB were assessed and compared. Results showed that Y1R,
GP, and CREB increased, with a maximal increase about 100, 200, and 150 %,
respectively, on Day 2. By contrast, NPY decreased with a biggest reduction about
48 % on Day 2 and the pattern of expression during PPA treatment was opposite to 
those of Y1R, GP, and CREB. Central knockdown (using antisense) or inhibition
(using antagonist) of Y1R expression modulated the anorectic response of PPA and 
the reciprocal regulation between NPY and GP (or CREB), revealing an essential
role of Y1R in regulating NPY, GP, and CREB. These results suggest that Y1R
participates in the reciprocal regulation of NPY, GP, and CREB in the
hypothalamus during PPA treatment in conscious rats. The present results may aid 
the therapeutic research of PPA and related antiobesity drugs.

PMID: 23052195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Am J Pathol. 2012 Dec;181(6):1903-10. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.08.024. Epub
2012 Oct 4.

The onco-embryonic antigen ROR1 is expressed by a variety of human cancers.

Zhang S(1), Chen L, Wang-Rodriguez J, Zhang L, Cui B, Frankel W, Wu R, Kipps TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Moores UCSD Cancer Center, University of California-San Diego, 3855 Health
Sciences Dr. #0820, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

ROR1 is an orphan-receptor tyrosine-kinase-like surface antigen that is expressed
by many tissues during embryogenesis, some B-cell malignancies, and various
cancer cell lines but not by virtually all normal adult tissues. Here, we report 
that large proportions of many different human cancers also express ROR1,
particularly those cancers that have high-grade histology. Primary cancers that
expressed ROR1 more commonly expressed high levels of phosphorylated AKT (p-AKT) 
and phosphorylated cAMP response element binding-factor (p-CREB) than similar
cancers that lacked expression of ROR1. Induced expression of ROR1 could enhance 
basal p-AKT and p-CREB levels and could promote the growth of a cancer cell line,
MEC1. Conversely, silencing ROR1 resulted in lower levels of p-AKT and p-CREB,
which was associated with impaired tumor cell growth. In summary, this study
found that many different human cancers express ROR1 and that ROR1 may play a
functional role in promoting tumor cell growth, suggesting that this
orphan-receptor tyrosine-kinase-like protein may be a potential target for
therapy directed against a variety of human cancers.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3509760
PMID: 23041612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 16;287(47):39859-68. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.384248. Epub
2012 Oct 4.

Rit-mediated stress resistance involves a p38-mitogen- and stress-activated
protein kinase 1 (MSK1)-dependent cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB)
activation cascade.

Shi GX(1), Cai W, Andres DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, University of Kentucky
College of Medicine, Lexington, Kentucky 40536-0509, USA. gshi2@uky.edu

The cAMP response element (CRE)-binding protein (CREB) is a key regulatory factor
of gene transcription, and plays an essential role in development of the central 
nervous system and for neuroprotection. Multiple signaling pathways have been
shown to contribute to the regulation of CREB-dependent transcription, including 
both ERK and p38 mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases cascades. Recent studies
have identified the Ras-related small G-protein, Rit, as a central regulator of a
p38-MK2-HSP27 signaling cascade that functions as a critical survival mechanism
for cells adapting to stress. Here, we examine the contribution of Rit-p38
signaling to the control of stress-dependent gene transcription. Using a
pheochromocytoma cell model, we find that a novel Rit-p38-MSK1/2 pathway plays a 
critical role in stress-mediated CREB activation. RNAi-mediated Rit silencing, or
inhibition of p38 or MSK1/2 kinases, was found to disrupt stress-mediated
CREB-dependent transcription, resulting in increased cell death. Furthermore,
ectopic expression of active Rit stimulates CREB-Ser133 phosphorylation, induces 
expression of the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 and Bcl(XL) proteins, and promotes cell
survival. These data indicate that the Rit-p38-MSK1/2 signaling pathway may have 
an important role in the stress-dependent regulation of CREB-dependent gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC3501050
PMID: 23038261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Neurosci. 2012 Oct 3;32(40):13763-75. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1991-12.2012.

Extinction of aversive memories associated with morphine withdrawal requires
ERK-mediated epigenetic regulation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor
transcription in the rat ventromedial prefrontal cortex.

Wang WS(1), Kang S, Liu WT, Li M, Liu Y, Yu C, Chen J, Chi ZQ, He L, Liu JG.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Media,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China.

Recent evidence suggests that histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors facilitate
extinction of rewarding memory of drug taking. However, little is known about the
role of chromatin modification in the extinction of aversive memory of drug
withdrawal. In this study, we used conditioned place aversion (CPA), a highly
sensitive model for measuring aversive memory of drug withdrawal, to investigate 
the role of epigenetic regulation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)
gene expression in extinction of aversive memory. We found that CPA extinction
training induced an increase in recruiting cAMP response element-binding protein 
(CREB) to and acetylation of histone H3 at the promoters of BDNF exon I
transcript and increased BDNF mRNA and protein expression in the ventromedial
prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) of acute morphine-dependent rats and that such
epigenetic regulation of BDNF gene transcription could be facilitated or
diminished by intra-vmPFC infusion of HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A or
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) inhibitor U0126
(1,4-diamino-2,3-dicyano-1,4-bis(methylthio)butadiene) before extinction
training. Correspondingly, disruption of the epigenetic regulation of BDNF gene
transcription with U0126 or suppression of BDNF signaling with Trk receptor
antagonist K252a or BDNF scavenger tyrosine kinase receptor B (TrkB)-Fc blocked
extinction of CPA behavior. We also found that extinction training-induced
activation of ERK and CREB and extinction of CPA behavior could be potentiated or
suppressed by intra-vmPFC infusion of d-cycloserine, a NMDA receptor partial
agonist or aminophosphonopentanoic acid, a NMDA receptor antagonist. We conclude 
that extinction of aversive memory of morphine withdrawal requires epigenetic
regulation of BDNF gene transcription in the vmPFC through activation of the
ERK-CREB signaling pathway perhaps in a NMDA receptor-dependent manner.

PMID: 23035088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. PLoS Genet. 2012 Sep;8(9):e1002986. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002986. Epub 2012 
Sep 27.

TCF7L2 modulates glucose homeostasis by regulating CREB- and FoxO1-dependent
transcriptional pathway in the liver.

Oh KJ(1), Park J, Kim SS, Oh H, Choi CS, Koo SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Department of Molecular Cell
Biology and Samsung Biomedical Institute, Sungkyunkwan University School of
Medicine, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do, Korea.

Peripheral insulin resistance contributes to the development of type 2 diabetes. 
TCF7L2 has been tightly associated with this disease, although the exact
mechanism was largely elusive. Here we propose a novel role of TCF7L2 in hepatic 
glucose metabolism in mammals. Expression of medium and short isoforms of TCF7L2 
was greatly diminished in livers of diet-induced and genetic mouse models of
insulin resistance, prompting us to delineate the functional role of these
isoforms in hepatic glucose metabolism. Knockdown of hepatic TCF7L2 promoted
increased blood glucose levels and glucose intolerance with increased
gluconeogenic gene expression in wild-type mice, in accordance with the PCR array
data showing that only the gluconeogenic pathway is specifically up-regulated
upon depletion of hepatic TCF7L2. Conversely, overexpression of a nuclear isoform
of TCF7L2 in high-fat diet-fed mice ameliorated hyperglycemia with improved
glucose tolerance, suggesting a role of this factor in hepatic glucose
metabolism. Indeed, we observed a binding of TCF7L2 to promoters of gluconeogenic
genes; and expression of TCF7L2 inhibited adjacent promoter occupancies of CREB, 
CRTC2, and FoxO1, critical transcriptional modules in hepatic gluconeogenesis, to
disrupt target gene transcription. Finally, haploinsufficiency of TCF7L2 in mice 
displayed higher glucose levels and impaired glucose tolerance, which were
rescued by hepatic expression of a nuclear isoform of TCF7L2 at the physiological
level. Collectively, these data suggest a crucial role of TCF7L2 in hepatic
glucose metabolism; reduced hepatic expression of nuclear isoforms of this factor
might be a critical instigator of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3459990
PMID: 23028378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS Genet. 2012 Sep;8(9):e1002982. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002982. Epub 2012 
Sep 27.

Proteome-wide analysis of disease-associated SNPs that show allele-specific
transcription factor binding.

Butter F(1), Davison L, Viturawong T, Scheibe M, Vermeulen M, Todd JA, Mann M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of
Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany.

A causative role for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in many genetic
disorders has become evident through numerous genome-wide association studies.
However, identification of these common causal variants and the molecular
mechanisms underlying these associations remains a major challenge. Differential 
transcription factor binding at a SNP resulting in altered gene expression is one
possible mechanism. Here we apply PWAS ("proteome-wide analysis of SNPs"), a
methodology based on quantitative mass spectrometry that enables rapid screening 
of SNPs for differential transcription factor binding, to 12 SNPs that are highly
associated with type 1 diabetes at the IL2RA locus, encoding the interleukin-2
receptor CD25. We report differential, allele-specific binding of the
transcription factors RUNX1, LEF1, CREB, and TFAP4 to IL2RA SNPs rs12722508*A,
rs12722522*C, rs41295061*A, and rs2104286*A and demonstrate the functional
influence of RUNX1 at rs12722508 by reporter gene assay. Thus, PWAS may be able
to contribute to our understanding of the molecular consequences of human genetic
variability underpinning susceptibility to multi-factorial disease.

PMCID: PMC3459973
PMID: 23028375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Neurochem. 2012 Dec;123(6):919-31. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12036. Epub 2012 Oct 25.

Neuroprotective actions of glucagon-like peptide-1 in differentiated human
neuroprogenitor cells.

Velmurugan K(1), Bouchard R, Mahaffey G, Pugazhenthi S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Endocrinology, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Denver, Colorado
80045, USA.

Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1)-based therapies are currently available for the
treatment of type 2 diabetes, based on their actions on pancreatic ß cells. GLP-1
is also known to exert neuroprotective actions. To determine its mechanism of
action, we developed a neuron-rich cell culture system by differentiating human
neuroprogenitor cells in the presence of a combination of neurotrophins and
retinoic acid. The neuronal nature of these cells was characterized by
neurogenesis pathway-specific array. GLP-1 receptor expression was seen mainly in
the neuronal population. Culture of neurons in the presence of Aß oligomers
resulted in the induction of apoptosis as shown by the activation of caspase-3
and caspase-6. Exendin-4, a long-acting analog of GLP-1, protected the neurons
from apoptosis induced by Aß oligomers. Exendin-4 stimulated cyclic AMP response 
element binding protein phosphorylation, a regulatory step in its activation. A
transient transfection assay showed induction of a reporter linked to CRE
site-containing human brain-derived neurotrophic factor promoter IV, by the
growth factor through multiple signaling pathways. The anti-apoptotic action of
exendin-4 was lost following down-regulation of cAMP response element binding
protein. Withdrawal of neurotrophins resulted in the loss of neuronal phenotype
of differentiated neuroprogenitor cells, which was prevented by incubation in the
presence of exendin-4. Diabetes is a risk factor in the pathogenesis of
Alzheimer's disease. Our findings suggest that GLP-1-based therapies can decrease
the incidence of Alzheimer's disease among aging diabetic population.

Published 2012. This article is a US Government work and is in the public domain 
in the USA.

PMID: 23020846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Sep 25;109(39):15805-10. Epub 2012 Sep 10.

cAMP response element-binding protein promotes gliomagenesis by modulating the
expression of oncogenic microRNA-23a.

Tan X(1), Wang S, Zhu L, Wu C, Yin B, Zhao J, Yuan J, Qiang B, Peng X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing 100005, China.

Gliomas are the most common and deadly type of primary brain tumor. In this
study, we showed that cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB), a
proto-oncogenic transcription factor that is overexpressed in gliomas, can
promote gliomagenesis by modulating the expression of oncogenic microRNA-23a
(mir-23a). First, we found that CREB is highly expressed in glioma tissues and
cell lines. CREB is also essential for glioma cell growth and cell survival in
vitro and is critical for gliomagenesis in vivo. Second, microRNA microarray,
ChIP-chip, ChIP-quantitative PCR, and luciferase reporter assays showed that CREB
directly binds to the regulatory sequences of mir-23a and enhance the expression 
of mir-23a. Moreover, mir-23a was confirmed as a functional downstream target of 
CREB in glioma cell growth and cell survival. Finally, using computational
prediction followed by experimental confirmation, we identified PTEN, which is
frequently silenced in gliomas, as a downstream target of mir-23a. Taken
together, we propose that CREB promotes gliomagenesis and acts as a modulator of 
oncogenic mir-23a, which represses the tumor suppressor PTEN.

PMCID: PMC3465427
PMID: 23019365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2013 Feb;38(3):423-36. doi: 10.1038/npp.2012.197. Epub
2012 Sep 26.

Disrupted-in-schizophrenia-1 Gln31Leu polymorphism results in social anhedonia
associated with monoaminergic imbalance and reduction of CREB and ß-arrestin-1,2 
in the nucleus accumbens in a mouse model of depression.

Lipina TV(1), Fletcher PJ, Lee FH, Wong AH, Roder JC.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Neurodevelopment and Cognitive Functions, Samuel Lunenfeld Research 
Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Disrupted-in-schizophrenia-1 (DISC1) is associated with mental disorders,
including major depression. We previously showed that DISC1-Q31L mutant mice have
depression-like behaviors and can therefore be used to study neurobiological
mechanisms of depression and antidepressant (AD) medication action. First, we
found reduced levels of dopamine, serotonin and norepinephrine in the nucleus
accumbens (NAC) of DISC1-Q31L mutants. Next, we assessed social-conditioned place
preference as a reward-dependent task and the capacity of distinct ADs to correct
impaired social behavior in DISC1-Q31L mice. Bupropion, but not fluoxetine or
desipramine, was able to correct deficient social facilitation, social reward,
and social novelty in DISC1-Q31L mutants, whereas all three ADs were able to
improve social motivation and behavioral despair in DISC1-Q31L mutants.
Furthermore, we sought to correlate social anhedonia with molecular and cellular 
features including dendritic spine density, ß-arrestin-1,2, and
cAMP-response-element-binding protein (CREB) in the NAC as biomarkers related to 
depression and the DISC1 pathway. DISC1-Q31L mutants showed reduced levels of
ß-arrestin-1,2, CREB, and spine density in the NAC, further supporting the
construct validity of the genetic model. Bupropion induced the greatest effect on
CREB in DISC1-Q31L mutants, whereas all studied ADs corrected the reduced levels 
of ß-arrestin-1,2 and modestly ameliorated deficient spine density in this brain 
region. Overall, we find neurobiological changes accompanying social anhedonia in
the NAC of DISC1-Q31L mutant mice, consistent with a role for DISC1 in regulating
social reward as an endophenotype of depression.

PMCID: PMC3547193
PMID: 23011268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Retrovirology. 2012 Sep 25;9:77. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-9-77.

Low nuclear body formation and tax SUMOylation do not prevent NF-kappaB promoter 
activation.

Bonnet A(1), Randrianarison-Huetz V, Nzounza P, Nedelec M, Chazal M, Waast L,
Pene S, Bazarbachi A, Mahieux R, Bénit L, Pique C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U1016, Institut Cochin, 22 rue Méchain, 75014 Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: The Tax protein encoded by Human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1)
is a powerful activator of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway, a property critical for
HTLV-1-induced immortalization of CD4<U+207A> T lymphocytes. Tax permanently stimulates 
this pathway at a cytoplasmic level by activating the I<U+03BA>B kinase (IKK) complex
and at a nuclear level by enhancing the binding of the NF-<U+03BA>B factor RelA to its
cognate promoters and by forming nuclear bodies, believed to represent
transcriptionally active structures. In previous studies, we reported that Tax
ubiquitination and SUMOylation play a critical role in Tax localization and NF-<U+03BA>B
activation. Indeed, analysis of lysine Tax mutants fused or not to ubiquitin or
SUMO led us to propose a two-step model in which Tax ubiquitination first
intervenes to activate IKK while Tax SUMOylation is subsequently required for
promoter activation within Tax nuclear bodies. However, recent studies showing
that ubiquitin or SUMO can modulate Tax activities in either the nucleus or the
cytoplasm and that SUMOylated Tax can serve as substrate for ubiquitination
suggested that Tax ubiquitination and SUMOylation may mediate redundant rather
than successive functions.
RESULTS: In this study, we analyzed the properties of a new Tax mutant that is
properly ubiquitinated, but defective for both nuclear body formation and
SUMOylation. We report that reducing Tax SUMOylation and nuclear body formation
do not alter the ability of Tax to activate IKK, induce RelA nuclear
translocation, and trigger gene expression from a NF-<U+03BA>B promoter. Importantly,
potent NF-<U+03BA>B promoter activation by Tax despite low SUMOylation and nuclear body 
formation is also observed in T cells, including CD4<U+207A> primary T lymphocytes.
Moreover, we show that Tax nuclear bodies are hardly observed in HTLV-1-infected 
T cells. Finally, we provide direct evidence that the degree of NF-<U+03BA>B activation 
by Tax correlates with the level of Tax ubiquitination, but not SUMOylation.
CONCLUSIONS: These data reveal that the formation of Tax nuclear bodies,
previously associated to transcriptional activities in Tax-transfected cells, is 
dispensable for NF-<U+03BA>B promoter activation, notably in CD4<U+207A> T cells. They also
provide the first evidence that Tax SUMOylation is not a key determinant for
Tax-induced NF-<U+03BA>B activation.

PMCID: PMC3476979
PMID: 23009398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Nov-Dec;1819(11-12):1164-72. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.09.004. Epub 2012 Sep 19.

Suspected leukemia oncoproteins CREB1 and LYL1 regulate Op18/STMN1 expression.

San-Marina S(1), Han Y, Liu J, Minden MD.

Author information: 
(1)University Health Network, Princess Margaret Hospital, Toronto ON, Canada.
s.san-marina@Biostatistix.com

Stathmin (STMN1) is a microtubule destabilizing protein with a key role in cell
cycle progression and cell migration that is up-regulated in several cancers and 
may contribute to the malignant phenotype. However, the factors that regulate its
expression are not well understood. Loss as well as gain-of-function p53
mutations up-regulate STMN1 and in acute myelogenous leukemia where p53 is
predominantly wild-type, STMN1 is also over-expressed. Here we show regulatory
control of STMN1 expression by the leucine zipper transcription factor (TF) CREB1
and the basic helix-loop-helix TF LYL1. By ChIP-chip experiments we demonstrate
in vivo the presence of LYL1 and CREB1 in close proximity on the STMN1 promoter
and using promoter assays we reveal co-regulation of STMN1 by CREB1 and LYL1. By 
contrast, TAL1, another suspected oncoprotein in leukemia and close relative of
LYL1, exerts no regulatory effect on the STMN1 promoter. NLI, LMO2 and GATA2 are 
previously described co-activators of Tal1/Lyl1-E47 transcriptional complexes and
potentiate Lyl1 activation of the STMN1 promoter while having no effect on TAL1
transactivation. Promoter mutations that abrogate CREB1 proximal binding or
mutations of the DNA-binding domain of CREB1 abolish LYL1 transcriptional
activation. These results show that CRE and Ebox sites function as coordinated
units and support previous evidence of joint CREB1-and LYL1 transcription events 
activating an aberrant subset of promoters in leukemia. CREB1 or LYL1 shRNA
knock-down down-regulate STMN1 expression. Because down-regulation of STMN1 has
been shown to have anti-proliferative effects, while CREB1 and LYL1 are suspected
oncoproteins, interference with CREB1-LYL1 interactions may complement standard
chemotherapy and yield additional beneficial effects.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23000483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 Jan 5;365(1):84-94. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2012.09.006.
Epub 2012 Sep 20.

Family members CREB and CREM control thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH)
expression in the hypothalamus.

Chiappini F(1), Ramadoss P, Vella KR, Cunha LL, Ye FD, Stuart RC, Nillni EA,
Hollenberg AN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Center of Life Science, Boston, MA
02215, United States. franck.chiappini@inserm.fr

Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of the
hypothalamus is regulated by thyroid hormone (TH). cAMP response element binding 
protein (CREB) has also been postulated to regulate TRH expression but its
interaction with TH signaling in vivo is not known. To evaluate the role of CREB 
in TRH regulation in vivo, we deleted CREB from PVN neurons to generate the
CREB1(<U+0394>SIM1) mouse. As previously shown, loss of CREB was compensated for by an
up-regulation of CREM in euthyroid CREB1(<U+0394>SIM1) mice but TSH, T4 and T3 levels
were normal, even though TRH mRNA levels were elevated. Interestingly, TRH mRNA
expression was also increased in the PVN of CREB1(<U+0394>SIM1) mice in the hypothyroid 
state but became normal when made hyperthyroid. Importantly, CREM levels were
similar in CREB1(<U+0394>SIM1) mice regardless of thyroid status, demonstrating that the
regulation of TRH by T3 in vivo likely occurs independently of the CREB/CREM
family.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3572472
PMID: 23000398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3593-602. doi: 10.1172/JCI64145. Epub 2012 Sep
10.

NR4A nuclear receptors support memory enhancement by histone deacetylase
inhibitors.

Hawk JD(1), Bookout AL, Poplawski SG, Bridi M, Rao AJ, Sulewski ME, Kroener BT,
Manglesdorf DJ, Abel T.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Group and Department of Biology, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The formation of a long-lasting memory requires a transcription-dependent
consolidation period that converts a short-term memory into a long-term memory.
Nuclear receptors compose a class of transcription factors that regulate diverse 
biological processes, and several nuclear receptors have been implicated in
memory formation. Here, we examined the potential contribution of nuclear
receptors to memory consolidation by measuring the expression of all 49 murine
nuclear receptors after learning. We identified 13 nuclear receptors with
increased expression after learning, including all 3 members of the Nr4a
subfamily. These CREB-regulated Nr4a genes encode ligand-independent "orphan"
nuclear receptors. We found that blocking NR4A activity in memory-supporting
brain regions impaired long-term memory but did not impact short-term memory in
mice. Further, expression of Nr4a genes increased following the memory-enhancing 
effects of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors. Blocking NR4A signaling
interfered with the ability of HDAC inhibitors to enhance memory. These results
demonstrate that the Nr4a gene family contributes to memory formation and is a
promising target for improving cognitive function.

PMCID: PMC3461922
PMID: 22996661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012 Nov;32(11):2751-60. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.300302. Epub 2012 Sep 20.

TLR 2 induces vascular smooth muscle cell migration through cAMP response
element-binding protein-mediated interleukin-6 production.

Lee GL(1), Chang YW, Wu JY, Wu ML, Wu KK, Yet SF, Kuo CC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and System Medicine, National Health Research
Institutes, 35 Keyan Road, Zhunan, Miaoli County 35053, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: Migration of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) from the media into 
intima contributes to the development of atherosclerosis. Gene deletion
experiments implicate a role for toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) in atherogenesis.
However, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. We postulate that TLR2
promotes VSMC migration by enhancing interleukin (IL)-6 production.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Migration assays revealed that TLR2 agonists promoted VSMC
migration but not cell proliferation or viability. TLR2 deficiency or inhibition 
of TLR2 signaling with anti-TLR2 antibody suppressed TLR2 agonist-induced VSMC
migration and IL-6 production, which was mediated via p38 mitogen-associated
protein kinase and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 signaling pathways. 
Neutralizing anti-IL-6 antibodies impaired TLR2-mediated VSMC migration and
formation of filamentous actin fiber and lamellipodia. Blockade of p38
mitogen-associated protein kinase or extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2
activation inhibited TLR2 agonist pam3CSK4-induced phosphorylation of cAMP
response element-binding protein, which regulates IL-6 promoter activity through 
the cAMP response element site. Moreover, cAMP response element-binding protein
small interfering RNA inhibited pam3CSK4-induced IL-6 production and VSMC
migration. Additionally, Rac1 small interfering RNA inhibited pam3CSK4-induced
VSMC migration but not IL-6 production.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that on ligand binding, TLR2 activates p38
mitogen-associated protein kinase and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2
signaling in VSMCs. These signaling pathways act in concert to activate cAMP
response element-binding protein and subsequent IL-6 production, which in turn
promotes VSMC migration via Rac1-mediated actin cytoskeletal reorganization.

PMID: 22995520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Neurosci Lett. 2012 Oct 24;528(2):190-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.08.079. Epub 
2012 Sep 7.

Heptamethoxyflavone, a citrus flavonoid, enhances brain-derived neurotrophic
factor production and neurogenesis in the hippocampus following cerebral global
ischemia in mice.

Okuyama S(1), Shimada N, Kaji M, Morita M, Miyoshi K, Minami S, Amakura Y,
Yoshimura M, Yoshida T, Watanabe S, Nakajima M, Furukawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Pharmacology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Matsuyama University, 4-2 Bunkyo-cho, Matsuyama, Ehime 790-8578, Japan.
sokuyama@cc.matsuyama-u.ac.jp

In the present study using a transient global ischemia mouse model, we showed
that (1) a citrus flavonoid 3,5,6,7,8,3',4'-heptamethoxyflavone (HMF) induced the
phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2 (ERK1/2) and cAMP
response element-binding protein (CREB) in the hippocampus after ischemia; (2)
HMF increased the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), a
representative neurotrophic factor in the central nervous system, in the
hippocampal dentate gyrus, and most BDNF-positive cells were also stained with
anti-glial fibrillary acidic protein (one of the major intermediate filament
proteins of mature astrocytes) and (3) HMF increased doublecortin positive
neuronal precursor cells in the dentate gyrus subventricular zone or subgranular 
zone. These results suggest that HMF has the ability to induce BDNF production in
astrocytes and enhance neurogenesis after brain ischemia, which may be mediated
by activation of ERK1/2 and CREB.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22985518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 26;287(44):36922-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.402958. Epub
2012 Sep 12.

Prostaglandin E2-induced IL-23p19 subunit is regulated by cAMP-responsive
element-binding protein and C/AATT enhancer-binding protein ß in bone
marrow-derived dendritic cells.

Kocieda VP(1), Adhikary S, Emig F, Yen JH, Toscano MG, Ganea D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Temple University School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

We reported previously that prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) up-regulates IL-23 in vitro
in bone marrow-derived dendritic cells and in vivo in models of collagen-induced 
arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease, leading to preferential Th17
development and activity. There is very little information on the molecular
mechanisms involved in the PGE2-induced up-regulation of Il23a gene expression.
In this study we investigated the signaling pathways and transcription factors
involved in the stimulatory effect of PGE2. Although PGE2 does not induce
IL-23p19 expression by itself, it synergizes with both extra- and intracellular
Toll-like receptor ligands and with inflammatory cytokines such as TNFa. We
established that the effect of PGE2 in conjunction with either LPS or TNFa is
mediated through the EP4 receptor and the cAMP-dependent activation of both
protein kinase A (PKA) and exchange protein activated by cAMP (EPAC). Using the
EP4 agonist PGE(1)OH in conjunction with TNFa, we found that PKA-induced
phosphorylation of cAMP-response element-binding protein ((P)CREB) and
EPAC-induced phosphorylation of C/AATT enhancer-binding protein ß ((P)C/EBPß)
mediate the stimulatory effect of PGE2 on IL-23p19 expression. This is the first 
report of CREB and C/EBPß involvement in Il23a promoter activation. Mutation
within the putative CREB and C/EBP sites combined with in vivo DNA binding (ChIP)
assays identified the distal CREB site (-1125) and the two proximal C/EBP sites
(-274 and -232) as essential for PKA-activated CREB and EPAC-activated
C/EBPß-induced IL-23p19 expression.

PMCID: PMC3481295
PMID: 22977257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Dec;44(12):2212-22. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2012.08.021. Epub 2012 Sep 3.

CIL-102 induces matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2)/MMP-9 down-regulation via
simultaneous suppression of genetic transcription and mRNA stability.

Liu WH(1), Chen YL, Chang LS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Sun Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung
804, Taiwan.

This study explores the CIL-102 suppression mechanism on matrix
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) and MMP-9 expression in human leukemia K562 cells.
CIL-102 attenuated K562 cell invasion with decreased MMP-2/MMP-9 protein
expression and mRNA levels. Moreover, CIL-102 reduced luciferase activity of
MMP-2/MMP-9 promoter constructs and MMP-2/MMP-9 mRNA stability. CIL-102 treatment
induced JNK and p38 MAPK activation but reduced the phospho-ERK level.
Transfection of constitutively active MEK1 restored MMP-2 and MMP-9 promoter
activity in CIL-102-treated cells, while suppression of p38 MAPK/JNK activation
abolished CIL-102-induced MMP-2/MMP-9 mRNA decay. CIL-102-induced p38 MAPK/JNK
activation led to protein phosphatase 2A-mediated tristetraprolin (TTP)
down-regulation. The reduction in TTP-KH-type splicing regulatory protein (KSRP) 
complexes formation promoted KSRP-mediated MMP-2/MMP-9 mRNA decay in
CIL-102-treated K562 cells. Moreover, CIL-102 reduced invasion and MMP-2/MMP-9
expression in breast and liver cancer cells. Taken together, our data indicate
that CIL-102 induces MMP-2/MMP-2 down-regulation via simultaneous suppression of 
genetic transcription and mRNA stability, and suggest a potential utility for
CIL-102 in reducing MMP-2/MMP-9-mediated cancer progression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22964005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 26;287(44):37340-51. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.384743. Epub
2012 Sep 6.

Increased phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene expression and steatosis during 
hepatitis C virus subgenome replication: role of nonstructural component 5A and
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß.

Qadri I(1), Choudhury M, Rahman SM, Knotts TA, Janssen RC, Schaack J, Iwahashi M,
Puljak L, Simon FR, Kilic G, Fitz JG, Friedman JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, Colorado
80045, USA.

Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection greatly increases the risk for type 2
diabetes and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis; however, the pathogenic mechanisms
remain incompletely understood. Here we report gluconeogenic enzyme
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) transcription and associated
transcription factors are dramatically up-regulated in Huh.8 cells, which stably 
express an HCV subgenome replicon. HCV increased activation of cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB), CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBPß), forkhead
box protein O1 (FOXO1), and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>
coactivator 1a (PGC-1a) and involved activation of the cAMP response element in
the PEPCK promoter. Infection with dominant-negative CREB or C/EBPß-shRNA
significantly reduced or normalized PEPCK expression, with no change in PGC-1a or
FOXO1 levels. Notably, expression of HCV nonstructural component NS5A in Huh7 or 
primary hepatocytes stimulated PEPCK gene expression and glucose output in HepG2 
cells, whereas a deletion in NS5A reduced PEPCK expression and lowered cellular
lipids but was without effect on insulin resistance, as demonstrated by the
inability of insulin to stimulate mobilization of a pool of insulin-responsive
vesicles to the plasma membrane. HCV-replicating cells demonstrated increases in 
cellular lipids with insulin resistance at the level of the insulin receptor,
increased insulin receptor substrate 1 (Ser-312), and decreased Akt (Ser-473)
activation in response to insulin. C/EBPß-RNAi normalized lipogenic genes sterol 
regulatory element-binding protein-1c, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
<U+03B3>, and liver X receptor a but was unable to reduce accumulation of triglycerides 
in Huh.8 cells or reverse the increase in ApoB expression, suggesting a role for 
increased lipid retention in steatotic hepatocytes. Collectively, these data
reveal an important role of NS5A, C/EBPß, and pCREB in promoting HCV-induced
gluconeogenic gene expression and suggest that increased C/EBPß and NS5A may be
essential components leading to increased gluconeogenesis associated with HCV
infection.

PMCID: PMC3481331
PMID: 22955269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e44149. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044149. Epub 2012 Aug 31.

Environmental enrichment alters nicotine-mediated locomotor sensitization and
phosphorylation of DARPP-32 and CREB in rat prefrontal cortex.

Gomez AM(1), Midde NM, Mactutus CF, Booze RM, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Sciences, South Carolina College
of Pharmacy, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina, USA.

Exposure within an environmental enrichment paradigm results in neurobiological
adaptations and decreases the baseline of locomotor activity. The current study
determined activation of DARPP-32 (dopamine- and cAMP-regulated
phosphoprotein-32) and CREB (cAMP response element binding protein), and
locomotor activity in rats raised in enriched (EC), impoverished (IC), and
standard (SC) conditions following repeated administration of nicotine or saline.
In the saline-control group, the basal phosphorylation state of DARPP-32 at
Threonine-34 site (pDARPP-32 Thr34) in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) was lower in
EC compared to IC and SC rats, which was positively correlated with their
respective baseline activities. While nicotine (0.35 mg/kg, freebase) produced
locomotor sensitization across all housing conditions when the nicotine-mediated 
locomotor activity was expressed as a percent change from their respective saline
control, EC rats displayed greater sensitization to nicotine than IC and SC rats.
Consistent with the behavioral findings, repeated nicotine injection increased
pDARPP-32 Thr34 in PFC of EC and IC rats and in nucleus accumbens of EC rats;
however, the magnitude of change from saline control in nicotine-induced
enhancement of pDARPP-32 Thr34 in PFC was strikingly increased in EC rats
relative to IC rats. Moreover, EC rats had lower basal phosphorylation levels of 
CREB at serine 133 in PFC and nucleus accumbens compared to IC and SC rats,
whereas the nicotine-induced increase in phosphorylated CREB-Ser133 was more
pronounced in PFC of EC rats relative to IC and SC rats. Collectively, these
findings suggest innovative insights into advancing our understanding of the
molecular mechanisms of enrichment-induced changes in the motivational effects of
nicotine, and aiding in the identification of new therapeutic strategies for
tobacco smokers.

PMCID: PMC3432100
PMID: 22952905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e44107. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044107. Epub 2012 Aug 31.

Resveratrol inhibits LPS-induced MAPKs activation via activation of the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway in murine RAW 264.7 macrophage cells.

Zong Y(1), Sun L, Liu B, Deng YS, Zhan D, Chen YL, He Y, Liu J, Zhang ZJ, Sun J, 
Lu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Kunming Medical University, Kunming, Yunnan, People's
Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Resveratrol is a natural polyphenolic compound that has
cardioprotective, anticancer and anti-inflammatory properties. We investigated
the capacity of resveratrol to protect RAW 264.7 cells from inflammatory insults 
and explored mechanisms underlying inhibitory effects of resveratrol on RAW 264.7
cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Murine RAW 264.7 cells were treated with
resveratrol (1, 5, and 10 µM) and/or LPS (5 µg/ml). Nitric oxide (NO) and
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) were measured by Griess reagent and ELISA. The mRNA and
protein levels of proinflammatory proteins and cytokines were analysed by ELISA, 
RT-PCR and double immunofluorescence labeling, respectively. Phosphorylation
levels of Akt, cyclic AMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB),
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) cascades, AMP-activated protein kinase 
(AMPK) and expression of SIRT1(Silent information regulator T1) were measured by 
western blot. Wortmannin (1 µM), a specific phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-K)
inhibitor, was used to determine if PI3-K/Akt signaling pathway might be involved
in resveratrol's action on RAW 264.7 cells. Resveratrol significantly attenuated 
the LPS-induced expression of nitric oxide (NO), prostaglandin E2 (PGE2),
inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), tumor necrosis 
factor-a (TNF-a) and interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß) in RAW 264.7 cells. Resveratrol
increased Akt phosphorylation in a time-dependent manner. Wortmannin, a specific 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-K) inhibitor, blocked the effects of
resveratrol on LPS-induced RAW 264.7 cells activation. In addition, PI3-K
inhibition partially abolished the inhibitory effect of resveratrol on the
phosphorylation of cyclic AMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB) and
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) cascades. Meanwhile, PI3-K is essential
for resveratrol-mediated phosphorylation of AMPK and expression of SIRT1.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: This investigation demonstrates that PI3-K/Akt
activation is an important signaling in resveratrol-mediated activation of AMPK
phosphorylation and SIRT1 expression, and inhibition of phosphorylation of CREB
and MAPKs activation, proinflammatory mediators and cytokines production in
response to LPS in RAW 264.7 cells.

PMCID: PMC3432093
PMID: 22952890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3490-503. doi: 10.1172/JCI64906. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

FOXO1 orchestrates the bone-suppressing function of gut-derived serotonin.

Kode A(1), Mosialou I, Silva BC, Rached MT, Zhou B, Wang J, Townes TM, Hen R,
DePinho RA, Guo XE, Kousteni S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, College of Physicians and
Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Serotonin is a critical regulator of bone mass, fulfilling different functions
depending on its site of synthesis. Brain-derived serotonin promotes osteoblast
proliferation, whereas duodenal-derived serotonin suppresses it. To understand
the molecular mechanisms of duodenal-derived serotonin action on osteoblasts, we 
explored its transcriptional mediation in mice. We found that the transcription
factor FOXO1 is a crucial determinant of the effects of duodenum-derived
serotonin on bone formation We identified two key FOXO1 complexes in osteoblasts,
one with the transcription factor cAMP-responsive element-binding protein 1
(CREB) and another with activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4). Under normal
levels of circulating serotonin, the proliferative activity of FOXO1 was promoted
by a balance between its interaction with CREB and ATF4. However, high
circulating serotonin levels prevented the association of FOXO1 with CREB,
resulting in suppressed osteoblast proliferation. These observations identify
FOXO1 as the molecular node of an intricate transcriptional machinery that
confers the signal of duodenal-derived serotonin to inhibit bone formation.

PMCID: PMC3461930
PMID: 22945629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Endocrinol Invest. 2013 May;36(5):331-8. doi: 10.3275/8582. Epub 2012 Aug 29.

Different signal transduction pathways elicited by basic fibroblast growth factor
and interleukin 1ß regulate CREB phosphorylation in Sertoli cells.

Galardo MN(1), Riera MF, Regueira M, Pellizzari EH, Cigorraga SB, Meroni SB.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Endocrinológicas, CEDIE-CONICET, Hospital de Niños
Ricardo Gutiérrez, Gallo 1330, C1425EDF Buenos Aires, Argentina.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) and interleukin 1ß
(IL1ß) belong to the set of intratesticular regulators that provide for the
fine-tuning of processes implicated in the maintenance of spermatogenesis. The
aim of this study was to investigate if bFGF and IL1ß activate CREB, what
signaling pathways may be participating and the possible relationship between
CREB activation and the regulation of Sertoli cell function.
METHODS: Twenty-day-old rat Sertoli cell cultures were used.
RESULTS: Cultures stimulated with bFGF and IL1ß produced a time-dependent
increment in phosphorylated CREB levels that reached maximal values in 5- and
15-minute incubations respectively. MEK inhibitors--PD98059 and U0126--blocked
the effect of bFGF on phosphorylated CREB while a p38-MAPK
inhibitor--SB203580--blocked the effect of IL1ß on phosphorylated CREB. A
possible correlation between CREB regulation and two Sertoli cell-differentiated 
functions, Ldh A and transferrin expression, was explored. PD98059 blocked the
ability of bFGF to stimulate Ldh A expression and SB203580 blocked the ability of
IL1ß to stimulate Ldh A expression and LDH activity. Concerning transferrin,
PD98059 and U0126 were able to inhibit the ability of bFGF to stimulate its secre
tion. On the contrary, SB203580 was unable to block IL1ß induced increase in
transferrin secretion suggesting that the p38-MAPK pathway does not participate
in the mechanism of action of the cytokine to regulate transferrin.
CONCLUSIONS: The results presented herein suggest that CREB is stimulated in
response to bFGF and IL1ß through p42/p44-MAPK and p38-MAPK pathways and that
this transcription factor may be partially responsible for the regulation of
Sertoli cell function.

PMID: 22932066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Appl Microbiol. 2012 Dec;113(6):1498-506. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2672.2012.05437.x. Epub 2012 Sep 17.

Lactobacillus pentosus var. plantarum C29 protects scopolamine-induced memory
deficit in mice.

Jung IH(1), Jung MA, Kim EJ, Han MJ, Kim DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee Univertisy,
Seoul, Korea.

AIMS: In the preliminary study, kimchi, a traditional food fermented with Chinese
cabbage, protected scopolamine-induced mouse memory deficit in passive avoidance 
test. Therefore, we screened protective ingredients, particularly lactic acid
bacteria, from Chinese cabbage kimchi against scopolamine-induced memory deficit 
in mice.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Lactic acid bacteria, isolated from Chinese cabbage kimchi, 
were identified by 16S rDNA sequence analysis, G+C content and cellular fatty
acid composition and sugar fermentation test. Memory deficit was induced in mice 
by intraperitoneally injecting with scopolamine. Kimchi, particularly its
supernatant, protected scopolamine-induced memory deficit in mice in passive
avoidance test. Of kimchi ingredients, a lactic acid bacterium, strain C29,
potently protected scopolamine-induced memory deficit in mice. C29 was a
gram-positive, catalase-negative, anaerobic and non-motile rod. Its pylogenetic
property was near to Lactobacillus pentosus (99%) and Lact. plantarum (99%).
However, C29 fermented inulin and L-rhamnose and grew in pH 3 and at 45°C in
contrast with Lact. pentosus and Lact. plantarum. Therefore, it named to be Lact 
pentosus var. plantarum C29. The strain C29 protected scopolamine-induced memory 
deficit in Y-maze and Morris water maze tests. Furthermore, C29 increased
hippocampal BDNF and p-CREB expressions, which were reduced by scopolamine.
CONCLUSION: Lactobacillus pentosus var. plantarum C29 may protect memory deficit 
by inducing BDNF and p-CREB expressions.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: Lactic acid bacteria, such as Lact pentosus
var. plantarum C29, may prevent memory deficit and its contained fermented foods 
may be beneficial for dementia.

© 2012 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

PMID: 22925033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012 Nov;32(11):2670-7. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.254946. Epub 2012 Aug 23.

Extracellular acidification activates cAMP responsive element binding protein via
Na+/H+ exchanger isoform 1-mediated Ca²<U+207A> oscillation in central nervous system
pericytes.

Nakamura K(1), Kamouchi M, Arimura K, Nishimura A, Kuroda J, Ishitsuka K, Tokami 
H, Sugimori H, Ago T, Kitazono T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Maidashi 3-1-1, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: We have previously shown that Na(+)/H(+) exchanger isoform 1 (NHE1)
plays an important role in Ca(2+) signaling and cell proliferation in human
central nervous system (CNS) pericytes. The aims of the present study were to
elucidate how NHE1-induced Ca(2+) signaling during acidosis is transformed into
cellular responses in CNS pericytes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Human CNS pericytes were cultured, and the activation of
cAMP responsive element-binding protein (CREB) was evaluated by Western blotting 
analysis, immunofluorescence, and luciferase assays. In human CNS pericytes, low 
extracellular Na(+) or low pH generated Ca(2+) oscillation and subsequently
phosphorylated Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMKII) and CREB in a
time-dependent manner. Focal cerebral ischemia was applied using photothrombotic 
distal middle cerebral artery occlusion in mice, and the phosphorylation of CREB 
and the production of interleukin-6 were observed in pericytes migrating into the
peri-infarct penumbra during the early phase after ischemic insult.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that extracellular acidosis induces Ca(2+)
oscillation via NHE1, leading to Ca(2+)/CaMKII-dependent CREB activation in human
CNS pericytes. Acidosis may upregulate a variety of proteins, such as
interleukin-6, through the NHE1-Ca2+/CaMKII-CREB pathway in brain pericytes and
may thus modulate brain ischemic insult.

PMID: 22922957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Endocrinology. 2012 Oct;153(10):4938-45. Epub 2012 Aug 23.

Cross talk between PKC and CREB in the induction of COX-2 by PGF2a in human
amnion fibroblasts.

Guo CM(1), Kasaraneni N, Sun K, Myatt L.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, People's Republic 
of China.

Compelling evidence indicates a crucial role of prostaglandin F2a (PGF2a) in
parturition. Both the maternal and fetal sides of the fetal membranes synthesize 
PGF2a, which exerts effects via the prostaglandin F2a receptor (FP) that is
coupled to the activation of protein kinase C (PKC). Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)
catalyzes the rate-limiting step of the inducible synthesis of prostaglandin.
Although activation of PKC is known to induce COX-2 expression, it is not clear
whether PGF2a can induce COX-2 via FP receptor-coupled PKC activation. COX-2
promoter carries a cAMP-response element (CRE) and phosphorylation of CRE binding
protein 1 (CREB1) is associated with COX-2 expression in human amnion
fibroblasts. We demonstrated that human amnion fibroblasts produced PGF2a and
expressed FP receptor. PGF2a increased COX-2 expression and CREB1
phosphorylation, which could be blocked by either the FP receptor antagonist
AL8810 or PKC inhibitor Ro31-7549. The PKC activator,
phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA), could mimic the induction of COX-2 and
CREB1 phosphorylation. The induction of COX-2 by PGF2a and PMA could be
attenuated by the small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of CREB1 expression or
overexpressing dominant-negative CREB1. A chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
showed that the binding of CREB1 to the COX-2 promoter was increased by PGF2a and
PMA in amnion fibroblasts. In conclusion, we provide evidence that PGF2a induces 
COX-2 expression via the FP receptor and phosphorylates CREB1 by PKC, thus
increasing CREB1 binding to the COX-2 promoter and the expression of COX-2 in
human amnion fibroblasts. This feed-forward loop may be crucial for the
production of prostaglandins in the fetal membranes prior to the onset of labor.

PMCID: PMC3512005
PMID: 22919060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Atherosclerosis. 2012 Oct;224(2):348-54. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2012.07.038. Epub 2012 Aug 2.

Acyl chain-dependent effect of lysophosphatidylcholine on cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 
expression in endothelial cells.

Brkic L(1), Riederer M, Graier WF, Malli R, Frank S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Center of Molecular Medicine,
Harrachgasse 21/III, Medical University Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria.

OBJECTIVE: Previously we identified palmitoyl-, oleoyl- linoleoyl-, and
arachidonoyl-lysophosph-atidylcholine (LPC 16:0, 18:1, 18:2 and 20:4) as the most
prominent LPC species generated by endothelial lipase (EL). In the present study,
we examined the capacity of those LPC to modulate expression of cyclooxygenase
(COX)-2 in vascular endothelial cells.
METHODS & RESULTS: LPC 16:0 and 20:4 promoted both COX-2 mRNA- and protein
synthesis with different potencies and kinetics. While LPC 18:1 induced a weak
and transient increase in COX-2 mRNA, but not protein, LPC 18:2 increased COX-2
protein, without impacting mRNA. Chelation of intracellular Ca(2+) and inhibition
of p38 MAPK markedly attenuated 16:0 LPC- and 20:4 LPC- elicited induction of
COX-2 expression, whereas inhibition of phospholipase C (PLC) attenuated only the
effect of 16:0 LPC. LPC 16:0 and 20:4 differed markedly in their potencies to
increase cytosolic Ca(2+) concentration and in the kinetics of p38 MAPK
activation. While the effects of 16:0 and 20:4 LPC on COX-2 expression were
profoundly sensitive to silencing of either c-Jun or p65 (NF-<U+03BA>B), respectively,
silencing of cyclic AMP responsive element binding protein (CREB) attenuated
markedly the effect of both LPC.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that the tested LPC species are capable of
inducing COX-2 expression, whereby the efficacy and the relative contribution of 
underlying signaling mechanisms markedly differ, due to the length and degree of 
saturation of LPC acyl chains.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3465554
PMID: 22901457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Cancer Epidemiol. 2012;2012:540563. doi: 10.1155/2012/540563. Epub 2012 Jul 29.

Genetic Influences on Physiological and Subjective Responses to an Aerobic
Exercise Session among Sedentary Adults.

Karoly HC(1), Stevens CJ, Magnan RE, Harlaar N, Hutchison KE, Bryan AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Colorado at Boulder, 
345 UCB, Boulder, CO 80309-0345, USA.

Objective. To determine whether genetic variants suggested by the literature to
be associated with physiology and fitness phenotypes predicted differential
physiological and subjective responses to a bout of aerobic exercise among
inactive but otherwise healthy adults. Method. Participants completed a 30-minute
submaximal aerobic exercise session. Measures of physiological and subjective
responding were taken before, during, and after exercise. 14 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) that have been previously associated with various exercise
phenotypes were tested for associations with physiological and subjective
response to exercise phenotypes. Results. We found that two SNPs in the FTO gene 
(rs8044769 and rs3751812) were related to positive affect change during exercise.
Two SNPs in the CREB1 gene (rs2253206 and 2360969) were related to change in
temperature during exercise and with maximal oxygen capacity (VO(2) max). The
SLIT2 SNP rs1379659 and the FAM5C SNP rs1935881 were associated with
norepinephrine change during exercise. Finally, the OPRM1 SNP rs1799971 was
related to changes in norepinephrine, lactate, and rate of perceived exertion
(RPE) during exercise. Conclusion. Genetic factors influence both physiological
and subjective responses to exercise. A better understanding of genetic factors
underlying physiological and subjective responses to aerobic exercise has
implications for development and potential tailoring of exercise interventions.

PMCID: PMC3414053
PMID: 22899923  [PubMed]


35. Virchows Arch. 2012 Sep;461(3):339-43. doi: 10.1007/s00428-012-1295-y. Epub 2012 
Aug 11.

Clear cell sarcoma expressing a novel chimerical transcript EWSR1 exon 7/ATF1
exon 6.

Gineikiene E(1), Seinin D, Brasiuniene B, Brazaitis A, Griskevicius L,
Jakubauskas A.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology, Oncology and Transfusion Medicine Center, Vilnius University
Hospital Santariskiu Klinikos, Santariskiu 2, Vilnius 08661, Lithuania.

Clear cell sarcoma harbours recurrent translocation, resulting in EWSR1/ATF1 or
less commonly EWSR1/CREB1 fusion. To date, six types of EWSR1/ATF1 fusion have
been reported, of which three are in-frame and encode functional proteins. We
present a reverse transcription - polymerase chain reaction analysis of a tumour 
near the hallux of the right foot. The sequencing of obtained fragments revealed 
the presence of a novel chimerical transcript-the in-frame fusion between EWSR1
exon 7 and ATF1 exon 6 that represents the fourth in-frame type of EWSR1/ATF1
fusion identified in clear cell sarcomas.

PMID: 22886438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Neurochem Res. 2012 Dec;37(12):2686-96. doi: 10.1007/s11064-012-0858-2. Epub 2012
Aug 10.

Acute resveratrol treatment modulates multiple signaling pathways in the ischemic
brain.

Shin JA(1), Lee KE, Kim HS, Park EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Ewha Medical Research
Institute, Ewha Womans University, 911-1 Mok6dong, Yangcheon-gu, Seoul 158-710,
Republic of Korea.

Resveratrol has several beneficial effects, including reductions of oxidative
stress, inflammatory responses and apoptosis. It has been known that resveratrol 
is a sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) activator and protective effects of resveratrol are
mediated by Akt and mitogen-activated protein kinases. However, it is not
examined whether these pathways are regulated by resveratrol in the ischemic
brain. Previously, we found that acute resveratrol treatment reduces brain injury
induced by transient focal ischemic stroke. In the present study, we defined the 
signaling pathways modulated by resveratrol in ischemia by examining SIRT1
expression and phosphorylation of Akt, ERK1/2 and p38 in the ischemic cortex.
Resveratrol increased expression of SIRT1 and phosphorylation of Akt and p38 but 
inhibited the increase in phosphorylation of ERK1/2. Gene and protein levels of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator 1a, a downstream
molecule of SIRT1, and mRNA levels of its target genes antioxidative superoxide
dismutase 2 and uncoupling protein 2 were elevated. Resveratrol also increased
phosphorylation of cyclic AMP-response-element-binding protein and transcription 
of the anti-apoptotic gene Bcl-2. These results suggest that various
neuroprotective actions of resveratrol, including anti-oxidative, anti-apoptotic 
and inflammatory effects, are mediated via modulation of multiple signaling
pathways in the ischemic brain.

PMID: 22878646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2012 Sep 1;22(17):5466-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.07.036. 
Epub 2012 Jul 20.

2-Amino-1,3,4-thiadiazole derivative (FABT) inhibits the extracellular
signal-regulated kinase pathway and induces cell cycle arrest in human non-small 
lung carcinoma cells.

Juszczak M(1), Matysiak J, Szeliga M, Pozarowski P, Niewiadomy A, Albrecht J,
Rzeski W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology, Institute of Rural Health, Lublin, Poland.
goskazyla@poczta.onet.pl

The anticancer potential of 2-amino-1,3,4-thiadiazole compounds has been
documented by in vitro and in vivo studies. In our previous research, we
described the synthesis as well as the antiproliferative and neuroprotective
activities of 2-(4-fluorophenyloamino)-5-(2,4-dihydroxyphenyl)-1,3,4-thiadiazole 
(FABT). The aim of the present study was to investigate the molecular mechanisms 
involved in FABT-induced growth inhibition in A549 lung carcinoma cells. Western 
blotting analysis revealed that FABT inhibited the activation of the
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) pathway, and Real-time PCR
analysis showed no changes in the expression of P44ERK1 and CREB1 genes.
Furthermore, FABT induced cell cycle arrest in the GO/G1 phase and enhanced
p27/Kip1 expression. Our results suggest that FABT acts by inhibiting ERK1/2
pathway and cell cycle progression through G1 into S phase in A549 cells. Further
studies are needed to completely explain the molecular mechanisms of anticancer
action of this 2-aminothiadiazole derivative.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22877634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mol Brain. 2012 Aug 6;5:27. doi: 10.1186/1756-6606-5-27.

Roles of CREB in the regulation of FMRP by group I metabotropic glutamate
receptors in cingulate cortex.

Wang H(1), Morishita Y, Miura D, Naranjo JR, Kida S, Zhuo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, 1 King's
College Circle, Toronto, ON, M5S 1A8, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Fragile X syndrome is caused by lack of fragile X mental retardation 
protein (FMRP) due to silencing of the FMR1 gene. The metabotropic glutamate
receptors (mGluRs) in the central nervous system contribute to higher brain
functions including learning/memory, mental disorders and persistent pain. The
transcription factor cyclic AMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) is
involved in important neuronal functions, such as synaptic plasticity and
neuronal survival. Our recent study has shown that stimulation of Group I mGluRs 
upregulated FMRP and activated CREB in anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), a key
region for brain cognitive and executive functions, suggesting that activation of
Group I mGluRs may upregulate FMRP through CREB signaling pathway.
RESULTS: In this study, we demonstrate that CREB contributes to the regulation of
FMRP by Group I mGluRs. In ACC neurons of adult mice overexpressing dominant
active CREB mutant, the upregulation of FMRP by stimulating Group I mGluR is
enhanced compared to wild-type mice. However, the regulation of FMRP by Group I
mGluRs is not altered by overexpression of Ca2+-insensitive mutant form of
downstream regulatory element antagonist modulator (DREAM), a transcriptional
repressor involved in synaptic transmission and plasticity.
CONCLUSION: Our study has provided further evidence for CREB involvement in
regulation of FMRP by Group I mGluRs in ACC neurons, and may help to elucidate
the pathogenesis of fragile X syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3478997
PMID: 22867433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Cells. 2012 Sep;34(3):323-8. Epub 2012 Jul 27.

Involvement of the cAMP response element binding protein, CREB, and cyclin D1 in 
LPA-induced proliferation of P19 embryonic carcinoma cells.

Kim MJ(1), Sun Y, Yang H, Kim NH, Jeon SH, Huh SO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Institute of Natural
Medicine, Hallym University, Chuncheon, 200-702, Korea.

Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is a lipid growth factor that induces proliferation
of fibroblasts by activating the cAMP response element binding protein (CREB).
Here, we further investigated whether LPA induces proliferation of P19 cells, a
line of pluripotent embryonic carcinoma cells. 5'-Bromo-2-deoxyuridine
incorporation and cell viability assays showed that LPA stimulated proliferation 
of P19 cells. Immunoblot experiments with P19 cells revealed that the mitogen
activated protein kinases, including p-ERK, p38, pAKT, glycogen synthase kinase
3ß, and CREB were phosphorylated by treatment with 10 µM LPA. LPA-induced
phosphorylation of CREB was efficiently blocked by U0126 and H89, inhibitors of
the MAP kinases ERK1/2 and mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase 1,
respectively. Involvement of cyclin D1 in LPA-induced P19 cell proliferation was 
verified by immunoblot analysis in combination with pharmacological inhibitor
treatment. Furthermore, LPA up-regulated CRE-harboring cyclin D1 promoter
activity, suggesting that CREB and cyclin D1 play significant roles in
LPA-induced proliferation of P19 embryonic carcinoma cells.

PMCID: PMC3887837
PMID: 22847216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Neuropharmacology. 2013 Jan;64:153-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2012.07.010. Epub
2012 Jul 27.

Chronic caffeine prevents changes in inhibitory avoidance memory and hippocampal 
BDNF immunocontent in middle-aged rats.

Sallaberry C(1), Nunes F, Costa MS, Fioreze GT, Ardais AP, Botton PH, Klaudat B, 
Forte T, Souza DO, Elisabetsky E, Porciúncula LO.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Studies on the Purinergic System, Department of Biochemistry,
Health and Basic Sciences Institute, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Rua
Ramiro Barcelos, 2600-anexo, Porto Alegre, RS 90035 003, Brazil.

Beneficial effects of caffeine on memory processes have been observed in animal
models relevant to neurodegenerative diseases and aging, although the underlying 
mechanisms remain unknown. Because brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is
associated with memory formation and BDNF's actions are modulated by adenosine
receptors, the molecular targets for the psychostimulant actions of caffeine, we 
here compare the effects of chronic caffeine (1 mg/mL drinking solution for 30
days) on short- and long term memory and on levels of hippocampal proBDNF, mature
BDNF, TrkB and CREB in young (3 month old) and middle-aged (12 month old) rats.
Caffeine treatment substantially reduced i) age-related impairments in the two
types of memory in an inhibitory avoidance paradigm, and ii) parallel increases
in hippocampal BDNF levels. In addition, chronic caffeine increased proBDNF and
CREB concentrations, and decreased TrkB levels, in hippocampus regardless of age.
These data provide new evidence in favor of the hypothesis that modifications in 
BDNF and related proteins in the hippocampus contribute to the pro-cognitive
effects of caffeine on age-associated losses in memory encoding. This article is 
part of a Special Issue entitled 'Cognitive Enhancers'.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22841916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Nutr Biochem. 2013 Apr;24(4):638-46. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2012.03.008. Epub
2012 Jul 21.

Small molecule kaempferol modulates PDX-1 protein expression and subsequently
promotes pancreatic ß-cell survival and function via CREB.

Zhang Y(1), Zhen W, Maechler P, Liu D.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an, 710072,
China.

Chronic hyperlipidemia causes ß-cell apoptosis and dysfunction, thereby
contributing to the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes (T2D). Thus, searching for
agents to promote pancreatic ß-cell survival and improve its function could be a 
promising strategy to prevent and treat T2D. We investigated the effects of
kaempferol, a small molecule isolated from ginkgo biloba, on apoptosis and
function of ß-cells and further determined the mechanism underlying its actions. 
Kaempferol treatment promoted viability, inhibited apoptosis and reduced
caspase-3 activity in INS-1E cells and human islets chronically exposed to
palmitate. In addition, kaempferol prevented the lipotoxicity-induced
down-regulation of antiapoptotic proteins Akt and Bcl-2. The cytoprotective
effects of kaempferol were associated with improved insulin secretion, synthesis,
and pancreatic and duodenal homeobox-1 (PDX-1) expression. Chronic hyperlipidemia
significantly diminished cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) production,
protein kinase A (PKA) activation, cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB)
phosphorylation and its regulated transcriptional activity in ß-cells, all of
which were restored by kaempferol treatment. Disruption of CREB expression by
transfection of CREB siRNA in INS-1E cells or adenoviral transfer of
dominant-negative forms of CREB in human islets ablated kaempferol protection of 
ß-cell apoptosis and dysfunction caused by palmitate. Incubation of INS-1E cells 
or human islets with kaempferol for 48h induced PDX-1 expression. This effect of 
kaempferol on PDX-1 expression was not shared by a host of structurally related
flavonoid compounds. PDX-1 gene knockdown reduced kaempferol-stimulated cAMP
generation and CREB activation in INS-1E cells. These findings demonstrate that
kaempferol is a novel survivor factor for pancreatic ß-cells via up-regulating
the PDX-1/cAMP/PKA/CREB signaling cascade.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3654796
PMID: 22819546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Breast Cancer Res. 2012 Jul 20;14(4):R111. doi: 10.1186/bcr3232.

Prolactin-induced protein mediates cell invasion and regulates integrin signaling
in estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer.

Naderi A, Meyer M.

INTRODUCTION: Molecular apocrine is a subtype of estrogen receptor (ER)-negative 
breast cancer that is characterized by a steroid-response gene signature. We have
recently identified a positive feedback loop between androgen receptor (AR) and
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling in this subtype. In this
study, we investigated the transcriptional regulation of molecular apocrine genes
by the AR-ERK feedback loop.
METHODS: The transcriptional effects of AR and ERK inhibition on molecular
apocrine genes were assessed in cell lines. The most regulated gene in this
process, prolactin-induced protein (PIP), was further studied using
immunohistochemistry of breast tumors and xenograft models. The transcriptional
regulation of PIP was assessed by luciferase reporter assay and chromatin
immunoprecipitation. The functional significance of PIP in cell invasion and
viability was assessed using siRNA knockdown experiments and the mechanism of PIP
effect on integrin-ß1 signaling was studied using immunoblotting and
immunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: We found that PIP is the most regulated molecular apocrine gene by the
AR-ERK feedback loop and is overexpressed in ER-/AR+ breast tumors. In addition, 
PIP expression is regulated by AR-ERK signaling in xenograft models. These
observations are explained by the fact that PIP is a target gene of the ERK-CREB1
pathway and is also induced by AR activation. Furthermore, we demonstrated that
PIP has a significant functional role in maintaining cell invasion and viability 
of molecular apocrine cells because of a positive regulatory effect on the
Integrin-ERK and Integrin-Akt signaling pathways. In fact, PIP-knockdown markedly
decreases the phosphorylation of ERK, Akt, and CREB1. Importantly, PIP knockdown 
leads to a marked reduction of integrin-ß1 binding to ILK1 and ErbB2 that can be 
reversed by the addition of fibronectin fragments.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a novel feedback loop between PIP and CREB1
mediated through the Integrin signaling pathway. In this process, PIP cleaves
fibronectin to release fragments that activate integrin signaling, which in turn 
increases PIP expression through the ERK-CREB1 pathway. In addition, we
demonstrated that PIP expression has a profound effect on cell invasion and the
viability of molecular apocrine cells. Therefore, PIP signaling may be a
potential therapeutic target in molecular apocrine breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3680918
PMID: 22817771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 14;287(38):32069-77. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.385864. Epub
2012 Jul 19.

Transcriptional co-activator p300 maintains basal hepatic gluconeogenesis.

He L(1), Naik K, Meng S, Cao J, Sidhaye AR, Ma A, Radovick S, Wondisford FE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolism, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA. heling@jhmi.ed

A major cause of fasting hyperglycemia in diabetes mellitus is unregulated
hepatic glucose production (HGP). Insulin suppresses HGP by phosphorylating CBP
and disassembling the CREB-CBP complex from gluconeogenic genes. p300 is closely 
related to CBP; but in contrast to CBP, p300 binds constitutively to CREB due to 
the absence of phosphorylation site found in CBP. In a phosphorylation-competent 
p300(G442S) knock-in mouse model, we demonstrate that HGP is now exquisitely
sensitive to insulin suppression. p300(G422S) and hepatic-deleted p300 mice
exhibited significant lower blood glucose levels in the fasted and post-prandial 
states, indicating a role for p300 in maintaining basal HGP.

PMCID: PMC3442537
PMID: 22815486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Physiol. 2012 Oct 1;590(19):4917-32. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2012.234187. Epub
2012 Jul 9.

Regulation of hippocampus-dependent memory by the zinc finger protein Zbtb20 in
mature CA1 neurons.

Ren A(1), Zhang H, Xie Z, Ma X, Ji W, He DZ, Yuan W, Ding YQ, Zhang XH, Zhang WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai
200433, China.

The mammalian hippocampus harbours neural circuitry that is crucial for
associative learning and memory. The mechanisms that underlie the development and
regulation of this complex circuitry are not fully understood. Our previous study
established an essential role for the zinc finger protein Zbtb20 in the
specification of CA1 field identity in the developing hippocampus. Here, we show 
that conditionally deleting Zbtb20 specifically in mature CA1 pyramidal neurons
impaired hippocampus-dependent memory formation, without affecting hippocampal
architecture or the survival, identity and basal excitatory synaptic activity of 
CA1 pyramidal neurons. We demonstrate that mature CA1-specific Zbtb20 knockout
mice exhibited reductions in long-term potentiation (LTP) and NMDA receptor
(NMDAR)-mediated excitatory post-synaptic currents. Furthermore, we show that
activity-induced phosphorylation of ERK and CREB is impaired in the hippocampal
CA1 of Zbtb20 mutant mice. Collectively, these results indicate that Zbtb20 in
mature CA1 plays an important role in LTP and memory by regulating NMDAR
activity, and activation of ERK and CREB.

PMCID: PMC3487045
PMID: 22777671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 24;287(35):29529-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.338012. Epub
2012 Jun 29.

Suppression of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B activation and inflammation in microglia by
physically modified saline.

Khasnavis S(1), Jana A, Roy A, Mazumder M, Bhushan B, Wood T, Ghosh S, Watson R, 
Pahan K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
IL 60612, USA.

Chronic inflammation involving activated microglia and astroglia is becoming a
hallmark of many human diseases, including neurodegenerative disorders. Although 
NF-<U+03BA>B is a multifunctional transcription factor, it is an important target for
controlling inflammation as the transcription of many proinflammatory molecules
depends on the activation of NF-<U+03BA>B. Here, we have undertaken a novel approach to 
attenuate NF-<U+03BA>B activation and associated inflammation in activated glial cells. 
RNS60 is a 0.9% saline solution containing charge-stabilized nanostructures that 
are generated by subjecting normal saline to Taylor-Couette-Poiseuille (TCP) flow
under elevated oxygen pressure. RNS60, but not normal saline, RNS10.3
(TCP-modified saline without excess oxygen), and PNS60 (saline containing excess 
oxygen without TCP modification) were found to inhibit the production of nitric
oxide (NO) and the expression of inducible NO synthase in activated microglia.
Similarly, RNS60 also inhibited the expression of inducible NO synthase in
activated astroglia. Inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B activation by RNS60 suggests that RNS60 
exerts its anti-inflammatory effect through the inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B.
Interestingly, RNS60 induced the activation of type IA phosphatidylinositol (PI) 
3-kinase and Akt and rapidly up-regulated I<U+03BA>Ba, a specific endogenous inhibitor
of NF-<U+03BA>B. Inhibition of PI 3-kinase and Akt by either chemical inhibitors or
dominant-negative mutants abrogated the RNS60-mediated up-regulation of I<U+03BA>Ba.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that RNS60 induced the activation of cAMP-response
element-binding protein (CREB) via the PI 3-kinase-Akt pathway and that RNS60
up-regulated I<U+03BA>Ba via CREB. These results describe a novel anti-inflammatory
property of RNS60 via type IA PI 3-kinase-Akt-CREB-mediated up-regulation of
I<U+03BA>Ba, which may be of therapeutic benefit in neurodegenerative disorders.

PMCID: PMC3436140
PMID: 22753407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Oct;1823(10):1658-65. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.06.011. Epub 2012 Jun 25.

Sphingosine 1-phosphate induces MKP-1 expression via p38 MAPK- and CREB-mediated 
pathways in airway smooth muscle cells.

Che W(1), Manetsch M, Quante T, Rahman MM, Patel BS, Ge Q, Ammit AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Research Group, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia.

Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P), a bioactive sphingolipid elevated in asthmatic
airways, is increasingly recognized as playing an important role in respiratory
disease. S1P activates receptor-mediated signaling to modulate diverse cellular
functions and promote airway inflammation. Although many of the stimulatory
pathways activated by S1P have been delineated, especially mitogen-activated
protein kinases (MAPK), the question of whether S1P exerts negative feedback
control on its own signaling cascade via upregulation of phosphatases remains
unexplored. We show that S1P rapidly and robustly upregulates mRNA and protein
expression of the MAPK deactivator-MAPK phosphatase 1 (MKP-1). Utilizing the
pivotal airway structural cell, airway smooth muscle (ASM), we confirm that S1P
activates all members of the MAPK family and, in part, S1P upregulates MKP-1
expression in a p38 MAPK-dependent manner. MKP-1 is a cAMP response element
binding (CREB) protein-responsive gene and here, we reveal for the first time
that an adenylate cyclase/PKA/CREB-mediated pathway also contributes to
S1P-induced MKP-1. Thus, by increasing MKP-1 expression via parallel p38 MAPK-
and CREB-mediated pathways, S1P temporally regulates MAPK signaling pathways by
upregulating the negative feedback controller MKP-1. This limits the extent and
duration of pro-inflammatory MAPK signaling and represses cytokine secretion in
ASM cells. Taken together, our results demonstrate that S1P stimulates both
kinases and the phosphatase MKP-1 to control inflammation in ASM cells and may
provide a greater understanding of the molecular mechanisms responsible for the
pro-asthmatic functions induced by the potent bioactive sphingolipid S1P in the
lung.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22743041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Nov;113(11):3587-98. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24237.

Cyclic GMP/protein kinase G type-Ia (PKG-Ia) signaling pathway promotes CREB
phosphorylation and maintains higher c-IAP1, livin, survivin, and Mcl-1
expression and the inhibition of PKG-Ia kinase activity synergizes with cisplatin
in non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Wong JC(1), Bathina M, Fiscus RR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Diabetes and Obesity Prevention, Treatment, Research and Education,
and College of Pharmacy, Roseman University of Health Sciences, Henderson, Nevada
89014, USA.

Previously, our laboratory showed that nitric oxide (NO)/cyclic GMP
(cGMP)/protein kinase G type-Ia (PKG-Ia) signaling pathway plays an important
role in preventing spontaneous apoptosis and promoting cell proliferation in both
normal cells (bone marrow stromal cells and vascular smooth muscle cells) and
certain cancer cells (ovarian cancer cells). In the present study, we
investigated the novel role of the cGMP/PKG-Ia pathway in preventing spontaneous 
apoptosis, promoting colony formation and regulating phosphorylation of cAMP
response element binding (CREB) protein and protein expression of inhibitor of
apoptosis proteins (IAPs) and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2-related proteins in NCI-H460
and A549 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells.
1H-(1,2,4)oxadiazolo(4,3-a)quinoxalin-1-one (ODQ), which blocks endogenous
NO-induced activation of cGMP/PKG-Ia, induced apoptosis and decreased colony
formation. ODQ also decreased CREB ser133 phosphorylation and protein expression 
of c-IAP1, livin, and survivin. DT-2 (inhibitor of PKG-Ia kinase activity)
increased apoptosis by twofold and decreased CREB ser133 phosphorylation and
c-IAP1, livin, and survivin expression. Gene knockdown of PKG-Ia expression using
small-interfering RNA increased apoptosis and decreased CREB ser133
phosphorylation, and c-IAP1, livin, survivin, and Mcl-1 expression. Inhibition of
PKG-Ia kinase activity with DT-2 dramatically enhanced pro-apoptotic effects of
the chemotherapeutic agent cisplatin. Combined treatment of DT-2 and cisplatin
increased apoptosis compared with cisplatin or DT-2 alone, showing a synergistic 
effect. The data suggest that the PKG-Ia kinase activity is necessary for
maintaining higher levels of CREB phosphorylation at ser133 and protein
expression of c-IAP1, livin, survivin, and Mcl-1, preventing spontaneous
apoptosis and promoting colony formation in NSCLC cells, which may limit the
effectiveness of chemotherapeutic agents like cisplatin.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22740515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Aug;26(8):1278-90. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1347. Epub 2012 Jun 
25.

The LIM domain protein FHL2 interacts with the NR5A family of nuclear receptors
and CREB to activate the inhibin-a subunit gene in ovarian granulosa cells.

Matulis CK(1), Mayo KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences and Center of Reproductive Science,
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA.

Nuclear receptor transcriptional activity is enhanced by interaction with
coactivators. The highly related nuclear receptor 5A (NR5A) subfamily members
liver receptor homolog 1 and steroidogenic factor 1 bind to and activate several 
of the same genes, many of which are important for reproductive function. To
better understand transcriptional activation by these nuclear receptors, we
sought to identify interacting proteins that might function as coactivators. The 
LIM domain protein four and a half LIM domain 2 (FHL2) was identified as
interacting with the NR5A receptors in a yeast two-hybrid screen of a human ovary
cDNA library. FHL2, and the closely related FHL1, are both expressed in the
rodent ovary and in granulosa cells. Small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of 
FHL1 and FHL2 in primary mouse granulosa cells reduced expression of the NR5A
target genes encoding inhibin-a and P450scc. In vitro assays confirmed the
interaction between the FHL and NR5A proteins and revealed that a single LIM
domain of FHL2 is sufficient for this interaction, whereas determinants in both
the ligand binding domain and DNA binding domain of NR5A proteins are important. 
FHL2 enhances the ability of both liver receptor homolog 1 and steroidogenic
factor 1 to activate the inhibin-a subunit gene promoter in granulosa cells and
thus functions as a transcriptional coactivator. FHL2 also interacts with cAMP
response element-binding protein and substantially augments activation of inhibin
gene expression by the combination of NR5A receptors and forskolin, suggesting
that FHL2 may facilitate integration of these two signals. Collectively these
results identify FHL2 as a novel coactivator of NR5A nuclear receptors in ovarian
granulosa cells and suggest its involvement in regulating target genes important 
for mammalian reproduction.

PMCID: PMC3404300
PMID: 22734036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Cell Biol Int. 2012 Nov 1;36(11):1005-12. doi: 10.1042/CBI20110089.

MicroRNA 17-92 expressed by a transposone-based vector changes expression level
of cell-cycle-related genes.

Attar M(1), Arefian E, Nabiuni M, Adegani FJ, Bakhtiari SH, Karimi Z, Barzegar M,
Soleimani M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Tehran, Iran.

Erratum in
    Cell Biol Int. 2012 Dec 1;36(12):1299.

The miR-17-92 cluster is composed of seven miRNAs (microRNAs; miR-17-5p,
miR-17-3p, miR-18a, miR-19a, miR-20a, miR-19b-1 and miR-92a-1). Previous studies 
have indicated that this cluster is involved in cell proliferation and their
overexpression has been seen in several types of cancer. We have assessed the
overexpression effects of miR-17-92 on the expression of several genes associated
with cell-cycle regulation. The human miR-17-92 gene was cloned into a
transposone-based vector, piggyBac and transfected into HEK-293T [HEK-293 cells
(human embryonic kidney cells) expressing the large T-antigen of SV40 (simian
virus 40)] cell line. Gene expression analysis indicated that up-regulation of
this cluster causes significant changes in the expression of several cell-cycle
related genes, including CDK2 (cyclin-dependent kinase 2), cyclin-D2, c-Myc and
CREB (cAMP-response-element-binding protein). Other methods of transcripts
assessment confirmed miR-17-92 overexpression enhances cell proliferation.

PMID: 22731656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Neurochem. 2012 Sep;122(5):911-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2012.07838.x. Epub 
2012 Jul 11.

ERK1/2, p38, and JNK regulate the expression and the activity of the three
isoforms of the Na+ /Ca2+ exchanger, NCX1, NCX2, and NCX3, in neuronal PC12
cells.

Sirabella R(1), Secondo A, Pannaccione A, Molinaro P, Formisano L, Guida N, Di
Renzo G, Annunziato L, Cataldi M.

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione IRCCS SDN, Naples, Italy.

We evaluated whether changes in expression and activity of the three
sodium/calcium exchanger isoforms, NCX1, NCX2, and NCX3 occurred in PC12 cells
when the extracellular-signal-regulated kinases 1/2 (ERK1/2), c-Jun N-terminal
kinases (JNK), and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) were silenced,
pharmacologically blocked, or activated with nerve growth factor (NGF). Several
findings suggesting that MAPKs control NCX emerged: (1) A decrease in NCX1 and
NCX3 basal expression occurred when JNK or MEK1, the
extracellular-signal-regulated kinases 1/2 upstream activator, were
pharmacologically blocked, respectively; (2) NGF increased cAMP response
element-binding 1 (CREB1) and Specificity Protein 1 (Sp1) binding to ncx1
promoter and CREB1 binding to two different sequences close to ncx2 transcription
start site on genomic DNA; (3) An up-regulation of NCX1 and NCX3, abrogated upon 
either MEK1 or p38 blockade, and a down-regulation of NCX2, abolished upon p38
blockade, occurred upon NGF-induced MAPK activation. The NCX1 up-regulation was
abolished upon either CREB1 or Sp1 silencing, whereas NCX2 down-regulation was
abrogated only by CREB1 silencing. The NCX3 up-regulation was unaffected by CREB1
or Sp1 silencing and abolished upon proteasomal inhibition; (4) Whole-cell Na(+) 
/Ca(2+) exchange decreased when MEK1 and JNK were blocked and increased when
MAPKs were activated by NGF. Collectively, these results demonstrate a
MAPK-dependent regulation of NCX expression and activity which could be relevant 
in mediating some of the effects of MAPKs in neurons.

© 2012 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2012 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMID: 22708976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Breast Cancer Res. 2012 Jun 14;14(3):R95.

Phosphorylated and sumoylation-deficient progesterone receptors drive
proliferative gene signatures during breast cancer progression.

Knutson TP(1), Daniel AR, Fan D, Silverstein KA, Covington KR, Fuqua SA, Lange
CA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine (Division of Hematology, Oncology, and
Transplantation) and Pharmacology, Masonic Cancer Center, University of
Minnesota, 420 Delaware Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA.

INTRODUCTION: Progesterone receptors (PR) are emerging as important breast cancer
drivers. Phosphorylation events common to breast cancer cells impact PR
transcriptional activity, in part by direct phosphorylation. PR-B but not PR-A
isoforms are phosphorylated on Ser294 by mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) 
and cyclin dependent kinase 2 (CDK2). Phospho-Ser294 PRs are resistant to
ligand-dependent Lys388 SUMOylation (that is, a repressive modification).
Antagonism of PR small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)ylation by mitogenic protein
kinases suggests a mechanism for derepression (that is, transcriptional
activation) of target genes. As a broad range of PR protein expression is
observed clinically, a PR gene signature would provide a valuable marker of PR
contribution to early breast cancer progression.
METHODS: Global gene expression patterns were measured in T47D and MCF-7 breast
cancer cells expressing either wild-type (SUMOylation-capable) or K388R
(SUMOylation-deficient) PRs and subjected to pathway analysis. Gene sets were
validated by RT-qPCR. Recruitment of coregulators and histone methylation levels 
were determined by chromatin immunoprecipitation. Changes in cell proliferation
and survival were determined by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assays and
western blotting. Finally, human breast tumor cohort datasets were probed to
identify PR-associated gene signatures; metagene analysis was employed to define 
survival rates in patients whose tumors express a PR gene signature.
RESULTS: 'SUMO-sensitive' PR target genes primarily include genes required for
proliferative and pro-survival signaling. DeSUMOylated K388R receptors are
preferentially recruited to enhancer regions of derepressed genes (that is, MSX2,
RGS2, MAP1A, and PDK4) with the steroid receptor coactivator, CREB-(cAMP-response
element-binding protein)-binding protein (CBP), and mixed lineage leukemia 2
(MLL2), a histone methyltransferase mediator of nucleosome remodeling. PR
SUMOylation blocks these events, suggesting that SUMO modification of PR prevents
interactions with mediators of early chromatin remodeling at 'closed' enhancer
regions. SUMO-deficient (phospho-Ser294) PR gene signatures are significantly
associated with human epidermal growth factor 2 (ERBB2)-positive luminal breast
tumors and predictive of early metastasis and shortened survival. Treatment with 
antiprogestin or MEK inhibitor abrogated expression of SUMO-sensitive PR
target-genes and inhibited proliferation in BT-474 (estrogen receptor
(ER)+/PR+/ERBB2+) breast cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that reversible PR SUMOylation/deSUMOylation profoundly 
alters target gene selection in breast cancer cells. Phosphorylation-induced PR
deSUMOylation favors a permissive chromatin environment via recruitment of CBP
and MLL2. Patients whose ER+/PR+ tumors are driven by hyperactive (that is,
derepressed) phospho-PRs may benefit from endocrine (antiestrogen) therapies that
contain an antiprogestin.

PMCID: PMC3446358
PMID: 22697792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jul 27;287(31):26302-11. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.342113. Epub
2012 Jun 8.

Elevation of highly up-regulated in liver cancer (HULC) by hepatitis B virus X
protein promotes hepatoma cell proliferation via down-regulating p18.

Du Y(1), Kong G, You X, Zhang S, Zhang T, Gao Y, Ye L, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research, Key Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and
Technology of Ministry of Education, Institute for Molecular Biology, Nankai
University, Tianjin 300071, China.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) play crucial roles in human cancers. It has been
reported that lncRNA highly up-regulated in liver cancer (HULC) is dramatically
up-regulated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Hepatitis B virus X protein (HBx)
contributes importantly to the development of HCC. However, the function of HULC 
in HCC mediated by HBx remains unclear. Here, we report that HULC is involved in 
HBx-mediated hepatocarcinogenesis. We found that the expression levels of HULC
were positively correlated with those of HBx in clinical HCC tissues. Moreover,
we revealed that HBx up-regulated HULC in human immortalized normal liver L-O2
cells and hepatoma HepG2 cells. Luciferase reporter gene assay and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay showed that HBx activated the HULC promoter via 
cAMP-responsive element-binding protein. We further demonstrated that HULC
promoted cell proliferation by methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium,
5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine, colony formation assay, and tumorigenicity assay.
Next, we hypothesized that HULC might function through regulating a tumor
suppressor gene p18 located near HULC in the same chromosome. We found that the
mRNA levels of p18 were inversely correlated with those of HULC in the above
clinical HCC specimens. Then, we validated that HULC down-regulated p18, which
was involved in the HULC-enhanced cell proliferation in vitro and in vivo.
Furthermore, we observed that knockdown of HULC could abolish the HBx-enhanced
cell proliferation through up-regulating p18. Thus, we conclude that the
up-regulated HULC by HBx promotes proliferation of hepatoma cells through
suppressing p18. This finding provides new insight into the roles of lncRNAs in
HBx-related hepatocarcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3406714
PMID: 22685290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Oct;1820(10):1636-46. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2012.05.008. Epub 2012 May 29.

PKA and cAMP stimulate proliferation of mouse embryonic stem cells by elevating
GLUT1 expression mediated by the NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB/CBP signaling pathways.

Kim MO(1), Lee YJ, Park JH, Ryu JM, Yun SP, Han HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Regulation of glucose transporter (GLUT) expression and activity
plays a vital role in the supply of glucose to embryonic stem (ES) cells.
METHODS: To observe the effect of 6-phenyl cyclic monophosphate (cAMP) on glucose
uptake and cell proliferation, 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG) uptake,
immunohistochemistry, Western blotting, and immunoprecipitation were carried out.
RESULTS: Among GLUT isoforms in mouse ES cells, GLUT1 was predominantly expressed
and 6-phenyl cAMP increased GLUT mRNA levels. Among cAMP agonists, 6-phenyl cAMP 
increased 2-DG uptake more than that of 8-p-chlorophenylthio-2'-O-methyl-cAMP.
6-Phenyl cAMP increased GLUT1 expression and translocation from the cytosol to
the plasma membrane. 6-Phenyl cAMP increased 2-DG uptake in a time- and
concentration-dependent manner due to an increase in V(max) but not K(m).
6-Phenyl cAMP increased phosphorylation of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and cAMP
response element binding (CREB) and expression of the CREB protein (CBP) and
transducer of regulated CREB activity 2 (TORC2) in sequence. 6-Phenyl cAMP
induced complex formation of NF-<U+03BA>B/CREB/CBP/TORC2, which are involved in the
increase of gluconeogenic enzyme expression. 6-Phenyl cAMP also increased cell
cycle regulatory protein expression levels, the proportion of S-phase cells, and 
proto-oncogene expression via protein kinase A (PKA)-dependent NF-<U+03BA>B signaling.
Finally, GLUT1 siRNA blocked the 6-phenyl cAMP-induced increase in ES cell
proliferation. We conclude that PKA stimulated the complex formation of
CREB/CBP/TORC2 via NF-<U+03BA>B, which induced effective coordination of glucose uptake 
as well as proliferation in ES cells.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: 6-Phenyl cAMP-induced PKA activation modified the
proliferation, which may be beneficial for expanding ES cell use to cell therapy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22658979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36177. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036177. Epub 2012 May 24.

Loss of CCDC6, the first identified RET partner gene, affects pH2AX S139 levels
and accelerates mitotic entry upon DNA damage.

Merolla F(1), Luise C, Muller MT, Pacelli R, Fusco A, Celetti A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale, CNR, Naples, Italy.

CCDC6 was originally identified in chimeric genes caused by chromosomal
translocation involving the RET proto-oncogene in some thryoid tumors mostly upon
ionizing radiation exposure. Recognised as a pro-apoptotic phosphoprotein that
negatively regulates CREB1-dependent transcription, CCDC6 is an ATM substrate
that is responsive to genotoxic stress. Here we report that following genotoxic
stress, loss or inactivation of CCDC6 in cancers that carry the CCDC6 fusion,
accelerates the dephosphorylation of pH2AX S139, resulting in defective G2 arrest
and premature mitotic entry. Moreover, we show that CCDC6 depleted cells appear
to repair DNA damaged in a shorter time compared to controls, based on reporter
assays in cells. High-troughput proteomic screening predicted the interaction
between the CCDC6 gene product and the catalytic subunit of Serin-Threonin
Protein Phosphatase 4 (PP4c) recently identified as the evolutionarily conserved 
pH2AX S139 phosphatase that is activated upon DNA Damage. We describe the
interaction between CCDC6 and PP4c and we report the modulation of PP4c enzymatic
activity in CCDC6 depleted cells. We discuss the functional significance of
CCDC6-PP4c interactions and hypothesize that CCDC6 may act in the DNA Damage
Response by negatively modulating PP4c activity. Overall, our data suggest that
in primary tumours the loss of CCDC6 function could influence genome stability
and thereby contribute to carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3360053
PMID: 22655027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Exp Cell Res. 2012 Oct 1;318(16):2004-13. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.04.015. Epub 
2012 May 29.

OX2R activation induces PKC-mediated ERK and CREB phosphorylation.

Guo Y(1), Feng P.

Author information: 
(1)Louis Stokes Cleveland VA Medical Center, Research Sec, Rm: K217, 10701 East
BLVD, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.

Deficiencies in brain orexins and components of mitogen activated protein kinase 
(MAPK) signaling pathway have been reported in either human depression or animal 
model of depression. Brain administration of orexins affects behaviors toward
improvement of depressive symptoms. However, the documentation of endogenous
linkage between orexin receptor activation and MAPK signaling pathway remains to 
be insufficient. In this study, we report the effects of orexin 2 receptor (OX2R)
activation on cell signaling in CHO cells over-expressing OX2R and in mouse
hypothalamus cell line CLU172. Short-term extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK) phosphorylation and long-term cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)
response element binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation were subsequently
observed in CHO cells that over-express OX2R while 20 min of ERK phosphorylation 
was significantly detected in mouse adult hypothalamus neuron cell line CLU172.
Orexin A, which can also activate OX2R, mediated ERK phosphorylation was as the
same as orexin B in CHO cells. A MAPK inhibitor eliminated ERK phosphorylation
but not CREB phosphorylation in CHO cells. Also, ERK and CREB phosphorylation was
not mediated by protein kinase A (PKA) or calmodulin kinase (CaMK). However,
inhibition of protein kinase C (PKC) by GF 109203X eliminated the phosphorylation
of ERK and CREB in CHO cells. A significant decrease in ERK and CREB
phosphorylation was observed with 1 µM GF 109203X pre-treatment indicating that
the conventional and novel isoforms of PKC are responsible for CREB
phosphorylation after OX2R activation. In contrast, ERK phosphorylation induced
by orexin B in CLU172 cells cannot be inhibited by 1 µM of protein kinase C
inhibitor. From above observation we conclude that OX2R activation by orexin B
induces ERK and CREB phosphorylation and orexin A played the same role as orexin 
B. Several isoforms of PKC may be involved in prolonged CREB phosphorylation.
Orexin B induced ERK phosphorylation in mouse hypothalamus neuron cells differs
from CHO cell line and cannot be inhibited by PKC inhibitor GF 109203X. And
hypothalamus neuron cells may use different downsteam pathway for orexin B
induced ERK phosphorylation. This result supports findings that orexins might
have anti-depressive roles.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3580264
PMID: 22652455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Sep 1;40(17):e135. Epub 2012 May 29.

Integrative analysis of gene and miRNA expression profiles with transcription
factor-miRNA feed-forward loops identifies regulators in human cancers.

Yan Z(1), Shah PK, Amin SB, Samur MK, Huang N, Wang X, Misra V, Ji H, Gabuzda D, 
Li C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

We describe here a novel method for integrating gene and miRNA expression
profiles in cancer using feed-forward loops (FFLs) consisting of transcription
factors (TFs), miRNAs and their common target genes. The dChip-GemiNI (Gene and
miRNA Network-based Integration) method statistically ranks computationally
predicted FFLs by their explanatory power to account for differential gene and
miRNA expression between two biological conditions such as normal and cancer.
GemiNI integrates not only gene and miRNA expression data but also
computationally derived information about TF-target gene and miRNA-mRNA
interactions. Literature validation shows that the integrated modeling of
expression data and FFLs better identifies cancer-related TFs and miRNAs compared
to existing approaches. We have utilized GemiNI for analyzing six data sets of
solid cancers (liver, kidney, prostate, lung and germ cell) and found that
top-ranked FFLs account for ~20% of transcriptome changes between normal and
cancer. We have identified common FFL regulators across multiple cancer types,
such as known FFLs consisting of MYC and miR-15/miR-17 families, and novel FFLs
consisting of ARNT, CREB1 and their miRNA partners. The results and analysis web 
server are available at http://www.canevolve.org/dChip-GemiNi.

PMCID: PMC3458521
PMID: 22645320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Blood. 2012 Jul 5;120(1):155-65. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-357418. Epub 2012 May
24.

Sox4 cooperates with CREB in myeloid transformation.

Sandoval S(1), Kraus C, Cho EC, Cho M, Bies J, Manara E, Accordi B, Landaw EM,
Wolff L, Pigazzi M, Sakamoto KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Gwynne Hazen,
Cherry Memorial Laboratories, Mattel Children's Hospital, University of
California, Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, CA, USA.

The cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) is a nuclear transcription
factor that is critical for normal and neoplastic hematopoiesis. Previous studies
have demonstrated that CREB is a proto-oncogene whose overexpression promotes
cellular proliferation in hematopoietic cells. Transgenic mice that overexpress
CREB in myeloid cells develop a myeloproliferative disease with splenomegaly and 
aberrant myelopoiesis. However, CREB overexpressing mice do not spontaneously
develop acute myeloid leukemia. In this study, we used retroviral insertional
mutagenesis to identify genes that accelerate leukemia in CREB transgenic mice.
Our mutagenesis screen identified several integration sites, including oncogenes 
Gfi1, Myb, and Ras. The Sox4 transcription factor was identified by our screen as
a gene that cooperates with CREB in myeloid leukemogenesis. We show that the
transduction of CREB transgenic mouse bone marrow cells with a Sox4 retrovirus
increases survival and self-renewal of cells in vitro. Furthermore, leukemic
blasts from the majority of acute myeloid leukemia patients have higher CREB,
phosphorylated CREB, and Sox 4 protein expression. Sox4 transduction of mouse
bone marrow cells results in increased expression of CREB target genes. We also
demonstrate that CREB is a direct target of Sox4 by chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays. These results indicate that Sox4 and CREB cooperate and contribute to
increased proliferation of hematopoietic progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC3390953
PMID: 22627767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Pineal Res. 2012 Nov;53(4):344-57. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2012.01004.x. Epub 
2012 May 23.

Phosphorylation of cyclic AMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) is
influenced by melatonin treatment in pancreatic rat insulinoma ß-cells (INS-1).

Bazwinsky-Wutschke I(1), Wolgast S, Mühlbauer E, Albrecht E, Peschke E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Martin Luther University
Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany. ivonne.bazwinsky@medizin.uni-halle.de

The pineal hormone melatonin exerts its influence on the insulin secretion of
pancreatic islets by a variety of signalling pathways. The purpose of the present
study was to analyse the impact of melatonin on the phosphorylated transcription 
factor cAMP-response element-binding protein (pCREB). In pancreatic rat
insulinoma ß-cells (INS-1), pCREB immunofluorescence intensities in cell nuclei
using digitised confocal image analysis were measured to semi-quantify
differences in the pCREB immunoreactivity (pCREB-ir) caused by different
treatments. Increasing concentrations of forskolin or 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine
(IBMX) resulted in a dose-dependent rise of the mean fluorescence intensity in
pCREB-ir nuclear staining. Concomitant melatonin application significantly
decreased pCREB-ir in INS-1 cells after 30-min, 1-hr and 3-hr treatment. The
melatonin receptor antagonists luzindole and 4-phenyl-2-propionamidotetraline
(4P-PDOT) completely abolished the pCREB phosphorylation-decreasing effect of
melatonin, indicating that both melatonin receptor isoforms (MT(1) and MT(2)) are
involved. In a transfected INS-1 cell line expressing the human MT(2) receptor,
melatonin caused the greatest reduction in pCREB after IBMX treatment compared
with nontransfected INS-1 cells, indicating a crucial influence of melatonin
receptor density on pCREB regulation. Furthermore, the downregulation of pCREB by
melatonin is concomitantly associated with a statistically significant
downregulation of Camk2d transcript levels, as measured after 3 hr. In
conclusion, the present study provides evidence that the phosphorylation level of
CREB is modulated in pancreatic ß-cells by melatonin. Mediated via CREB,
melatonin regulates the expression of genes that play an important functional
role in the regulation of ß-cell signalling pathways.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22616931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Cell Biochem. 2012 Sep;368(1-2):47-59. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1341-8. Epub
2012 May 19.

Guanylyl cyclase/natriuretic peptide receptor-A signaling antagonizes the
vascular endothelial growth factor-stimulated MAPKs and downstream effectors AP-1
and CREB in mouse mesangial cells.

Tripathi S(1), Pandey KN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, School of 
Medicine, SL-39, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA.

Along with its natriuretic, diuretic, and vasodilatory properties, atrial
natriuretic peptide (ANP), and its guanylyl cyclase/natriuretic peptide
receptor-A (GC-A/NPRA) exhibit an inhibitory effect on cell growth and
proliferation. However, the signaling pathways mediating this inhibition are not 
well understood. The objective of this study was to determine the effect of
ANP-NPRA system on mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) and the downstream
proliferative transcription factors involving activating protein-1 (AP-1) and
cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB) in agonist-stimulated mouse
mesangial cells (MMCs). We found that ANP inhibited vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF)-stimulated phosphorylation of MAPKs (Erk1, Erk2, JNK, and p38), to 
a greater extent in NPRA-transfected cells (50-60 %) relative to
vector-transfected cells (25-30 %). The analyses of the phosphorylated
transcription factors revealed that ANP inhibited VEGF-stimulated activation of
CREB, and the AP-1 subunits (c-jun and c-fos). Gel shift assays demonstrated that
ANP inhibited VEGF-stimulated AP-1 and CREB DNA-binding ability by 67 and 62 %,
respectively. The addition of the protein kinase G (PKG) inhibitor, KT-5823,
restored the VEGF-stimulated activation of MAPKs, AP-1, and CREB, demonstrating
the integral role of cGMP/PKG signaling in NPRA-mediated effects. Our results
delineate the underlying mechanisms through which ANP-NPRA system exerts an
inhibitory effect on MAPKs and down-stream effector molecules, AP-1, and CREB,
critical for cell growth and proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3488346
PMID: 22610792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2012 Jul;303(2):L130-40. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00363.2011. Epub 2012 May 18.

Olprinone and colforsin daropate alleviate septic lung inflammation and apoptosis
through CREB-independent activation of the Akt pathway.

Oishi H(1), Takano K, Tomita K, Takebe M, Yokoo H, Yamazaki M, Hattori Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine 
and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Japan.

Olprinone, a specific phosphodiesterase III inhibitor, and corforsin daropate, a 
direct adenylate cyclase activator, are now being used in critical conditions. We
investigated whether their therapeutic use provides protection against septic
acute lung injury (ALI) and mortality. Polymicrobial sepsis was induced by cecal 
ligation and puncture (CLP) in BALB/c mice. Olprinone or colforsin daropate was
continuously given through an osmotic pump that was implanted into the peritoneal
cavity immediately following CLP. These treatments prevented the ALI development 
in CLP mice, as indicated by the findings that severe hypoxemia, increased
pulmonary vascular permeability, and histological lung damage were strikingly
remedied. Furthermore, continued administration of olprinone or colforsin
daropate suppressed apoptosis induction in septic lungs and improved the survival
of CLP mice. Olprinone and corforsin daropate enhanced Akt phosphorylation in
septic lungs. Wortmannin, which inhibits the Akt upstream regulator
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, abrogated the protective effects of olprinone and 
corforsin daropate on sepsis-associated lung inflammation and apoptosis. In vivo 
transfection of cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CREB) decoy
oligodeoxynucleotide failed to negate the abilities of these agents to increase
Akt phosphorylation and to inhibit I<U+03BA>Ba degradation in septic lungs. These
results demonstrate for the first time that CREB-independent Akt-mediated
signaling is a critical mechanism contributing to the therapeutic effects of
olprinone and corforsin daropate on septic ALI. Moreover, our data also suggest
that these cyclic AMP-related agents, by blocking both nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B
activation and apoptosis induction, may represent an effective therapeutic
approach to the treatment of the septic syndrome.

PMID: 22610350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Exp Neurol. 2012 Aug;236(2):199-206. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.05.008. Epub
2012 May 15.

Norepinephrine differentially modulates the innate inflammatory response provoked
by amyloid-ß peptide via action at ß-adrenoceptors and activation of cAMP/PKA
pathway in human THP-1 macrophages.

Yang JH(1), Lee EO, Kim SE, Suh YH, Chong YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Division of Molecular Biology 
and Neuroscience, Ewha Medical Research Institute, Ewha Womans University Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.

Evidence indicates that norepinephrine (NE) has antiinflammatory activities and
plays a neuroprotective role where inflammatory events contribute to Alzheimer's 
disease pathology. Here, we evaluated the effects of NE on amyloid beta 1-42
(Aß1-42)-induced cytotoxicity and proinflammatory cytokine/chemokine secretion,
and determined the mechanisms through which NE exerts its actions in human THP-1 
macrophages. NE clearly reduced the Aß1-42-mediated production of the
proinflammatory chemokine, monocytic chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1/CCL2). In
contrast to its ability to reduce MCP-1 secretion, NE enhanced the amounts of the
proinflammatory cytokine interleukin (IL)-1ß secreted from Aß1-42 treated cells. 
NE significantly reduced the Aß1-42-induced cytotoxicity in situations where it
contributed to the increased IL-1ß and decreased MCP-1 during Aß1-42 stimulation.
The ability of NE to differentially modulate the Aß1-42-induced immune responses 
was mediated by ß-adrenoceptors, as the aforementioned effects were replicated by
the ß-adrenoceptor agonist, isoproterenol, and blocked by the ß-adrenoceptor
antagonist, dl-propranolol. Of note, the NE effects on Aß1-42-induced responses
were mimicked by dbcAMP and forskolin, but significantly blocked by H89, an
inhibitor of PKA. Moreover, NE abolished Aß1-42-mediated decline of CREB
phosphorylation. Overall, NE suppresses Aß1-42-mediated cytotoxicity and MCP-1
secretion, but enhances Aß-mediated IL-1ß secretion through action at
ß-adrenoceptors, accompanied by activation of cAMP/PKA pathway and CREB in human 
microglia-like THP-1 cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22609331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Cell Metab. 2012 Jun 6;15(6):848-60. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2012.04.019. Epub 2012
May 17.

Time-restricted feeding without reducing caloric intake prevents metabolic
diseases in mice fed a high-fat diet.

Hatori M(1), Vollmers C, Zarrinpar A, DiTacchio L, Bushong EA, Gill S, Leblanc M,
Chaix A, Joens M, Fitzpatrick JA, Ellisman MH, Panda S.

Author information: 
(1)Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

While diet-induced obesity has been exclusively attributed to increased caloric
intake from fat, animals fed a high-fat diet (HFD) ad libitum (ad lib) eat
frequently throughout day and night, disrupting the normal feeding cycle. To test
whether obesity and metabolic diseases result from HFD or disruption of metabolic
cycles, we subjected mice to either ad lib or time-restricted feeding (tRF) of a 
HFD for 8 hr per day. Mice under tRF consume equivalent calories from HFD as
those with ad lib access yet are protected against obesity, hyperinsulinemia,
hepatic steatosis, and inflammation and have improved motor coordination. The tRF
regimen improved CREB, mTOR, and AMPK pathway function and oscillations of the
circadian clock and their target genes' expression. These changes in catabolic
and anabolic pathways altered liver metabolome and improved nutrient utilization 
and energy expenditure. We demonstrate in mice that tRF regimen is a
nonpharmacological strategy against obesity and associated diseases.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3491655
PMID: 22608008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Br J Cancer. 2012 Jun 5;106(12):1967-75. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2012.207. Epub 2012 May
17.

In vitro analysis of ovarian cancer response to cisplatin, carboplatin, and
paclitaxel identifies common pathways that are also associated with overall
patient survival.

Bicaku E(1), Xiong Y, Marchion DC, Chon HS, Stickles XB, Chen N, Judson PL, Hakam
A, Gonzalez-Bosquet J, Wenham RM, Apte SM, Fulp W, Cubitt CL, Chen DT, Lancaster 
JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

BACKGROUND: Carboplatin and cisplatin, alone or in combination with paclitaxel,
have similar efficacies against ovarian cancer (OVCA) yet exhibit different
toxicity profiles. We characterised the common and unique cellular pathways that 
underlie OVCA response to these drugs and analyse whether they have a role in
OVCA survival.
METHODS: Ovarian cancer cell lines (n=36) were treated with carboplatin,
cisplatin, paclitaxel, or carboplatin-paclitaxel (CPTX). For each cell line,
IC(50) levels were quantified and pre-treatment gene expression analyses were
performed. Genes demonstrating expression/IC(50) correlations (measured by
Pearson; P<0.01) were subjected to biological pathway analysis. An independent
OVCA clinico-genomic data set (n=142) was evaluated for clinical features
associated with represented pathways.
RESULTS: Cell line sensitivity to carboplatin, cisplatin, paclitaxel, and CPTX
was associated with the expression of 77, 68, 64, and 25 biological pathways
(P<0.01), respectively. We found three common pathways when drug combinations
were compared. Expression of one pathway ('Transcription/CREB pathway') was
associated with OVCA overall survival.
CONCLUSION: The identification of the Transcription/CREB pathway (associated with
OVCA cell line platinum sensitivity and overall survival) could improve patient
stratification for treatment with current therapies and the rational selection of
future OVCA therapy agents targeted to these pathways.

PMCID: PMC3388569
PMID: 22596241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2012 Jul;19(7):1054-64. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00237-12. Epub
2012 May 16.

Fell Pony syndrome: characterization of developmental hematopoiesis failure and
associated gene expression profiles.

Tallmadge RL(1), Stokol T, Gould-Earley MJ, Earley E, Secor EJ, Matychak MB,
Felippe MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell
University, Ithaca, New York, USA.

Fell Pony syndrome (FPS) is a fatal immunodeficiency that occurs in foals of the 
Fell Pony breed. Affected foals present with severe anemia, B cell lymphopenia,
and opportunistic infections. Our objective was to conduct a prospective study of
potential FPS-affected Fell Pony foals to establish clinical, immunological, and 
molecular parameters at birth and in the first few weeks of life. Complete blood 
counts, peripheral blood lymphocyte phenotyping, and serum immunoglobulin
concentrations were determined for 3 FPS-affected foals, 49 unaffected foals, and
6 adult horses. In addition, cytology of bone marrow aspirates was performed
sequentially in a subset of foals. At birth, the FPS-affected foals were not
noticeably ill and had hematocrit and circulating B cell counts comparable to
those of unaffected foals; however, over 6 weeks, values for both parameters
steadily declined. A bone marrow aspirate from a 3-week-old FPS-affected foal
revealed erythroid hyperplasia and concurrent erythroid and myeloid dysplasia,
which progressed to a severe erythroid hypoplasia at 5 weeks of life.
Immunohistochemical staining confirmed the paucity of B cells in primary and
secondary lymphoid tissues. The mRNA expression of genes involved in B cell
development, signaling, and maturation was investigated using qualitative and
quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR). Several genes, including CREB1, 
EP300, MYB, PAX5, and SPI1/PU.1, were sequenced from FPS-affected and unaffected 
foals. Our study presents evidence of fetal erythrocyte and B cell hematopoiesis 
with rapid postnatal development of anemia and B lymphopenia in FPS-affected
foals. The transition between fetal/neonatal and adult-like hematopoiesis may be 
an important aspect of the pathogenesis of FPS.

PMCID: PMC3393361
PMID: 22593239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Jun;36(6):857-68. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31824644ac.

Malignant gastrointestinal neuroectodermal tumor: clinicopathologic,
immunohistochemical, ultrastructural, and molecular analysis of 16 cases with a
reappraisal of clear cell sarcoma-like tumors of the gastrointestinal tract.

Stockman DL(1), Miettinen M, Suster S, Spagnolo D, Dominguez-Malagon H, Hornick
JL, Adsay V, Chou PM, Amanuel B, Vantuinen P, Zambrano EV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI
53226, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Dec;36(12):1905-8; author reply 1908.

The clinical, histologic, immunophenotypic, ultrastructural, and molecular
features of a distinctive gastrointestinal tumor are described. Sixteen patients,
8 women and 8 men aged 17 to 77 years (mean age, 42 y; 63% less than 40 y)
presented with abdominal pain, intestinal obstruction, and an abdominal mass.
Mean tumor size was 5.2 cm (range, 2.4 to 15.0 cm). The tumors arose in the small
bowel (10), stomach (4), and colon (2) and were histologically characterized by a
sheet-like or nested population of epithelioid or oval-to-spindle cells with
small nucleoli and scattered mitoses. Five cases showed focal clearing of the
cytoplasm. Scattered osteoclast-type multinucleated giant cells were present in 8
cases. The tumor cells were positive for S-100 protein, SOX10, and vimentin in
100% of cases, for CD56 in 70%, for synaptophysin in 56%, for NB84 in 50%, for
NSE in 45%, and for neurofilament protein in 14% of cases. All cases tested were 
negative for specific melanocytic, gastrointestinal stromal tumors, epithelial,
and myoid markers. Ultrastructural examination of 5 cases showed features of
primitive neuroectodermal cells with clear secretory vesicles, dense-core
granules, occasional gap junctions, and no evidence of melanogenesis. EWSR1 gene 
rearrangement was assessed by fluorescence in situ hybridization in 14 cases.
Twelve cases (86%) showed split EWSR1 signal consistent with a chromosomal
translocation involving EWSR1. One case showed extra intact signals, indicating
that the nuclei possessed either extra copies of the EWSR1 gene or chromosome 22 
polysomy. Only 1 case showed no involvement of the EWSR1 gene. Six cases
demonstrated rearrangement of the partner fusion gene ATF1 (46%), and 3 showed
rearrangement of CREB1 (23%); 2 cases lacked rearrangement of either partner
gene. Clinical follow-up was available in 12 patients and ranged from 1.5 to 106 
months. Six patients died of their tumors (mean survival, 32 mo; 83% less than 24
mo). At last follow-up, 4 patients were alive with regional, lymph node, and
liver metastases, and 2 patients were alive with no evidence of disease. The
tumor described here is an aggressive form of neuroectodermal tumor that should
be separated from other primitive epithelioid and spindle cell tumors of the
gastrointestinal tract. The distinctive ultrastructural features and absence of
melanocytic differentiation serve to separate them from soft tissue clear cell
sarcomas involving the gastrointestinal tract. The designation "malignant
gastrointestinal neuroectodermal tumor" is proposed for this tumor type.

PMID: 22592145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Jun;36(6):883-8. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31824b1ee0.

Endobronchial pulmonary angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma: two cases with
EWSR1-CREB1 and EWSR1-ATF1 fusions.

Thway K(1), Nicholson AG, Wallace WA, Al-Nafussi A, Pilling J, Fisher C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, 203 Fulham
Road, London, UK. khin.thway@rmh.nhs.uk

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is a rare soft tissue neoplasm of
intermediate biological potential, predominantly occurring in the extremities of 
children and young adults. It has only recently been reported as a primary lung
tumor. We describe 2 cases arising endobronchially harboring EWSR1 gene
rearrangements by fluorescence in situ hybridization and, respectively,
EWSR1-CREB1 and EWSR1-ATF1 gene fusions by reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction. Histologically, both tumors showed classical features of AFH,
comprising multiple nodules of bland spindle to epithelioid cells surrounded by
lymphoplasmacytic inflammation and at least a partial fibrous capsule. Both
tumors showed focal but strong desmin immunoreactivity, with focal pancytokeratin
and epithelial membrane antigen in 1 case. The lung is now a recognized site of
AFH occurrence, but tumors arising here can be associated with different gene
fusions. It is important to recognize AFH in the pulmonary region, as its
behavior at other sites is generally relatively indolent; however, it may be
mistaken for metastatic or more aggressive primary lung tumors. It is likely that
cases of AFH in the lung may have been previously missed because of their
morphologic and genetic overlap with other pulmonary lesions.

PMID: 22588066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Nat Med. 2012 Jun;18(6):943-9. doi: 10.1038/nm.2756.

NF-<U+03BA>Binducing kinase (NIK) promotes hyperglycemia and glucose intolerance in
obesity by augmenting glucagon action.

Sheng L(1), Zhou Y, Chen Z, Ren D, Cho KW, Jiang L, Shen H, Sasaki Y, Rui L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

The canonical inhibitor of nuclear factor <U+03BA>B kinase subunit ß (IKK-ß)nuclear
factor of <U+03BA> light polypeptide gene enhancer in B cells 1 (NF-<U+03BA>B1) pathway has
been well documented to promote insulin resistance; however, the noncanonical
NF-<U+03BA>Binducing kinase (NIK)NF-<U+03BA>B2 pathway is not well understood in obesity.
Additionally, the contribution of counter-regulatory hormones, particularly
glucagon, to hyperglycemia in obesity is unclear. Here we show that NIK promotes 
glucagon responses in obesity. Hepatic NIK was abnormally activated in mice with 
dietary or genetic obesity. Systemic deletion of Map3k14, encoding NIK, resulted 
in reduced glucagon responses and hepatic glucose production (HGP). Obesity is
associated with high glucagon responses, and liver-specific inhibition of NIK led
to lower glucagon responses and HGP and protected against hyperglycemia and
glucose intolerance in obese mice. Conversely, hepatocyte-specific overexpression
of NIK resulted in higher glucagon responses and HGP. In isolated mouse livers
and primary hepatocytes, NIK also promoted glucagon action and glucose
production, at least in part by increasing cAMP response element-binding (CREB)
stability. Therefore, overactivation of liver NIK in obesity promotes
hyperglycemia and glucose intolerance by increasing the hyperglycemic response to
glucagon and other factors that activate CREB.

PMCID: PMC3766969
PMID: 22581287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Neoplasia. 2012 Apr;14(4):283-96.

Cross-regulation between FOXA1 and ErbB2 signaling in estrogen receptor-negative 
breast cancer.

Naderi A(1), Meyer M, Dowhan DH.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Princess Alexandra
Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. a.naderi@uq.edu.au

Molecular apocrine is a subtype of estrogen receptor-negative (ER.) breast
cancer, which is characterized by a steroid-response gene signature that includes
androgen receptor, FOXA1, and a high frequency of ErbB2 overexpression. In this
study, we demonstrate that there is a strong association between the
overexpression of FOXA1 and ErbB2 in ER- breast tumors. This has led us to
identify a cross-regulation network between FOXA1 and ErbB2 signaling in ER-
breast cancer. We present two mechanisms to explain the association between FOXA1
and ErbB2 overexpression in molecular apocrine cells. In one process, ErbB2
signaling genes CREB1 and c-Fos regulate FOXA1 transcription, and in another
process, AP2a regulates the expression of both FOXA1 and ErbB2. Moreover, we
demonstrate that FOXA1, in turn, regulates the transcription of ErbB2 signaling
genes. This includes a core gene signature that is shared across two molecular
apocrine cell lines. Importantly, the most upregulated (RELB) and downregulated
(PAK1) genes in this signature are direct FOXA1 targets. Our data suggest that
FOXA1 acts as a dual-function transcription factor and the repressive function of
FOXA1 on RELB can be explained by the recruitment of its binding partner
corepressor TLE3. It is notable that a group of FOXA1-regulated genes vary across
molecular apocrine cell lines leading to the differences in the functional
effects of FOXA1 on extracellular signal-regulated kinase phosphorylation and
cell viability between these lines. This study demonstrates that there is a
cross-regulation network between FOXA1 and ErbB2 signaling that connects FOXA1 to
some of the key signaling pathways in ER-breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3349255
PMID: 22577344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Genes Brain Behav. 2012 Aug;11(6):720-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2012.00807.x.
Epub 2012 Jun 10.

CREB1 modulates the influence of childhood sexual abuse on adult's anger traits.

Hasler R(1), Perroud N, Baud P, Olié E, Guillaume S, Malafosse A, Courtet P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
roland.hasler@hcuge.ch

Childhood maltreatment and genes underlie vulnerability to suicidal behaviours
(SB), possibly by affecting the constitution of endophenotypes such as anger
traits. The CREB protein has been implicated in antidepressant response, suicide 
and mood disorders in general. The aim of this study was to investigate if CREB1 
gene is associated with SB and/or anger-related traits and if these associations 
are modulated by childhood maltreatment. Five hundred and thirty-four male
suicide attempters and 357 male non-suicide attempters were genotyped for several
polymorphisms within CREB1 gene. Four hundred and thirty-seven (156 non-suicide
attempters and 281 suicide attempters) completed the State-Trait Anger Expression
Inventory (STAXI) and 288 (265 suicide attempters and 23 controls) fulfilled the 
Childhood Trauma Questionnaire (CTQ). In total, 72 males had experienced
childhood sexual abuse. Our results did not show any significant association
between CREB1 and suicide behaviour. We found a significant interaction showing
that CREB1 rs4675690 polymorphism modulated the effect of childhood sexual abuse 
on adulthood anger-out levels (P = 0.003). Sexually abused subjects carrying the 
CC genotype showed higher anger-out scores than T allele carriers, whereas no
difference was observed in non-sexually abused subjects. CREB1 rs4675690
polymorphism modulates the association between childhood sexual abuse and
adulthood anger-trait level. This is, to our knowledge, the first study to show
such an interaction and to highlight the main effect of this gene on modulating
the effect of child abuse on psychopathologies and warrant further investigation 
on this topic.

© 2012 The Authors. Genes, Brain and Behavior © 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd and
International Behavioural and Neural Genetics Society.

PMID: 22574704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Mol Med (Berl). 2012 Nov;90(11):1267-82. doi: 10.1007/s00109-012-0902-3. Epub
2012 May 9.

Polycystin-1 regulates amphiregulin expression through CREB and AP1 signalling:
implications in ADPKD cell proliferation.

Aguiari G(1), Bizzarri F, Bonon A, Mangolini A, Magri E, Pedriali M, Querzoli P, 
Somlo S, Harris PC, Catizone L, Del Senno L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Ferrara, via
Fossato di Mortara, 74, 44121 Ferrara, Italy. dsn@unife.it

In autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), renal cyst development
and enlargement, as well as cell growth, are associated with alterations in
several pathways, including cAMP and activator protein 1 (AP1) signalling.
However, the precise mechanism by which these molecules stimulate cell
proliferation is not yet fully understood. We now show by microarray analysis,
luciferase assay, mutagenesis, and chromatin immunoprecipitation that CREB and
AP1 contribute to increased expression of the amphiregulin gene, which codifies
for an epidermal growth factor-like peptide, in ADPKD cystic cells, thereby
promoting their cell growth. Increased amphiregulin (AR) expression was
associated with abnormal cell proliferation in both PKD1-depleted and -mutated
epithelial cells, as well as primary cystic cell lines isolated from ADPKD kidney
tissues. Consistently, normal AR expression and proliferation were re-established
in cystic cells by the expression of a mouse full-length PC1. Finally, we show
that anti-AR antibodies and inhibitors of AP1 are able to reduce cell
proliferation in cystic cells by reducing AR expression and EGFR activity. AR can
therefore be considered as one of the key activators of the growth of human ADPKD
cystic cells and thus a new potential therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC4028691
PMID: 22570239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Jul;26(7):1144-57. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1343. Epub 2012 May 
7.

Mechanism of PKA-dependent and lipid-raft independent stimulation of Connexin43
expression by oxytoxin in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Yun SP(1), Park SS, Ryu JM, Park JH, Kim MO, Lee JH, Han HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Korea.

Previous studies shows that connexins appear very early during murine embryo
development, the gap junctional intercellular communication found in the inner
cell mass of early embryo is also maintained in embryonic stem cells (ESC), and
expression of oxytocin receptor (OTR) is developmentally regulated at early
embryonic development. However, effect of oxytocin (OT) on the regulation of the 
connexin43 (Cx43) and maintenance of undifferentiation is not fully understood in
stem cells. Therefore, we investigated the effect of OT on Cx43 expression and
related signaling cascades in mouse ESC. OT increased Cx43 expression that was
inhibited by the OTR inhibitor atosiban. In experiments to examine whether the
effect of OT depends on lipid rafts, caveolin-1 (cav-1), cav-2, and flotillin-2, 
but not OTR, were detected in lipid raft fractions. Also, colocalization of OTR, 
cav-1, and cav-2 was not detected. Moreover, the lipid raft disruptor
methyl-ß-cyclodextrin did not attenuate OT-induced Cx43 expression. In
experiments to examine related signaling pathways, OT activated cAMP/protein
kinase A (PKA) which was inhibited by adenylyl cyclase inhibitor SQ 22536 and PKA
inhibitor PKI. OT increased nuclear factor <U+03BA>-light-chain-enhancer of activated B 
cells (NF-<U+03BA>B) phosphorylation which was inhibited by PKI. OT also increased cAMP 
response element-binding (CREB)/CREB-binding protein (CBP) expression in the
nucleus and induced the formation of CREB1/NF-<U+03BA>B/CBP complexes, which was blocked
by the NF-<U+03BA>B-specific small interfering RNA, NF-<U+03BA>B inhibitors, SN50, and
bay11-7082. Complex disruption by NF-<U+03BA>B inhibitors decreased OT-induced Cx43
expression. In conclusion, OT stimulates Cx43 expression through the
NF-<U+03BA>B/CREB/CBP complex via the lipid raft-independent OTR-mediated cAMP/PKA in
mouse ESC.

PMID: 22564436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Oncogene. 2013 Mar 21;32(12):1594-600. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.151. Epub 2012 May
7.

The Trop-2 signalling network in cancer growth.

Guerra E(1), Trerotola M, Aloisi AL, Tripaldi R, Vacca G, La Sorda R, Lattanzio
R, Piantelli M, Alberti S.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Cancer Pathology, Department of Oncology and Experimental Medicine and
CeSI, Foundation University 'G. d'Annunzio', Chieti, Italy.

Our findings show that upregulation of a wild-type Trop-2 has a key controlling
role in human cancer growth, and that tumour development is quantitatively driven
by Trop-2 expression levels. However, little is known about the regulation of
expression of the TROP2 gene. Hence, we investigated the TROP2 transcription
control network. TROP2 expression was shown to depend on a highly interconnected 
web of transcription factors: TP63/TP53L, ERG, GRHL1/Get-1 (grainyhead-like
epithelial transactivator), HNF1A/TCF-1 (T-cell factor), SPI1/PU.1, WT (Wilms'
tumour)1, GLIS2, AIRE (autoimmune regulator), FOXM1 (forkhead box M1) and FOXP3, 
with HNF4A as the major network hub. TROP2 upregulation was shown to subsequently
drive the expression and activation of CREB1 (cyclic AMP-responsive-element
binding protein), Jun, NF-<U+03BA>B, Rb, STAT1 and STAT3 through induction of the cyclin
D1 and ERK (extracellular signal regulated kinase)/MEK (MAPK/ERK kinase)
pathways. Growth-stimulatory signalling through NF-<U+03BA>B, cyclin D1 and ERK was
shown to require an intact Trop-2 cytoplasmic tail. Network hubs and interacting 
partners are co-expressed with Trop-2 in primary human tumours, supporting a role
of this signalling network in cancer growth.

PMID: 22562244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Aug;44(8):1254-65. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2012.04.018. Epub 2012 Apr 27.

Acidosis-induced V-ATPase trafficking in salivary ducts is initiated by
cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway via regulation of Rab11b expression.

Oehlke O(1), Schlosshardt C, Feuerstein M, Roussa E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Department of Molecular Embryology,
University of Freiburg, Albertstrasse 17, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.
oliver.oehlke@anat.uni-freiburg.de

Changes in systemic acid-base homeostasis cause a series of organ-specific
cellular responses, among them changes of acid-base transporter activities, and
recruitment or retrieval of these transporters from intracellular pools to the
plasma membrane and vice versa. The purpose of this study was to investigate the 
impact of protein phosphorylation in the acidosis-induced translocation of
vacuolar-type H(+)-ATPase (V-ATPase) in salivary ducts and to identify molecular 
targets. Therefore, the human submandibular gland cell line HSG was exposed to
acidosis and V-ATPase trafficking was investigated in the presence or absence of 
inhibitors and activators of sAC/PKA and Src/ERK signaling pathways. Putative
target genes have been identified by RT-PCR and immunoblotting, and validated by 
loss-of-function experiments. Acidosis caused activation of cAMP/PKA and Src
signaling and inhibition of either pathway significantly impaired
acidosis-induced V-ATPase redistribution and incorporation into the plasma
membrane. Activation of ERK1/2 was Src-independent, whereas activation of PKA
caused phosphorylation of cAMP response element-binding (CREB) and activation to 
regulate Rab11b transcription. Loss-of-function of CREB down-regulated Rab11b
transcript and protein and significantly impaired acidosis-induced V-ATPase
translocation in HSG cells. These data demonstrate that the cAMP/PKA/CREB
signaling pathway initiates acidosis-induced V-ATPase trafficking in salivary
ducts via regulation of Rab11b expression and provide first evidence for a
molecular mechanism underlying cAMP/PKA-dependent transporter trafficking that
could account for accumulation and activity of transporters in other cellular
systems as well.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22561749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 May 18;421(4):801-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.04.091. Epub 2012 Apr 25.

The impact of Ca²<U+207A>/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II on insulin gene
expression in MIN6 cells.

Suefuji M(1), Furukawa N, Matsumoto K, Oiso H, Shimoda S, Yoshinaga T, Matsuyama 
R, Miyagawa K, Kondo T, Kawashima J, Tsuruzoe K, Araki E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Medicine, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto, Japan.

Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) is expressed in
insulin-secreting ß cells. However, the effects of CaMKII on insulin synthesis
are unknown. Although Ser133 phosphorylation of cyclic AMP-responsive
element-binding protein (CREB) typically increases CREB transcriptional activity,
CaMKII phosphorylates CREB at Ser142 and at Ser133 to exert a dominant inhibitory
effect. Our objective was to characterize the role of CaMKII in insulin gene
expression. In MIN6 cells, insulin gene promoter activity was significantly
down-regulated by wild-type (WT) CaMKIId2, but was significantly upregulated
after small interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown of CaMKIId expression. These
results were independent of glucose concentrations and membrane depolarization.
Insulin mRNA levels were also decreased by WT CaMKIId2 and increased by CaMKIId
siRNA. Downregulation of insulin gene promoter activity by WT CaMKIId2 was partly
mediated via cyclic AMP-responsive element 2 (CRE2). WT CaMKIId2 significantly
increased CREB phosphorylation at Ser142 and significantly decreased binding to
CREB binding protein (CBP), whereas kinase dead CaMKIId2 did not. Our results
indicate that CaMKIId2 downregulates insulin gene expression by Ser142
phosphorylation of CREB and reducing binding of CREB to CBP.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22554507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. IUBMB Life. 2012 Jul;64(7):628-35. doi: 10.1002/iub.1030. Epub 2012 Apr 27.

MicroRNA-181b targets cAMP responsive element binding protein 1 in gastric
adenocarcinomas.

Chen L(1), Yang Q, Kong WQ, Liu T, Liu M, Li X, Tang H.

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Life Science Research Center and Basic Medical School, Tianjin Medical
University, Tianjin, China.

MicroRNAs are a class of small endogenous non-coding RNAs that function as
post-transcriptional regulators. In our previous study, we found that miR-181b
was significantly downregulated in human gastric adenocarcinoma tissue samples
compared to the adjacent normal gastric tissues. In this study, we confirm the
down-regulation of miR-181b in human gastric cancer cell lines versus the gastric
epithelial cells. Overexpression of miR-181b suppressed the proliferation and
colony formation rate of gastric cancer cells. miR-181b downregulated the
expression of cAMP responsive element binding protein 1 (CREB1) by binding its 3'
untranslated region. Overexpression of CREB1 counteracted the suppression of
growth in gastric cancer cells caused by ectopic expression of miR-181b. These
results indicate that miR-181b may function as a tumor suppressor in gastric
adenocarcinoma cells through negative regulation of CREB1.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22539488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Apr;42(4):912-23. doi: 10.1002/eji.201141965.

Prostaglandin E2 modulates IL-8 expression through formation of a multiprotein
enhanceosome in human colonic epithelial cells.

Srivastava V(1), Dey I, Leung P, Chadee K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Health
Sciences Centre, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

Gastrointestinal inflammation is mediated by the pro-inflammatory mediators
interleukin-8 (IL-8) and prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2) ). PGE(2) binding and
coupling through EP2/4 receptor subtypes on colonic epithelial cells stimulates
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and IL-8 production. Here we determined the
mechanisms whereby PGE(2) regu-lates IL-8 in Caco2 colonic epithelial cells and
in cells over-expressing the EP2/4 receptors (EP2S/EP4S). PGE(2) coupling through
EP2 activated the transcription factor inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER),
whereas coupling through EP4 receptors activated the cyclic AMP-responsive
element-binding protein (CREB). Activation of CREB in Caco2/EP2S was protein
kinase A (PKA) dependent, whereas in EP4S cells, activation of CREB occurred
through the PKA and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathways. Since ICER lacks the 
transactivation domain, it functions as a transcription repressor as opposed to
CREB. PGE(2) coupling through EP2/4 receptors can therefore acts in an opposing
manner to either decrease (EP2) or promote IL-8 expression by recruiting
CREB-binding protein (CBP) (EP4), which formed a multiprotein IL-8 enhanceosome. 
A novel half CRE (167CRE) and a composite NFAT1-AP1-like site in the IL-8
promoter participated in binding and complex formation as confirmed by
mutagenesis and expression studies. These data unravel the mechanisms by which
expression of IL-8 is controlled by different signalling pathways that are
activated by PGE(2) but acting through different EP receptors.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22531917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. FASEB J. 2012 Aug;26(8):3230-9. doi: 10.1096/fj.12-205609. Epub 2012 Apr 20.

Salt-inducible kinase 1 regulates E-cadherin expression and intercellular
junction stability.

Eneling K(1), Brion L, Pinto V, Pinho MJ, Sznajder JI, Mochizuki N, Emoto K,
Soares-da-Silva P, Bertorello AM.

Author information: 
(1)Membrane Signaling Networks, Atherosclerosis Research Unit, Department of
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska
University Hospital-Solna, Stockholm, Sweden.

The protein kinase liver kinase B1 (LKB1) regulates cell polarity and
intercellular junction stability. Also, LKB1 controls the activity of
salt-inducible kinase 1 (SIK1). The role and relevance of SIK1 and its downstream
effectors in linking the LKB1 signals within these processes are partially
understood. We hypothesize that SIK1 may link LKB1 signals to the maintenance of 
epithelial junction stability by regulating E-cadherin expression. Results from
our studies using a mouse lung alveolar epithelial (MLE-12) cell line or human
renal proximal tubule (HK2) cell line transiently or stably lacking the
expression of SIK1 (using SIK1 siRNAs or shRNAs), or with its expression
abrogated (sik1(+/+) vs. sik1(-/-) mice), indicate that suppression of SIK1
(~40%) increases the expression of the transcriptional repressors Snail2
(~12-fold), Zeb1 (~100%), Zeb2 (~50%), and TWIST (~20-fold) by activating
cAMP-response element binding protein. The lack of SIK1 and activation of
transcriptional repressors decreases the availability of E-cadherin (mRNA and
protein expression by ~100 and 80%, respectively) and the stability of
intercellular junctions in epithelia (decreases in transepithelial resistance).
Furthermore, LKB1-mediated increases in E-cadherin expression are impaired in
cells where SIK1 has been disabled. We conclude that SIK1 is a key regulator of
E-cadherin expression, and thereby contributes to the stability of intercellular 
junctions.

PMCID: PMC3405263
PMID: 22522110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Glia. 2012 Jul;60(7):1130-44. doi: 10.1002/glia.22340. Epub 2012 Apr 17.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase p38 regulates Krox-20 to direct Schwann cell
differentiation and peripheral myelination.

Hossain S(1), de la Cruz-Morcillo MA, Sanchez-Prieto R, Almazan G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.

We previously reported that addition of extracellular matrix (ECM) extracts to
rat Schwann cell-dorsal root ganglion neuron (DRGN) co-cultures activated
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) p38, whereas inhibition blocked
myelination. Here, we used p38 pharmacological inhibitors and gene silencing to
assess their effects on downstream kinases and key transcription factors. We show
that p38a regulates expression of the master transcription factor, Krox-20,
required for the onset of myelination in Schwann cell-DRGNs, as assessed by
immunocytochemistry and qRT-PCR. p38 activity is also required for the expression
of the cell cycle inhibitor p27(kip1) , associated with Schwann cell
differentiation. Three potential effectors of p38 were explored: MAPK-activated
protein kinase-2 (MK2), mitogen and stress-activated protein kinase-1 (MSK-1),
and the transcription factor cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB).
Inhibition of MK2 with CMPD1 or gene knockdown with siRNAs reduced numbers of
Krox-20-positive Schwann cells and expression of myelin proteins MBP and MAG. ECM
activated CREB and increased Krox-20 expression, whereas CREB1 gene silencing
reduced Krox-20. Furthermore, two nonselective inhibitors of MSK-1 (H89 and
R0-318820) decreased ECM-induced CREB phosphorylation and, similar to anti-MSK-1 
siRNAs, reduced Krox-20-positive cells. In addition, p38 modulated the expression
of two transcription factors involved in the regulation of Krox-20 [suppressed
cAMP-inducible protein (SCIP) and Sox10], but not Sox2, an antagonist of Krox-20.
Collectively, our results show that p38 primarily directs Schwann cell
differentiation and peripheral myelination by regulating Krox-20 expression
through its downstream effectors, MK2 and MSK-1/CREB, and transcription factors
SCIP and Sox10.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22511272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Jul;36(7):e1-e11. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31825485c5.

Tumors with EWSR1-CREB1 and EWSR1-ATF1 fusions: the current status.

Thway K(1), Fisher C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK.
khin.thway@rmh.nhs.uk

EWSR1-CREB1 and EWSR1-ATF1 are gene fusions of which one or both have now been
consistently described in 5 histopathologically and behaviorally diverse
neoplasms: angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma, conventional clear cell sarcoma (of 
tendons and aponeuroses), clear cell sarcoma-like tumor of the gastrointestinal
tract, hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma of the salivary gland, and primary
pulmonary myxoid sarcoma. Some of the tumors in this group have been described
only recently, and others have been the subject of recent genetic insights
contributing to their characterization. These neoplasms are all rare; yet, the
increasing frequency with which EWSR1-CREB1 and EWSR1-ATF1 fusions are being
described in separate entities is noteworthy. The additional molecular mechanisms
by which tumors with such variable morphologic, immunohistochemical, and clinical
phenotypes are generated are yet to be understood. We review the
clinicopathologic and molecular features of this group of neoplasms unified by
the presence of EWSR1-CREB1 and EWSR1-ATF1 genetic fusions.

PMID: 22510762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. FASEB J. 2012 Jul;26(7):3000-11. doi: 10.1096/fj.12-206367. Epub 2012 Apr 13.

cAMP response element-binding (CREB) recruitment following a specific CpG
demethylation leads to the elevated expression of the matrix metalloproteinase 13
in human articular chondrocytes and osteoarthritis.

Bui C(1), Barter MJ, Scott JL, Xu Y, Galler M, Reynard LN, Rowan AD, Young DA.

Author information: 
(1)Musculoskeletal Research Group, Institute of Cellular Medicine, Medical
School, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Osteoarthritis is a degenerative joint disease characterized by a progressive and
irreversible loss of the articular cartilage, due in main part to the cleavage of
type II collagen within the matrix by the enzyme matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP)13. Here, we examined the methylation status of MMP13 promoter and report
the demethylation of specific CpG dinucleotides within its promoter in
osteoarthritic compared to normal cartilage, which correlates with increased
MMP13 expression. Of the promoter CpG sites examined, the -104 CpG was
consistently demethylated following treatment of human articular chondrocytes
with 10 µM DNA-methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, again
correlating with increased MMP13 expression. Methylation of the -104 CpG site
resulted in reduced promoter activity in the chondrosarcoma cell line SW1353 as
shown by CpG-free luciferase reporter. Using electrophoretic mobility shift
assays, we identified CREB as the regulating factor able to only bind to the
MMP13 promoter when the -104 CpG is demethylated, and confirmed this binding by
chromatin immunoprecipitation. Finally, we demonstrated that CREB induces MMP13
expression only following treatment of SW1353 with 0.5 µM Ca(2+) ionophore
A23187. In summary, the -104 CpG is demethylated in osteoarthritic cartilage,
correlating with the elevated MMP13 expression and cartilage destruction,
providing a highly novel link between epigenetic status and arthritic disease.

PMID: 22505473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Sep;113(9):2822-34. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24157.

Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans lipopolysaccharide regulates bone
sialoprotein gene transcription.

Li X(1), Zhou L, Takai H, Sasaki Y, Mezawa M, Li Z, Wang Z, Yang L, Wang S,
Matsumura H, Kaneko T, Yoshimura A, Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Chiba 271-8587, Japan.

Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans (A. actinomycetemcomitans) is believed to
be associated with aggressive periodontitis characterized by a rapid bone loss.
A. actinomycetemcomitans lipopolysaccharide (LPS) has a similar structure to
Escherichia coli LPS, and they are Toll-like receptor 4 agonists. Bone
sialoprotein (BSP) is an early marker of osteoblast differentiation. To
investigate the effects of A. actinomycetemcomitans LPS on bone formation, we
targeted BSP as a marker for osteogenic differentiation and bone formation. BSP
mRNA levels were decreased by 0.1 µg/ml and increased by 0.01 µg/ml A.
actinomycetemcomitans LPS at 6 h in osteoblast-like ROS17/2.8 cells. In transient
transfection analyses, 0.1 µg/ml decreased and 0.01 µg/ml A.
actinomycetemcomitans LPS increased luciferase activities of the construct (-116 
to +60). Introduction of 2 bp mutations to the constructs showed that the effects
of A. actinomycetemcomitans LPS were mediated by a cAMP response element (CRE), a
FGF2 response element (FRE), and a homeodomain protein-binding site (HOX).
Tyrosine kinase, ERK1/2, and PI3-kinase/Akt participated in the effects of both
0.1 and 0.01 µg/ml A. actinomycetemcomitans LPS. The results of gel shift showed 
that 0.1 µg/ml decreased while 0.01 µg/ml A. actinomycetemcomitans LPS increased 
CRE-, FRE-, and HOX-binding protein complexes formation at 6 h, and revealed that
0.01 µg/ml A. actinomycetemcomitans LPS induced BSP transcription through CREB1, 
JunD, Fra2, c-Fos, Runx2, Dlx5, and Smad1 targeting those response elements.
These studies therefore indicated that 0.1 µg/ml suppressed and 0.01 µg/ml A.
actinomycetemcomitans LPS increased BSP gene transcription mediated through CRE, 
FRE, and HOX elements in the rat BSP gene promoter.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22492284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Toxicology. 2012 Jun 14;296(1-3):73-82. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2012.03.007. Epub 2012
Apr 3.

High dose bisphenol A impairs hippocampal neurogenesis in female mice across
generations.

Jang YJ(1), Park HR, Kim TH, Yang WJ, Lee JJ, Choi SY, Oh SB, Lee E, Park JH, Kim
HP, Kim HS, Lee J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy and Research Institute for Drug
Development, Longevity Life Science and Technology Institutes, Pusan National
University, Geumjeong-gu, Busan 609-735, Republic of Korea.

Bisphenol A (BPA) is used as a monomer during the manufacture of polycarbonate
plastics and epoxy resins. However, BPA adversely affects reproductive organ
growth and development, and it has been proposed that the detrimental effects of 
BPA could extend to future generations. The present study was conducted to
evaluate the transgenerational effects of BPA on hippocampal neurogenesis and
neurocognitive function. Pregnant female C57BL/6 mice (F0) were exposed to BPA
(0.1-10 mg/kg) from gestation day 6 to 17, and female offspring (F2) from F1
generation mice were prepared. It was found that exposure of F0 mice to BPA at 10
mg/kg decreased the number of newly generated cells in the hippocampi of F2
female mice. Passive avoidance testing revealed that high-doses BPA (1 mg/kg and 
10 mg/kg) decreased cross-over latency time in F2 mice, suggesting a BPA-mediated
neurocognitive deficit in terms of memory retention. Furthermore, it was found
that levels of phospho-ERK, brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), and
phospho-CREB in hippocampi were significantly lower in F2 mice. Interestingly,
the effects of BPA on hippocampal neurogenesis were found to be correlated with
altered DNA methylation. In particular, high-dose BPA exposure increased DNA
methylation of the CREB regulated transcription coactivator 1 (Crtc1) generated
in F2 mice. These findings suggest that BPA exposure of pregnant mothers could
adversely affect hippocampal neurogenesis and cognitive function in future
generations by modulating the ERK and BDNF-CREB signaling cascades.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22484357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2012 Jul;16(7):667-71. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2011.0232.
Epub 2012 Apr 5.

The relationship between single nucleotide polymorphisms in 5-HT2A signal
transduction-related genes and the response efficacy to selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitor treatments in Chinese patients with major depressive disorder.

Li HF(1), Yu X, Yang K, He CY, Kou SJ, Cao SX, Xie GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, the First Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, P.R. China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the possible relationship between six single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) (rs6311 and rs6305 of 5-HT2A, rs5443 of Gß3, rs2230739 of
ACDY9, rs1549870 of PDE1A and rs255163 of CREB1, which are all related with
5-HT2A the signal transduction pathway) and the response efficacy to selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) treatments in major depressive disorder (MDD)
Chinese.
METHODS: This study included 194 depressed patients to investigate the influence 
of 6 polymorphisms in 5-HT2A signal transduction-related genes on the efficacy of
SSRIs assessed over 1 year. The efficacies of SSRIs on 194 MDD patients were
evaluated in an 8-week open-trial study. Over 1 year, a follow-up study was
completed for 174 of them to observe the long-term efficacy of SSRIs. The
optimal-scaling regression analysis was used for testing the relationship between
the different genotypes of five SNPs and the efficacy in MDD.
RESULTS: It showed that the patients with rs5443TT and rs2230739GG have a
relatively good efficacy in response to short-term SSRIs. We also found that good
efficacy appeared in depressed patients with rs2230739GG in response to long-term
SSRIs.
CONCLUSIONS: It suggested that different genotypes of rs5443 and rs2230739 might 
influence the signal transduction pathways of second message and affect
therapeutic efficacy.

PMCID: PMC3396003
PMID: 22480177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 May;26(5):846-58. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1259. Epub 2012 Apr
2.

Critical role of TRPC1-mediated Ca²<U+207A> entry in decidualization of human
endometrial stromal cells.

Kawarabayashi Y(1), Hai L, Honda A, Horiuchi S, Tsujioka H, Ichikawa J, Inoue R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka 814-0180, Japan.

Decidualization is an ovarian steroid-induced remodeling/differentiation process 
of uterus essential for embryo implantation and placentation. Here, we
investigated the possible involvement of enhanced Ca²<U+207A> dynamics in the
decidualization process in human endometrial stromal cells (hESC) in its
connection with a recently emerging nonvoltage-gated Ca²<U+207A> entry channel
superfamily, the transient receptor potential (TRP) protein. Combined application
of 17ß-estradiol (E2) (10 nM) and progesterone (P4) (1 µM) for 7-14 d resulted in
morphological changes of hESC characteristic of decidualization (i.e. cell size
increase), whereas sole application of E2 exerted little effects. A 7- to 14-d
E2/P4 treatment greatly increased the expression level of decidualization markers
IGF binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1) and prolactin and also up-regulated the
expression of TRPC1, a canonical TRP subfamily member that has been implicated in
store-operated Ca²<U+207A> influx (SOC) in other cell types. In parallel with this
up-regulation, SOC activity in hESC, the nuclear translocation of phosphorylated 
cAMP responsive element binding protein (p-CREB) and the expression of Forkhead
box protein 01 were enhanced significantly. Small interfering RNA knockdown of
TRPC1 counteracted the E2/P4-induced up-regulation of IGFBP-1 and prolactin and
enhancement of SOC activity together with the inhibition of hESC size increase,
p-CREB nuclear translocation, and FOXO1 up-regulation. Coadministration of SOC
inhibitors SK&F96365 or Gd³<U+207A> with E2/P4 also suppressed the up-regulation of
IGFBP-1 and hESC size increase. Similar inhibitory effects were observed with
extracellularly applied TRPC1 extracellular loop 3-directed antibody, which is
known to bind a near-pore domain of TRPC1 channel and block its Ca²<U+207A> transporting
activity. These results strongly suggest that up-regulation of TRPC1 protein and 
consequent enhancement of SOC-mediated Ca²<U+207A> influx may serve as a crucial step
for the decidualization process of hESC probably via p-CREB-dependent
transcriptional activity associated with FOXO1 activation.

PMID: 22474110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2012 Jun;39(6):510-7. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1681.2012.05702.x.

cAMP response element-binding protein 1 is required for hydroxyurea-mediated
induction of <U+03B3>-globin expression in K562 cells.

Banan M(1), Esmaeilzadeh-Gharehdaghi E, Nezami M, Deilami Z, Farashi S, Philipsen
S, Esteghamat F, Pourfarzad F, Ali Imam AM, Najmabadi H.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. mbbanan@yahoo.com

1. Hydroxyurea (HU) is a drug used for the treatment of haemoglobinopathies.
Hydroxyurea functions by upregulating <U+03B3>-globin transcription and fetal
haemoglobin (HbF) production in erythroid cells. The K562 erythroleukaemia cell
line is widely used as a model system in which to study the mechanism of <U+03B3>-globin
induction by HU. However, the transcription factors required for the upregulation
of <U+03B3>-globin expression by HU in K562 cells have not been identified. Similarities
between the HU and sodium butyrate (SB) pathways suggest cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB) 1 as a potential candidate. Thus, the aim of the
present study was to investigate the possible role of CREB1 in the HU pathway. 2.
Experiments were performed using transient and stable RNA interference (RNAi) to 
show that CREB1 is necessary for HU-mediated induction of <U+03B3>-globin expression and
haemoglobin production in K562 cells. 3. Furthermore, western blot analyses
demonstrated that CREB1 becomes phosphorylated in a dose-dependent manner after
HU (100-400 µmol/L) treatment of K562 cells for 72 h. 4. We also investigated
role of a G<U+03B3> promoter CREB1 response element (G-CRE) in this pathway.
Quantitative amplification refractory mutation system-polymerase chain reaction
experiments were performed to demonstrate that HU induces the expression of both 
G<U+03B3> and A<U+03B3> in this cell line. In addition, electrophoretic mobility shift assays
were used to show that levels of CREB1 complexes binding to the G-CRE site are
increased following HU treatment and are decreased in CREB1-knockdown cells. 5.
The results suggest that CREB1 is necessary for <U+03B3>-globin induction by HU in K562 
cells, a role that may be mediated, in part, through the G-CRE element.

© 2012 The Authors Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology © 2012
Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 22469229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2012 Jul;22(7):453-68. doi:
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2012.02.006. Epub 2012 Mar 30.

European Group for the Study of Resistant Depression (GSRD)--where have we gone
so far: review of clinical and genetic findings.

Schosser A(1), Serretti A, Souery D, Mendlewicz J, Zohar J, Montgomery S, Kasper 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria.

The primary objective of this review is to give an overview of the main findings 
of the European multicenter project "Patterns of Treatment Resistance and
Switching Strategies in Affective Disorder", performed by the Group for the Study
of Resistant Depression (GSRD). The aim was to study methodological issues,
operational criteria, clinical characteristics, and genetic variables associated 
with treatment resistant depression (TRD), that is failure to reach response
after at least two consecutive adequate antidepressant trials. The primary
findings of clinical variables associated with treatment resistance include
comorbid anxiety disorders as well as non-response to the first antidepressant
received lifetime. Although there is a plethora of hints in textbooks that
switching the mechanism of action should be obtained in case of nonresponse to
one medication, the results of the GSRD challenge this notion by demonstrating in
retrospective and prospective evaluations that staying on the same antidepressant
mechanism of action for a longer time is more beneficial than switching, however,
when switching is an option there is no benefit to switch across class. The GSRD 
candidate gene studies found that metabolism status according to cytochrome P450 
gene polymorphisms may not be helpful to predict response and remission rates to 
antidepressants. Significant associations with MDD and antidepressant treatment
response were found for COMT SNPs. Investigating the impact of COMT on suicidal
behaviour, we found a significant association with suicide risk in MDD patients
not responding to antidepressant treatment, but not in responders. Further
significant associations with treatment response phenotypes were found with BDNF,
5HTR2A and CREB1. Additional investigated candidate genes were DTNBP1, 5HT1A,
PTGS2, GRIK4 and GNB3.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22464339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Neurosignals. 2013;21(1-2):61-74. doi: 10.1159/000335208. Epub 2012 Mar 28.

Coincidence signaling of dopamine D1-like and M1 muscarinic receptors in the
regulation of cyclic AMP formation and CREB phosphorylation in mouse prefrontal
cortex.

Olianas MC(1), Dedoni S, Onali P.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Biochemical Pharmacology, Department of Neurosciences, University
of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.

In the prefrontal cortex, dopamine D1-like and M1 muscarinic receptors are both
involved in the regulation of attentional, cognitive and emotional processes but 
so far no information has been provided on their functional interaction. In the
present study we show that in mouse medial prefrontal cortex, concomitant
activation of M1 muscarinic receptors potentiated D1-like receptor-induced cyclic
AMP formation through a mechanism involving activation of Gq/11 and the release
of G protein ß<U+03B3> subunits. Immunohistochemical studies indicated that the adenylyl
cyclase isoforms AC2 and AC4 are expressed in mouse prefrontal cortex and that
they colocalize with D1-like receptors with a greater association for AC4. In
primary cultures of frontal cortex neurons, D1-like receptor-induced Ser133
phosphorylation of the transcription factor cyclic AMP-responsive element binding
protein (CREB) was potentiated by concurrent stimulation of M1 receptors.
Suppression of AC4 expression with small interfering RNA transfection reduced D1 
stimulation of cyclic AMP formation and CREB phosphorylation and abolished the M1
potentiation, whereas knockdown of AC2 had no significant effects. These data
indicate that in mouse prefrontal cortex Gq/11-coupled M1 receptor and Gs-coupled
D1-like receptor inputs converge on AC4 with a consequent enhancement of cyclic
AMP formation and signaling to the nucleus.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22456324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Pathol Int. 2012 Apr;62(4):232-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2011.02781.x. Epub
2012 Jan 13.

Differences of molecular expression mechanisms among neural cell adhesion
molecule 1, synaptophysin, and chromogranin A in lung cancer cells.

Kashiwagi K(1), Ishii J, Sakaeda M, Arimasu Y, Shimoyamada H, Sato H, Miyata C,
Kamma H, Aoki I, Yazawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine,
Yokohama, Japan.

Neural cell adhesion molecule 1 (NCAM1), synaptophysin (SYPT), and chromogranin A
(CGA) are immunohistochemical markers for diagnosing lung neuroendocrine tumors
(LNETs). However, the precise expression mechanisms have not been studied in
enough detail. The purpose of the present study is to define the molecular
mechanisms of NCAM1, SYPT, and CGA gene expressions, using cultivated lung cancer
cells and focusing upon NeuroD1 (ND1), achaete-scute homolog-like 1 (ASCL1), and 
known transcription factors, repressor element 1 (RE1)-silencing transcription
factor (REST) and c-AMP responsive element-binding protein (CREB). Promoter
assays, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and transfection experiments revealed that
ND1 activated NCAM1, that ASCL1 weakly upregulated SYPT expression, and that CGA 
expression was not regulated by ND1 or ASCL1. REST expression was restricted in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells, and knockdown of REST could cause as
much SYPT expression as in SCLC cells and weak CGA expression in NSCLC cells.
However, CGA gene upregulation via CREB activation was not found in REST-lacking 
NSCLC cells, indicating the requirement of some additional mechanism for
sufficient expression. These results suggest that NCAM1, SYPT and CGA expressions
are differently regulated by neuroendocrine phenotype-specific transcription
factors and provide a reason why NCAM1 and SYPT are frequently expressed in
LNETs, irrespective of malignancy grade.

© 2011 The Authors. Pathology International © 2011 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 22449227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Mech Ageing Dev. 2012 May;133(5):291-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2012.03.004. Epub 2012
Mar 16.

Age-related impairments in memory and in CREB and pCREB expression in hippocampus
and amygdala following inhibitory avoidance training.

Morris KA(1), Gold PE.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Program, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana,
Illinois, USA.

This experiment examined whether age-related changes in CREB and pCREB contribute
to the rapid forgetting seen in aged animals. Young (3-month-old) and aged
(24-month-old) Fischer-344 rats received inhibitory avoidance training with a low
(0.2 mA, 0.4 s) or moderate (0.5 mA, 0.5 s) foot shock; memory was measured 7
days later. Other rats were euthanized 30 min after training, and CREB and pCREB 
expression levels were examined in the hippocampus, amygdala, and piriform cortex
using immunohistochemistry. CREB levels decreased with age in the hippocampus and
amygdala. After training with either shock level, young rats exhibited good
memory and increases in pCREB levels in the hippocampus and amygdala. Aged rats
exhibited good memory for the moderate but not the low shock but did not show
increases in pCREB levels after either shock intensity. These results suggest
that decreases in total CREB and in pCREB activation in the hippocampus and
amygdala may contribute to rapid forgetting in aged rats. After moderate foot
shock, the stable memory in old rats together with absence of CREB activation
suggests either that CREB was phosphorylated in a spatiotemporal pattern other
than analyzed here or that the stronger training conditions engaged alternate
mechanisms that promote long-lasting memory.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3359401
PMID: 22445851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2012 May 15;302(10):H1998-2007. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00057.2011. Epub 2012 Mar 16.

CREB critically regulates action potential shape and duration in the adult mouse 
ventricle.

Schulte JS(1), Seidl MD, Nunes F, Freese C, Schneider M, Schmitz W, Müller FU.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Münster, Münster,
Germany. J.S.Schulte@uni-muenster.de

The cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) belongs to the CREB/cAMP
response element binding modulator/activating transcription factor 1 family of
cAMP-dependent transcription factors mediating a regulation of gene transcription
in response to cAMP. Chronic stimulation of ß-adrenergic receptors and the
cAMP-dependent signal transduction pathway by elevated plasma catecholamines play
a central role in the pathogenesis of heart failure. Ion channel remodeling,
particularly a decreased transient outward current (I(to)), and subsequent action
potential (AP) prolongation are hallmarks of the failing heart. Here, we studied 
the role of CREB for ion channel regulation in mice with a cardiomyocyte-specific
knockout of CREB (CREB KO). APs of CREB KO cardiomyocytes were prolonged with
increased AP duration at 50 and 70% repolarization and accompanied by a by 51%
reduction of I(to) peak amplitude as detected in voltage-clamp measurements. We
observed a 29% reduction of Kcnd2/Kv4.2 mRNA in CREB KO cardiomyocytes mice while
the other I(to)-related channel subunits Kv4.3 and KChIP2 were not different
between groups. Accordingly, Kv4.2 protein was reduced by 37% in CREB KO.
However, we were not able to detect a direct regulation of Kv4.2 by CREB. The
I(to)-dependent AP prolongation went along with an increase of I(Na) and a
decrease of I(Ca,L) associated with an upregulation of Scn8a/Nav1.6 and
downregulation of Cacna1c/Cav1.2 mRNA in CREB KO cardiomyocytes. Our results from
mice with cardiomyocyte-specific inactivation of CREB definitively indicate that 
CREB critically regulates the AP shape and duration in the mouse ventricle, which
might have an impact on ion channel remodeling in situations of altered
cAMP-dependent signaling like heart failure.

PMID: 22427515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Int J Oncol. 2012 Jun;40(6):1923-8. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1398. Epub 2012 Mar 8.

Alternariol induces DNA polymerase ß expression through the PKA-CREB signaling
pathway.

Zhao J(1), Liu K, Lu J, Ma J, Zhang X, Jiang Y, Yang H, Jin G, Zhao G, Zhao M,
Dong Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou 450001, P.R. China.

Alternariol (AOH) is a mycotoxin of Alternaria alternata and can cause DNA damage
and gene mutations. Low-dose and long-term treatment with AOH has been linked
with incidence of esophageal carcinoma. DNA polymerase ß (polß) is a key enzyme
in DNA base excision repair (BER). When it is overexpressed or mutated in cells, 
DNA polß can cause genetic instability. Elevated DNA polß has also been reported 
in several human cancers. Here, we report that AOH at 2, 10, 20 µM induces DNA
polß expression. In the process, protein kinase A (PKA) catalytic subunit
activation, nuclear translocation and cAMP response element binding protein
(CREB) phosphorylation are involved. AOH also increased CREB binding to the cAMP 
response element (CRE) consensus motif, which is present in the DNA polß gene
promoter. The PKA inhibitor H89 was able to block AOH-induced PKA-CREB
activation, CREB DNA binding activity and decrease DNA polß expression. Our
results suggest that AOH can upregulate DNA polß expression through the PKA-CREB 
signal transduction pathway.

PMID: 22406678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Hum Pathol. 2012 Sep;43(9):1463-70. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.10.022. Epub 2012
Mar 9.

Identification of biomarkers to distinguish clear cell sarcoma from malignant
melanoma.

Yang L(1), Chen Y, Cui T, Knösel T, Zhang Q, Geier C, Katenkamp D, Petersen I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Jena,
Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, 07743 Jena, Germany.

Clear cell sarcoma is a rare and malignant soft tissue tumor that shows
phenotypic and immunohistochemical overlap with cutaneous malignant melanoma;
identification of biomarkers that differentiate clear cell sarcoma from malignant
melanoma is therefore needed. In this study, we performed mutation analysis of
BRAF and NRAS, investigated the EWSR1 gene rearrangement and evaluated the
protein expression of insulin-like growth factor 2 and insulin-like growth factor
1R in 31 cases of malignant melanoma and 16 cases of clear cell sarcoma. By
direct sequencing and high-resolution melting analysis, we identified BRAF and
NRAS mutations in 51.6% and 12.9% of malignant melanoma cases, respectively,
while none of clear cell sarcoma harbored BRAF or NRAS mutations. Fluorescence in
situ hybridization showed that 78.6% of clear cell sarcoma exhibited the
t(12;22)(q13;q12) translocation. The presence of type 1, 2, and 3 EWSR1/ATF1
fusion gene transcripts was confirmed by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction analysis, but type 4 and EWSR1/CREB1 fusion gene transcripts were not
found. No fusion transcript could be detected in any of the malignant melanoma
cases. Additionally, immunohistochemistry showed that the majority of clear cell 
sarcoma and malignant melanoma had insulin-like growth factor 2 and insulin-like 
growth factor receptor 1 expression; however the expression of insulin-like
growth factor 1R was significantly higher in clear cell sarcoma compared to
melanoma (p = .006). Our results suggest that the combination of BRAF and NRAS
mutation analysis with fusion gene detection contributes to diagnosis of
malignant melanoma and clear cell sarcoma, and that insulin-like growth factor 1R
might be a novel target for the treatment of these two malignancies.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22406360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Psychiatry Res. 2012 Jun 30;198(1):39-46. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2011.08.022.
Epub 2012 Mar 3.

Case-control association study of 14 variants of CREB1, CREBBP and CREM on
diagnosis and treatment outcome in major depressive disorder and bipolar
disorder.

Crisafulli C(1), Shim DS, Andrisano C, Pae CU, Chiesa A, Han C, Patkar AA, Lee
SJ, Serretti A, De Ronchi D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychiatry, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

Some evidence suggests an association between genetic variants within the cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) response element-binding protein (CREB), CREB
binding protein (CREBBP) and cAMP response element-modulator (CREM) and several
psychiatric disorders. The present study investigated whether some single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within these genes could be associated with major
depressive disorder (MDD) and bipolar disorder (BD) and whether they could
predict clinical outcomes in Korean in-patients treated with antidepressants and 
mood stabilizers, respectively. The sample comprised 145 patients with MDD, 132
patients with BD and 170 psychiatrically healthy controls. Participants were
genotyped for 14 SNPs within CREB1, CREBBP and CREM. Baseline and final clinical 
measures, including the Montgomery-Åsberg Depression Rating Scale and Young Mania
Rating Scale for patients with MDD and BD, respectively, were recorded. All
p-values were 2-tailed, and statistical significance was conservatively set at
the 0.006 level in order to reduce the likelihood of false positive results. We
failed to observe any association of the 14 SNPs genotypes or alleles with
clinical improvement, response and remission rates as well as final outcomes in
any of such disorders. Our findings suggest that the 14 SNP under investigation
in our study do not influence diagnosis and treatment response in patients with
MDD and BD. However, taking into account the several limitations of our study,
further research is needed to draw more definitive conclusions.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22386572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e32298. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032298. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

Brain and spinal cord interaction: protective effects of exercise prior to spinal
cord injury.

Gomez-Pinilla F(1), Ying Z, Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology and Physiology, University of California Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America. fgomezpi@ucla.edu

We have investigated the effects of a spinal cord injury on the brain and spinal 
cord, and whether exercise provided before the injury could organize a protective
reaction across the neuroaxis. Animals were exposed to 21 days of voluntary
exercise, followed by a full spinal transection (T7-T9) and sacrificed two days
later. Here we show that the effects of spinal cord injury go beyond the spinal
cord itself and influence the molecular substrates of synaptic plasticity and
learning in the brain. The injury reduced BDNF levels in the hippocampus in
conjunction with the activated forms of p-synapsin I, p-CREB and p-CaMK II, while
exercise prior to injury prevented these reductions. Similar effects of the
injury were observed in the lumbar enlargement region of the spinal cord, where
exercise prevented the reductions in BDNF, and p-CREB. Furthermore, the response 
of the hippocampus to the spinal lesion appeared to be coordinated to that of the
spinal cord, as evidenced by corresponding injury-related changes in BDNF levels 
in the brain and spinal cord. These results provide an indication for the
increased vulnerability of brain centers after spinal cord injury. These findings
also imply that the level of chronic activity prior to a spinal cord injury could
determine the level of sensory-motor and cognitive recovery following the injury.
In particular, exercise prior to the injury onset appears to foster protective
mechanisms in the brain and spinal cord.

PMCID: PMC3284558
PMID: 22384207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e29527. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029527. Epub 2012 Feb 27.

Transcriptional regulation of N-acetylglutamate synthase.

Heibel SK(1), Lopez GY, Panglao M, Sodha S, Mariño-Ramírez L, Tuchman M, Caldovic
L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genetic Medicine Research, Children's National Medical Center,
Washington, DC, United States of America.

The urea cycle converts toxic ammonia to urea within the liver of mammals. At
least 6 enzymes are required for ureagenesis, which correlates with dietary
protein intake. The transcription of urea cycle genes is, at least in part,
regulated by glucocorticoid and glucagon hormone signaling pathways.
N-acetylglutamate synthase (NAGS) produces a unique cofactor, N-acetylglutamate
(NAG), that is essential for the catalytic function of the first and
rate-limiting enzyme of ureagenesis, carbamyl phosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1).
However, despite the important role of NAGS in ammonia removal, little is known
about the mechanisms of its regulation. We identified two regions of high
conservation upstream of the translation start of the NAGS gene. Reporter assays 
confirmed that these regions represent promoter and enhancer and that the
enhancer is tissue specific. Within the promoter, we identified multiple
transcription start sites that differed between liver and small intestine.
Several transcription factor binding motifs were conserved within the promoter
and enhancer regions while a TATA-box motif was absent. DNA-protein pull-down
assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed binding of Sp1 and CREB, but
not C/EBP in the promoter and HNF-1 and NF-Y, but not SMAD3 or AP-2 in the
enhancer. The functional importance of these motifs was demonstrated by decreased
transcription of reporter constructs following mutagenesis of each motif. The
presented data strongly suggest that Sp1, CREB, HNF-1, and NF-Y, that are known
to be responsive to hormones and diet, regulate NAGS transcription. This provides
molecular mechanism of regulation of ureagenesis in response to hormonal and
dietary changes.

PMCID: PMC3287996
PMID: 22383952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 27;287(18):14456-66. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.319681. Epub
2012 Feb 28.

Deregulated hepatic metabolism exacerbates impaired testosterone production in
Mrp4-deficient mice.

Morgan JA(1), Cheepala SB, Wang Y, Neale G, Adachi M, Nachagari D, Leggas M, Zhao
W, Boyd K, Venkataramanan R, Schuetz JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The physiological role of multidrug resistance protein 4 (Mrp4, Abcc4) in the
testes is unknown. We found that Mrp4 is expressed primarily in mouse and human
Leydig cells; however, there is no current evidence that Mrp4 regulates
testosterone production. We investigated its role in Leydig cells, where
testosterone production is regulated by cAMP, an intracellular messenger formed
when the luteinizing hormone (LH) receptor is activated. Because Mrp4 regulates
cAMP, we compared testosterone levels in Mrp4(-/-) and Mrp4(+/+) mice. Young
Mrp4(-/-) mice had significantly impaired gametogenesis, reduced testicular
testosterone, and disruption of Leydig cell cAMP homeostasis. Both young and
adult mice had impaired testosterone production. In Mrp4(-/-) primary Leydig
cells treated with LH, intracellular cAMP production was impaired and
cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation was strongly
attenuated. Notably, expression of CREB target genes that regulate testosterone
biosynthesis was reduced in Mrp4(-/-) Leydig cells in vivo. Therefore, Mrp4 is
required for normal Leydig cell testosterone production. However, adult Mrp4(-/-)
mice are fertile, with a normal circulating testosterone concentration. The
difference is that in 3-week-old Mrp4(-/-) mice, disruption of gonadal
testosterone production up-regulates hepatic Cyp2b10, a known
testosterone-metabolizing enzyme. Therefore, defective testicular testosterone
production de-regulates hepatic Cyp-mediated testosterone metabolism to disrupt
gametogenesis. These findings have important implications for understanding the
side effects of therapeutics that disrupt Mrp4 function and are reported to alter
androgen production.

PMCID: PMC3340271
PMID: 22375007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e32195. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032195. Epub 2012 Feb 21.

Resveratrol inhibits inflammatory responses via the mammalian target of rapamycin
signaling pathway in cultured LPS-stimulated microglial cells.

Zhong LM(1), Zong Y, Sun L, Guo JZ, Zhang W, He Y, Song R, Wang WM, Xiao CJ, Lu
D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science, Yunnan University, Kunming, Yunnan, China.

BACKGROUND: Resveratrol have been known to possess many pharmacological
properties including antioxidant, cardioprotective and anticancer effects.
Although current studies indicate that resveratrol produces neuroprotection
against neurological disorders, the precise mechanisms for its beneficial effects
are still not fully understood. We investigate the effect of anti-inflammatory
and mechamisms of resveratrol by using lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated murine
microglial BV-2 cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: BV-2 cells were treated with resveratrol (25, 50,
and 100 µM) and/or LPS (1 µg/ml). Nitric oxide (NO) and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)
were measured by Griess reagent and ELISA. The mRNA and protein levels of
proinflammatory proteins and cytokines were analysed by RT-PCR and double
immunofluorescence labeling, respectively. Phosphorylation levels of PTEN
(phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10), Akt, mammalian target 
of rapamycin (mTOR), mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) cascades,
inhibitor <U+03BA>B-a (I<U+03BA>B-a) and cyclic AMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB)
were measured by western blot. Resveratrol significantly attenuated the
LPS-induced expression of NO, PGE2, inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS),
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a), interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß)
and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) in BV-2 cells. Resveratrol increased PTEN, Akt and 
mTOR phosphorylation in a dose-dependent manner or a time-dependent manner.
Rapamycin (10 nM), a specific mTOR inhibitor, blocked the effects of resveratrol 
on LPS-induced microglial activation. In addition, mTOR inhibition partially
abolished the inhibitory effect of resveratrol on the phosphorylation of I<U+03BA>B-a,
CREB, extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2), c-Jun N-terminal
protein kinase (JNK), and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK).
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: This study indicates that resveratrol inhibited
LPS-induced proinflammatory enzymes and proinflammatory cytokines via
down-regulation phosphorylation of NF-<U+03BA>B, CREB and MAPKs family in a
mTOR-dependent manner. These findings reveal, in part, the molecular basis
underlying the anti-inflammatory properties of resveratrol.

PMCID: PMC3283735
PMID: 22363816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. FASEB J. 2012 Jun;26(6):2327-37. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-199976. Epub 2012 Feb 17.

The phosphatase calcineurin PP2BAß mediates part of mineralocorticoid receptor
transcriptional activity.

Seiferth A(1), Ruhs S, Mildenberger S, Gekle M, Grossmann C.

Author information: 
(1)Julius-Bernstein-Institut für Physiologie, Universität Halle-Wittenberg,
Magdeburger Strasse 6, 06112 Halle (Saale), Germany.

Recently it was shown that the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) may exert part of 
its transcriptional activity by mediation of calcineurin (PP2B). Here we
investigated the mechanism of interaction of MR with calcineurin and provide a
new MR signaling pathway with potential physiological and pathophysiological
relevance. MR <U+2192> calcineurin crosstalk was assessed in a heterologous expression
system (human embryonic kidney cells), which provides the opportunity for
detailed mechanistic investigation. SiRNA knockdown experiments show that
activated MR, but not GR, reduces CREB- and enhances NFaT-mediated
transcriptional activation via the catalytic calcineurin subunit PP2BAß but not
via PP2BAa. Altered PP2BAß expression, elevated cytosolic Ca(2+), activation of
mitogen-activated kinase [p38, extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2], 
or protein kinase C do not seem to be involved, whereas inhibition of the
chaperone heat-shock protein 90 (HSP90) abrogated the effect of MR.
Coimmunoprecipitation indicates the existence of protein complexes harboring MR
and PP2BAß independent of MR activation but dependent on HSP90. Activated MR
alters the subcellular distribution of PP2BAß, enhancing its nuclear fraction,
and reduces mRNA expression of the endogenous inhibitor CAIN (calcineurin
inhibitor) but not of RCAN1 (regulator of calcineurin). Overall, transcriptional 
relevant MR <U+2192> calcineurin crosstalk occurs via the catalytic subunit PP2BAß,
enables glucocorticoid response element-independent genomic signaling of MR, and 
is of potential pathophysiological relevance. Mechanistically, the crosstalk
results from HSP90-mediated cytosolic protein complex formation, altered
subcellular distribution, and altered endogenous inhibitor expression.

PMID: 22345406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 6;287(15):11899-910. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.308064. Epub
2012 Feb 16.

Influenza A virus induces interleukin-27 through cyclooxygenase-2 and protein
kinase A signaling.

Liu L(1), Cao Z, Chen J, Li R, Cao Y, Zhu C, Wu K, Wu J, Liu F, Zhu Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan 430072, China.

We previously reported that IL-27, which belongs to the IL-12 family of
cytokines, is elevated in the serum of patients infected with influenza A virus
(IAV). Here, we show that the expression of IL-27 was significantly up-regulated 
in A549 human lung epithelial cells and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
infected with IAV. Additionally, IAV triggered IL-27 expression through protein
kinase A and cAMP-response element-binding protein signaling, which was mediated 
by cyclooxygenase-2-derived prostaglandin E(2). IL-27 inhibited IAV replication
by STAT1/2/3 phosphorylation and activated antiviral factor protein kinase R
phosphorylation. Clinical analysis showed that IL-27 levels were significantly
elevated in a cohort of patients infected with IAV compared with healthy
individuals and that circulating IL-27 levels were tightly and positively
correlated with prostaglandin E(2) levels. These results indicate that IL-27
expression is one host immune factor produced in response to IAV infection and
that elevated IL-27 levels inhibit viral replication.

PMCID: PMC3320938
PMID: 22343630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Acta Derm Venereol. 2012 Nov;92(6):675-80. doi: 10.2340/00015555-1319.

Light-emitting diodes at 830 and 850 nm inhibit melanin synthesis in vitro.

Kim JM(1), Kim NH, Tian YS, Lee AY.

Author information: 
(1)Dongguk University Research Institute of Biotechnology Medical Science
Research Center, Gyeonggi-do, Korea.

Treatment of hyperpigmentation remains a challenge. Because of the positive
effects of low-energy Nd:YAG lasers on the treatment of melasma, it is suggested 
that laser-like light-emitting diodes (LEDs) can potentially ameliorate
hyperpigmentation. We evaluated the effect of seven different LED wavelengths on 
melanogenesis. LED irradiation at 830 nm (dose-dependent, from 1 to 20 J/cm2) and
850 nm (1 J/cm2) significantly reduced melanin production and tyrosinase
expression, not only in a normal human melanocyte monoculture both with and
without forskolin stimulation but also in a three-dimensional multiple cell type 
culture. It reduced melanin content via inactivation of the apoptosis
signal-regulating kinase and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 pathways. 
The level of phosphorylated cyclic AMP response element-binding protein was also 
decreased by LED irradiation. Moreover, LED irradiation reduced melanogenesis
through decreased expression of tyrosinase family genes (tyrosinase-related
protein-1 and 2, and microphthalmia-associated transcription factor). These
results indicate that LEDs could potentially be used to treat
melanin-overproducing skin conditions.

PMID: 22334261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. FEBS J. 2012 Apr;279(7):1252-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2012.08519.x. Epub 2012
Mar 2.

MicroRNA-182 targets cAMP-responsive element-binding protein 1 and suppresses
cell growth in human gastric adenocarcinoma.

Kong WQ(1), Bai R, Liu T, Cai CL, Liu M, Li X, Tang H.

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Life Science Research Center and Basic Medical School, Tianjin Medical
University, Tianjin, China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) constitute a class of noncoding RNAs that
post-transcriptionally regulate gene expression. Recent evidence indicates that
many miRNAs function as oncogenes or tumor suppressors by negatively regulating
their target genes. In our previous study, using miRNA microarray analysis, we
found that miRNA-182 (miR-182) was significantly downregulated in human gastric
adenocarcinoma tissue samples. Here, we confirmed the downregulation of miR-182
in a larger sample of gastric tissue samples. Overexpression of miR-182
suppressed the proliferation and colony formation of gastric cancer cells. An
oncogene, encoding cAMP-responsive element binding protein 1 (CREB1), serves as a
direct target gene of miR-182. A fluorescent reporter assay confirmed that
miR-182 binds specifically to the predicted site of the CREB1 mRNA 3'-UTR. When
miR-182 was overexpressed in gastric cancer cell lines, both the mRNA and protein
levels of CREB1 were depressed. Furthermore, CREB1 was present at a high level in
human gastric adenocarcinoma tissues, and this was inversely correlated with
miR-182 expression. Ectopic expression of CREB1 overcame the suppressive
phenotypes of gastric cancer cells caused by miR-182. These results indicate that
miR-182 targets the CREB1 gene and suppresses gastric adenocarcinoma cell growth,
suggesting that miR-182 shows tumor-suppressive activity in human gastric cancer.

© 2012 The Authors Journal compilation © 2012 FEBS.

PMID: 22325466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Immunopharmacol Immunotoxicol. 2012 Oct;34(5):810-4. doi:
10.3109/08923973.2012.657799. Epub 2012 Feb 11.

The effects of dehydrocostus lactone on osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells in redox
changes and PI3K/Akt/CREB.

Seo MS(1), Choi EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food & Nutrition, Education Graduate School, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul, Korea.

Antimycin A (AMA) inhibits mitochondrial electron transport chain between
cytochrome b and c. In the present study, we investigated the effects of
dehydrocostus lactone on osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells in the presence of AMA with 
a focus on redox changes and PI3K/Akt/CREB signaling. AMA increased nitrotyrosin 
level and decreased NADPH level, activities of thioredoxin reductase,
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), and Akt (protein kinase B [PKB]), and
phosphorylated cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB). Pretreatment with
dehydrocostus lactone prior to AMA exposure significantly prevented the loss of
NADPH, production of nitrotyrosine, and thioredoxin reductase inactivation
induced by AMA. Moreover, dehydrocostus lactone increased activities of PI3K and 
Akt, and CREB phosphorylation inhibited by AMA. These results suggest that
antioxidant activity and PI3K/Akt/CREB activation are related to the protective
effect of dehydrocostus lactone against osteoblast damage induced by AMA.

PMID: 22324303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Nutr Neurosci. 2012 Jan;15(1):18-24. doi: 10.1179/1476830511Y.0000000031.

Depletion of intracellular zinc induced apoptosis in cultured hippocampal neurons
through Raf/MEK/ERK pathways.

Pang W(1), Lu H, Hu YD, Yang HP, Leng X, Jiang YG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Institute of Hygiene & Environmental Medicine,
Academy of Military Medical Science, Tianjin, China.

An experiment was performed to observe the changes in Raf-1
kinase/mitogen-activated protein kinase ERK (MEK)/extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase (ERK) signaling pathways in cultured hippocampal neurons and its
correlation with neurons apoptosis induced by intracellular zinc depletion.
Cultured hippocampal neurons were exposed to a cell membrane-permeant zinc
chelator TPEN (2 µM), and to TPEN plus zinc sulfate (5 µM) for 24 h. Cultures
were then processed to detect neuronal viability by the methyl thiazolyl
tetrazolium assay, while apoptosis rate was simultaneously observed by the flow
cytometric analysis. Caspase-3, Raf-1, pMEK, pERK1/2, and pCREB protein levels
were examined by Western blot assays. The viability in TPEN-incubated neurons was
notably decreased, apoptosis rate and expression of caspase-3 significantly
increased compared to untreated controls. The significant down-regulation of
Raf/MEK/ERK signaling pathway and expression of pCREB were decreased in
TPEN-treated neurons. Co-addition of zinc almost completely reversed TPEN-induced
alterations described. The results demonstrated zinc-modulated apoptosis and the 
expression of Raf/MEK/ERK at the protein level in hippocampal neurons. It is
possible that zinc depletion-induced apoptosis in cultured hippocampal neurons
may be relevant to the changes of Raf/MEK/ERK signaling pathway.

PMID: 22305649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Mol Brain. 2012 Feb 2;5:5. doi: 10.1186/1756-6606-5-5.

Hippocampal function is not required for the precision of remote place memory.

Kitamura T(1), Okubo-Suzuki R, Takashima N, Murayama A, Hino T, Nishizono H, Kida
S, Inokuchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine &
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.

BACKGROUND: During permanent memory formation, recall of acquired place memories 
initially depends on the hippocampus and eventually become
hippocampus-independent with time. It has been suggested that the quality of
original place memories also transforms from a precise form to a less precise
form with similar time course. The question arises of whether the quality of
original place memories is determined by brain regions on which the memory
depends.
RESULTS: To directly test this idea, we introduced a new procedure: a
non-associative place recognition memory test in mice. Combined with genetic and 
pharmacological approaches, our analyses revealed that place memory is precisely 
maintained for 28 days, although the recall of place memory shifts from
hippocampus-dependent to hippocampus-independent with time. Moreover, the
inactivation of the hippocampal function does not inhibit the precision of remote
place memory.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that the quality of place memories is not
determined by brain regions on which the memory depends.

PMCID: PMC3317849
PMID: 22296713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Biol Pharm Bull. 2012;35(2):265-8.

Genotype distributions and allele frequencies of possible major depressive
disorder-associated single nucleotide polymorphisms, cyclic adenosine
monophosphate response element binding protein 1 rs4675690 and Piccolo rs2522833,
in a Japanese population.

Inoue K(1), Ando N, Suzuki E, Hayashi H, Tsuji D, Itoh K.

Author information: 
(1)Department Clinical Pharmacology & Genetics, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Shizuoka, Japan.

It is known that the onset of major depressive disorder (MDD) would be associated
with genetic factors. To investigate the susceptibility to psychiatric disorders,
e.g. MDD, schizophrenia etc., it is necessary to compare the genetic differences 
of objective polymorphisms between in patients and in relative contol subjects.
Recently, an increasing number of studies focused on the role of cyclic adenosine
monophosphate response element binding protein 1 (CREB1) and Piccolo (PCLO) on
MDD. However, there was no report about genetic characterization of polymorphisms
in between MDD patients and healthy subjects in Japanese population. We analized 
genotype distributions and allele frequencies of CREB1 rs4675690 and PCLO
rs2522833 polymorphisms in 267 Japanese subjects, respectively. In CREB1
rs4675690, C allele frequency (0.41) was lower than T allele (0.59). While in
PCLO rs2522833, A allele frequency (0.45) was lower than C allele (0.55). Our
findings may be useful for investigating the genetic factors concerning the
susceptibility to MDD in Japanese population.

PMID: 22293360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Gene. 2012 Mar 15;496(1):8-16. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.01.012. Epub 2012 Jan 20.

Long non-coding RNA UCA1 regulated cell cycle distribution via CREB through PI3-K
dependent pathway in bladder carcinoma cells.

Yang C(1), Li X, Wang Y, Zhao L, Chen W.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 76 West Yanta Road, 710061 Xi'an, China.

Long non-coding RNA urothelial carcinoma associated 1 (UCA1) promotes human
bladder cancer cell proliferation, but the underlying mechanism remains unknown. 
After knocking down of UCA1 in BLZ-211 cells, several cell cycle-related genes
(CDKN2B, EP300 and TGFß-2) were screened by microarray assay and validated by
real-time PCR. Interestingly, in western blot analysis, p300 (encoded by EP300)
and its coactivator cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) level were
significantly down-regulated. Both suppression of UCA1 expression by shRNA in
BLZ-211 cells and ectopic expression of UCA1 in UMUC-2 cells showed that UCA1
alteration paralleled to the expression and phosphorylation of CREB, and UCA1
obviously influenced AKT expression and activity. Furthermore, in BLZ-211 cells, 
cell cycle progression was greatly reduced after PI3-K pathway was blocked by
LY294002, indicating that UCA1 affected cell cycle progression through CREB.
Taken together, we concluded that UCA1 regulated cell cycle through CREB via
PI3K-AKT dependent pathway in bladder cancer.

Crown Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22285928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Nutr. 2012 Mar;142(3):448-55. doi: 10.3945/jn.111.152108. Epub 2012 Jan 25.

LOC66273 isoform 2, a novel protein highly expressed in white adipose tissue,
induces adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 cells.

Ma X(1), Ding W, Wang J, Wu G, Zhang H, Yin J, Zhou L, Li D.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, China Agricultural University,
Beijing, China. maxi@cau.edu.cn

Obesity results in part from altered adipocyte metabolism and enhanced
adipogenesis. However, the factors that influence insulin-independent
differentiation of preadipocytes in response to excess intake of dietary energy
remain poorly understood. Based on our recent finding that LOC66273 isoform 2
(LI2), a gene that encodes a novel Mth938 domain-containing protein, is highly
expressed in white adipose tissues, we hypothesized that LI2 plays an important
role in adipogenesis. Plasmid pcDNA3.1-LI2 was electroporated into 3T3-L1
preadipocytes to overexpress the LI2 protein. Synthetic siRNA was transfected
into 3T3-L1 cells to knockdown endogenous LI2. Using constitutively active and
potent siRNA against LI2, we determined cell morphology, cell viability, and
adipocytic factors in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes. Our results indicated that LI2 was
sufficient to drive preadipocyte differentiation via modulating the
phosphorylation level and transcriptional activity of CREB, coincident with
expression of several adipogenic regulators and mature adipocyte markers, without
insulin treatment. In addition, overexpression of the LI2 protein inhibited
preadipocyte growth, whereas knockdown of the LI2 protein resulted in
preadipocyte apoptosis via caspase-3 activation during adipogenesis. These
results indicated that LI2 might function to switch preadipocytes from
proliferation to differentiation and to maintain the viability of preadipocytes
during adipogenesis by regulating the caspase-3 pathway. Our findings highlight
the importance of LI2 in the formation of new adipocytes, thus helping understand
the mechanisms responsible for insulin-independent adipogenesis in mammals.

PMID: 22279136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Hum Mutat. 2012 Apr;33(4):651-4. doi: 10.1002/humu.22027. Epub 2012 Feb 14.

A p.D116G mutation in CREB1 leads to novel multiple malformation syndrome
resembling CrebA knockout mouse.

Kitazawa S(1), Kondo T, Mori K, Yokoyama N, Matsuo M, Kitazawa R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diagnostic Molecular Pathology, Kobe University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

We evaluated an autopsy case with severe neonatal respiratory distress,
hypoplasia of thymus, thyroid gland and cerebellum, and agenesis of the corpus
callosum displaying striking phenotypic similarity to the CrebA knockout mouse.
On the assumption that comparable genetic alterations must be present, we checked
the whole genomic DNA sequence of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) response 
element binding protein 1 (CREB1), the human counterpart of mouse CrebA, and
found a missense c.347A>G mutation corresponding to p.D116G within the
kinase-inducible domain (KID) of CREB1. When transcribed in vitro, while Ser-133 
phosphorylation of KID was maintained upon forskolin treatment, mutated CREB1
protein failed to associate with the KIX domain of co-activator CREBBP/EP300, and
thereby, interrupted cAMP-dependent protein kinase A signal transduction as the
dominant-negative form. This is the first report of a sporadic CREB1-related
multiple malformation syndrome that, in light of accumulated knowledge of
phenotypic features in gene-targeted animals, clearly emphasizes the importance
of cross-species translational research.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22267179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Leukoc Biol. 2012 Apr;91(4):591-8. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0411193. Epub 2012 Jan 18.

A novel p38-MAPK signaling axis modulates neutrophil biology in head and neck
cancer.

Dumitru CA(1), Fechner MK, Hoffmann TK, Lang S, Brandau S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen,
Germany.

Neutrophils are emerging as important mediators in cancer progression. Recent
studies associated neutrophils with poor clinical outcome of HNC patients and
showed that HNC induces recruitment, survival, and release of proinflammatory
factors by neutrophils in vitro. The molecular mechanisms through which HNC and
other cancers modulate neutrophil biology are currently unknown. To explore these
mechanisms, we used an in vitro system that models the interaction between human 
HNC cells and neutrophils or neutrophilic-differentiated HL-60 cells,
respectively. We show that HNC-derived factors activate p38-MAPK in neutrophils, 
which partly promotes neutrophil survival, but not neutrophil recruitment and
motility. Most importantly, HNC-induced p38-MAPK activation strongly stimulates
the release of CCL4, CXCL8, and MMP9 by neutrophils. We identify CREB and
interestingly, p27 phosphorylated at T198 as downstream members of the
HNC-induced p38-MAPK signaling cascade. Using siRNA technology, we demonstrate
that p27 and CREB mediate the release of CCL4 and CXCL8 and that CREB,
additionally, mediates the release of MMP9. These data unravel novel molecular
mechanisms involved in regulation of neutrophil proinflammatory functions. Our
studies on human HNC tissues indicate that tumor-infiltrating neutrophils might
be a major source of CCL4 and particularly, MMP9 in cancer patients. Thus, our
findings provide novel, mechanistic insights relevant for the pathophysiology of 
HNC and possibly, other types of cancer as well.

PMID: 22262799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29506. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029506. Epub 2012 Jan 10.

Identification of gene networks and pathways associated with Guillain-Barré
syndrome.

Chang KH(1), Chuang TJ, Lyu RK, Ro LS, Wu YR, Chang HS, Huang CC, Kuo HC, Hsu WC,
Chu CC, Chen CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital Linkou Medical Center
and College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taiwan, Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: The underlying change of gene network expression of Guillain-Barré
syndrome (GBS) remains elusive. We sought to identify GBS-associated gene
networks and signaling pathways by analyzing the transcriptional profile of
leukocytes in the patients with GBS.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Quantitative global gene expression microarray analysis of 
peripheral blood leukocytes was performed on 7 patients with GBS and 7 healthy
controls. Gene expression profiles were compared between patients and controls
after standardization. The set of genes that significantly correlated with GBS
was further analyzed by Ingenuity Pathways Analyses. 256 genes and 18 gene
networks were significantly associated with GBS (fold change =2, P<0.05). FOS,
PTGS2, HMGB2 and MMP9 are the top four of 246 significantly up-regulated genes.
The most significant disease and altered biological function genes associated
with GBS were those involved in inflammatory response, infectious disease, and
respiratory disease. Cell death, cellular development and cellular movement were 
the top significant molecular and cellular functions involved in GBS.
Hematological system development and function, immune cell trafficking and
organismal survival were the most significant GBS-associated function in
physiological development and system category. Several hub genes, such as MMP9,
PTGS2 and CREB1 were identified in the associated gene networks. Canonical
pathway analysis showed that GnRH, corticotrophin-releasing hormone and ERK/MAPK 
signaling were the most significant pathways in the up-regulated gene set in GBS.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals the gene networks and canonical pathways
associated with GBS. These data provide not only networks between the genes for
understanding the pathogenic properties of GBS but also map significant pathways 
for the future development of novel therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC3254618
PMID: 22253732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Endocrinology. 2012 Mar;153(3):1116-28. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1895. Epub 2012 Jan 
17.

Antiapoptotic actions of exendin-4 against hypoxia and cytokines are augmented by
CREB.

Velmurugan K(1), Balamurugan AN, Loganathan G, Ahmad A, Hering BJ, Pugazhenthi S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Endocrinology, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Denver, Colorado
80220, USA.

Islets isolated from cadaveric donor pancreas are functionally viable and can be 
transplanted in diabetic patients to reduce insulin requirements. This
therapeutic approach is less efficient because a significant portion of
functional islets is lost due to oxidative stress, inflammation, and hypoxia.
Exendin-4, a glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist, is known to improve islet 
survival through activation of the transcription factor, cAMP response element
binding protein (CREB). However, isolated human islets are exposed to several
stresses known to down-regulate CREB. The objective of the present study was to
determine whether the cytoprotective actions of exendin-4 in human islets can be 
augmented by increasing the levels of CREB. Simulation of ischemia/reperfusion
injury and exposure to hypoxic conditions in cultured human islets resulted in
decreased CREB activation and induction of apoptosis. Islets were transduced with
adenoviral CREB followed by exposure to exendin-4 as a strategy for improving
their survival. This combination increased the levels of several proteins needed 
for ß-cell survival and function, including insulin receptor substrate-2, Bcl-2, 
and baculoviral IAP repeat-containing 3, and suppressed the expression of
proapoptotic and inflammatory genes. A combination of CREB and exendin-4 exerted 
enhanced antiapoptotic action in cultured islets against hypoxia and cytokines.
More significantly, transplantation of human islets transduced with adenoviral
CREB and treated with exendin-4 showed improved glycemic control over a 30-d
period in diabetic athymic nude mice. These observations have significant
implications in the therapeutic potential of exendin-4 and CREB in the islet
transplantation setting as well as in preserving ß-cell mass of diabetic
patients.

PMID: 22253425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Nat Med. 2012 Jan 6;18(1):24-6. doi: 10.1038/nm.2624.

Finding a sirtuin truth in Huntington's disease.

La Spada AR.

Comment on
    Nat Med. 2012 Jan;18(1):153-8.
    Nat Med. 2012 Jan;18(1):159-65.

PMID: 22227661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Oct;33(10):2398-410. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.11.025. Epub 2012 Jan 5.

Neuroprotection provided by dietary restriction in rats is further enhanced by
reducing glucocortocoids.

Qiu G(1), Spangler EL, Wan R, Miller M, Mattson MP, So KF, de Cabo R, Zou S,
Ingram DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Nanfang Hospital, Nanfang Medical University,
Guangdong Province, PR China.

Glucocorticoids (GC)--corticosterone (CORT) in rodents and cortisol in
primates--are stress-induced hormones secreted by adrenal glands that interact
with the hypothalamic pituitary axis. High levels of cortisol in humans are
observed in neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease (AD) and
Parkinson's disease (PD), as well as in diabetes, post-traumatic stress syndrome,
and major depression. Experimental models of diabetes in rats and mice have
demonstrated that reduction of CORT reduces learning and memory deficits and
attenuates loss of neuronal viability and plasticity. In contrast to the negative
associations of elevated GC levels, CORT is moderately elevated in dietary
restriction (DR) paradigms which are associated with many healthy anti-aging
effects including neuroprotection. We demonstrate here in rats that ablating CORT
by adrenalectomy (ADX) with replenishment to relatively low levels (30% below
that of controls) prior to the onset of a DR regimen (ADX-DR) followed by central
administration of the neurotoxin, kainic acid (KA), significantly attenuates
learning deficits in a 14-unit T-maze task. The performance of the ADX-DR KA
group did not differ from a control group (CON) that did not receive KA and was
fed ad libitum (AL). By contrast, the sham-operated DR (SHAM-DR KA) group,
SHAM-AL KA group, and ADX-AL KA group demonstrated poorer learning behavior in
this task compared to the CON group. Stereological analysis revealed equivalent
DR-induced neuroprotection in the SH-DR KA and ADX-DR KA groups, as measured by
cell loss in the CA2/CA3 region of the hippocampus, while substantial cell loss
was observed in SH-AL and ADX-AL rats. A separate set of experiments was
conducted with similar dietary and surgical treatment conditions but without KA
administration to examine markers of neurotrophic activity, brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF), transcriptions factors (pCREB), and chaperone
proteins (HSP-70). Under these conditions, we noted elevations in both BDNF and
pCREB in ADX DR rats compared to the other groups; whereas, HSP-70, was
equivalently elevated in ADX-DR and SH-DR groups and was higher than observed in 
both SH-AL and ADX-AL groups. These results support findings that DR protects
hippocampal neurons against KA-induced cellular insult. However, this
neuroprotective effect was further enhanced in rats with a lower-than control
level of CORT resulting from ADX and maintained by exogenous CORT
supplementation. Our results then suggest that DR-induced physiological elevation
of GC may have negative functional consequences to DR-induced beneficial effects.
These negative effects, however, can be compensated by other DR-produced cellular
and molecular protective mechanisms.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3374050
PMID: 22226488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2013 Feb;16(1):189-98. doi:
10.1017/S146114571100188X. Epub 2012 Jan 9.

The antidepressant hyperforin increases the phosphorylation of CREB and the
expression of TrkB in a tissue-specific manner.

Gibon J(1), Deloulme JC, Chevallier T, Ladevèze E, Abrous DN, Bouron A.

Author information: 
(1)UMR CNRS 5249, Grenoble, France.

Hyperforin is one of the main bioactive compounds that underlie the
antidepressant actions of the medicinal plant Hypericum perforatum (St. John's
wort). However, the effects of a chronic hyperforin treatment on brain cells
remains to be fully addressed. The following study was undertaken to further
advance our understanding of the biological effects of this plant extract on
neurons. Special attention was given to its impact on the brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) receptor TrkB and on adult hippocampal neurogenesis
since they appear central to the mechanisms of action of antidepressants. The
consequences of a chronic hyperforin treatment were investigated on cortical
neurons in culture and on the brain of adult mice treated for 4 wk with a daily
injection (i.p.) of hyperforin (4 mg/kg). Its effects on the expression of the
cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element-binding protein (CREB),
phospho-CREB (p-CREB), TrkB and phospho-TrkB (p-TrkB) were analysed by Western
blot experiments and its impact on adult hippocampal neurogenesis was also
investigated. Hyperforin stimulated the expression of TRPC6 channels and TrkB via
SKF-96365-sensitive channels controlling a downstream signalling cascade
involving Ca(2+), protein kinase A, CREB and p-CREB. In vivo, hyperforin
augmented the expression of TrkB in the cortex but not in the hippocampus where
hippocampal neurogenesis remained unchanged. In conclusion, this plant extract
acts on the cortical BDNF/TrkB pathway leaving adult hippocampal neurogenesis
unaffected. This study provides new insights on the neuronal responses controlled
by hyperforin. We propose that the cortex is an important brain structure
targeted by hyperforin.

PMID: 22226089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Neurosci. 2012 Jan 4;32(1):143-50. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4266-11.2012.

HIV-1 Tat triggers nuclear localization of ZO-1 via Rho signaling and cAMP
response element-binding protein activation.

Zhong Y(1), Zhang B, Eum SY, Toborek M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuroscience and Vascular Biology Laboratory, Department of
Neurosurgery, University of Kentucky Medical Center, Lexington, Kentucky 40536,
USA.

The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-specific protein trans-activator of
transcription (Tat) can contribute to the dysfunction of brain endothelial cells 
and HIV trafficking into the brain by disrupting tight junction (TJ) integrity at
the blood-brain barrier (BBB) level. Specific TJ proteins, such as zonula
occludens (ZO) proteins, localize not only at the cell-cell borders but are also 
present in the nuclei. The objective of the present study was to evaluate the
mechanisms and significance of Tat-induced nuclear localization of ZO-1.
Treatment of a brain endothelial cell line (hCMEC/D3 cells) with Tat resulted in 
a decrease in total levels of ZO-1 but significantly upregulated ZO-1 protein
expression in the nuclei. In addition, exposure to Tat stimulated Rho signaling
and induced phosphorylation and activity of transcription factor cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB), binding sites that have been identified in the
proximal region of the ZO-1 promoter. Interestingly, inhibition of the Rho
cascade protected against Tat-induced upregulation of ZO-1 in the nuclei and
activation of CREB. Depletion of CREB by infection of cells with specific shRNA
lentiviral particles attenuated both Tat-induced Rho signaling and nuclear
targeting of ZO-1. A decrease in CREB levels also attenuated Tat-induced
endothelial and BBB hyperpermeability as well as transendothelial migration of
monocytic cells. The role of CREB in Tat-mediated alterations of ZO-1 was
confirmed in brain microvessels in mice with CREB shRNA lentiviral particles
injected into the cerebral circulation. The present results indicate the crucial 
role of Rho signaling and CREB in modulation of nuclear localization of ZO-1 and 
maintaining the integrity of endothelial monolayers.

PMCID: PMC3566645
PMID: 22219277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2012 Feb 15;518(2):133-41. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2011.12.012. 
Epub 2011 Dec 23.

Conditioned media from lung cancer cell line A549 and PC9 inactivate pulmonary
fibroblasts by regulating protein phosphorylation.

Park AM(1), Hayakawa S, Honda E, Mine Y, Yoshida K, Munakata H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Kinki University, Ohno-Higashi, Osaka-Sayama,
Osaka, Japan.

Pulmonary fibrosis is a devastating condition resulting from excess extracellular
matrix deposition that leads to progressive lung destruction and scarring. In the
pathogenesis of fibrotic diseases, activation of myofibroblasts by transforming
growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) plays a crucial role. Since no effective therapy for
pulmonary fibrosis is currently recognized, finding an effective antifibrotic
agent is an important objective. One approach might be through identification of 
agents that inactivate myofibroblasts. In the current study we examined the
potential of conditioned medium obtained from several types of cells to exhibit
myofibroblast inactivating activity. Conditioned media from lung cancer cell
lines A549 and PC9 were found to have this action, as shown by its ability to
decrease a-smooth muscle actin expression in MRC-5 cells. Subsequently the
inhibitory factor was purified from the medium and identified as
5'-deoxy-5'-methylthioadenosine (MTA), and its mechanism of action elucidated.
Activation of protein kinase A and cAMP responsive element binding protein (CREB)
were detected. MTA inhibited TGF-ß-induced mitogen-activated protein kinase
activation. Furthermore, the gain-of-function mutant CREB caused inactivation of 
myofibroblasts. These results show that A549 and PC9 conditioned media have the
ability to inactivate myofibroblasts, and that CREB-phosphorylation plays a
central role in this process.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22209754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Proteomics Bioinform. 2012;5(8):177-184.

Antibody Microarray Analysis of Signaling Networks Regulated by Cxcl13 and Cxcr5 
in Prostate Cancer.

El-Haibi CP(1), Singh R, Gupta P, Sharma PK, Greenleaf KN, Singh S, Lillard JW
Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Advanced prostate cancer (PCa) often spreads to distant organs, leading to
increased morbidity and mortality. It is now well established that chemokines and
their cognate receptors play a crucial role in the multi-step process of
metastasis. We have previously identified CXCR5 to be highly expressed by PCa
tissues and cell lines and its specific ligand, CXCL13, is significantly elevated
in the serum of patients with PCa and differentiated PCa cases with other benign 
prostatic diseases. CXCR5:CXCL13 interactions promote PCa cell invasion,
migration, and differential matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) expression. Thus, it
is important to understand the molecular and cellular processes that mediate
these events. In this study, we quantified changes in apoptosis, cell cycle, and 
cytoskeleton rearrangement biological pathways from CXCL13-treated hormone
refractory PCa cell line (PC3) to better elucidate the signaling pathways
activated by CXCL13:CXCR5 interaction. Using antibody arrays that displayed 343
different protein- and phosphorylation-specific antibodies, regulatory networks
that control cancer progression signaling cascades were identified. Three
regulatory networks were dramatically induced by CXCL13: Akt1/2-cyclin-dependent 
kinases (Cdk1/2)-Cdk inhibitor 1B (CDKN1B), Integrinß3-focal adhesion kinase
(Fak)/Src-Paxillin(PXN), and Akt-Jun-cAMP response-element binding protein
(CREB1). In general, phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K)/Akt and stress-activated
protein kinase (SAPK)/c-jun kinase (JNK) were the major signaling pathways
modulated by CXCL13 in PCa cells. This cluster analysis revealed proteins whose
activation patterns can be attributed to CXCL13:CXCR5 interaction in the
androgen-independent PC3 cell line. Taken together, these results suggest that
CXCL13 contributes to cell-signaling cascades that regulate advanced PCa cell
invasion, growth, and/or survival.

PMCID: PMC3760521
PMID: 24009409  [PubMed]


118. Neurosci Lett. 2012 Feb 2;508(1):37-41. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.12.013. Epub
2011 Dec 17.

Possible influence of CREB1, CREBBP and CREM variants on diagnosis and treatment 
outcome in patients with schizophrenia.

Crisafulli C(1), Chiesa A, Han C, Lee SJ, Shim DS, Balzarro B, Andrisano C,
Sidoti A, Patkar AA, Pae CU, Serretti A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomorphology and Biotechnologies, Division of Biology and
Genetics, University of Messina, Italy.

The present study explores whether some single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
within CREB1 (rs2709377 and rs6740584), CREBBP (rs2239317, rs2239316, rs3025702, 
rs130021, rs130005, rs129974 and rs9392) and CREM (rs1148247, rs4934735,
rs12775799, rs6481941 and rs16935888) could be associated with schizophrenia
(SKZ) and whether they could predict clinical outcomes in Korean in-patients
treated with antipsychotics. Two-hundred twenty one in-patients suffering from
SKZ and 170 psychiatrically healthy controls were genotyped for 10 SNPs within
CREB1, CREBBP and CREM. All patients were assessed for the severity of illness at
baseline and at discharge by means of the Positive and Negative Symptoms Scale
(PANSS). Our findings suggest the lack of influence of SNPs under investigation
in the present study on the susceptibility to SKZ and on the response to
antipsychotics. However, taking into account the several limitations of our
study, further research is needed to draw more definitive conclusions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22198373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Nat Neurosci. 2011 Dec 25;15(2):294-7. doi: 10.1038/nn.2990.

Computational design of enhanced learning protocols.

Zhang Y(1), Liu RY, Heberton GA, Smolen P, Baxter DA, Cleary LJ, Byrne JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, W.M. Keck Center for the Neurobiology 
of Learning and Memory, The University of Texas Medical School at Houston,
Houston, Texas, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2012 Feb;15(2):178-9.

Learning and memory are influenced by the temporal pattern of training stimuli.
However, the mechanisms that determine the effectiveness of a particular training
protocol are not well understood. We tested the hypothesis that the efficacy of a
protocol is determined in part by interactions among biochemical cascades that
underlie learning and memory. Previous findings suggest that the protein kinase A
(PKA) and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) cascades are necessary to
induce long-term synaptic facilitation (LTF) in Aplysia, a neuronal correlate of 
memory. We developed a computational model of the PKA and ERK cascades and used
it to identify a training protocol that maximized PKA and ERK interactions. In
vitro studies confirmed that the protocol enhanced LTF. Moreover, the protocol
enhanced the levels of phosphorylation of the transcription factor CREB1.
Behavioral training confirmed that long-term memory also was enhanced by the
protocol. These results illustrate the feasibility of using computational models 
to design training protocols that improve memory.

PMCID: PMC3267874
PMID: 22197829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jan 10;109(2):621-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1109237109.
Epub 2011 Dec 21.

A role for neuronal cAMP responsive-element binding (CREB)-1 in brain responses
to calorie restriction.

Fusco S(1), Ripoli C, Podda MV, Ranieri SC, Leone L, Toietta G, McBurney MW,
Schütz G, Riccio A, Grassi C, Galeotti T, Pani G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Signaling, Institute of General Pathology, Universita'
Cattolica School of Medicine, 00168 Rome, Italy.

Calorie restriction delays brain senescence and prevents neurodegeneration, but
critical regulators of these beneficial responses other than the NAD(+)-dependent
histone deacetylase Sirtuin-1 (Sirt-1) are unknown. We report that effects of
calorie restriction on neuronal plasticity, memory and social behavior are
abolished in mice lacking cAMP responsive-element binding (CREB)-1 in the
forebrain. Moreover, CREB deficiency drastically reduces the expression of Sirt-1
and the induction of genes relevant to neuronal metabolism and survival in the
cortex and hippocampus of dietary-restricted animals. Biochemical studies reveal 
a complex interplay between CREB and Sirt-1: CREB directly regulates the
transcription of the sirtuin in neuronal cells by binding to Sirt-1 chromatin;
Sirt-1, in turn, is recruited by CREB to DNA and promotes CREB-dependent
expression of target gene peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3>
coactivator-1a and neuronal NO Synthase. Accordingly, expression of these CREB
targets is markedly reduced in the brain of Sirt KO mice that are, like
CREB-deficient mice, poorly responsive to calorie restriction. Thus, the above
circuitry, modulated by nutrient availability, links energy metabolism with
neurotrophin signaling, participates in brain adaptation to nutrient restriction,
and is potentially relevant to accelerated brain aging by overnutrition and
diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3258594
PMID: 22190495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Cell Microbiol. 2012 Apr;14(4):546-59. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01740.x.
Epub 2012 Jan 18.

Herpes simplex virus type 1 infection activates the Epstein-Barr virus
replicative cycle via a CREB-dependent mechanism.

Wu H(1), Li T, Zeng M, Peng T.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institutes of
Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China.

The reactivation of latent Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) to lytic replication is
important in pathogenesis and requires virus-host cellular interactions. However,
the mechanism underlying the reactivation of EBV is not yet fully understood. In 
the present study, herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) was shown to induce the
reactivation of latent EBV by triggering BZLF1 expression. The BZLF1 promoter
(Zp) was not activated by HSV-1 essential glycoprotein-induced membrane fusion.
Nevertheless, Zp was activated within 6 h post HSV-1 infection in virus
entry-dependent and replication-independent manners. Using a panel of Zp deletion
mutants, HSV-1 was shown to promote Zp through a cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP) response element (CRE) located in ZII. The phosphorylated cAMP response
element-binding (phos-CREB) protein, the cellular transactivator that binds to
CRE, also increased after HSV-1 infection. By transient transfection,
cAMP-dependent protein kinase A and HSV-1 US3 protein were found to be capable of
activating Zp in CREB- and CRE-dependent manners. The relationship between EBV
activation and HSV-1 infection revealed a possible common mechanism that
stimulated latent EBV into lytic cycles in vivo.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22188237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2012 Jan;159B(1):1-4. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32006.

No evidence of non-homologous insertions in mouse model of MDD created by
replacement of homologous mouse DNA sequence with pathogenic 6-base human CREB1
promoter sequence.

Zubenko GS(1), Hughes HB 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. zubenkog@pitt.edu

We have recently reported the creation and initial characterization of the first 
etiology-based recombinant mouse model of major depressive disorder (MDD). This
was achieved by replacing the corresponding mouse DNA sequence with a 6-base DNA 
sequence from the human CREB1 promoter that is associated with the development of
MDD in families identified by probands with recurrent, early-onset MDD. The
current study explored whether the desired homologous recombination event at the 
mouse Creb1 gene that resulted in the creation of the mouse model was also
accompanied by insertions of the targeting vector at unintended non-homologous
locations in the mouse genome. No evidence of insertions of targeting vector
sequence was observed at regions other than the mouse Creb1 gene.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3245663
PMID: 22180334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Nat Med. 2011 Dec 18;18(1):159-65. doi: 10.1038/nm.2559.

Sirt1 mediates neuroprotection from mutant huntingtin by activation of the TORC1 
and CREB transcriptional pathway.

Jeong H(1), Cohen DE, Cui L, Supinski A, Savas JN, Mazzulli JR, Yates JR 3rd,
Bordone L, Guarente L, Krainc D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, MassGeneral Institute
for Neurodegenerative Disease, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown,
Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2012 Jan;18(1):24-6.
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2012 Feb;13(2):71.

Sirt1, a NAD-dependent protein deacetylase, has emerged as a key regulator of
mammalian transcription in response to cellular metabolic status and stress. Here
we show that Sirt1 has a neuroprotective role in models of Huntington's disease, 
an inherited neurodegenerative disorder caused by a glutamine repeat expansion in
huntingtin protein (HTT). Brain-specific knockout of Sirt1 results in
exacerbation of brain pathology in a mouse model of Huntington's disease, whereas
overexpression of Sirt1 improves survival, neuropathology and the expression of
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in Huntington's disease mice. We show
that Sirt1 deacetylase activity directly targets neurons to mediate
neuroprotection from mutant HTT. The neuroprotective effect of Sirt1 requires the
presence of CREB-regulated transcription coactivator 1 (TORC1), a brain-specific 
modulator of CREB activity. We show that under normal conditions, Sirt1
deacetylates and activates TORC1 by promoting its dephosphorylation and its
interaction with CREB. We identified BDNF as a key target of Sirt1 and TORC1
transcriptional activity in both normal and Huntington's disease neurons. Mutant 
HTT interferes with the TORC1-CREB interaction to repress BDNF transcription, and
Sirt1 rescues this defect in vitro and in vivo. These studies suggest a key role 
for Sirt1 in transcriptional networks in both the normal and Huntington's disease
brain and offer an opportunity for therapeutic development.

PMCID: PMC3509213
PMID: 22179316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2012 Mar;112(5):892-7. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.01287.2011. Epub 2011 Dec 15.

Heritability of submaximal exercise heart rate response to exercise training is
accounted for by nine SNPs.

Rankinen T(1), Sung YJ, Sarzynski MA, Rice TK, Rao DC, Bouchard C.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genomics Laboratory, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, 6400 Perkins
Rd., Baton Rouge, LA 70808-4124, USA. rankint@pbrc.edu

Endurance training-induced changes in hemodynamic traits are heritable. However, 
few genes associated with heart rate training responses have been identified. The
purpose of our study was to perform a genome-wide association study to uncover
DNA sequence variants associated with submaximal exercise heart rate training
responses in the HERITAGE Family Study. Heart rate was measured during
steady-state exercise at 50 W (HR50) on 2 separate days before and after a 20-wk 
endurance training program in 483 white subjects from 99 families. Illumina
HumanCNV370-Quad v3.0 BeadChips were genotyped using the Illumina BeadStation
500GX platform. After quality control procedures, 320,000 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) were available for the genome-wide association study
analyses, which were performed using the MERLIN software package (single-SNP
analyses and conditional heritability tests) and standard regression models
(multivariate analyses). The strongest associations for HR50 training response
adjusted for age, sex, body mass index, and baseline HR50 were detected with SNPs
at the YWHAQ locus on chromosome 2p25 (P = 8.1 × 10(-7)), the RBPMS locus on
chromosome 8p12 (P = 3.8 × 10(-6)), and the CREB1 locus on chromosome 2q34 (P =
1.6 × 10(-5)). In addition, 37 other SNPs showed P values <9.9 × 10(-5). After
removal of redundant SNPs, the 10 most significant SNPs explained 35.9% of the
<U+0394>HR50 variance in a multivariate regression model. Conditional heritability tests
showed that nine of these SNPs (all intragenic) accounted for 100% of the <U+0394>HR50
heritability. Our results indicate that SNPs in nine genes related to
cardiomyocyte and neuronal functions, as well as cardiac memory formation, fully 
account for the heritability of the submaximal heart rate training response.

PMCID: PMC3311659
PMID: 22174390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Cell Biochem. 2012 May;113(5):1488-500. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24018.

Upregulation of mTORC2 activation by the selective agonist of EPAC,
8-CPT-2Me-cAMP, in prostate cancer cells: assembly of a multiprotein signaling
complex.

Misra UK(1), Pizzo SV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

Ligation of cell surface-associated GRP78 by activated a(2) -macroglobulin
triggers pro-proliferative cellular responses. In part, this results from
activation of adenylyl cyclase leading to an increase in cAMP. We have previously
employed the cAMP analog 8-CPT-2Me-cAMP to probe these responses. Here we show in
1-LN prostate cancer cells that 8-CPT-2Me-cAMP causes a dose-dependent increase
in Epac1, p-Akt(T308) , p-Akt(S473) , but not p-CREB. By contrast, the PKA
activator 6-Benz-cAMP caused a dose-dependent increase in p-CREB, but not Epac1. 
We measured mTORC2-dependent Akt phosphorylation at S473 in immunoprecipitates of
mTOR or Rictor from 1-LN cells. 8-CPT-2Me-cAMP caused a two-threefold increase in
p-Akt(S473) and Akt(S473) kinase activity in Rictor immunoprecipitates. By
contrast, there was only a negligible effect on p-Akt(T308) in Rictor
immunoprecipitates. Silencing Rictor gene expression by RNAi significantly
suppressed 8-CPT-2Me-cAMP-induced phosphorylation of Akt at Ser(473) . These
studies represent the first report that Epac1 mediates mTORC2-dependent
phosphorylation of Akt(S473) . Pretreatment of these cells with the PI 3-Kinase
inhibitor LY294002 significantly suppressed 8-CPT-2Me-cAMP-dependent p-Akt(S473) 
and p-Akt(S473) kinase activities, and both effects were rapamycin insensitive.
This treatment caused a two to threefold increase in S6 Kinase and 4EBP1
phosphorylation, indices of mTORC1 activation. Pretreatment of the cells with
LY294002 and rapamycin significantly suppressed 8-CPT-2Me-cAMP-induced
phosphorylation of S6 Kinase and 4EBP1. We further demonstrate that in
8-CPT-2Me-cAMP-treated cells, Epac1 co-immunoprecipitates with AKAP, Raptor,
Rictor, PDE3B, and PDE4D suggesting thereby that during Epac1-induced activation 
of mTORC1 and mTORC2, Epac1 may have an additional function as a "scaffold"
protein.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22173835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Neurosci. 2011 Dec 14;31(50):18401-11. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2816-11.2011.

Serotonin-mediated synapsin expression is necessary for long-term facilitation of
the Aplysia sensorimotor synapse.

Hart AK(1), Fioravante D, Liu RY, Phares GA, Cleary LJ, Byrne JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, W.M. Keck Center for Neurobiology of
Learning and Memory, The University of Texas Medical School at Houston, Houston, 
Texas 77030, USA.

Serotonin (5-HT)-induced long-term facilitation (LTF) of the Aplysia sensorimotor
synapse depends on enhanced gene expression and protein synthesis, but
identification of the genes whose expression and regulation are necessary for LTF
remains incomplete. In this study, we found that one such gene is synapsin, which
encodes a synaptic vesicle-associated protein known to regulate short-term
synaptic plasticity. Both synapsin mRNA and protein levels were increased by
5-HT. Upregulation of synapsin protein occurred in presynaptic sensory neurons at
neurotransmitter release sites. To investigate the molecular mechanisms
underlying synapsin regulation, we cloned the promoter region of Aplysia
synapsin, and found that the synapsin promoter contained a cAMP response element 
(CRE), raising the possibility that the transcriptional activator CRE-binding
protein 1 (CREB1) mediates 5-HT-induced regulation of synapsin. Indeed, binding
of CREB1 to the synapsin promoter was increased following treatment with 5-HT.
Furthermore, increased acetylation of histones H3 and H4 and decreased
association of histone deacetylase 5 near the CRE site are consistent with
transcriptional activation by CREB1. RNA interference (RNAi) targeting synapsin
mRNA blocked the 5-HT-induced increase in synapsin protein levels and LTF; in the
absence of 5-HT treatment, basal synapsin levels were unaffected. These results
indicate that the 5-HT-induced regulation of synapsin levels is necessary for LTF
and that this regulation is part of the cascade of synaptic events involved in
the consolidation of memory.

PMCID: PMC3407595
PMID: 22171042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Immunol. 2012 Jan 1;188(1):367-78. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100076. Epub 2011 Dec
2.

Myeloid cell IL-10 production in response to leishmania involves inactivation of 
glycogen synthase kinase-3ß downstream of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase.

Nandan D(1), Camargo de Oliveira C, Moeenrezakhanlou A, Lopez M, Silverman JM,
Subek J, Reiner NE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.

Leishmania disease expression has been linked to IL-10. In this study, we
investigated the regulation of IL-10 production by macrophages infected with
Leishmania donovani. Infection of either murine or human macrophages brought
about selective phosphorylation of Akt-2 in a PI3K-dependent manner. These events
were linked to phosphorylation and inactivation of glycogen synthase kinase-3ß
(GSK-3ß) at serine 9, as the latter was abrogated by inhibition of either PI3K or
Akt. One of the transcription factors that is negatively regulated by GSK-3ß is
CREB, which itself positively regulates IL-10 expression. Infection of
macrophages with leishmania induced phosphorylation of CREB at serine 133, and
this was associated with enhanced CREB DNA binding activity and induction of
IL-10. Similar to phosphorylation of GSK-3ß, both phosphorylation of CREB at
serine 133 and CREB DNA binding activity were abrogated in cells treated with
inhibitors of either PI3K or Akt prior to infection. Furthermore, disruption of
this pathway either by inhibition of Akt or by overexpression of GSK-3ß markedly 
attenuated IL-10 production in response to leishmania. Thus, GSK-3ß negatively
regulates myeloid cell IL-10 production in response to leishmania. Switching off 
GSK-3ß promotes disease pathogenesis.

PMID: 22140263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Clin Invest. 2012 Jan;122(1):91-106. doi: 10.1172/JCI59466. Epub 2011 Dec 1.

Administration of BMP2/7 in utero partially reverses Rubinstein-Taybi
syndrome-like skeletal defects induced by Pdk1 or Cbp mutations in mice.

Shim JH(1), Greenblatt MB, Singh A, Brady N, Hu D, Drapp R, Ogawa W, Kasuga M,
Noda T, Yang SH, Lee SK, Rebel VI, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. jshim@hsph.harvard.edu

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest. 2012 May 1;122(5):1948.

Mutations in the coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP) are a major cause of the 
human skeletal dysplasia Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS); however, the mechanism 
by which these mutations affect skeletal mineralization and patterning is
unknown. Here, we report the identification of 3-phosphoinositide-dependent
kinase 1 (PDK1) as a key regulator of CBP activity and demonstrate that its
functions map to both osteoprogenitor cells and mature osteoblasts. In
osteoblasts, PDK1 activated the CREB/CBP complex, which in turn controlled
runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) activation and expression of bone
morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2). These pathways also operated in vivo, as
evidenced by recapitulation of RTS spectrum phenotypes with osteoblast-specific
Pdk1 deletion in mice (Pdk1osx mice) and by the genetic interactions observed in 
mice heterozygous for both osteoblast-specific Pdk1 deletion and either Runx2 or 
Creb deletion. Finally, treatment of Pdk1osx and Cbp+/- embryos with BMPs in
utero partially reversed their skeletal anomalies at birth. These findings
illustrate the in vivo function of the PDK1-AKT-CREB/CBP pathway in bone
formation and provide proof of principle for in utero growth factor
supplementation as a potential therapy for skeletal dysplasias.

PMCID: PMC3248303
PMID: 22133875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Mol Neurosci. 2012 Jan;46(1):88-99. doi: 10.1007/s12031-011-9675-3. Epub 2011
Nov 30.

A selective human bombesin receptor subtype-3 peptide agonist mediates CREB
phosphorylation and transactivation.

Qin X(1), Qu X, Coy D, Weber HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Xiangya Medicine School, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, 410078, People's Republic of China.

The native ligand for the G protein-coupled bombesin receptor subtype-3 (BRS-3)
has currently not been identified. Studies in mice showed robust BRS-3 expression
in the hypothalamic satiety centers, and genetic receptor inactivation resulted
in obesity, diabetes, and hypertension. BRS-3 was also detected in normal human
pancreatic islet cells suggesting a critical role of BRS-3 in regulating energy
metabolism and satiety via central and peripheral mechanisms of action. The
cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CREB) is a main regulator of
pancreatic ß-cell gene expression required for glucose homeostasis and islet cell
survival, and hypothalamic regulation of satiety. Therefore, in this study we
examined whether agonist-dependent hBRS-3 stimulation mediates CREB activation. A
selective hBRS-3 peptide agonist and two non-selective hBRS-3 peptide agonists
were used to activate ectopically expressed hBRS-3. Stimulation with hBRS-3
peptide agonists resulted in transient calcium mobilization, whereby the
selective peptide agonist acted exclusively via hBRS-3 but not through the
gastrin-releasing peptide receptor (GRP-R). A selective high-affinity GRP-R
antagonist did not inhibit hBRS-3-mediated calcium signals. We also found
time-dependent CREB phosphorylation in response to the selective hBRS-3
activation, which was abrogated by pretreatment with protein kinase A and protein
kinase C inhibitors. Human BRS-3 agonists also stimulated CREB transactivation
and resulted in modest increases of CRE-dependent gene transcription. These
changes were significantly reduced after pretreatment with inhibitors of PKA,
PKC, and MEK-1. Thus, our results suggest that hBRS-3 agonist-dependent signaling
mediates CREB phosphorylation and transactivation through partially PKA, PKC, and
MEK-1 pathways.

PMID: 22127929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Physiol. 2012 Mar 15;590(6):1349-56. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2011.222232. Epub
2011 Nov 28.

Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II function in vascular remodelling.

Singer HA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Sciences, Albany Medical College (MC-8), 47 New
Scotland Avenue, Albany, NY 12208, USA. singerh@mail.amc.edu

Vascular smooth muscle (VSM) undergoes a phenotypic switch in response to injury,
a process that contributes to pathophysiological vascular wall remodelling. VSM
phenotype switching is a consequence of changes in gene expression, including an 
array of ion channels and pumps affecting spatiotemporal features of
intracellular Ca(2+) signals. Ca(2+) signalling promotes vascular wall
remodelling by regulating cell proliferation, motility, and/or VSM gene
transcription, although the mechanisms are not clear. In this review, the
functions of multifunctional Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II
(CaMKII) in VSM phenotype switching and synthetic phenotype function are
considered. CaMKII isozymes have complex structural and autoregulatory
properties. Vascular injury in vivo results in rapid changes in CaMKII isoform
expression with reduced expression of CaMKII<U+03B3> and upregulation of CaMKIId in
medial wall VSM. SiRNA-mediated suppression of CaMKIId or gene deletion
attenuates VSM proliferation and consequent neointimal formation. In vitro
studies support functions for CaMKII in the regulation of cell proliferation,
motility and gene expression via phosphorylation of CREB1 and HDACIIa/MEF2
complexes. These studies support the concept, and provide potential mechanisms,
whereby Ca(2+) signalling through CaMKIId promotes VSM phenotype transitions and 
vascular remodelling.

PMCID: PMC3382326
PMID: 22124148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2012 Apr;46(4):524-31. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2011-0213OC. 
Epub 2011 Nov 22.

Particulate matter induces cardiac arrhythmias via dysregulation of carotid body 
sensitivity and cardiac sodium channels.

Wang T(1), Lang GD, Moreno-Vinasco L, Huang Y, Goonewardena SN, Peng YJ, Svensson
EC, Natarajan V, Lang RM, Linares JD, Breysse PN, Geyh AS, Samet JM, Lussier YA, 
Dudley S, Prabhakar NR, Garcia JG.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep & Allergy, Department of Medicine, 
University of Illinois at Chicago, Illinois, USA.

The mechanistic links between exposure to airborne particulate matter (PM)
pollution and the associated increases in cardiovascular morbidity and mortality,
particularly in people with congestive heart failure (CHF), have not been
identified. To advance understanding of this issue, genetically engineered mice
(CREB(A133)) exhibiting severe dilated cardiomyopathic changes were exposed to
ambient PM collected in Baltimore. CREB(A133) mice, which display aberrant
cardiac physiology and anatomy reminiscent of human CHF, displayed evidence of
basal autonomic aberrancies (compared with wild-type mice) with PM exposure via
aspiration, producing significantly reduced heart rate variability, respiratory
dysynchrony, and increased ventricular arrhythmias. Carotid body afferent nerve
responses to hypoxia and hyperoxia-induced respiratory depression were pronounced
in PM-challenged CREB(A133) mice, and denervation of the carotid bodies
significantly reduced PM-mediated cardiac arrhythmias. Genome-wide expression
analyses of CREB(A133) left ventricular tissues demonstrated prominent Na(+) and 
K(+) channel pathway gene dysregulation. Subsequent PM challenge increased
tyrosine phosphorylation and nitration of the voltage-gated type V cardiac muscle
a-subunit of the Na(+) channel encoded by SCN5A. Ranolazine, a Na(+) channel
modulator that reduces late cardiac Na(+) channel currents, attenuated
PM-mediated cardiac arrhythmias and shortened PM-elongated QT intervals in vivo. 
These observations provide mechanistic insights into the epidemiologic findings
in susceptibility of human CHF populations to PM exposure. Our results suggest a 
multiorgan pathobiology inherent to the CHF phenotype that is exaggerated by PM
exposure via heightened carotid body sensitivity and cardiac Na(+) channel
dysfunction.

PMID: 22108299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e26682. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026682. Epub 2011 Nov 9.

Maternal synchronization of gestational length and lung maturation.

Besnard V(1), Wert SE, Ikegami M, Xu Y, Heffner C, Murray SA, Donahue LR,
Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)The Perinatal Institute and Section of Neonatology, Perinatal and Pulmonary
Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, the Department of
Pediatrics and The University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati,
Ohio, United States of America.

Among all mammals, fetal growth and organ maturation must be precisely
synchronized with gestational length to optimize survival at birth. Lack of
pulmonary maturation is the major cause of infant mortality in preterm birth.
Whether fetal or maternal genotypes influence the close relationship between the 
length of gestation and lung function at birth is unknown. Structural and
biochemical indicators of pulmonary maturity were measured in two mouse strains
whose gestational length differed by one day. Shorter gestation in C57BL/6J mice 
was associated with advanced morphological and biochemical pulmonary development 
and better perinatal survival when compared to A/J pups born prematurely. After
ovarian transplantation, A/J pups were born early in C57BL/6J dams and survived
after birth, consistent with maternal control gestational length. Expression of
genes critical for perinatal lung function was assessed in A/J pups born after
ovarian transfer. A subset of mRNAs important for perinatal respiratory
adaptation was selectively induced in the A/J pups born after ovarian transfer.
mRNAs precociously induced after ovarian transfer indicated an important role for
the transcription factors C/EBPa and CREB in maternally induced lung maturation. 
We conclude that fetal lung maturation is determined by both fetal and maternal
genotypes. Ovarian transfer experiments demonstrated that maternal genotype
determines the timing of birth and can influence fetal lung growth and maturation
to ensure perinatal survival.

PMCID: PMC3212521
PMID: 22096492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012 Jan 15;52(2):314-27. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.10.483. Epub 2011 Oct 31.

The anthocyanin cyanidin-3-O-ß-glucoside, a flavonoid, increases hepatic
glutathione synthesis and protects hepatocytes against reactive oxygen species
during hyperglycemia: Involvement of a cAMP-PKA-dependent signaling pathway.

Zhu W(1), Jia Q, Wang Y, Zhang Y, Xia M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Guangzhou Center for Disease Control and Prevention,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.

Enhanced oxidative stress due to high glucose contributes to pathological changes
in diabetes-related liver complications. Reducing oxidative stress may alleviate 
these pathogenic processes. Anthocyanin, a natural antioxidant, has been reported
to reduce intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels but the mechanism of
this reduction is not fully understood. The glutathione (GSH) antioxidant system 
is critical for counteracting oxidative stress-induced intracellular injury. In
this study, we evaluated the mechanism of the anthocyanin-mediated regulation of 
GSH synthesis and reduction in intracellular ROS levels. We observed that
treatment of human HepG2 cells with the anthocyanin C3G significantly reduced ROS
levels induced by high glucose. C3G incubation increased glutamate-cysteine
ligase expression, which in turn mediated the reduction in ROS levels. However,
the upregulation of glutamate-cysteine ligase catalytic subunit (Gclc) expression
by C3G occurred independent of the Nrf1/2 transcription factors. Notably, the
cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB) was identified as the target
transcription factor involved in the C3G-mediated upregulation of Gclc
expression. C3G increased phosphorylation of CREB through protein kinase A (PKA) 
activation, which induced a CREB-mediated upregulation of Gclc transcription. In 
vivo, treatment with C3G increased the GSH synthesis in the liver of diabetic
db/db mice through PKA-CREB-dependent induction of Gclc expression. Finally,
oxidative stress determined by lipid peroxidation, neutrophil infiltration, and
hepatic steatosis was attenuated in C3G-treated db/db mice. Our results
demonstrate that the anthocyanin C3G has an effect of activating GSH synthesis
through a novel antioxidant defense mechanism against excessive ROS production,
contributing to the prevention of hyperglycemia-induced hepatic oxidative damage.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22085656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Cell Metab. 2011 Dec 7;14(6):758-67. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2011.10.007. Epub 2011
Nov 10.

Proatherogenic abnormalities of lipid metabolism in SirT1 transgenic mice are
mediated through Creb deacetylation.

Qiang L(1), Lin HV, Kim-Muller JY, Welch CL, Gu W, Accili D.

Author information: 
(1)Naomi Berrie Diabetes Center, College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Dyslipidemia and atherosclerosis are associated with reduced insulin sensitivity 
and diabetes, but the mechanism is unclear. Gain of function of the gene encoding
deacetylase SirT1 improves insulin sensitivity and could be expected to protect
against lipid abnormalities. Surprisingly, when transgenic mice overexpressing
SirT1 (SirBACO) are placed on atherogenic diet, they maintain better glucose
homeostasis, but develop worse lipid profiles and larger atherosclerotic lesions 
than controls. We show that transcription factor cAMP response element binding
protein (Creb) is deacetylated in SirBACO mice. We identify Lys136 is a substrate
for SirT1-dependent deacetylation that affects Creb activity by preventing its
cAMP-dependent phosphorylation, leading to reduced expression of glucogenic genes
and promoting hepatic lipid accumulation and secretion. Expression of
constitutively acetylated Creb (K136Q) in SirBACO mice mimics Creb activation and
abolishes the dyslipidemic and insulin-sensitizing effects of SirT1 gain of
function. We propose that SirT1-dependent Creb deacetylation regulates the
balance between glucose and lipid metabolism, integrating fasting signals.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3237922
PMID: 22078933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Psychiatr Danub. 2011 Dec;23(4):401-5.

[Depression: diagnosis, treatment and course].

[Article in German]

Stuppäck C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinik für Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie I, CDK Salzburg, PMU,
Salzburg, Austria. C.Stuppaeck@salk.at

Depressions are very common mental diseases. The diagnosis is made by
psychopathology criteria and the course of the disorder. There is a growing body 
to the knowledge about etiology and treatment of depression - neuro-imaging,
neuroplasticity, CREB and BDNF are all modified by antidepressants treatment
and/or psychotherapy. As differential diagnoses, depressive syndromes on the
basis of organic diseases but also burn-out syndromes may play a role, different 
therapeutic efforts are necessary. The treatment of depression consists of
psychopharmacological and psychotherapeutic strategies, combinations of both are 
useful. Many psychopharmacological substances with differing mechanisms of action
are available - combinations of antidepressants with complementing mechanisms are
possible. The course of depressions is mainly influenced by "working therapies". 
Comorbid somatic diseases and their successful treatment are of relevance for the
long term course.

PMID: 22075744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Korean J Parasitol. 2011 Sep;49(3):291-4. doi: 10.3347/kjp.2011.49.3.291. Epub
2011 Sep 30.

NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB are involved in IL-8 production of human neutrophils induced by
Trichomonas vaginalis-derived secretory products.

Nam YH(1), Min D, Park SJ, Kim KA, Lee YA, Shin MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medical Biology, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Korea.

Trichomonas vaginalis is a flagellated lumen-dwelling extracellular protozoan
parasite that causes human trichomoniasis via sexual intercourse. Human
neutrophils play a crucial role in acute tissue inflammatory responses in T.
vaginalis infection. In this study, we investigated the signaling mechanism of
neutrophil responses when stimulated with T. vaginalis-derived secretory products
(TvSP), which were collected from 1×10(7) live trichomonads. Incubation of human 
neutrophils isolated from peripheral blood with TvSP induced up-regulation of
IL-8 protein secretion. In addition, stimulation with TvSP induced
phosphorylation of NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB in neutrophils. Moreover, TvSP-induced IL-8
production was also significantly inhibited by pretreatment of neutrophils with
i<U+03BA>B inhibitor or CREB inhibitor. These results suggest that transcription factors
NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB are involved in IL-8 production in human neutrophils induced by
stimulation with T. vaginalis infection.

PMCID: PMC3210848
PMID: 22072831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Virol. 2012 Jan;86(2):1010-20. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06169-11. Epub 2011 Nov 9.

Epigenetic changes mediated by microRNA miR29 activate cyclooxygenase 2 and
lambda-1 interferon production during viral infection.

Fang J(1), Hao Q, Liu L, Li Y, Wu J, Huo X, Zhu Y.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan
University, Wuhan, China.

Lambda-1 interferon (IFN-<U+03BB>1) and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) were reported to play
an important role in host antiviral defense. However, the mechanism by which
IFN-<U+03BB>1 and COX2 are activated and modulated during viral infection remains
unclear. In this study, we found that expression of both circulating IFN-<U+03BB>1 and
COX2-derived prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) was coordinately elevated in a cohort of
influenza patients compared to healthy individuals. Expression of IFN-<U+03BB>1 was
blocked by a selective COX2 inhibitor during influenza A virus infection in A549 
human lung epithelial cells but enhanced by overexpression of COX2, indicating
that the production of IFN-<U+03BB>1 is COX2 dependent. COX2 was able to increase IFN-<U+03BB>1
expression by promoting NF-<U+03BA>B binding to the enhancer in the IFN-<U+03BB>1 promoter. We 
found that epigenetic changes activate COX2 expression and PGE2 accumulation
during viral infection. The expression of DNA methyltransferase 3a (DNMT3a) and
DNMT3b, but not that of DNMT1, was downregulated following influenza A virus
infection in both A549 cells and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). We
showed that microRNA miR29 suppresses DNMT activity and thus induces expression
of COX2 and PGE2. Furthermore, miR29 expression was elevated 50-fold in virally
infected A549 cells and 10-fold in PBMCs from influenza patients, compared to
expression after mock infection of A549 cells or in healthy individuals,
respectively. Activation of the protein kinase A signaling pathway and
phosphorylation of CREB1 also contributed to COX2 expression. Collectively, our
work defines a novel proinflammatory cascade in the control of influenza A virus 
infection.

PMCID: PMC3255816
PMID: 22072783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Cell Mol Med. 2012 Aug;16(8):1866-77. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2011.01482.x.

Epigenetic control of CCR5 transcript levels in immune cells and modulation by
small molecules inhibitors.

Wierda RJ(1), Kuipers HF, van Eggermond MC, Benard A, van Leeuwen JC, Carluccio
S, Geutskens SB, Jukema JW, Marquez VE, Quax PH, van den Elsen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Previously, we have shown that CCR5 transcription is regulated by CREB-1.
However, the ubiquitous pattern of CREB-1 expression suggests the involvement of 
an additional level of transcriptional control in the cell type-specific
expression of CCR5. In this study, we show that epigenetic changes (i.e. DNA
methylation and histone modifications) within the context of the CCR5 P1 promoter
region correlate with transcript levels of CCR5 in healthy and in malignant
CD4(+) T lymphocytes as well as in CD14(+) monocytes. In normal naïve T cells and
CD14(+) monocytes the CCR5 P1 promoter resembles a bivalent chromatin state, with
both repressive and permissive histone methylation and acetylation marks. The
CCR5-expressing CD14(+) monocytes however show much higher levels of acetylated
histone H3 (AcH3) compared to the non-CCR5-expressing naïve T cells. Combined
with a highly methylated promoter in CD14(+) monocytes, this indicates a dominant
role for AcH3 in CCR5 transcription. We also show that pharmacological
interference in the epigenetic repressive mechanisms that account for the lack of
CCR5 transcription in T leukaemic cell lines results in an increase in CREB-1
association with CCR5 P1 chromatin. Furthermore, RNA polymerase II was also
recruited into CCR5 P1 chromatin resulting in CCR5 re-expression. Together, these
data indicate that epigenetic modifications of DNA, and of histones, contribute
to the control of CCR5 transcription in immune effector cells.

© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3309068
PMID: 22050776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. FASEB J. 2012 Feb;26(2):778-87. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-191742. Epub 2011 Nov 2.

Phthalates induce proliferation and invasiveness of estrogen receptor-negative
breast cancer through the AhR/HDAC6/c-Myc signaling pathway.

Hsieh TH(1), Tsai CF, Hsu CY, Kuo PL, Lee JN, Chai CY, Wang SC, Tsai EM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital,
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

The environmentally present group of chemical phthalates, or phthalate esters,
has been recognized as a rising threat to public health, including cancer. While 
most studies have addressed the estrogenic effects of phthalates in malignancies 
of the breast and the prostate, little is known about their role in the etiology 
of hormone-independent cancer. Here we show that treatments with the phthalates
n-butyl benzyl phthalate (BBP) and dibutyl phthalate (DBP) at 1 µM induced
proliferation (BBP, 3.2-fold; DBP, 3.2-fold), migration (BBP, 2.6-fold; DBP,
2.6-fold), invasion (BBP, 2.7-fold; DBP, 3.1-fold), and tumor formation (EC(50): 
BBP, 0.12 µM; DBP, 0.22 µM) in estrogen receptor (ER)-negative breast cancer
cells (MDA-MB-231). We further demonstrate that phthalates stimulated the cell
surface aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and triggered the downstream cyclic AMP
(cAMP)-PKA-CREB1 signaling cascade. The pathway led to increased expression of
HDAC6, which facilitated nuclear assembly of the ß-catenin-LEF1/TCF4
transcriptional complex and transactivation of the c-Myc oncogene. This
nongenomic pathway emanated from the phthalate-induced AhR promoted tumorigenesis
of ER-negative breast cancer. Collectively, our findings revealed a novel
oncogenic mechanism of phthalates in breast cancer independent from their
estrogenic activities.

PMID: 22049059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2012 Feb 1;302(3):G397-405. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00087.2011. Epub 2011 Oct 28.

The role of mechanical forces and adenosine in the regulation of intestinal
enterochromaffin cell serotonin secretion.

Chin A(1), Svejda B, Gustafsson BI, Granlund AB, Sandvik AK, Timberlake A, Sumpio
B, Pfragner R, Modlin IM, Kidd M.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA.

Enterochromaffin (EC) cells of the diffuse neuroendocrine cell system secrete
serotonin (5-HT) with activation of gut motility, secretion, and pain. These
cells express adenosine (ADORA) receptors and are considered to function as
mechanosensors. Physiological pathways mediating mechanosensitivity and adenosine
responsiveness remain to be fully elucidated, as do their roles in inflammatory
bowel disease (IBD) and neoplasia. Pure (98-99%) FACS-sorted normal and IBD human
EC cells and neoplastic EC cells (KRJ-I) were studied. IBD-EC cells and KRJ-I
overexpressed ADORA2B. NECA, a general ADORA receptor agonist, stimulated,
whereas the A2B receptor antagonist MRS1754 inhibited, 5-HT release (EC50 = 1.8 ×
10-6 M; IC50 = 3.7 × 10-8 M), which was associated with corresponding alterations
in intracellular cAMP levels and pCREB (Ser133). Mechanical stimulation using a
rhythmic flex model induced transcription and activation of Tph1 (tryptophan
hydroxylase) and VMAT1 (vesicular monoamine transporter 1) and the release of
5-HT, which could be inhibited by MRS1754 and amplified by NECA. Secretion was
also inhibited by H-89 (PKA inhibitor) while Tph1 and VMAT1 transcription was
regulated by PKA/MAPK and PI3K-mediated signaling. Normal and IBD-EC cells also
responded to NECA and mechanical stimulation with PKA activation, cAMP
production, and 5-HT release, effects reversible by MRS1754. EC cells express
stimulatory ADORA2B, and rhythmic stretch induces A2B activation,
PKA/MAPK/IP3-dependent transcription, and PKA-dependent secretion of 5-HT
synthesis and secretion. Receptor expression is amplified in IBD and neoplasia,
and 5-HT release is increased. Determination of factors that regulate EC cell
function are necessary for understanding its role as a mechanosensory cell and to
facilitate the development of agents that can selectively target cell function in
EC cell-associated disease.

PMCID: PMC3287403
PMID: 22038827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Pathol Oncol Res. 2012 Apr;18(2):545-8. doi: 10.1007/s12253-011-9468-6. Epub 2011
Oct 26.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma: pleomorphic variant associated with
multiplication of EWSR1-CREB1 fusion gene.

Tornóczky T(1), Bogner B, Krausz T, Ottóffy G, Szuhai K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, II. Diagnostic Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine,
Clinical Center, Pécs University, Rákóczi út 2., 7623, Pécs, Hungary.
ttamas64@hotmail.com

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is a rare soft tissue tumor which
exceptionally occurs in visceral organs or bones. Histologically this is a bland,
monomorphic tumor and only occasionally shows pleomorphism. Vast majority of the 
soft tissue cases share the same translocation and the resulting EWSR1-CREB1 gene
fusion as background pathogenetic alteration. Here we report a 10-year-old boy
with subcutaneous tumor of the right shoulder. Histological, immunohistochemical 
and FISH analyses of the case revealed pleomorphic phenotype, characteristic
immunophenotype and multiplication of the EWSR1-CREB1 fusion gene in the nuclei
of the tumor cells. The possible explanation of the fusion gene multiplication,
its relation to the morphology and the clinical outcome are discussed in the
context of the published literature.

PMID: 22038502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e25991. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025991. Epub 2011 Oct 10.

Identification of a predominant co-regulation among kinetochore genes,
prospective regulatory elements, and association with genomic instability.

Reinhold WC(1), Erliandri I, Liu H, Zoppoli G, Pommier Y, Larionov V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United
States of America. wcr@mail.nih.gov

The NCI-60 cell line panel is the most extensively characterized set of cells in 
existence, and has been used extensively as a screening tool for drug discovery. 
Previously, the potential of this panel has not been applied to the fundamental
cellular processes of chromosome segregation. In the current study, we used data 
from multiple microarray platforms accumulated for the NCI-60 to characterize an 
expression pattern of genes involved in kinetochore assembly. This analysis
revealed that 17 genes encoding the constitutive centromere associated network of
the kinetochore core (the CCAN complex) plus four additional genes with
established importance in kinetochore maintenance (CENPE, CENPF, INCENP, and
MIS12) exhibit similar patterns of expression in the NCI-60, suggesting a
mechanism for co-regulated transcription of these genes which is maintained
despite the multiple genetic and epigenetic rearrangements accumulated in these
cells (such as variations in DNA copy number and karyotypic complexity). A
complex group of potential regulatory influences are identified for these genes, 
including the transcription factors CREB1, E2F1, FOXE1, and FOXM1, DNA copy
number variation, and microRNAs has-miR-200a, 23a, 23b, 30a, 30c, 27b, 374b, 365.
Thus, our results provide a template for experimental studies on the regulation
of genes encoding kinetochore proteins, the process that, when aberrant, leads to
the aneuploidy that is a hallmark of many cancers. We propose that the comparison
of expression profiles in the NCI-60 cell line panel could be a tool for the
identification of other gene groups whose products are involved in the assembly
of organelle protein complexes.

PMCID: PMC3189923
PMID: 22016797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Feb;1822(2):286-92. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2011.10.004.
Epub 2011 Oct 12.

Multi-faced neuroprotective effects of Ginsenoside Rg1 in an Alzheimer mouse
model.

Fang F(1), Chen X, Huang T, Lue LF, Luddy JS, Yan SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Physicians & Surgeons College of Columbia University,
New York, NY 10032, USA.

There has been no extensive characterization of the effects of Ginsenoside Rg1, a
pharmacological active component purified from the nature product ginseng, in an 
Alzheimer's disease mouse model. The well-characterized transgenic Alzheimer
disease (AD) mice over expressing amyloid precursor protein (APP)/Aß (Tg mAPP)
and nontransgenic (nonTg) littermates at age of 6 and 9 months were treated with 
Rg 1 for three months via intraperitoneal injection. Mice were then evaluated for
changes in amyloid pathology, neuropathology and behavior. Tg mAPP treated with
Rg1 showed a significant reduction of cerebral Aß levels, reversal of certain
neuropathological changes, and preservation of spatial learning and memory, as
compared to vehicle-treated mice. Rg1 treatment inhibited activity of <U+03B3>-secretase
in both Tg mAPP mice and B103-APP cells, indicating the involvement of Rg1 in APP
regulation pathway. Furthermore, administration of Rg1 enhanced PKA/CREB pathway 
activation in mAPP mice and in cultured cortical neurons exposed to Aß or
glutamate-mediated synaptic stress. Most importantly, the beneficial effects on
attenuation of cerebral Aß accumulation, improvement in neuropathological and
behavioral changes can be extended to the aged mAPP mice, even to 12-13 months
old mice that had extensive amyloid pathology and severe neuropathological and
cognitive malfunction. These studies indicate that Rg1 has profound multi-faced
and neuroprotective effects in an AD mouse model. Rg1 induces neuroprotection
through ameliorating amyloid pathology, modulating APP process, improving
cognition, and activating PKA/CREB signaling. These findings provide a new
perspective for the treatment of AD and demonstrate potential for a new class of 
drugs for AD treatment.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3304026
PMID: 22015470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Proteome Res. 2011 Dec 2;10(12):5472-80. doi: 10.1021/pr2007285. Epub 2011 Oct 
26.

Effects of docosahexaenoic acid on mouse brain synaptic plasma membrane proteome 
analyzed by mass spectrometry and (16)O/(18)O labeling.

Sidhu VK(1), Huang BX, Kim HY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Signaling, Division of Intramural Clinical and
Biological Reasearch, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States.

Docosahexenoic acid (DHA, 22:6n-3) plays an important role in development of
proper brain function in mammals. We have previously reported that DHA promotes
synaptogenesis and synaptic function in hippocampal neurons while DHA-depletion
in the brain due to n-3 fatty acid deficiency produces opposite effects. To gain 
insight into underlying molecular mechanisms, we investigated whether the brain
DHA status affects the synaptic plasma membrane (SPM) proteome by using
nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS and (16)O/(18)O labeling. The DHA level in mouse brains was
lowered by dietary depletion of n-3 fatty acids, and SPM was prepared by
differential centrifugation followed by osmotic shock. SPM proteins from
DHA-adequate and depleted brains were analyzed by nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS after
SDS-PAGE, in-gel digestion, and differential O(18)/O(16) labeling. This strategy 
allowed comparative quantitation of more than 200 distinct membrane or
membrane-associated proteins from DHA-adequate or depleted brains. We found that 
18 pre- and postsynaptic proteins that are relevant to synaptic physiology were
significantly down-regulated in DHA-depleted mouse brains. The protein network
analysis suggests involvement of CREB and caspase-3 pathways in the DHA-dependent
modulation of synaptic proteome. Reduction of specific synaptic proteins due to
brain DHA-depletion may be an important mechanism for the suboptimal brain
function associated with n-3 fatty acid deficiency.

PMCID: PMC3458425
PMID: 22003853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2012 Mar;69(6):857-96. doi: 10.1007/s00018-011-0844-x. Epub
2011 Oct 16.

The dynorphin/<U+03BA>-opioid receptor system and its role in psychiatric disorders.

Tejeda HA(1), Shippenberg TS, Henriksson R.

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Neuroscience Section, Integrative Neuroscience Research Branch,
NIDA-IRP, NIH, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

The dynorphin/<U+03BA>-opioid receptor system has been implicated in the pathogenesis
and pathophysiology of several psychiatric disorders. In the present review, we
present evidence indicating a key role for this system in modulating
neurotransmission in brain circuits that subserve mood, motivation, and cognitive
function. We overview the pharmacology, signaling, post-translational,
post-transcriptional, transcriptional, epigenetic and cis regulation of the
dynorphin/<U+03BA>-opioid receptor system, and critically review functional
neuroanatomical, neurochemical, and pharmacological evidence, suggesting that
alterations in this system may contribute to affective disorders, drug addiction,
and schizophrenia. We also overview the dynorphin/<U+03BA>-opioid receptor system in the
genetics of psychiatric disorders and discuss implications of the reviewed
material for therapeutics development.

PMID: 22002579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 Nov;35(11):1722-32. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318227e4d2.

Primary pulmonary myxoid sarcoma with EWSR1-CREB1 fusion: a new tumor entity.

Thway K(1), Nicholson AG, Lawson K, Gonzalez D, Rice A, Balzer B, Swansbury J,
Min T, Thompson L, Adu-Poku K, Campbell A, Fisher C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK.
khin.thway@rmh.nhs.uk

We present clinicopathologic data on 10 pulmonary myxoid sarcomas, which are
defined by distinctive histomorphologic features and characterized by a recurrent
fusion gene, that appear to represent a distinct tumor entity at this site. The
patients [7 female, 3 male; aged 27 to 67 y (mean, 45 y)] presented with local or
systemic symptoms (n=5), symptoms from cerebral metastasis (1), or incidentally
(2). Follow-up of 6 patients showed that 1 with brain metastasis died shortly
after primary tumor resection, 1 developed a renal metastasis but is alive and
well, and 4 are disease free after 1 to 15 years. All tumors involved pulmonary
parenchyma, with a predominant endobronchial component in 8 and ranged from 1.5
to 4 cm. Microscopically, they were lobulated and composed of cords of polygonal,
spindle, or stellate cells within myxoid stroma, morphologically reminiscent of
extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma. Four cases showed no or minimal atypia, 6
showed focal pleomorphism, and 5 had necrosis. Mitotic indices varied, with most 
tumors not exceeding 5/10 high-power fields. Tumors were immunoreactive for only 
vimentin and weakly focal for epithelial membrane antigen. Of 9 tumors, 7 were
shown to harbor a specific EWSR1-CREB1 fusion by reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction and direct sequencing, with 7 of 10 showing EWSR1 rearrangement by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. This gene fusion has been described
previously in 2 histologically and behaviorally different sarcomas: clear cell
sarcoma-like tumors of the gastrointestinal tract and angiomatoid fibrous
histiocytomas; however, this is a novel finding in tumors with the morphology we 
describe and that occur in the pulmonary region.

PMID: 21997693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Physiol Res. 2011;60(6):941-50. Epub 2011 Oct 12.

GIP-dependent expression of hypothalamic genes.

Ambati S(1), Duan J, Hartzell DL, Choi YH, Della-Fera MA, Baile CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Dairy Science, University of Georgia, Athens, GA
30602-2771, USA.

GIP (glucose dependent insulinotrophic polypeptide), originally identified as an 
incretin peptide synthesized in the gut, has recently been identified, along with
its receptors (GIPR), in the brain. Our objective was to investigate the role of 
GIP in hypothalamic gene expression of biomarkers linked to regulating energy
balance and feeding behavior related neurocircuitry. Rats with lateral
cerebroventricular cannulas were administered 10 µg GIP or 10 microl artificial
cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF) daily for 4 days, after which whole hypothalami were
collected. Real time Taqman RT-PCR was used to quantitatively compare the mRNA
expression levels of a set of genes in the hypothalamus. Administration of GIP
resulted in up-regulation of hypothalamic mRNA levels of AVP (46.9±4.5 %), CART
(25.9±2.7 %), CREB1 (38.5±4.5 %), GABRD (67.1±11 %), JAK2 (22.1±3.6 %), MAPK1
(33.8±7.8 %), NPY (25.3±5.3 %), OXT (49.1±5.1 %), STAT3 (21.6±3.8 %), and TH
(33.9±8.5 %). In a second experiment the same set of genes was evaluated in
GIPR(-/-) and GIPR(+/?) mice to determine the effect of lack of GIP stimulation
on gene expression. In GIPR(-/-) mice expressions of the following genes were
down-regulated: AVP (27.1±7.5 %), CART (28.3±3.7 %), OXT (25.2±5.8 %), PTGES
(23.9±4.5 %), and STAT3 (8.8±2.3 %). These results suggest that AVP, CART, OXT
and STAT3 may be involved in energy balance-related hypothalamic circuits
affected by GIP.

PMID: 21995902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Exp Dermatol. 2011 Dec;20(12):986-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2011.01379.x. Epub
2011 Oct 13.

Depigmenting action of platycodin D depends on the cAMP/Rho-dependent signalling 
pathway.

Jung E(1), Hwang W, Kim S, Kim YS, Kim YS, Lee J, Park D.

Author information: 
(1)Biospectrum Life Science Institute, Seongnam City, Gyunggi Do, Korea Natural
Products Research Institute, College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University,
Seoul, Korea.

The overproduction and accumulation of melanin in the skin could lead to a
pigmentary disorders, such as melasma, freckle, postinflammatory melanoderma and 
solar lentigo. Therefore, this study was conducted to investigate the effects of 
platycodin D (PD) on melanogenesis and its action mechanisms. In this study, we
found that PD significantly inhibited melanin synthesis at low concentrations.
These effects were further demonstrated by the PD-induced inhibition of cAMP
production, phosphorylation of the cAMP-response element-binding protein and
expression of microphthalmia-associated transcription factor and its downstream
genes, tyrosinase, tyrosinase-related proteins-1 and Dct/tyrosinase-related
proteins-2, suggesting that PD inhibits melanogenesis through the downregulation 
of cAMP signalling. Furthermore, PD induced significant morphological changes in 
melanocytes, namely, the retraction of dendrites. A small GTPase assays revealed 
that PD stimulated an increase in GTP-bound Rho content, one of downstream
molecules of cAMP, but not in Rac or CDC42 content. Moreover, a Rho inhibitor (C3
exoenzyme) and a Rho kinase inhibitor (Y27632) attenuated the dendrite retraction
induced by PD. Taken together, these findings indicate that PD inhibits
melanogenesis by inhibiting the cAMP-protein kinase A pathway and also suppresses
melanocyte dendricity through activation of the Rho signal that is mediated by
PD-induced reduction in cAMP production. Therefore, these results suggest that PD
exerts its inhibitory effects on melanogenesis and melanocyte dendricity via
suppression of cAMP signalling and may be introduced as an inhibitor of
hyperpigmentation caused by UV irradiation or pigmented skin disorders.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21995379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Rhinology. 2011 Oct;49(4):464-9. doi: 10.4193/Rhino10.107.

Role of cAMP-PKA/CREB pathway in regulation of AQP 5 production in rat nasal
epithelium.

Wang W(1), Zheng M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou City, Fujian, China.

OBJECTIVES: Aquaporin 5 (AQP5) is a water-specific channel protein. In this
study, we investigated the possible role of the cyclic adenosine
monophosphate-protein kinase A/cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element
binding protein (cAMP-PKA/CREB) pathway in the regulation of AQP5 in nasal
epithelial cells.
METHODS: Rat nasal epithelial cells were cultured and treated with the PKA
inhibitor H89 or cAMP inducing medicine forskolin for 12 or 24 hours in vitro.
AQP5 and phosphorylated CREB (p-CREB) at serine133 (Ser133) were detected by
immunocytochemistry, Western blotting or real-time PCR. Experiments were repeated
10 times.
RESULTS: After treatment with H89 for 12 or 24 hours, the number of cells
positive for AQP5 and p-CREB (Ser133) were decreased, p-CREB (Ser133) and AQP5
protein decreased, and AQP5 mRNA decreased. After treatment with forskolin for 12
or 24 hours, the number of p-CREB (Ser133) and AQP5 positive cells increased,
p-CREB (Ser133) and AQP5 protein increased, and AQP5 mRNA was increased.
CONCLUSION: Both H89 (PKA inhibitor) and forskolin (cAMP inducing medicine)
regulate AQP5 production through the cAMP-PKA/CREB pathway, which could influence
the secretory function of the submucosal glands in nasal epithelium.

PMID: 21991573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Mech Ageing Dev. 2011 Nov-Dec;132(11-12):560-7. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2011.09.005.
Epub 2011 Oct 1.

Short bouts of mild-intensity physical exercise improve spatial learning and
memory in aging rats: involvement of hippocampal plasticity via AKT, CREB and
BDNF signaling.

Aguiar AS Jr(1), Castro AA, Moreira EL, Glaser V, Santos AR, Tasca CI, Latini A, 
Prediger RD.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Farmacologia, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina,
88049-900 Florianópolis, SC, Brazil.

In the present study, we investigated whether mild-intensity physical exercise
represents a successful strategy to enhance spatial learning and memory and
hippocampal plasticity in aging rats, as previously described for long-term
exposure to running wheel or treadmill exercise. Aging Wistar rats were submitted
to short bouts (4-6 min) of exercise treadmill during five consecutive weeks.
This mild-intensity exercise program increased muscle oxygen consumption by
soleus and heart in aging rats and reversed age-related long-term spatial
learning and memory impairments evaluated in the water maze and step-down
inhibitory avoidance tasks. Remarkably, the observed cognitive-enhancing
properties of short bouts of exercise were accompanied by the activation of
serine/threonine protein kinase (AKT) and cAMP response element binding (CREB)
pro-survival signaling that culminates in the marked increase on the
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) mRNA expression and BDNF protein levels 
on the hippocampus of aging rats. Altogether, these results indicate that short
bouts of exercise represent a viable behavioral strategy to improve cognition and
synaptic plasticity in aging rats which should be taken into account in further
studies addressing the effects of physical exercise in aging subjects.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21983475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25088. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025088. Epub 2011 Sep 30.

New striatal neurons in a mouse model of progressive striatal degeneration are
generated in both the subventricular zone and the striatal parenchyma.

Luzzati F(1), De Marchis S, Parlato R, Gribaudo S, Schütz G, Fasolo A, Peretto P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Human Biology, University of Turin, Torino, Italy.

Acute striatal lesions increase proliferation in the subventricular zone (SVZ)
and induce migration of SVZ neuroblasts to the striatum. However, the potential
of these cells to replace acutely degenerated neurons is controversial. The
possible contribution of parenchymal progenitors to striatal lesion-induced
neurogenesis has been poorly explored. Here, we present a detailed investigation 
of neurogenesis in the striatum of a mouse model showing slow progressive
neurodegeneration of striatal neurons, the Creb1(Camkcre4)Crem<U+207B>/<U+207B> mutant mice
(CBCM). By using BrdU time course analyses, intraventricular injections of a cell
tracker and 3D reconstructions we showed that neurodegeneration in CBCM mice
stimulates the migration of SVZ neuroblasts to the striatum without altering SVZ 
proliferation. SVZ-neuroblasts migrate as chains through the callosal striatal
border and then enter within the striatal parenchyma as individual cells. In
addition, a population of clustered neuroblasts showing high turnover rates were 
observed in the mutant striatum that had not migrated from the SVZ. Clustered
neuroblasts might originate within the striatum itself because they are
specifically associated with parenchymal proliferating cells showing features of 
intermediate neuronal progenitors such as clustering, expression of EGF receptor 
and multiple glial (SOX2, SOX9, BLBP) and neuronal (Dlx, Sp8, and to some extent 
DCX) markers. Newborn striatal neurons had a short lifespan and did not replace
projection neurons nor expressed sets of transcription factors involved in their 
specification. The differentiation failure of endogenous neuroblasts likely
occurred cell autonomously because transplanted wild type embryonic precursors
correctly differentiated into striatal projection neurons. Thus, we propose that 
under progressive degeneration, neither SVZ derived nor intra-striatal generated 
neurons have the potential to differentiate into striatal projection neurons.

PMCID: PMC3184103
PMID: 21980380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Blood. 2011 Nov 17;118(20):5487-97. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-355644. Epub 2011 
Oct 4.

Molecular dissection of the miR-17-92 cluster's critical dual roles in promoting 
Th1 responses and preventing inducible Treg differentiation.

Jiang S(1), Li C, Olive V, Lykken E, Feng F, Sevilla J, Wan Y, He L, Li QJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA.

Mir-17-92 encodes 6 miRNAs inside a single polycistronic transcript, the proper
expression of which is critical for early B-cell development and lymphocyte
homeostasis. However, during the T-cell antigen response, the physiologic
function of endogenous miR-17-92 and the roles of the individual miRNAs remain
elusive. In the present study, we functionally dissected the miR-17-92 cluster
and revealed that miR-17 and miR-19b are the key players controlling Th1
responses through multiple coordinated biologic processes. These include:
promoting proliferation, protecting cells from activation-induced cell death,
supporting IFN-<U+03B3> production, and suppressing inducible regulatory T-cell
differentiation. Mechanistically, we identified Pten (phosphatase and tensin
homolog) as the functionally important target of miR-19b, whereas the function of
miR-17 is mediated by TGFßRII and the novel target CREB1. Because of its vigorous
control over the Th1 cell-inducible regulatory T cell balance, the loss of
miR-17-92 in CD4 T cells results in tumor evasion. Our results suggest that
miR-19b and miR-17 could be harnessed to enhance the efficacy of T cell-based
tumor therapy.

PMCID: PMC3217351
PMID: 21972292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Anticancer Res. 2011 Oct;31(10):3301-13.

Phytoestrogens induce apoptosis via extrinsic pathway, inhibiting nuclear
factor-kappaB signaling in HER2-overexpressing breast cancer cells.

Seo HS(1), Choi HS, Choi HS, Choi YK, Um JY, Choi I, Shin YC, Ko SG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Biology and Pharmacogenomics and Center for Clinical
Research and Genomics, Institute of Oriental Medicine, Kyung Hee University, 1
Hoegi-dong, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Phytoestrogens are known to prevent tumor induction. But their
molecular mechanisms of action are largely unknown. This study aimed to examine
the effect of genistein and quercetin on proliferation and apoptosis in
HER2-expressing breast cancer cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The antiproliferative effects of phytoestrogens were
tested by proliferation assays. Flow cytometry was performed to analyze the cell 
cycle. The effect of phytoestrogens on cell-signaling molecules was determined by
Western blotting.
RESULTS: Genistein and quercetin inhibited the proliferation of MCF-7 vec and
MCF-7 HER2 cells. This growth inhibition was accompanied with an increase of
subG(0)/G(1) apoptotic fractions. Genistein and quercetin induced extrinsic
apoptosis pathway, up-regulating p53. Genistein and quercetin reduced the
phosphorylation level of I<U+03BA>Ba, and abrogated the nuclear translocation of p65 and
its phosphorylation within the nucleus.
CONCLUSION: Genistein and quercetin exert their antiproliferative activity by
inhibiting NF<U+03BA>B signaling. Phytoestrogens could be potential useful compounds to 
prevent or treat HER2-overexpressing breast cancer.

PMID: 21965740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Nov;226(11):2782-9. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22554.

TRB3 mediates homocysteine-induced inhibition of endothelial cell proliferation.

Zou T(1), Liu WJ, Li SD, Zhou W, Yang JF, Zou CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Beijing Hospital, Beijing, China.

Hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy) has been shown to induce endothelial dysfunction, an 
early event in the progression of atherosclerosis. However, the underlying
mechanism of endothelial cell injury in HHcy has not been clearly elucidated. In 
this study, we examined the effect of homocysteine on tribbles-related protein 3 
(TRB3)-mediated cell-cycle arrest in human umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVECs). Treatment of HUVECs with homocysteine (0-250<U+2009>µmol/L) resulted in
inhibition of cell proliferation assessed by [(3)H]-thymidine incorporation into 
DNA. Homocysteine induced cell-cycle arrest in the G1 phase by up-regulating the 
protein levels of p27(kip1). Under these conditions, homocysteine did not induce 
endoplasmic reticulum stress. However, homocysteine up-regulated the expression
of TRB3, thus leading to the dephosphorylation of Akt (Thr308). Knock-down of
endogenous TRB3 using siRNA significantly suppressed the inhibitory effect of
homocysteine on the proliferation of HUVECs. Homocysteine-induced TRB3 expression
was mediated by the cAMP/cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) pathway.
These results demonstrate that TRB3 is a critical molecule in the
homocysteine-mediated cell-cycle arrest in endothelial cells.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21935927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. FASEB J. 2012 Jan;26(1):376-86. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-190934. Epub 2011 Sep 16.

Adenosine promotes alternative macrophage activation via A2A and A2B receptors.

Csóka B(1), Selmeczy Z, Koscsó B, Németh ZH, Pacher P, Murray PJ, Kepka-Lenhart
D, Morris SM Jr, Gause WC, Leibovich SJ, Haskó G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, USA.

Adenosine has been implicated in suppressing the proinflammatory responses of
classically activated macrophages induced by Th1 cytokines. Alternative
macrophage activation is induced by the Th2 cytokines interleukin (IL)-4 and
IL-13; however, the role of adenosine in governing alternative macrophage
activation is unknown. We show here that adenosine treatment of IL-4- or
IL-13-activated macrophages augments the expression of alternative macrophage
markers arginase-1, tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1), and 
macrophage galactose-type C-type lectin-1. The stimulatory effect of adenosine
required primarily A(2B) receptors because the nonselective adenosine receptor
agonist 5'-N-ethylcarboxamidoadenosine (NECA) increased both arginase activity
(EC(50)=261.8 nM) and TIMP-1 production (EC(50)=80.67 nM), and both pharmacologic
and genetic blockade of A(2B) receptors prevented the effect of NECA. A(2A)
receptors also contributed to the adenosine augmentation of IL-4-induced TIMP-1
release, as both adenosine and NECA were less efficacious in augmenting TIMP-1
release by A(2A) receptor-deficient than control macrophages. Of the
transcription factors known to drive alternative macrophage activation,
CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein ß was required, while cAMP response
element-binding protein and signal transducer and activator of transcription 6
were dispensable in mediating the effect of adenosine. We propose that adenosine 
receptor activation suppresses inflammation and promotes tissue restitution, in
part, by promoting alternative macrophage activation.

PMCID: PMC3250237
PMID: 21926236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2011 Oct;36(11):2153-4. doi: 10.1038/npp.2011.126.

Is CREB the angry bird that releases memory in Alzheimer's?

Wang A(1), Bibb JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Comment on
    Neuropsychopharmacology. 2011 Oct;36(11):2169-86.

PMCID: PMC3176573
PMID: 21918517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Jun;227(6):2759-66. doi: 10.1002/jcp.23020.

CFTR negatively regulates cyclooxygenase-2-PGE(2) positive feedback loop in
inflammation.

Chen J(1), Jiang XH, Chen H, Guo JH, Tsang LL, Yu MK, Xu WM, Chan HC.

Author information: 
(1)Epithelial Cell Biology Research Center, School of Biomedical Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations of
the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), a cAMP-dependent 
anion channel mostly expressed in epithelia. Accumulating evidence suggests that 
CF airway epithelia are overwhelmed by excessive inflammatory cytokines and
prostaglandins (PGs), which eventually lead to the over-inflammatory condition
observed in CF lung disease. However, the exact underlying mechanism remains
elusive. In this study, we observed increased cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression
and over-production of prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) in human CF bronchial
epithelia cell line (CFBE41o--) with elevated NF-<U+03BA>B activity compared to a
wild-type airway epithelial cell line (16HBE14o--). Moreover, we demonstrated
that CFTR knockout mice had inherently higher levels of COX-2 and NF-<U+03BA>B activity,
supporting the notion that lack of CFTR results in hyper-inflammatory signaling. 
In addition, we identified a positive feedback loop for production of PGE(2)
involving PKA and transcription factor, CREB. More importantly, overexpression of
wild-type CFTR significantly suppressed COX-2 expression in CFBE41o- cells, and
wild-type CFTR protein expression was significantly increased when 16HBE14o--
cells were challenged with LPS as well as PGE(2), indicating possible involvement
of CFTR in negative regulation of COX-2/PGE(2). In conclusion, CFTR is a negative
regulator of PGE(2)-mediated inflammatory response, defect of which may result in
excessive activation of NF-<U+03BA>B, leading to over production of PGE(2) as seen in
inflammatory CF tissues.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21913191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Biotechniques. 2011 Sep;51(3):153. doi: 10.2144/000113729.

Profile of Sheena Josselyn. Interviewed by Kristie Nybo.

Josselyn S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neurosciences & Mental Health, Department of Physiology, University of
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

PMID: 21906034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Ethnopharmacol. 2012 Jun 1;141(2):622-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.08.043. Epub
2011 Aug 27.

Inhibition of the p38 and PKA signaling pathways is associated with the
anti-melanogenic activity of Qian-wang-hong-bai-san, a Chinese herbal formula, in
B16 cells.

Tsang TF(1), Ye Y, Tai WC, Chou GX, Leung AK, Yu ZL, Hsiao WL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer and Inflammation Research, School of Chinese Medicine, Hong 
Kong Baptist University, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong, China.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Qian-wang-hong-bai-san (QW), a Chinese herbal
formula, is traditionally used as a skin whitening agent in China.
AIM OF STUDY: In our previous screening assays, QW was identified as an effective
tyrosinase inhibitor. In this study, we aim to investigate the underlying
mechanism of the anti-melanogenic effect of QW in B16 cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Cytotoxicity of QW in B16 cell line was examined by MTT
assay. Cellular tyrosinase activity was determined based on the melanin content
measured at 475 nm with a microplate spectrophotometer. Protein expression was
analyzed by Western blotting and quantified by Quantity One.
RESULTS: QW dose-dependently inhibited tyrosinase activity and decreased melanin 
content at 48 h without significant cytotoxicity in B16 cells. Western blot
analysis showed that QW treatment down-regulated the expression levels of
phospho-p38, phospho-CREB, MITF, tyrosinase, TRP-1 and TRP-2 in a dose-dependent 
manner. At the same time, QW treatment for 48 h inhibited IBMX-induced elevation 
of cellular melanin content and tyrosinase activity. However, the attenuation of 
IBMX-mediated up-regulations of phospho-CREB and phospho-PKA was readily observed
with 60 min of QW treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The anti-melanogenic activity of QW in B16 melanoma cells can be
attributed, at least in part, to the inhibition of the p38 MAPK and PKA signaling
pathways. These findings shed new light on the molecular mechanisms of the
skin-whitening property of QW.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21903156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Cell Cycle. 2011 Sep 15;10(18):3072-7. Epub 2011 Sep 15.

A GSK-3-mediated transcriptional network maintains repression of immediate early 
genes in quiescent cells.

Tullai JW(1), Graham JR, Cooper GM.

Author information: 
(1)Boston University, Boston, MA, USA.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) plays a central role in cell survival and
proliferation, in part by the regulation of transcription. Unlike most protein
kinases, GSK-3 is active in quiescent cells in the absence of growth factor
signaling. In a recent series of studies, we employed a systems-level approach to
understanding the transcription network regulated by GSK-3 in a quiescent cell
model. We identified a group of immediate early genes that were upregulated in
quiescent cells solely by the inhibition of GSK-3 in the absence of growth factor
stimulation. Computational analysis of the upstream sequences of these genes
identified statistically over-represented binding sites for the transcription
factors CREB, NF<U+03BA>B and AP-1, and the roles of these factors in regulating
expression of GSK-3 target genes were verified by chromatin immunoprecipitation
and RNA interference. In quiescent cells, GSK-3 inhibits CREB, NF<U+03BA>B and AP-1,
thereby maintaining repression of their target genes and contributing to
maintenance of cell cycle arrest.

PMCID: PMC3218618
PMID: 21900749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Cancer Res. 2011 Nov 1;71(21):6738-48. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1882. Epub
2011 Sep 7.

Definition of a FoxA1 Cistrome that is crucial for G1 to S-phase cell-cycle
transit in castration-resistant prostate cancer.

Zhang C(1), Wang L, Wu D, Chen H, Chen Z, Thomas-Ahner JM, Zynger DL, Eeckhoute
J, Yu J, Luo J, Brown M, Clinton SK, Nephew KP, Huang TH, Li W, Wang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry and the Comprehensive Cancer
Center, The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2011 Dec 15;71(24):7718.

The enhancer pioneer transcription factor FoxA1 is a global mediator of steroid
receptor (SR) action in hormone-dependent cancers. In castration-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC), FoxA1 acts as an androgen receptor cofactor to drive G2
to M-phase cell-cycle transit. Here, we describe a mechanistically distinct
SR-independent role for FoxA1 in driving G1 to S-phase cell-cycle transit in
CRPC. By comparing FoxA1 binding sites in prostate cancer cell genomes, we
defined a codependent set of FoxA1-MYBL2 and FoxA1-CREB1 binding sites within the
regulatory regions of the Cyclin E2 and E2F1 genes that are critical for CRPC
growth. Binding at these sites upregulate the Cyclin E2 and Cyclin A2 genes in
CRPC but not in earlier stage androgen-dependent prostate cancer, establishing a 
stage-specific role for this pathway in CRPC growth. Mechanistic investigations
indicated that FoxA1, MYBL2, or CREB1 induction of histone H3 acetylation
facilitated nucleosome disruption as the basis for codependent transcriptional
activation and G1 to S-phase cell-cycle transit. Our findings establish FoxA1 as 
a pivotal driver of the cell-cycle in CRPC which promotes G1 to S-phase transit
as well as G2 to M-phase transit through two distinct mechanisms.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4081454
PMID: 21900400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Cell Tissue Res. 2011 Sep;345(3):343-56. doi: 10.1007/s00441-011-1220-8. Epub
2011 Aug 25.

Comparative effect of FGF2, synthetic peptides 1-28 N-POMC and ACTH on
proliferation in rat adrenal cell primary cultures.

Mattos GE(1), Jacysyn JF, Amarante-Mendes GP, Lotfi CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of São
Paulo, SP, Brazil.

There is evidence that pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC)-derived peptides other than
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) have a role in adrenal cell proliferation. We 
compared the activity of synthetic rat N-terminal POMC fragment 1-28 with
disulfide bridges (N-POMC(w)) and without disulfide bridges (N-POMC(w/o)), with
the activity of fibroblast growth factor (FGF2), a widely studied adrenal growth 
factor, and ACTH, in well-characterized pure cultures of both isolated adrenal
Glomerulosa (G) and Fasciculata/Reticularis (F/R) cells. Three days of
FGF2-treatment had a proliferative effect similar to serum, and synthetic peptide
N-POMC(w) induced proliferation more efficiently than N-POMC(w/o). Moreover, both
induced proliferation via the ERK1/2 pathway. In contrast, sustained ACTH
treatment decreased proliferation and viability through apoptosis induction, but 
not necrosis, and independently of PKA and PKC pathways. Further elucidation of
1-28 POMC signal transduction is of interest, and primary cultures of adrenal
cells were found to be useful for examining the trophic activity of this peptide.

PMID: 21866314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Endocrinology. 2011 Oct;152(10):3680-9. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1229. Epub 2011 Aug 
23.

Insulin/IGF-I regulation of necdin and brown adipocyte differentiation via CREB- 
and FoxO1-associated pathways.

Cypess AM(1), Zhang H, Schulz TJ, Huang TL, Espinoza DO, Kristiansen K, Unterman 
TG, Tseng YH.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, Department of Medicine, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA. aaron.cypess@joslin.harvard.edu

Brown adipose tissue plays an important role in obesity, insulin resistance, and 
diabetes. We have previously shown that the transition from brown preadipocytes
to mature adipocytes is mediated in part by insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1
and the cell cycle regulator protein necdin. In this study, we used
pharmacological inhibitors and adenoviral dominant negative constructs to
demonstrate that this transition involves IRS-1 activation of Ras and ERK1/2,
resulting in phosphorylation of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) and 
suppression of necdin expression. This signaling did not include an elevation of 
intracellular calcium. A constitutively active form of CREB expressed in IRS-1
knockout cells decreased necdin promoter activity, necdin mRNA, and necdin
protein levels, leading to a partial restoration of differentiation. By contrast,
forkhead box protein (Fox)O1, which is regulated by the phosphoinositide 3
kinase-Akt pathway, increased necdin promoter activity. Based on reporter gene
assays using truncations of the necdin promoter and chromatin immunoprecipitation
studies, we demonstrated that CREB and FoxO1 are recruited to the necdin
promoter, likely interacting with specific consensus sequences in the proximal
region. Based on these results, we propose that insulin/IGF-I act through IRS-1
phosphorylation to stimulate differentiation of brown preadipocytes via two
complementary pathways: 1) the Ras-ERK1/2 pathway to activate CREB and 2) the
phosphoinositide 3 kinase-Akt pathway to deactivate FoxO1. These two pathways
combine to decrease necdin levels and permit the clonal expansion and coordinated
gene expression necessary to complete brown adipocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3176640
PMID: 21862615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Nat Neurosci. 2011 Aug 14;14(9):1115-7. doi: 10.1038/nn.2891.

The brain-specific microRNA miR-128b regulates the formation of fear-extinction
memory.

Lin Q(1), Wei W, Coelho CM, Li X, Baker-Andresen D, Dudley K, Ratnu VS, Boskovic 
Z, Kobor MS, Sun YE, Bredy TW.

Author information: 
(1)Intellectual Development and Disabilities Research Center, David Geffen School
of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California,
USA.

MicroRNAs are small non-coding RNAs that mediate post-transcriptional gene
silencing. Fear-extinction learning in C57/Bl6J mice led to increased expression 
of the brain-specific microRNA miR-128b, which disrupted stability of several
plasticity-related target genes and regulated formation of fear-extinction
memory. Increased miR-128b activity may therefore facilitate the transition from 
retrieval of the original fear memory toward the formation of a new
fear-extinction memory.

PMID: 21841775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Toxicol Lett. 2011 Oct 10;206(2):238-43. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2011.07.027. Epub 
2011 Jul 30.

Rubratoxin B induces signs of fatty acid oxidation disorders (FAODs) in mice.

Iwashita K(1), Nagashima H.

Author information: 
(1)National Food Research Institute, National Agriculture and Food Research
Organization, 2-1-12 Kannondai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Rubratoxin B is a mycotoxin that causes hypoglycemia and fatty liver. We
investigated the effect of rubratoxin B on hepatic glycogen content and
regulation, because blood glucose levels are associated with hepatic glycogen
storage. Mice were treated with 1.5mg/kg rubratoxin B for 24h. Stomachs of
treated mice became extremely swollen, and the contents were significantly
heavier than those of controls. Hypoglycemia stimulates appetite; therefore,
rubratoxin B may perturb satiation. Rubratoxin B evidently depleted hepatic
glycogen stores. Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) activity and mRNA
levels in treated mice were reduced, indicating that rubratoxin B caused hepatic 
glycogen depletion by inhibiting PEPCK. PEPCK activity and mRNA levels were
reduced to similar degrees; it appears that PEPCK activity is regulated
transcriptionally. Levels of the PEPCK gene trans-activators phospho-CREB (active
form) and C/EBPa were significantly reduced in the livers of treated mice,
suggesting that these factors are important for PEPCK gene transcription.
Rubratoxicosis and fatty acid oxidation disorders (FAODs) share characteristic
signs, such as robust appetite, hypoglycemia, hepatic glycogen depletion, and
fatty liver. Although FAODs are generally considered genetic deficiencies, our
results indicate that a chemical can also cause FAOD-like signs in mice.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21835235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 30;286(39):34199-214. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.247684. Epub
2011 Aug 10.

The extracellular signal-regulated kinase mitogen-activated protein
kinase/ribosomal S6 protein kinase 1 cascade phosphorylates cAMP response
element-binding protein to induce MUC5B gene expression via D-prostanoid receptor
signaling.

Choi YH(1), Lee SN, Aoyagi H, Yamasaki Y, Yoo JY, Park B, Shin DM, Yoon HG, Yoon 
JH.

Author information: 
(1)The Airway Mucus Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul
120-752, Korea.

Mucus hypersecretion is a prominent feature of respiratory diseases, and MUC5B is
a major airway mucin. Mucin gene expression can be affected by inflammatory
mediators, including prostaglandin (PG) D(2,) an inflammatory mediator
synthesized by hematopoietic PGD synthase (H-PGDS). PGD(2) binds to either
D-prostanoid receptor (DP1) or chemoattractant receptor homologous molecule
expressed on T-helper type 2 cells (CRTH2). We investigated the mechanisms by
which PGD(2) induces MUC5B gene expression in airway epithelial cells. Western
blot analysis showed that H-PGDS was highly expressed in nasal polyps. Similar
results were obtained for PGD(2) expression. In addition, we could clearly detect
the expressions of both H-PGDS and DP1 in nasal epithelial cells but not CRTH2.
We demonstrated that PGD(2) increased MUC5B gene expression in normal human nasal
epithelial cells as well as in NCI-H292 cells in vitro. S5751, a DP1 antagonist, 
inhibited PGD(2)-induced MUC5B expression, whereas a CRTH2 antagonist (OC0459)
did not. These data suggest that PGD(2) induced MUC5B expression via DP1.
Pretreatment with extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) inhibitor (PD98059)
blocked both PGD(2)-induced ERK mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
activation and MUC5B expression. Proximity ligation assays showed direct
interaction between RSK1 and cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB).
Stimulation with PGD(2) caused an increase in intracellular cAMP levels, whereas 
intracellular Ca(2+) did not have such an effect. PGD(2)-induced MUC5B mRNA
levels were regulated by CREB via direct interaction with two cAMP-response
element sites (-921/-914 and -900/-893). Finally, we demonstrated that PGD(2) can
induce MUC5B overproduction via ERK MAPK/RSK1/CREB signaling and that DP1
receptor may have suppressive effects in controlling MUC5B overproduction in the 
airway.

PMCID: PMC3190772
PMID: 21832046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Jun;227(6):2430-40. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22978.

CREB coactivator CRTC2/TORC2 and its regulator calcineurin crucially mediate
follicle-stimulating hormone and transforming growth factor ß1 upregulation of
steroidogenesis.

Fang WL(1), Lee MT, Wu LS, Chen YJ, Mason J, Ke FC, Hwang JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

In vitro and in vivo studies implicate that follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
and transforming growth factor ß1 (TGFß1) play crucial physiological roles in
regulating ovarian granulosa cell function essential to fertility control in
females. FSH induces cAMP and calcium signaling, thereby activating transcription
factor CREB to upregulate steroidogenic gene expression, and TGFß1 greatly
enhances FSH-stimulated steroidogenesis. A CREB coactivator CRTC2/TORC2 was
identified to function as a cAMP and calcium-sensitive coincidence sensor. This
led us to explore the role of CRTC2 and its regulator calcineurin in FSH and
TGFß1-stimulated steroidogenesis. Primary culture of granulosa cells from
gonadotropin-primed immature rats was used. Immunoblotting analysis shows that
FSH rapidly and transiently induced dephosphorylation/activation of CRTC2, and
FSH<U+2009>+<U+2009>TGFß1 additionally induced late-phase CRTC2 dephosphorylation.
Immunofluorescence analysis further confirms FSH<U+2009>±<U+2009>TGFß1 promoted CRTC2 nuclear
translocation. Using selective inhibitors, we demonstrate that FSH activated
CRTC2 in a PKA- and calcineurin-dependent manner, and TGFß1 acting through its
type I receptor (TGFßRI)-modulated FSH action in a calcineurin-mediated and
PKA-independent fashion. Next, we investigated the involvement of calcineurin and
CRTC2 in FSH and TGFß1-stimulated steroidogenesis. Calcineurin and TGFßRI
inhibitor dramatically reduced the FSH<U+2009>±<U+2009>TGFß1-increased progesterone synthesis
and protein levels of StAR, P450scc, and 3ß-HSD enzyme. Furthermore,
chromatin-immunoprecipitation and immunoprecipitation analyses demonstrate that
FSH<U+2009>±<U+2009>TGFß1 differentially increased CRTC2, CREB, and CBP binding to these
steroidogenic genes, and CREB nuclear association with CRTC2 and CBP. In all,
this study reveals for the first time that CRTC2 and calcineurin are critical
signaling mediators in FSH and TGFß1-stimulated steroidogenesis in ovarian
granulosa cells.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21826657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Microbes Infect. 2011 Dec;13(14-15):1211-20. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2011.07.006.
Epub 2011 Jul 23.

Leukotriene B4 receptor BLT-mediated phosphorylation of NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB is
involved in IL-8 production in human mast cells induced by Trichomonas
vaginalis-derived secretory products.

Nam YH(1), Min D, Kim HP, Song KJ, Kim KA, Lee YA, Kim SH, Shin MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medical Biology, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, 134 Sichon-dong, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-752, Republic of Korea.

Trichomonas vaginalis is a protozoan parasite that causes acute tissue
inflammation in vaginal trichomoniasis. In this study, we investigated the
signaling mechanisms through which T. vaginalis-derived secretory products (TvSP)
induce chemokine IL-8 production in human mast cells. Stimulation with TvSP
induced up-regulation of IL-8 protein secretion in HMC-1 cells. In addition, TvSP
induced phosphorylation of transcription factors NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB in HMC-1 cells.
Pretreatment of TvSP with lipase, but not heat or proteinase K strongly abolished
the stimulatory effect on IL-8 production. Moreover, TvSP-induced IL-8 production
and phosphorylation of NF-<U+03BA>B or CREB were inhibited when HMC-1 cells were
stimulated with modified TvSP collected from 5-lipooxygenase inhibitor-treated
trichomonads. Indeed, T. vaginalis-secreted lipid mediator LTB(4) (700pg/ml) from
1×10(7) trichomonads. Furthermore, pretreatment of HMC-1 cells with antagonists
for LTB(4) receptors BLT1 or BLT2 abolished the stimulatory effects of TvSP.
Finally, TvSP-induced IL-8 production was inhibited by pretreatment with I<U+03BA>B or
CREB inhibitors. These results suggest that T. vaginalis-derived secretory lipid 
mediator LTB(4) induces IL-8 production in mast cells via BLT-dependent
activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB.

Copyright © 2011 Institut Pasteur. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 21824526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Aging Cell. 2011 Dec;10(6):962-71. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2011.00735.x. Epub
2011 Aug 24.

Age-related decline in osteoblastogenesis and 1a-hydroxylase/CYP27B1 in human
mesenchymal stem cells: stimulation by parathyroid hormone.

Geng S(1), Zhou S, Glowacki J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

With aging, there is a decline in bone mass and in osteoblast differentiation of 
human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) in vitro. Osteoblastogenesis can be
stimulated with 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) [1,25(OH)(2) D(3) ] and, in some
hMSCs, by the precursor 25-hydroxyvitamin D(3) (25OHD(3) ).
CYP27B1/1a-hydroxylase activates 25OHD(3) and, to a variable degree, hMSCs
express CYP27B1. In this study, we tested the hypotheses (i) that age affects
responsiveness to 25OHD(3) and expression/activity of CYP27B1 in hMSCs and (ii)
that parathyroid hormone (PTH) upregulates CYP27B1 in hMSCs, as it does in renal 
cells. There were age-related declines in osteoblastogenesis (n=8, P=0.0286) and 
in CYP27B1 gene expression (n=27, r= -0.498; P=0.008) in hMSCs. Unlike hMSCs from
young subjects (=50 years), hMSCs from older subjects (=55 years) were resistant 
to 25OHD(3) stimulation of osteoblastogenesis. PTH1-34 (100 nm) provided hMSCs
with responsiveness to 25OHD(3) (P=0.0313, Wilcoxon matched pairs test) and with 
two episodes of increased 1,25(OH)(2) D(3) synthesis, of cAMP response element
binding protein (CREB) activation, and of CYP27B1 upregulation. Both increases in
CYP27B1 expression by PTH were obliterated by CREB-siRNA or KG-501 (which
specifically inhibits the downstream binding of activated CREB). Only the second 
period of CREB signaling was diminished by AG1024, an inhibitor of insulin-like
growth factor-I receptor kinase. Thus, PTH stimulated hMSCs from elders with
responsiveness to 25OHD(3) by upregulating expression/activity of CYP27B1 and did
so through CREB and IGF-I pathways.

© 2011 The Authors. Aging Cell © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society
of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMCID: PMC3215854
PMID: 21824271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Mod Pathol. 2011 Dec;24(12):1560-70. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.126. Epub 2011
Aug 5.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma: unusual sites and unusual morphology.

Chen G(1), Folpe AL, Colby TV, Sittampalam K, Patey M, Chen MG, Chan JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Fujian Provincial Tumor Hospital, Fuzhou, Fujian,
China.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma is a soft tissue neoplasm of low malignant
potential, typically occurring in the superficial soft tissues of the extremities
in children and young adults. Occurrence outside somatic soft tissues is most
uncommon. This report describes eight such cases, involving the lung (three
cases), mediastinum (one case), vulva (two cases), retroperitoneum (one case) and
ovary (one case), with the latter three locations being hitherto unreported sites
of occurrence. Patients had a median age of 48 years, and presented with symptoms
related to the mass lesion (five cases) or were incidentally found to harbor a
tumor (three cases). Besides the typical histological features such as an outer
shell of lymphoid tissue, multinodular aggregates of dendritic-like tumor cells, 
blood-filled spaces and abundant admixed plasma cells, unusual features were
found focally in some cases, including clear cells, rhabdomyoblast-like cells,
pulmonary edema-like pattern and tumor cell cords lying in a myxoid stroma.
Immunoreactivity for the epithelial membrane antigen, desmin, smooth-muscle
actin, CD68 and CD99 was found in 100, 63, 43, 100 and 100% of cases,
respectively. Molecular studies provided support for the diagnosis in all seven
tested cases-EWS gene translocation in six cases (partner gene being CREB1 in
three and ATF1 in two in which information was available) and FUS gene
translocation in one case. Comparison of the reported cases of extrasomatic
angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma with their somatic soft tissue counterparts
showed a number of differences: higher mean age, slight male predominance
(particularly for bone lesions), larger tumors, higher frequency of systemic
symptoms, higher recurrence rate, myxoid change being more common and a much
higher frequency of EWS/ATF1 gene fusion.

PMID: 21822206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Neuroscience. 2011 Oct 13;193:377-86. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.07.059.
Epub 2011 Jul 28.

Activating transcription factor 4, a mediator of the integrated stress response, 
is increased in the dorsal root ganglia following painful facet joint
distraction.

Dong L(1), Guarino BB, Jordan-Sciutto KL, Winkelstein BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA.

Chronic neck pain is one of the most common musculoskeletal disorders in the US. 
Although biomechanical and clinical studies have implicated the facet joint as a 
primary source of neck pain, specific cellular mechanisms still remain
speculative. The purpose of this study was to investigate whether a mediator
(activating transcription factor; 4ATF4) of the integrated stress response (ISR) 
is involved in facet-mediated pain. Holtzman rats underwent C6/C7 facet joint
loading that produces either painful (n=16) or nonpainful (n=8) responses. A sham
group (n=9) was also included as surgical controls. Behavioral sensitivity was
measured and the C6 dorsal root ganglia (DRGs) were harvested on day 7 to
evaluate the total and neuronal ATF4 expression. In separate groups, an
intra-articular ketorolac injection was administered either immediately (D0
ketorolac) or 1 day (D1 ketorolac) after painful facet joint loading. Allodynia
was measured at days 1 and 7 after injury to assess the effects on behavioral
responses. ATF4 and BiP (an indicator of ISR activation) were separately
quantified at day 7. Facet joint loading sufficient to elicit behavioral
hypersensitivity produced a threefold increase in total and neuronal ATF4
expression in the DRG. After ketorolac treatment at the time of injury, ATF4
expression was significantly (P<0.01) reduced despite not producing any
attenuation of behavioral responses. Interestingly, ketorolac treatment at day 1 
significantly (P<0.001) alleviated behavioral sensitivity at day 7, but did not
modify ATF4 expression. BiP expression was unchanged after either intervention
time. Results suggest that ATF4-dependent activation of the ISR does not directly
contribute to persistent pain, but it may sensitize neurons responsible for pain 
initiation. These behavioral and immunohistochemical findings imply that
facet-mediated pain may be sustained through other pathways of the ISR.

Copyright © 2011 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3171593
PMID: 21821103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22445. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022445. Epub 2011 Jul 26.

Acidic environment leads to ROS-induced MAPK signaling in cancer cells.

Riemann A(1), Schneider B, Ihling A, Nowak M, Sauvant C, Thews O, Gekle M.

Author information: 
(1)Julius-Bernstein-Institut für Physiologie der Universität Halle-Wittenberg,
Halle, Germany.

Tumor micromilieu often shows pronounced acidosis forcing cells to adapt their
phenotype towards enhanced tumorigenesis induced by altered cellular signalling
and transcriptional regulation. In the presents study mechanisms and potential
consequences of the crosstalk between extra- and intracellular pH (pH(e), pH(i)) 
and mitogen-activated-protein-kinases (ERK1/2, p38) was analyzed. Data were
obtained mainly in AT1 R-3327 prostate carcinoma cells, but the principle
importance was confirmed in 5 other cell types. Extracellular acidosis leads to a
rapid and sustained decrease of pH(i) in parallel to p38 phosphorylation in all
cell types and to ERK1/2 phosphorylation in 3 of 6 cell types. Furthermore, p38
phosphorylation was elicited by sole intracellular lactacidosis at normal pH(e). 
Inhibition of ERK1/2 phosphorylation during acidosis led to necrotic cell death. 
No evidence for the involvement of the kinases c-SRC, PKC, PKA, PI3K or EGFR nor 
changes in cell volume in acidosis-induced MAPK activation was obtained. However,
our data reveal that acidosis enhances the formation of reactive oxygen species
(ROS), probably originating from mitochondria, which subsequently trigger MAPK
phosphorylation. Scavenging of ROS prevented acidosis-induced MAPK
phosphorylation whereas addition of H(2)O(2) enhanced it. Finally, acidosis
increased phosphorylation of the transcription factor CREB via p38, leading to
increased transcriptional activity of a CRE-reporter even 24 h after switching
the cells back to a normal environmental milieu. Thus, an acidic tumor
microenvironment can induce a longer lasting p38-CREB-medited change in the
transcriptional program, which may maintain the altered phenotype even when the
cells leave the tumor environment.

PMCID: PMC3144229
PMID: 21818325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Oct;25(10):1819-30. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-0014. Epub 2011 Aug
4.

A TSH-CREB1-microRNA loop is required for thyroid cell growth.

Leone V(1), D'Angelo D, Ferraro A, Pallante P, Rubio I, Santoro M, Croce CM,
Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche, Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare,
Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia di Napoli, Università degli Studi di Napoli
Federico II, Naples, Italy.

MicroRNA (miRNA or miR) are an important class of regulators that participate in 
such biological functions as development, cell proliferation, differentiation,
and apoptosis. The aim of this study was to elucidate the role of miRNA in cell
proliferation using a unique cell system, namely thyroid cells that require
thyrotropin for their growth. Here, we report the identification of a set of five
specific miRNA (miR-1, miR-28-A, miR-290-5p, miR-296-3p, and miR-297a), whose
down-regulation by thyrotropin is required for thyroid cell growth. In fact,
overexpression of these miRNA negatively affects cell growth. We show that three 
of these miRNA target cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB)1, a
thyrotropin-activated transcription factor, and that CREB1 binds the regulatory
regions of the down-regulated miRNA. Hence, these data indicate that a
synergistic loop involving thyrotropin, CREB1, and miRNA is required for thyroid 
cell proliferation.

PMID: 21816899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Environ Health Perspect. 2011 Dec;119(12):1775-80. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1103781. Epub
2011 Aug 3.

Low concentrations of bisphenol A induce mouse spermatogonial cell proliferation 
by G protein-coupled receptor 30 and estrogen receptor-a.

Sheng ZG(1), Zhu BZ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry and Ecotoxicology, Research
Center for Eco-Environmental Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Bisphenol A (BPA) is one of the most prevalent chemicals in daily-use
materials; therefore, human exposure to BPA is ubiquitous. The estrogenicity of
BPA is generally mediated by nuclear estrogen receptors (ERs). However, low
concentrations of BPA stimulate seminoma cell proliferation by an uncertain
mechanism that does not involve activation of ERs.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated the possible promoting effects of low-concentration
BPA and the possible mechanism(s) using the murine ER-ß negative spermatogonial
GC-1 cell line.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using the specific signaling inhibitor, BPA at test
concentrations ranging from 10-10 to 10-8 M markedly induced proliferation of
GC-1 cells by activating both cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG) and epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) extracellular regulated kinase (ERK) pathways. BPA 
stimulated a rapid (15-min) phosphorylation of the transcription factor cAMP
response element binding protein (CREB) and the cell cycle regulator
retinoblastoma protein (Rb). Interestingly, ER-a phosphorylation is involved in
the proliferation, whereas BPA does not directly transactivate ER-a in gene
reporter assays. Using specific agonists and gene silencing, we further observed 
that BPA mediates the proliferation and fos gene expression of GC-1 cells by G
protein-coupled receptor 30 (GPR30) and ER-a.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that low concentrations of BPA activate the PKG and
EGFR/ERK/c-fos pathways through a cross-talk between GPR30 and ER-a, which in
turn stimulates GC-1 cell proliferation. The present study provides a novel
insight regarding the potential role of GPR30 and ER-a in mediating the
proliferative effects of BPA in male germ cells.

PMCID: PMC3261991
PMID: 21813366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Affect Disord. 2011 Dec;135(1-3):336-40. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2011.06.039. Epub
2011 Jul 31.

Early influence of the rs4675690 on the neural substrates of sadness.

Fortier E(1), Noreau A, Lepore F, Boivin M, Pérusse D, Rouleau GA, Beauregard M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Neuropsychologie et Cognition (CERNEC), Département de 
Psychologie, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada.

BACKGROUND: CREB1 has previously been implicated in mood disorders, suicide, and 
antidepressant response. There is some evidence that the T allele in rs4675690, a
single-nucleotide polymorphism near the CREB1 gene, is involved in the modulation
of neural responses to negative stimuli. It is not known whether differential
brain activity during negative mood state appears early in life in T allele
carriers.
METHODS: Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was used to measure brain
activity, during a transient state of sadness, in children homozygous for the T
allele or the C allele. This primary emotion was selected given that it is the
prevailing mood in major depressive disorder (MDD). Blood-oxygen-level dependent 
(BOLD) signal changes were measured while subjects viewed blocks of neutral film 
excerpts and blocks of sad film excerpts.
RESULTS: There was significantly greater BOLD activation in the TT group,
compared to the CC group, in the right dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (Brodmann
area [BA 24]), right putamen, right caudate nucleus and left anterior temporal
pole (BA 21), when the brain activity associated with the viewing of the
emotionally neutral film excerpts was subtracted from that associated with the
viewing of the sad film excerpts.
LIMITATIONS: A replication study using larger samples may be required for more
definitive conclusions.
CONCLUSIONS: The different pattern of regional brain activation found here during
transient sadness - in children carrying the T allele, compared to those carrying
the C allele - might increase later in life susceptibility to emotional
dysregulation and depressive symptoms.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21807415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Toxicol In Vitro. 2011 Dec;25(8):1671-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2011.07.004. Epub
2011 Jul 18.

Luteolin protects osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells from antimycin A-induced
cytotoxicity through the improved mitochondrial function and activation of
PI3K/Akt/CREB.

Choi EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food and Nutrition, Education Graduate School, Kyung Hee
University, 1 Hoegi-dong, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea.
cheunmi@hanmail.net

Luteolin is a flavonoid found in many herbal extracts including celery, green
pepper, parsley, perilla leaf and seeds, and chamomile. Antimycin A (AMA) is an
inhibitor of the mitochondrial electron transport chain. In the present study,
the protective effect of luteolin on AMA-induced cell damage was investigated in 
osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells. Luteolin significantly increased the viability of
MC3T3-E1 cells in the presence of AMA and the effect of luteolin in increasing
cell viability was completely prevented by the presence of LY294002, Akt
inhibitor, or auranofin, suggesting that the effect of luteolin might be partly
mediated from PI3K, Akt, and thioredoxin reductase. Pre-treatment with luteolin
prior to AMA exposure significantly prevented mitochondrial membrane potential
dissipation, ATP loss, inactivation of complex I and IV, ROS production,
inactivation of thioredoxin reductase, intracellular calcium elevation, and
cytochrome c release induced by AMA. Moreover, luteolin increased activities of
PI3K (phosphoinositide 3-kinase) and Akt (protein kinase B), and CREB
(cAMP-response element-binding protein) phosphorylation inhibited by AMA
treatment. Collectively, these results suggest that luteolin protects MC3T3-E1
cells from AMA-induced cell damage through the improved mitochondrial function
and activation of PI3K/Akt/CREB.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21782929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2012 Feb;219(3):699-713. doi:
10.1007/s00213-011-2406-1. Epub 2011 Jul 16.

CREB1 and CREB-binding protein in striatal medium spiny neurons regulate
behavioural responses to psychostimulants.

Madsen HB(1), Navaratnarajah S, Farrugia J, Djouma E, Ehrlich M, Mantamadiotis T,
Van Deursen J, Lawrence AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Florey Neuroscience Institutes, Parkville, VIC, Australia.

RATIONALE: The transcription factor cAMP responsive element-binding protein 1
(CREB1) has a complex influence on behavioural responses to drugs of abuse which 
varies depending on the brain region in which it is expressed. In response to
drug exposure, CREB1 is phosphorylated in the striatum, a structure that is
critically involved in reward-related learning.
OBJECTIVE: The present study assessed the role of striatal CREB1 and its
coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP) in behavioural responses to
psychostimulants.
METHODS: Using the 'cre/lox' recombination system, we generated mice with a
postnatal deletion of CREB1 or CBP directed to medium spiny neurons of the
striatum. qRT-PCR and immunohistochemistry were used to confirm the deletion, and
mice were assessed with respect to their locomotor response to acute cocaine (20 
mg/kg), cocaine sensitization (10 mg/kg), amphetamine-induced stereotypies (10
mg/kg) and ethanol-induced hypnosis (3.5 g/kg).
RESULTS: Here we show that CREB1 mutant mice have increased sensitivity to
psychostimulants, an effect that does not generalise to ethanol-induced hypnosis.
Furthermore, in the absence of CREB1, there is rapid postnatal upregulation of
the related transcription factor CREM, indicating possible redundancy amongst
this family of transcription factors. Finally striatal deletion of CBP, a
coactivator for the CREB1/CREM signalling pathway, results in an even more
increased sensitivity to psychostimulants.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that striatal CREB1 regulates sensitivity to
psychostimulants and that CREM acting via CBP is able to partially compensate in 
the absence of CREB1 signalling.

PMID: 21766169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Sep 1;137(1):783-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.06.046. Epub
2011 Jul 5.

A modified formulation of Chinese traditional medicine improves memory impairment
and reduces Aß level in the Tg-APPswe/PS1dE9 mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.

Jeon S(1), Bose S, Hur J, Jun K, Kim YK, Cho KS, Koo BS.

Author information: 
(1)Dongguk University Research Institute of Biotechnology, 26, 3-GA, Pil-dong,
Chung-gu, Seoul 100-715, Republic of Korea. jsong0304@dongguk.edu

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: SuHeXiang Wan (SHXW), a Chinese traditional
medicine has been used orally for the treatment of seizures, infantile
convulsion, stroke and so forth. Previously, we reported the effects of modified 
SHXW essential oil mixture of the fragrance containing herbs on the sedative
effect, anticonvulsant property and antioxidative activity after fragrance
inhalation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This study was undertaken to evaluate beneficial effects
of a modified recipe of SHXW (termed as KSOP1009) consisting of a ethanol extract
of 8 herbs including resin of Liquidambar orientalis Miller, seed of Myristica
fragrans Houtt., rhizome of Cnidium officinale Makino, lumber of Santalum album
L., fructus of Piper longum L., flower buds of Eugenia caryophyllata Merrill et
Perry, pollen of Typha orientalis Presl., and root of Salvia miltiorrhiza Bunge
in the neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease (AD). The
transgenic mice of AD, Tg-APPswe/PS1dE9, were fed KSOP1009 or as a positive
control, donepezil for 3 months from 4.5 months of age. Behavioral, immunological
and ELISA analyses were used to assess memory impairment, Aß accumulation and
plaque deposition in the brain. Other in vitro works were performed to examine
whether KSOP1009 inhibits the Aß(1-42)-induced neurotoxicity in human
neuroblastoma cell line, SH-SY5Y cells.
RESULTS: Intake of KSOP1009 improved the Aß-induced memory impairment and
suppressed Aß levels and plaque deposition in the brain of Tg-APPswe/PS1dE9 mice 
as much as that of donepezil treatment. KSOP1009 prevented the down-regulation of
phospho-CREB and increased AKT phosphorylation in the AD-like brains. Moreover,
KSOP1009 suppresses Aß-induced apoptosis and ROS production in SH-SY5Y cells.
CONCLUSION: The present study suggests that KSOP1009 may develop as a therapeutic
drug for treatment of AD patients.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21762767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Neurosci Lett. 2011 Aug 18;500(3):202-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.06.037. Epub 
2011 Jun 29.

Valproic acid inhibits neurosphere formation by adult subventricular cells by a
lithium-sensitive mechanism.

Zhou Q(1), Dalgard CL, Wynder C, Doughty ML.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience and Regenerative Medicine, Physiology and Genetics,
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, 4301 Jones Bridge Road,
Bethesda, MD 20814, United States.

The mood stabilizer valproic acid (VPA) decreases neural progenitor proliferation
and promotes neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus. However, the effects of VPA
on progenitor cells in the adult subventricular zone (SVZ) are not as well
characterized. Here we report VPA blocks neurosphere formation and inhibits DNA
synthesis in cultured NSCs from the SVZ of adult mice. Inhibition of DNA
synthesis is associated with the up-regulation of the differentiation
transcription factors Egr1 and Neurod1 and down-regulation of transcription
factors associated with "stemness". Co-treatment of VPA with the mood stabilizer 
lithium antagonizes the anti-proliferative effects of VPA on adult NSCs and
abolishes VPA activation of Egr1. Co-treatment of VPA with the MEK1/2 inhibitor
PD980589 similarly abolishes Egr1 activation consistent with VPA activation and
lithium antagonism of MEK-ERK signaling in adult NSCs. However, Western blot
reveals VPA significantly suppresses ERK2 phosphorylation in adult NSCs grown in 
proliferating culture conditions and that lithium co-treatment does not attenuate
this effect. Combined the data indicate VPA inhibition of adult NSC proliferation
and activation of Egr1 by VPA, along with the antagonism of these effects by
lithium, are the effects of cumulative changes in multiple signaling pathways and
are not attributable to a common kinase target.

Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 21741439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2011 Oct;36(11):2169-86. doi: 10.1038/npp.2011.107. Epub
2011 Jul 6.

Increasing CREB function in the CA1 region of dorsal hippocampus rescues the
spatial memory deficits in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.

Yiu AP(1), Rashid AJ, Josselyn SA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neurosciences and Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    Neuropsychopharmacology. 2011 Oct;36(11):2153-4.

The principal defining feature of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is memory impairment. 
As the transcription factor CREB (cAMP/Ca(2+) responsive element-binding protein)
is critical for memory formation across species, we investigated the role of CREB
in a mouse model of AD. We found that TgCRND8 mice exhibit a profound impairment 
in the ability to form a spatial memory, a process that critically relies on the 
dorsal hippocampus. Perhaps contributing to this memory deficit, we observed
additional deficits in the dorsal hippocampus of TgCRND8 mice in terms of (1)
biochemistry (decreased CREB activation in the CA1 region), (2) neuronal
structure (decreased spine density and dendritic complexity of CA1 pyramidal
neurons), and (3) neuronal network activity (decreased arc mRNA levels following 
behavioral training). Locally and acutely increasing CREB function in the CA1
region of dorsal hippocampus of TgCRND8 mice was sufficient to restore function
in each of these key domains (biochemistry, neuronal structure, network activity,
and most importantly, memory formation). The rescue produced by increasing CREB
was specific both anatomically and behaviorally and independent of plaque load or
Aß levels. Interestingly, humans with AD show poor spatial memory/navigation and 
AD brains have disrupted (1) CREB activation, and (2) spine density and dendritic
complexity in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons. These parallel findings not only
confirm that TgCRND8 mice accurately model key aspects of human AD, but
furthermore, suggest the intriguing possibility that targeting CREB may be a
useful therapeutic strategy in treating humans with AD.

PMCID: PMC3176558
PMID: 21734652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Mech Ageing Dev. 2011 Aug;132(8-9):405-11. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2011.06.005. Epub
2011 Jun 25.

The excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate stimulates DNA repair to increase
neuronal resiliency.

Yang JL(1), Sykora P, Wilson DM 3rd, Mattson MP, Bohr VA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, National Institute on Aging Intramural
Research Program, Baltimore, MD, USA. yangj2@mail.nih.gov

Glutamate is the most abundant excitatory neurotransmitter in the vertebrate
central nervous system and plays an important role in synaptic plasticity
required for learning and memory. Activation of glutamate ionotropic receptors
promptly triggers membrane depolarization and Ca(2+) influx, resulting in the
activation of several different protein kinases and transcription factors. For
example, glutamate-mediated Ca(2+) influx activates Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent
kinase, protein kinase C, and mitogen activated protein kinases resulting in
activation of transcription factors such as cyclic AMP response element binding
protein (CREB). Abnormally prolonged exposure to glutamate causes neuronal
injury, and such "excitotoxicity" has been implicated in many acute and chronic
diseases including ischemic stroke, epilepsy, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis,
Alzheimer's, Huntington's and Parkinson's diseases. Interestingly, although
glutamate-induced Ca(2+) influx can cause DNA damage by a mitochondrial reactive 
oxygen species-mediated mechanism, the Ca(2+) simultaneously activates CREB,
resulting in up-regulation of the DNA repair and redox protein
apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1. Here, we review connections between
physiological or aberrant glutamate receptor activation, Ca(2+)-mediated
signaling, oxidative DNA damage and repair efficiency, and neuronal
vulnerability. We conclude that glutamate signaling involves an adaptive cellular
stress response pathway that enhances DNA repair capability, thereby protecting
neurons against injury and disease.

Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3367503
PMID: 21729715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Mol Pain. 2011 Jul 1;7:48. doi: 10.1186/1744-8069-7-48.

Cancer-induced bone pain sequentially activates the ERK/MAPK pathway in different
cell types in the rat spinal cord.

Wang LN(1), Yao M, Yang JP, Peng J, Peng Y, Li CF, Zhang YB, Ji FH, Cheng H, Xu
QN, Wang XY, Zuo JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou 215006, China.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have demonstrates that, after nerve injury,
extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK) activation in the spinal
cord-initially in neurons, then microglia, and finally astrocytes. In addition,
phosphorylation of ERK (p-ERK) contributes to nociceptive responses following
inflammation and/or nerve injury. However, the role of spinal cells and the
ERK/MAPK pathway in cancer-induced bone pain (CIBP) remains poorly understood.
The present study analyzed activation of spinal cells and the ERK/MAPK pathway in
a rat model of bone cancer pain.
RESULTS: A Sprague Dawley rat model of bone cancer pain was established and the
model was evaluated by a series of tests. Moreover, fluorocitrate (reversible
glial metabolic inhibitor) and U0126 (a MEK inhibitor) was administered
intrathecally. Western blots and double immunofluorescence were used to detect
the expression and location of phosphorylation of ERK (p-ERK). Our studies on
pain behavior show that the time between day 6 and day 18 is a reasonable period 
("time window" as the remaining stages) to investigate bone cancer pain
mechanisms and to research analgesic drugs. Double-labeling immunofluorescence
revealed that p-ERK was sequentially expressed in neurons, microglia, and
astrocytes in the L4-5 superficial spinal cord following inoculation of Walker
256 cells. Phosphorylation of ERK (p-ERK) and the transcription factor cAMP
response element-binding protein (p-CREB) increased in the spinal cord of CIBP
rats, which was attenuated by intrathecal injection of fluorocitrate or U0126.
CONCLUSIONS: The ERK inhibitors could have a useful role in CIBP management,
because the same target is expressed in various cells at different times.

PMCID: PMC3150304
PMID: 21722369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Biomed Pharmacother. 2011 Jul;65(4):293-7. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2011.03.009.
Epub 2011 May 30.

Transcriptional regulation of the chemokine co-receptor CCR5 by the cAMP/PKA/CREB
pathway.

Banerjee A(1), Pirrone V, Wigdahl B, Nonnemacher MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Molecular Virology and
Translational Neuroscience, Institute for Molecular Medicine and Infectious
Disease, Drexel University College of Medicine, 245 N. 15th Street, MS# 1013A,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102, USA.

The cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-dependent signaling pathway directs the
expression of several genes involved in diverse neuroendocrine, immune,
metabolic, and developmental pathways. The primary effectors of this pathway are 
members of the cAMP response element binding (CREB) family of transcription
factors, in particular the CREB-1 and cAMP response element modulator (CREM).
Both these genes encode alternative splice variants that serve as activators or
repressors in a context- and position-specific manner. Although the ß-chemokine
receptor CC chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5) has been identified on progenitor cells
in the bone marrow, the regulatory mechanisms orchestrating its expression are
not fully understood. Previous reports have identified putative cAMP response
elements in the CCR5 promoter and have described a suppressive role of cAMP in
CCR5 expression. In this study, the CD34+CD4+CCR5+ human bone marrow progenitor
cell line TF-1 was used to investigate the detailed kinetics of CCR5
transcription in response to the elevation of intracellular cAMP levels and the
underlying molecular events. We hypothesize that CCR5 transcription follows an
asymmetrical sinusoidal pattern in TF-1 cells that parallels a protein kinase
A-dependent alternating change in the ratio of activator pCREB-1-a,<U+0394> to repressor
pCREM-a,ß isoforms. However, elevated CCR5 mRNA levels do not correlate with
enhancement in infectivity with respect to the R5 human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV-1) strain. Our results lend critical insight into the precise
mechanism governing the cAMP-CCR5 axis in progenitor cells and pose interesting
questions regarding its functional role in HIV-1 infection.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3150495
PMID: 21719243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Jul;1809(7):295-305. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2011.06.004. Epub 2011 Jun 28.

Identification and characterization of the major alternative promoter regulating 
Bcrp1/Abcg2 expression in the mouse intestine.

Natarajan K(1), Xie Y, Nakanishi T, Beck WT, Bauer KS, Ross DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Maryland School of
Pharmacy, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Mouse models are often used to predict drug absorption in humans. Mouse Bcrp1
protein exhibits sequence and functional homology with human BCRP protein.
Additionally, BCRP/Bcrp1 expression is regulated by alternative promoter usage in
humans and mice; however, the precise intestine-specific alternative promoter
utilized in either species is yet to be determined. Therefore we sought to
identify and characterize the mouse intestinal Bcrp1 promoter. Using real-time
quantitative RT-PCR and 5' RACE PCR we first established the predominance of a
single Bcrp1 first exon (E1b) in the Bcrp1 mRNA isolated throughout the mouse
intestine. Simultaneously using 5' RACE PCR we identified E1C as the predominant 
BCRP 5' UTR expressed in the human intestine. Next we established functional
activity for the murine promoter upstream of E1b using reporter assays.
Subsequently using deletion-construct analysis we found the core promoter region 
to span -231 to -42bps from the transcriptional start site of E1b. We then
predicted a cAMP response element (CRE) as a transcription factor binding site
unique only to the E1b promoter region, using in silico methods. We finally
established functional interaction of phospho-CREB (p-CREB) protein with the CRE 
on the E1b promoter using both functional assays and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays. In conclusion, mouse intestinal Bcrp1 expression is
regulated by a single alternative promoter upstream of E1b, the predominant Bcrp1
mRNA isoform expressed in the mouse intestine. Furthermore, Bcrp1 E1b mRNA
expression is regulated by binding of p-CREB to its cis site on the mouse E1b
promoter region.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3148308
PMID: 21718815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Cells. 2011 Sep;32(3):251-5. doi: 10.1007/s10059-011-1040-4. Epub 2011 Jun
23.

TGF-ß1 stimulates mouse macrophages to express APRIL through Smad and
p38MAPK/CREB pathways.

Jang YS(1), Kim JH, Seo GY, Kim PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Bioscience, College of Biomedical Science, Chuncheon
200-701, Korea.

A proliferation-inducing ligand (APRIL), a new TNF family member, supports B-cell
survival and tumor cell proliferation. APRIL is secreted as a soluble protein by 
macrophages, dendritic cells and activated T cells. However, factors involved in 
regulation of APRIL expression are as yet unknown. In this study, we investigated
the effect of TGF-ß1 on APRIL expression in P388D1, a mouse macrophage cell line.
TGF-ß1 induced APRIL mRNA expression in a time- and dose-dependent manner. One
nanogram per milliliter of TGF-ß1 was optimal and APRIL transcripts appeared as
early as 3 h after stimulation. Based on our studies, which included
overexpression of Smad3, DN-Smad3, and sh-Smad3, we found that Smad3 mediates
APRIL transcription at least partially. Further, experiments using inhibitors
revealed that p38MAPK and CREB are also involved in TGF-ß1-induced APRIL
expression. These results suggest that TGF-ß1, through Smad3 and p38MAPK/CREB
signaling pathways, stimulates APRIL expression in macrophages.

PMCID: PMC3887634
PMID: 21710205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Br J Haematol. 2011 Sep;154(5):569-78. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2011.08782.x.
Epub 2011 Jun 28.

Epigenetic silencing of MIR203 in multiple myeloma.

Wong KY(1), Liang R, So CC, Jin DY, Costello JF, Chim CS.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine Pathology Biochemistry, Queen Mary Hospital, The
University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China.

Epigenetic inactivation of tumour suppressor microRNAs has been implicated in
carcinogenesis. We studied the promoter methylation of MIR203 in eight normal
marrow controls, eight multiple myeloma (MM) cell lines, 20 monoclonal gammopathy
of undetermined significance (MGUS), 123 diagnostic MM and 19 relapsed MM samples
by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction. Promoter of MIR203 was
unmethylated in normal controls but homozygously methylated in 25% MM cell lines.
Treatment with 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine led to promoter demethylation and MIR203
re-expression. Cyclic AMP responsive element binding protein 1 (CREB1) mRNA was
predicted as a MIR203 direct target. Luciferase activity was reduced in
constructs carrying wild-type CREB1 3'UTR upon MIR203 expression but not in those
carrying mutant CREB1 3'UTR. Moreover, restoration of MIR203 led to
downregulation of CREB1 protein and inhibition of myeloma cell proliferation. In 
primary samples, MIR203 methylation occurred in 25·0% MGUS, 23·6% diagnostic MM, 
and 21·1% relapsed MM samples. In conclusion, MIR203 methylation is
disease-specific with reversible gene silencing in MM. MIR203 is a tumour
suppressor microRNA inhibiting cellular proliferation by targeting CREB1 mRNA in 
MM. Comparable occurrence of MIR203 methylation in MGUS and MM at diagnosis or
relapse suggested that MIR203 methylation may be an early event in myelomagenesis
instead of being acquired during disease progression.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21707582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Oncogene. 2012 Jan 26;31(4):469-79. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.247. Epub 2011 Jun 27.

Altered LKB1/CREB-regulated transcription co-activator (CRTC) signaling axis
promotes esophageal cancer cell migration and invasion.

Gu Y(1), Lin S, Li JL, Nakagawa H, Chen Z, Jin B, Tian L, Ucar DA, Shen H, Lu J, 
Hochwald SN, Kaye FJ, Wu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Shands Cancer Center,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610-3633, USA.

LKB1 is a tumor susceptibility gene for the Peutz-Jeghers cancer syndrome and is 
a target for mutational inactivation in sporadic human malignancies. LKB1 encodes
a serine/threonine kinase that has critical roles in cell growth, polarity and
metabolism. A novel and important function of LKB1 is its ability to regulate the
phosphorylation of CREB-regulated transcription co-activators (CRTCs) whose
aberrant activation is linked with oncogenic activities. However, the roles and
mechanisms of LKB1 and CRTC in the pathogenesis of esophageal cancer have not
been previously investigated. In this study, we observed altered LKB1-CRTC
signaling in a subset of human esophageal cancer cell lines and patient samples. 
LKB1 negatively regulates esophageal cancer cell migration and invasion in vitro.
Mechanistically, we determined that CRTC signaling becomes activated because of
LKB1 loss, which results in the transcriptional activation of specific downstream
targets including LYPD3, a critical mediator for LKB1 loss-of-function. Our data 
indicate that de-regulated LKB1-CRTC signaling might represent a crucial
mechanism for esophageal cancer progression.

PMID: 21706049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 26;286(34):29681-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.264945. Epub
2011 Jun 24.

Dual function of protein kinase C (PKC) in 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate
(TPA)-induced manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) expression: activation of
CREB and FOXO3a by PKC-alpha phosphorylation and by PKC-mediated inactivation of 
Akt, respectively.

Chung YW(1), Kim HK, Kim IY, Yim MB, Chock PB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, NHLBI, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-8012, USA.

12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) has been shown to induce
transcriptional activation of human manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) mRNA
in human lung carcinoma cells, A549, mediated by a protein kinase C
(PKC)-dependent activation of cAMP-responsive element-binding protein
(CREB)-1/ATF-1-like factors. In this study, we showed that MnSOD protein
expression was elevated in response to TPA or TNF-a, but not to hydrogen peroxide
treatment. TPA-induced generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) was blocked by
pretreatment of the PKC inhibitor BIM and NADPH oxidase inhibitor DPI. Small
interfering RNA (siRNA) experiments indicated that knocking down the NADPH
oxidase components e.g. Rac1, p22(phox), p67(phox), and NOXO1 in A549 cells
impaired TPA-induced MnSOD expression. To identify the PKC isozyme involved, we
used a sod2 gene response reporter plasmid, pSODLUC-3340-I2E-C, capable of
sensing the effect of TNF-a and TPA, to monitor the effects of PKC
isozyme-specific inhibitors and siRNA-induced knockdown of specific PKC isozyme. 
Our data indicate that TPA-induced MnSOD expression was independent of p53 and
most likely mediated by PKC-a-, and -e-dependent signaling pathways. Furthermore,
siRNA-induced knock-down of CREB and Forkhead box class O (FOXO) 3a led to a
reduction in TPA-induced MnSOD gene expression. Together, our results revealed
that TPA up-regulates, in part, two PKC-dependent transcriptional pathways to
induce MnSOD expression. One pathway involves PKC-a catalyzed phosphorylation of 
CREB and the other involves a PKC-mediated the PP2A catalyzed dephosphorylation
of Akt at Ser(473) which in turn leads to FOXO3a Ser(253) dephosphorylation and
its activation.

PMCID: PMC3191009
PMID: 21705328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Sep 1;137(1):592-600. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.06.007. Epub
2011 Jun 16.

Pharmacological evaluation of insulin mimetic novel suppressors of PEPCK gene
transcription from Paeoniae Rubra Radix.

Juan YC(1), Chang CC, Tsai WJ, Lin YL, Hsu YS, Liu HK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Herbal Drugs and Natural Products, National Research Institute of 
Chinese Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Paeoniae Rubra Radix (root of Paeonia lactiflora)
has been frequently employed in Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) as and
anti-diabetic therapy to enhance blood circulation and dissipate stasis.
AIM OF THE STUDY: Previously, we identified a novel hypoglycemic action of a
crude extract from Paeoniae Rubra Radix, which also suppressed
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) gene transcription. Therefore, the
current investigation intended to elucidate potential active bio-constituents of 
this herb and mechanisms of action.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) nuclear localization, the
PEPCK messenger (m)RNA level, pregnane X receptor (PXR) mRNA expression,
cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB) serine phosphorylation and DNA
binding were evaluated in dexamethasone (Dex) and 8-bromo-cAMP (CA)-stimulated
H4IIE cells, while efficacy of agents was assessed in a stable cell line
containing a green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter driven by the PEPCK
promoter. HPLC profiling, colorimetric assays, and NMR analysis were employed for
chemical characterization purpose.
RESULTS: An extract of Paeoniae Rubra Radix lacking the insulin mimetic compound,
1,2,3,4,6-penta-O-galloyl-beta-d-glucose (PGG), and termed the non-PGG fraction
(NPF), consisting of tannin polymers, suppressed PEPCK expression in the presence
of an insulin receptor antagonist (HNMPA-AM(3)), suggesting the action of this
fraction is independent of the insulin receptor. Furthermore, Dex-stimulated GR
nuclear localization and transactivation were prevented by the NPF. Similarly,
CA-stimulated CREB serine phosphorylation and DNA binding were also inhibited by 
the NPF in H4IIE cells. Hence NPF antagonizes both signaling pathways that induce
PEPCK gene transcription.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, the current study proposes that the potent suppressive
activity on PEPCK gene transcription observed with Paeoniae Rubra Radix extract, 
can be attributed to at least two distinct components, namely PGG and NPF.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21704145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Kidney Int. 2011 Sep;80(6):620-32. doi: 10.1038/ki.2011.161. Epub 2011 Jun 22.

Phosphoproteomic analysis of AT1 receptor-mediated signaling responses in
proximal tubules of angiotensin II-induced hypertensive rats.

Li XC(1), Zhuo JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Receptor and Signal Transduction, Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, The University of Mississippi Medical Center, 1500 North State
Street, Jackson, MS 39216, USA.

The signaling mechanisms underlying the effects of angiotensin II in proximal
tubules of the kidney are not completely understood. Here we measured signal
protein phosphorylation in isolated proximal tubules using pathway-specific
proteomic analysis in rats continuously infused with pressor or non-pressor doses
of angiotensin II over a 2-week period. Of the 38 phosphoproteins profiled, 14
were significantly altered by the pressor dose. This included increased
phosphorylation of the protein kinase C isoenzymes, PKCa and PKCßII, and the
glycogen synthase kinases, GSK3a and GSK3ß. Phosphorylation of the cAMP-response 
element binding protein 1 and PKCd were decreased, whereas PKC<U+025B> remained
unchanged. By contrast, the phosphorylation of only seven proteins was altered by
the non-pressor dose, which increased that of PKCa, PKCd, and GSKa.
Phosphorylation of MAP kinases, ERK1/2, was not increased in proximal tubules in 
vivo by the pressor dose, but was in proximal tubule cells in vitro. Infusion of 
the pressor dose decreased, whereas the non-pressor dose of angiotensin II
increased the phosphorylation of the sodium and hydrogen exchanger 3 (NHE-3) in
membrane fractions of proximal tubules. Losartan largely blocked the signaling
responses induced by the pressor dose. Thus, PKCa and PKCßII, GSK3a and GSK3ß,
and cAMP-dependent signaling pathways may have important roles in regulating
proximal tubular sodium and fluid transport in Ang II-induced hypertensive rats.

PMCID: PMC3164930
PMID: 21697807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20780. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020780. Epub 2011 Jun 9.

Transcriptional regulation of BMP2 expression by the PTH-CREB signaling pathway
in osteoblasts.

Zhang R(1), Edwards JR, Ko SY, Dong S, Liu H, Oyajobi BO, Papasian C, Deng HW,
Zhao M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Tulane University, New
Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America.

Intermittent application of parathyroid hormone (PTH) has well established
anabolic effects on bone mass in rodents and humans. Although transcriptional
mechanisms responsible for these effects are not fully understood, it is
recognized that transcriptional factor cAMP response element binding protein
(CREB) mediates PTH signaling in osteoblasts, and that there is a communication
between the PTH-CREB pathway and the BMP2 signaling pathway, which is important
for osteoblast differentiation and bone formations. These findings, in
conjunction with putative cAMP response elements (CREs) in the BMP2 promoter, led
us to hypothesize that the PTH-CREB pathway could be a positive regulator of BMP2
transcription in osteoblasts. To test this hypothesis, we first demonstrated that
PTH signaling activated CREB by phosphorylation in osteoblasts, and that both PTH
and CREB were capable of promoting osteoblastic differentiation of primary mouse 
osteoblast cells and multiple rodent osteoblast cell lines. Importantly, we found
that the PTH-CREB signaling pathway functioned as an effective activator of BMP2 
expression, as pharmacologic and genetic modulation of PTH-CREB activity
significantly affected BMP2 expression levels in these cells. Lastly, through
multiple promoter assays, including promoter reporter deletion, mutation,
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), and electrophoretic mobility shift assay
(EMSA), we identified a specific CRE in the BMP2 promoter which is responsible
for CREB transactivation of the BMP2 gene in osteoblasts. Together, these results
demonstrate that the anabolic function of PTH signaling in bone is mediated, at
least in part, by CREB transactivation of BMP2 expression in osteoblasts.

PMCID: PMC3111437
PMID: 21695256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Mol Cancer Res. 2011 Aug;9(8):1126-38. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-11-0162. Epub
2011 Jun 21.

Downregulation of Filamin A interacting protein 1-like is associated with
promoter methylation and induces an invasive phenotype in ovarian cancer.

Burton ER(1), Gaffar A, Lee SJ, Adeshuko F, Whitney KD, Chung JY, Hewitt SM,
Huang GS, Goldberg GL, Libutti SK, Kwon M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva
University, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy with a five-year
survival rate below 25% for patients with stages III and IV disease. Identifying 
key mediators of ovarian cancer invasion and metastasis is critical to the
development of more effective therapeutic interventions. We previously identified
Filamin A interacting protein 1-like (FILIP1L) as an important mediator of cell
proliferation and migration. In addition, targeted expression of FILIP1L in
tumors inhibited tumor growth in vivo. In our present study, we confirmed that
both mRNA and protein expression of FILIP1L were downregulated in ovarian cancer 
cells compared with normal ovarian epithelial cells. FILIP1L expression was
inversely correlated with the invasive potential of ovarian cancer cell lines and
clinical ovarian cancer specimens. We also provide evidence that DNA methylation 
is a mechanism by which FILIP1L is downregulated in ovarian cancer. The CpG
island in the FILIP1L promoter was heavily methylated in ovarian cancer cells.
Methylation status of the FILIP1L promoter was inversely correlated with FILIP1L 
expression in ovarian cell lines and clinical ovarian specimens. Reduced
methylation in the FILIP1L promoter following treatment with a DNA demethylating 
agent was associated with restoration of FILIP1L expression in ovarian cancer
cells. A transcription activator, cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) 
was shown to bind to the CREB/ATF site in the CpG island of the FILIP1L promoter.
Overall, these findings suggest that downregulation of FILIP1L associated with
DNA methylation is related with the invasive phenotype in ovarian cancer and that
modulation of FILIP1L expression has the potential to be a target for ovarian
cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3157597
PMID: 21693594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20285. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020285. Epub 2011 Jun 1.

Direct observation of dimerization between different CREB1 isoforms in a living
cell.

Sadamoto H(1), Saito K, Muto H, Kinjo M, Ito E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Functional Biology, Kagawa School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Tokushima Bunri University, Sanuki, Japan. sadamotoh@kph.bunri-u.ac.jp

Cyclic AMP-responsive element binding protein 1 (CREB1) plays multiple functions 
as a transcription factor in gene regulation. CREB1 proteins are also known to be
expressed in several spliced isoforms that act as transcriptional activators or
repressors. The activator isoforms, possessing the functional domains for kinase 
induction and for interaction with other transcriptional regulators, act as
transcriptional activators. On the other hand, some isoforms, lacking those
functional domains, are reported to be repressors that make heterodimers with
activator isoforms. The complex and ingenious function for CREB1 arises in part
from the variation in their spliced isoforms, which allows them to interact with 
each other. To date, however, the dimerization between the activator and
repressor isoforms has not yet been proved directly in living cells. In this
study, we applied fluorescence cross-correlation spectroscopy (FCCS) to
demonstrate direct observation of dimerization between CREB1 activator and
repressor. The FCCS is a well established spectroscopic method to determine the
interaction between the different fluorescent molecules in the aqueous condition.
Using differently labeled CREB1 isoforms, we successfully observed the
interaction of CREB1 activator and repressor via dimerization in the nuclei of
cultured cells. As a result, we confirmed the formation of heterodimer between
CREB1 activator and repressor isoforms in living cells.

PMCID: PMC3105992
PMID: 21673803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Integr Cancer Ther. 2012 Mar;11(1):48-60. doi: 10.1177/1534735411403307. Epub
2011 Jun 10.

Nomilin inhibits metastasis via induction of apoptosis and regulates the
activation of transcription factors and the cytokine profile in B16F-10 cells.

Pratheeshkumar P(1), Raphael TJ, Kuttan G.

Author information: 
(1)Amala Cancer Research Centre, Amala Nagar, Thrissur-680555, Kerala State,
India.

Nomilin is a triterpenoid present in common edible citrus fruits with putative
anticancer properties. In this study, the authors investigated the antimetastatic
potential of nomilin and its possible mechanism of action. Metastasis was induced
in C57BL/6 mice through the lateral tail vein using highly metastatic B16F-10
melanoma cells. Administration of nomilin inhibited tumor nodule formation in the
lungs (68%) and markedly increased the survival rate of the metastatic
tumor-bearing animals. These results correlated with the biochemical parameters
and histopathological analysis. Nomilin showed an inhibition of tumor cell
invasion and activation of matrix metalloproteinases. Treatment with nomilin
induced apoptotic response, characterized by an increase in the sub-G1 fraction
of cells with chromatin condensation and membrane blebbing, a typical ladder of
DNA fragmentation, and detection of apoptotic cells by TUNEL assay. Nomilin
treatment also exhibited a downregulated Bcl-2 and cyclin-D1 expression and
upregulated p53, Bax, caspase-9, caspase-3, p21, and p27 gene expression in
B16F-10 cells. Proinflammatory cytokine production and gene expression were found
to be downregulated in nomilin-treated cells. The study also reveals that nomilin
could inhibit the activation and nuclear translocation of antiapoptotic
transcription factors such as nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B, CREB, and ATF-2 in B16F-10 
cells.

PMID: 21665879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Nanotoxicology. 2012 Aug;6(5):543-53. doi: 10.3109/17435390.2011.590904. Epub
2011 Jun 13.

Nanoparticle-rich diesel exhaust affects hippocampal-dependent spatial learning
and NMDA receptor subunit expression in female mice.

Win-Shwe TT(1), Yamamoto S, Fujitani Y, Hirano S, Fujimaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Risk Research , National Institute for Environmental 
Studies , 16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. tin.tin.win.shwe@nies.go.jp

We investigated the effect of exposure to nanoparticle-rich diesel exhaust (NRDE)
on hippocampal-dependent spatial learning and memory function-related gene
expressions in female mice. Female BALB/c mice were exposed to clean air,
middle-dose NRDE (M-NRDE), high-dose NRDE (H-NRDE) or filtered diesel exhaust
(F-DE) for three months. A Morris water maze apparatus was used to examine
spatial learning. The expression levels of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
receptor subunit, proinflammatory cytokines and neurotrophin mRNAs in the
hippocampus were then investigated using real-time RT-PCR. Mice exposed to H-NRDE
required a longer time to reach the hidden platform and showed higher mRNA
expression levels of the NMDA receptor subunit NR2A, the proinflammatory cytokine
CCL3, and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in the hippocampus, compared
with the findings in the control group. These results indicate that three months 
of exposure to NRDE affected spatial learning and memory function-related gene
expressions in the female mouse hippocampus.

PMID: 21663545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2011 Apr-Jun;24(2):345-56.

Eugenolol and glyceryl-isoeugenol suppress LPS-induced iNOS expression by
down-regulating NF-kappaB AND AP-1 through inhibition of MAPKS and
AKT/IkappaBalpha signaling pathways in macrophages.

Yeh JL(1), Hsu JH, Hong YS, Wu JR, Liang JC, Wu BN, Chen IJ, Liou SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department and Graduate Institute of Pharmacology, College of Medicine,
Kaohsiung Medical University, and Department of Paediatrics, Kaohsiung Medical
University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Eugenol and isoeugenol, two components of clover oil, have been reported to
possess several biomedical properties, such as anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial
and antioxidant effects. This study aims to examine the anti-inflammatory effects
of eugenol, isoeugenol and four of their derivatives on expression of inducible
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) activated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in mouse
macrophages (RAW 264.7), and to investigate molecular mechanisms underlying these
effects. We found that two derivatives, eugenolol and glyceryl-isoeugenol, had
potent inhibitory effects on LPS-induced upregulation of nitrite levels, iNOS
protein and iNOS mRNA. In addition, they both suppressed the release of tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) induced by
LPS. Moreover, they both attenuated the DNA binding of NF-kB and AP-1,
phosphorylation of inhibitory kB-alpha (IkB-alpha), and nuclear translocation of 
p65 protein induced by LPS. Finally, we demonstrated that glyceryl-isoeugenol
suppressed the phosphorylation of ERK1/2, JNK and p38 MAPK, whereas eugenolol
suppressed the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK. Taken together, these
results suggest that that eugenolol and glyceryl-isoeugenol suppress LPS-induced 
iNOS expression by down-regulating NF-kB and AP-1 through inhibition of MAPKs and
Akt/IkB-alpha signaling pathways. Thus, this study implies that eugenolol and
glyceryl-isoeugenol may provide therapeutic benefits for inflammatory diseases.

PMID: 21658309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Arch Pharm Res. 2011 May;34(5):837-45. doi: 10.1007/s12272-011-0518-0. Epub 2011 
Jun 9.

Interference of alpha-synuclein with cAMP/PKA-dependent CREB signaling for
tyrosine hydroxylase gene expression in SK-N-BE(2)C cells.

Kim SS(1), Moon KR, Choi HJ.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Drug Development, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju 500-757, Korea.

Alpha-synuclein (a-SYN) is a small and highly conserved presynaptic protein that 
is implicated in both normal brain function and the pathogenesis of
neurodegenerative diseases. Although the physiological function of a-SYN has not 
been fully evaluated, several lines of evidence suggest that it plays an
important role in the regulation of dopamine homeostasis in the brain. Early
studies have demonstrated that interaction of a-SYN and tyrosine hydroxylase
(TH), a rate-limiting enzyme in dopamine synthesis, is functionally significant
for dopaminergic neurotransmission and the pathophysiology of Parkinson's
disease. In the present study, we would like to evaluate whether overexpression
of wild-type or mutant a-SYN might affect cAMP/PKA-dependent TH activation in
DA-producing SK-N-BE(2)C cells. Here we show that wild-type and mutant A30P and
A53T a-SYN attenuate forskolin-induced TH up-regulation, but do not suppress TH
basal expression in SK-N-BE(2)C cells. Forskolin-induced increase in TH promoter 
activity and CRE-dependent transcription are significantly suppressed in
a-SYN-overexpressing cells. Alpha-SYN enters the nucleus, but does not bind to
CREB or interfere with forskolin-induced CREB phosphorylation. These data
indicate that elevated levels of a-SYN due to a specific disease or the normal
aging process could be associated with dopaminergic neuronal dysfunction through 
interference with TH regulation.

PMID: 21656370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. CNS Drugs. 2011 Jun 1;25(6):459-71. doi: 10.2165/11589420-000000000-00000.

Suicidal ideation during antidepressant treatment: do genetic predictors exist?

Perroud N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
nader.perroud@hcuge.ch

Suicidal thoughts during antidepressant treatment have recently been the focus of
several candidate gene and genome-wide association studies. Although the clinical
risk factors for such events are well known, unfortunately they do not help to
predict who will have a suicidal event during antidepressant treatment and who
will not. Pharmacogenomic studies have therefore attempted to use genetic
variants to predict individual susceptibility to treatment-related suicidal
ideation. In this perspective, several genetic predictors have been highlighted, 
the majority of which relate to common mechanisms of antidepressant action: genes
involved in the neurotrophic and synaptic plasticity systems (CREB1, and BDNF and
its receptor NTRK2), noradrenergic system (ADRA2A), glutamatergic system (GRIA3, 
GRIK2 and GDA), inflammatory and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis
systems (IL28RA and FKBP5) and in other brain functions (PAPLN, APOO, KCNIP4 and 
ELP3). Although some of these genes may be of interest in predicting
antidepressant-induced suicidal ideation, they still need to be validated in
better phenotypically designed samples. Several methodological factors are indeed
responsible for the problems involved in implicating these findings in the
causation of a clinically relevant phenotype. These include discrepancies between
studies in defining phenotypes, with several different thresholds used to
establish significant suicidal ideation; the use of scales not truly designed to 
measure suicidal ideation; and the paucity of true suicidal events (suicide
attempts and/or completion) in pharmacogenomic studies. In conclusion,
pharmacogenomic studies are far from fulfilling their promise. There is a need
for future pharmacogenetic studies targeting events that are clinically
significant in order to find associated variants that will help clinicians to
improve their treatment strategies. While awaiting these genetic predictors,
clinicians need to bear in mind that all studies in this field support a
beneficial effect of antidepressants on suicidal ideation. This should therefore 
encourage them to prescribe antidepressant medication even in patients with
suicidal ideation.

PMID: 21649447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Cell Metab. 2011 Jun 8;13(6):729-38. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2011.03.019.

FGF15/19 regulates hepatic glucose metabolism by inhibiting the CREB-PGC-1a
pathway.

Potthoff MJ(1), Boney-Montoya J, Choi M, He T, Sunny NE, Satapati S, Suino-Powell
K, Xu HE, Gerard RD, Finck BN, Burgess SC, Mangelsdorf DJ, Kliewer SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

Regulation of hepatic carbohydrate homeostasis is crucial for maintaining energy 
balance in the face of fluctuating nutrient availability. Here, we show that the 
hormone fibroblast growth factor 15/19 (FGF15/19), which is released
postprandially from the small intestine, inhibits hepatic gluconeogenesis, like
insulin. However, unlike insulin, which peaks in serum 15 min after feeding,
FGF15/19 expression peaks approximately 45 min later, when bile acid
concentrations increase in the small intestine. FGF15/19 blocks the expression of
genes involved in gluconeogenesis through a mechanism involving the
dephosphorylation and inactivation of the transcription factor cAMP regulatory
element-binding protein (CREB). This in turn blunts expression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator-1a (PGC-1a) and other genes
involved in hepatic metabolism. Overexpression of PGC-1a blocks the inhibitory
effect of FGF15/19 on gluconeogenic gene expression. These results demonstrate
that FGF15/19 works subsequent to insulin as a postprandial regulator of hepatic 
carbohydrate homeostasis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3131185
PMID: 21641554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Apr;132(2):449-61. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1585-0. 
Epub 2011 Jun 3.

The peptide-hormone glucagon-like peptide-1 activates cAMP and inhibits growth of
breast cancer cells.

Ligumsky H(1), Wolf I, Israeli S, Haimsohn M, Ferber S, Karasik A, Kaufman B,
Rubinek T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oncology, Chaim Sheba Medical Center, 52621 Ramat-Gan, Israel.

The incretin hormone glucagon-like peptide (GLP)-1 is secreted from intestinal L 
cells in response to food intake, and promotes insulin secretion and pancreatic
ß-cell proliferation. Reduced GLP-1 levels are observed in obesity and type 2
diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and are associated with reduced insulin secretion and
increased insulin resistance. GLP-1 mediates its activities through activation of
a G-protein coupled receptor, which is expressed in the pancreas, as well as
other tissues. Long-acting GLP-1 receptor (GLP-1R) agonists, such as exendin-4,
are currently approved for the treatment of T2DM. As obesity and T2DM are
associated with increased risk of breast cancer, we aimed to explore the effects 
of GLP-1 and exendin-4, on breast cancer cells. Treatment with GLP-1 or exendin-4
reduced viability and enhanced apoptosis of breast cancer cells but did not
affect viability of nontumorigenic cells. Moreover, exendin-4 attenuated tumor
formation by breast cancer cells in athymic mice. Treatment with either GLP-1 or 
exendin-4 elevated cAMP levels, activated the down-stream target CREB, and
enhanced CRE promoter transcription, in breast cancer cells. Moreover, inhibition
of exendin-4-induced adenylate cyclase activation restored cell viability, thus
suggesting cAMP as a principle mediator of exendin-4 anti-tumorigenic activity.
While the pancreatic form of the GLP-1R could not be detected in breast cancer
cells, several lines of evidence indicated the existence of an alternative GLP-1R
in mammary cells. Thus, internalization of GLP-1 into MCF-7 cells was evidenced, 
infection of MCF-7 cells with the pancreatic receptor enhanced proliferation, and
treatment with exendin-(9-39), a GLP-1R antagonist, further increased cAMP
levels. Our studies indicate the incretin hormone GLP-1 as a potent inducer of
cAMP and an inhibitor of breast cancer cell proliferation. Reduced GLP-1 levels
may, therefore, serve as a novel link between obesity, diabetes mellitus, and
breast cancer.

PMID: 21638053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Sep 1;137(1):251-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.05.014. Epub
2011 May 17.

The memory-enhancing effects of Kami-ondam-tang in mice.

Hong JG(1), Kim DH, Park SJ, Kim JM, Cai M, Liu X, Lee CH, Ryu JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical Science, Kyung Hee University, #1
Hoeki-dong, Dongdaemoon-Ku, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Kami-ondam-tang (KOT), a traditional Chinese
medicine, has been used to treat mental and neuropsychiatric disorders, including
dementia. This study aimed to investigate the effects of KOT on cognition and the
mechanisms underlying these effects in mice.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using the passive avoidance task, we investigated the
effect of sub-chronic administration of KOT on the cognition of mice. We also
examined the expressions of protein kinase B (Akt), cAMP response element-binding
protein (CREB), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), and doublecortin (DCX) 
in the hippocampal CA1 and dentate gyrus regions using immunohistochemistry and
western blotting.
RESULTS: The administration of KOT (50mg/kg/day, p.o.) for 14 days significantly 
increased step-through latency in the passive avoidance task compared with
vehicle-treated controls. Furthermore, KOT administration (50mg/kg/day, p.o.)
significantly increased the expressions of phosphorylated Akt, phosphorylated
CREB and BDNF in the hippocampal CA1 and dentate gyrus. In addition, KOT
administration resulted in a significant increase in the number of
DCX-immunopositive cells in the dentate gyrus.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that KOT enhances cognitive performance
through the upregulation of Akt-CREB-BDNF signaling and neurogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21619923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Int Immunopharmacol. 2011 Oct;11(10):1497-503. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2011.05.001.
Epub 2011 May 25.

A phytoceramide analog stimulates the production of chemokines through CREB
activation in human endothelial cells.

Sekiya M(1), Ueda K, Okazaki K, Terashima J, Katou Y, Kikuchi H, Kurata S, Oshima
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, 6-3 Aoba,
Aramaki, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578, Japan.

Innate immunity is the front-line of self-defense against microbial infection. In
mammals, innate immunity interacts with adaptive immunity and has a key role in
the regulated immune response. From a pharmaceutical point of view, innate
immunity is an ideal target for the development of immunoregulators. Therefore,
we aimed to isolate and characterize a novel mammalian immunoregulator isolated
from the thermophilic cellulotic fungus Talaromyces sp. 2'-(R)-hydroxy-C(24)
phytoceramide (C(24)(2'OH)Phy) was isolated from Talaromyces sp. using a
Drosophila ex vivo culture system. C(24)(2'OH)Phy suppressed the immune
deficiency (IMD) pathway-dependent expression of antibacterial peptides in
Drosophila, whereas it stimulated the production of chemokines in human cells.
Structure activity relationship studies of C(24)(2'OH)Phy analogs revealed that
both the 2'-(R)-hydroxylignoceroyl group and phytoceramide backbone are essential
for the biologic activity of C(24)(2'OH)Phy. Microarray analysis revealed that
C(24)(2'OH)Phy selectively activates the transcription of inflammatory response
genes, including chemokines. Furthermore, a reporter gene assay and small
interfering RNA analysis demonstrated that C(24)(2'OH)Phy stimulates chemokine
production through cAMP response element-binding protein activation in human
cells. C(24)(2'OH)Phy may be a lead immunostimulating compound in humans.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 21616176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2011 Jul;31(5):669-74. doi: 10.1007/s10571-011-9686-1. Epub
2011 Apr 6.

Time-course of changes in phosphorylated CREB in neuroblasts and BDNF in the
mouse dentate gyrus at early postnatal stages.

Hwang IK(1), Yoo KY, Yoo DY, Choi JW, Lee CH, Choi JH, Yoon YS, Won MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Veterinary Medicine, and
Research Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University, Seoul,
South Korea.

Cyclic AMP (cAMP) response element-binding protein (CREB) is involved in memory, 
learning, and synaptic transmission. In this study, we observed changes of
phosphorylated CREB (pCREB) immunoreactivity and its protein levels as well as
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) levels in the hippocampal dentate gyrus 
at postnatal (P) 1, 7, 14, and 21 in mice. In addition, we also investigated
pCREB expression in doublecortin (DCX, a marker for neuronal progenitors)
immunoreactive neuroblasts at P21. pCREB immunoreaction at P1 was detected in
most of cells in the dentate gyrus, thereafter pCREB immunoreactivity was
decreased in all the layers of the dentate gyrus with time, however, strong pCREB
immunoreactivity was shown in cells confined to the subgranular zone of the
dentate gyrus at P21. In this group, many pCREB immunoreactive cells were
co-localized with DCX immunoreactive neuroblasts. In addition, pCREB protein
levels were decreased with age, showing that their levels were very low at P21,
while BDNF protein levels were increased with age. These results suggest that
pCREB may play important roles in functional maturity of granule cells in mice.

PMID: 21607831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2011 Jul;156B(5):517-31. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.31197. Epub 2011 May 19.

Replacement of homologous mouse DNA sequence with pathogenic 6-base human CREB1
promoter sequence creates murine model of major depressive disorder.

Zubenko GS(1), Hughes HB 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, USA. zubenkog@pitt.edu

Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a leading cause of disability worldwide.
Families with recurrent, early-onset MDD (RE-MDD), a severe, familial form of
MDD, have provided an important resource for identifying and characterizing
genetic variants that confer susceptibility to MDD and related disorders.
Previous studies identified a rare, highly penetrant A(-115)G transition within
the human CREB1 promoter that reduced promoter activity in vitro and was
associated with depressive disorders in RE-MDD families. The development of an
etiology-based recombinant animal model for MDD would facilitate the advancement 
of our limited understanding of the pathophysiology of MDD, as well as the
development of improved treatments. Here we report the construction and initial
characterization of a congenic mutant C57BL/6NTac mouse model that carries the
human pathogenic sequence at the homologous position of the mouse Creb1 promoter.
The recombinant strain exhibited decreases in reproductive capacity and pup
survival that may be related to increased infant mortality observed in RE-MDD
families; enlargement of the cerebral ventricles; reduced levels of CREB protein 
in the mouse cerebral cortex, as predicted from transfection experiments
employing the pathogenic human CREB1 promoter; and alterations in two
standardized behavioral tests, the forced swim and marble burying tests. These
initial findings support the pathogenicity of the human A(-115)G promoter
variant, and invite further characterization of this etiology-based recombinant
animal model for MDD. Human promoter variants that have highly penetrant effects 
on disease expression provide an attractive opportunity for creating
etiology-based mouse models of human diseases, with minimal disruption of the
mouse genome.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3236563
PMID: 21598377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Cell Signal. 2011 Sep;23(9):1479-88. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2011.05.001. Epub
2011 May 8.

ROS/Epac1-mediated Rap1/NF-kappaB activation is required for the expression of
BAFF in Raw264.7 murine macrophages.

Moon EY(1), Lee JH, Lee JW, Song JH, Pyo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Sejong University, Seoul 143-747, 
Republic of Korea. eunyimoon@sejong.ac.kr

B-cell activating factor (BAFF) plays a role for the maturation and the
maintenance of B cells. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) activates toll-like receptor 4
(TLR4)-dependent signal transduction, which resulted in BAFF expression through
nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) activation. Here, we investigated whether BAFF
expression could be regulated by p65 phosphorylation through the production of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) or cyclic AMP (cAMP) in Raw264.7 murine
macrophages. mBAFF expression was reduced by ROS scavengers and it was increased 
by dibutyl-cAMP, a cAMP analogue. mBAFF expression and mBAFF promoter activity
were increased by co-transfection of p65 but they were reduced by p65-small
interference (si) RNA. Serine (Ser) 276 phosphorylation of p65 was increased by
LPS-mediated PKA activation or by the treatment with forskolin, adenylate cyclase
activator and dibutyl-cAMP. In contrast, p65 phosphorylation at Ser276 was
decreased by ROS scavengers. H(2)O(2) increased intracellular cAMP concentration,
significantly. While no increase in p65 phosphorylation at Ser276 was detected by
the treatment with H(2)O(2), CREB and p65 phosphorylation at Ser133 and Ser536
was observed, respectively. It implicates that p65 phosphorylation at Ser276 is
independent of ROS-induced cAMP production. As another cAMP effector protein was 
cAMP-responsive guanine nucleotide exchange factor (Epac), a Rap GDP exchange
factor, NF-<U+03BA>B was activated by the treatment with
8-(4-chloro-phenylthio)-2'-O-methyladenosine-3',5'-cyclic monophosphate (CPT)
that is an activator to Epac. Epac1-mediated Rap1 was activated by the treatment 
with H(2)O(2) but it was inhibited by ROS scavengers. CPT induced p65
phosphorylation at both Ser276 and Ser536. CPT also increased not only mBAFF
expression but mBAFF promoter activity. Data demonstrate that TLR4-mediated mBAFF
expression was resulted from the crosstalk of p65 phosphorylation at Ser536 and
Ser276 through ROS- and/or cAMP-mediated signal transduction. It suggests for the
first time that ROS/Epac1-mediated Rap1/NF-<U+03BA>B pathway could be required for BAFF 
expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21596132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Neurosci. 2011 May 4;31(18):6871-9. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5071-10.2011.

The requirement for enhanced CREB1 expression in consolidation of long-term
synaptic facilitation and long-term excitability in sensory neurons of Aplysia.

Liu RY(1), Cleary LJ, Byrne JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, W. M. Keck Center for Neurobiology of 
Learning and Memory, The University of Texas Medical School at Houston, Texas
77030, USA.

Accumulating evidence suggests that the transcriptional activator cAMP response
element-binding protein 1 (CREB1) is important for serotonin (5-HT)-induced
long-term facilitation (LTF) of the sensorimotor synapse in Aplysia. Moreover,
creb1 is among the genes activated by CREB1, suggesting a role for this protein
beyond the induction phase of LTF. The time course of the requirement for CREB1
synthesis in the consolidation of long-term facilitation was examined using RNA
interference techniques in sensorimotor cocultures. Injection of CREB1
small-interfering RNA (siRNA) immediately or 10 h after 5-HT treatment blocked
LTF when measured at 24 and 48 h after treatment. In contrast, CREB1 siRNA did
not block LTF when injected 16 h after 5-HT treatment. These results demonstrate 
that creb1 expression must be sustained for a relatively long time to support the
consolidation of LTF. In addition, LTF is also accompanied by a long-term
increase in the excitability (LTE) of sensory neurons (SNs). Because LTE was
observed in the isolated SN after 5-HT treatment, this long-term change was
intrinsic to that element of the circuit. LTE was blocked when CREB1 siRNA was
injected into isolated SNs immediately after 5-HT treatment. These data suggest
that 5-HT-induced CREB1 synthesis is required for consolidation of both LTF and
LTE.

PMCID: PMC3092379
PMID: 21543617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Appl Toxicol. 2012 Sep;32(9):714-21. doi: 10.1002/jat.1689. Epub 2011 May 2.

Protective effect of apocynin on antimycin A-induced cell damage in osteoblastic 
MC3T3-E1 cells.

Choi EM(1), Lee YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food and Nutrition, Education Graduate School, Kyung Hee
University, 1, Hoegi-dong, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul, 130-701, Korea.
cheunmi@hanmail.net

Apocynin is a naturally occurring methoxy-substituted catechol, experimentally
used as an inhibitor of NADPH-oxidase. In the present study, we investigated the 
protective effects of apocynin on antimycin A (AMA)-induced toxicicy in
osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells. Exposure of MC3T3-E1 cells to AMA caused significant
cell viability loss, as well as mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP)
dissipation, complex IV inactivation, ATP loss, intracellular calcium ([Ca2+]i)
elevation and oxidative stress. Pretreatment with apocynin prior to AMA exposure 
significantly reduced AMA-induced cell damage by preventing MMP dissipation,
complex IV inactivation, ATP loss, [Ca2+]i elevation and oxidative stress. These 
results suggest that apocynin has a protective effect against AMA-induced cell
damage by its antioxidant effects and the attenuation of mitochondrial
dysfunction. Apocynin also induced the activation of PI3K (phosphoinositide
3-kinase), Akt (protein kinase B) and CREB (cAMP-response element-binding
protein) inhibited by AMA. All these data indicate that apocynin may reduce or
prevent osteoblasts degeneration in osteoporosis or other degenerative disorders.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21538410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Cancer. 2011 Nov 15;117(22):5161-71. doi: 10.1002/cncr.26161. Epub 2011 Apr 26.

Increased genetic susceptibility to intestinal-type gastric cancer is associated 
with increased activity of the RUNX3 distal promoter.

Lim B(1), Ju H, Kim M, Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Daejeon, Korea.

BACKGROUND: The runt-related transcription factor RUNX3 plays essential roles in 
various types of tumors, including gastric cancer. Epigenetic changes in the
methylation of the RUNX3 proximal promoter, but not common genetic changes in
RUNX3, have been associated with both changes in the gene expression and
development of the cancer.
METHODS: A case-control association study was conducted by genotyping 865
unrelated Korean subjects. Subsequent functional studies were performed to reveal
functional implication of genetic association.
RESULTS: Several single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in RUNX3 were
significantly associated with susceptibility to intestinal-type gastric cancer
(.0028 = P = .022) but not diffuse-type gastric cancer (.70 = P = .96). The
risk-associated, minor variant of an intestinal-type gastric cancer-associated
SNP in the RUNX3 distal promoter (rs7528484) significantly increased promoter
activity in a CREB1-dependent manner. The distal promoter-derived, 33 kDa isoform
of RUNX3 increased the activity of transcription factor nuclear factor kappa B
(NF-<U+03BA>B), which had been activated by Helicobacter pylori infection, a risk factor
for intestinal-type gastric cancer, and the expression of the interleukin-1ß gene
(IL1B), an NF-<U+03BA>B target genetically and functionally associated with gastric
cancer. In contrast, the proximal promoter-derived, 44 kDa isoform of RUNX3
decreased both NF-<U+03BA>B activity and IL1B expression.
CONCLUSIONS: In addition to epigenetic changes in the RUNX3 proximal promoter,
genetic changes in the distal promoter may be associated with susceptibility to
intestinal-type gastric cancer by increasing promoter activity. Functionally, 2
RUNX3 isoforms may contribute differentially to intestinal-type gastric cancer
susceptibility, at least in part through regulating NF-<U+03BA>B activity and IL1B
expression.

Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 21523770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Aging Cell. 2011 Oct;10(5):780-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2011.00717.x. Epub
2011 May 25.

Effects of age on parathyroid hormone signaling in human marrow stromal cells.

Zhou S(1), Bueno EM, Kim SW, Amato I, Shen L, Hahne J, Bleiberg I, Morley P,
Glowacki J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Human bone marrow stromal cells (hMSCs) have the potential to differentiate into 
osteoblasts; there are age-related decreases in their proliferation and
differentiation to osteoblasts. Parathyroid hormone (PTH), when applied
intermittently in vivo, has osteoanabolic effects in a variety of systems. In
this study, we compared PTH signaling and osteoanabolic effects in hMSCs from
young and old subjects. There were age-related decreases in expression of
PTH/PTHrP receptor type 1 (PTHR1) gene (P = 0.049, n = 19) and in PTH activation 
of CREB (P = 0.029, n = 7) and PTH stabilization of ß-catenin (P = 0.018, n = 7).
Three human PTH peptides, PTH1-34, PTH1-31C (Ostabolin-C, Leu(27) , Cyclo[Glu(22)
-Lys(26) ]-hPTH1-31), and PTH1-84 (10 nm), stimulated osteoblast differentiation 
with hMSCs. Treatment with PTH1-34 resulted in a significant 67% increase in
alkaline phosphatase activity in hMSCs obtained from younger subjects (<50 years 
old, n = 5), compared with an 18% increase in hMSCs from elders (>55 years old,
n = 7). Both knockdown of CREB and treatment with a protein kinase A inhibitor
H-89 blocked PTH stimulation of osteoblast differentiation in hMSCs from young
subjects. The PTH peptides significantly stimulated proliferation of hMSCs.
Treatment with PTH1-34 resulted in an average of twice as many cells in cultures 
of hMSCs from young subjects (n = 4), but had no effect with hMSCs from elders
(n = 7). Upregulation of PTHR1 by 24-h pretreatment with 100 nm dexamethasone
rescued PTH stimulation of proliferation in hMSCS from elders. In conclusion,
age-related intrinsic alterations in signaling responses to osteoanabolic agents 
like PTH may contribute to cellular and tissue aging of the human skeleton.

© 2011 The Authors. Aging Cell © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society
of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMCID: PMC3158270
PMID: 21518242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Dis Markers. 2011;30(2-3):123-32. doi: 10.3233/DMA-2011-0768.

Transcriptional control of monocyte gene expression in post-traumatic stress
disorder.

O'Donovan A(1), Sun B, Cole S, Rempel H, Lenoci M, Pulliam L, Neylan T.

Author information: 
(1)Veteran's Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA.
aoife.odonovan@ucsf.edu

Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) confers an increased risk for disorders
with an inflammatory etiology. PTSD-related dysregulation of the sympathetic
nervous system (SNS) and hypothalamic-pituitary adrenal (HPA) axis and associated
alterations in inflammatory activity may contribute to this increased risk.
However, little is known about convergent SNS, HPA and inflammatory signaling at 
the level of the immune cell transcriptome in PTSD. To explore such signaling, we
examined the prevalence of specific transcription factor binding motifs in the
promoter regions of differentially expressed genes in monocytes from individuals 
with PTSD and matched controls. Participants included 49 men (24 PTSD+ and 25
trauma-exposed controls) and 18 women (10 PTSD+ and 8 controls). Men with PTSD
showed up-regulation of target genes for the NF-<U+03BA>B/Rel family of transcription
factors, which convey inflammatory signals, up-regulation of target genes for
CREB/ATF transcription factors, which convey adrenergic signals from the SNS, and
down-regulation of target genes for the glucocorticoid receptor, which conveys
glucocorticoid signals from the HPA axis. Women with PTSD also showed significant
up-regulation of target genes for NF-<U+03BA>B and non-significant down-regulation of
target genes for GR, but significant down-regulation of target genes for
CREB/ATF. Altered transcriptional control of monocyte gene expression could
contribute to exaggerated inflammatory activity in PTSD.

PMCID: PMC3825251
PMID: 21508516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Hematol Oncol. 2011 Apr 20;4:17. doi: 10.1186/1756-8722-4-17.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) in XPC gene silencing and bladder cancer.

Xu XS(1), Wang L, Abrams J, Wang G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Wayne State University, 259 Mack
Avenue, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Bladder cancer is one of the most common malignancies and causes hundreds of
thousands of deaths worldwide each year. Bladder cancer is strongly associated
with exposure to environmental carcinogens. It is believed that DNA damage
generated by environmental carcinogens and their metabolites causes development
of bladder cancer. Nucleotide excision repair (NER) is the major DNA repair
pathway for repairing bulk DNA damage generated by most environmental
carcinogens, and XPC is a DNA damage recognition protein required for initiation 
of the NER process. Recent studies demonstrate reduced levels of XPC protein in
tumors for a majority of bladder cancer patients. In this work we investigated
the role of histone deacetylases (HDACs) in XPC gene silencing and bladder cancer
development. The results of our HDAC inhibition study revealed that the treatment
of HTB4 and HTB9 bladder cancer cells with the HDAC inhibitor valproic acid (VPA)
caused an increase in transcription of the XPC gene in these cells. The results
of our chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) studies indicated that the VPA
treatment caused increased binding of both CREB1 and Sp1 transcription factors at
the promoter region of the XPC gene for both HTB4 and HTB9 cells. The results of 
our immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining studies further revealed a strong
correlation between the over-expression of HDAC4 and increased bladder cancer
occurrence (p < 0.001) as well as a marginal significance of increasing incidence
of HDAC4 positivity seen with an increase in severity of bladder cancer (p =
0.08). In addition, the results of our caspase 3 activation studies demonstrated 
that prior treatment with VPA increased the anticancer drug cisplatin-induced
activation of caspase 3 in both HTB4 and HTB9 cells. All of these results suggest
that the HDACs negatively regulate transcription of the XPC gene in bladder
cancer cells and contribute to the severity of bladder tumors.

PMCID: PMC3108377
PMID: 21507255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2011 Apr;31(2):169-73. doi:
10.1007/s11596-011-0245-2. Epub 2011 Apr 20.

PDGF-induced proliferation of smooth muscular cells is related to the regulation 
of CREB phosphorylation and Nur77 expression.

Wang L(1), Dong X, Zhou W, Zeng Q, Mao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Tongren Hospital, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430060,
China. lingtingheyue@163.com

This study examined the relationship between PDGF-induced proliferation of
vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) and Nur77 expression and the effect of
atorvastatin on VSMC proliferation and Nur77 in PDGF-treated VSMCs. Rat VSMCs
were isolated and cultured. After incubation with atorvastatin or Nur77 siRNA,
the cells were stimulated with PDGF and detected for BrdU incorporation to
measure the proliferation of the VSMCs. Quantitative PCR and Western blotting
were used to determine the Nur77 protein and the CREB phosphorylation level, to
observe their relations with PDGF-induced VSMC proliferation. Our results showed 
that PDGF increased the BrdU incorporation in VSMCs, suggesting that it induced
the proliferation of the cells. The VSMC proliferation was associated with
increased Nur77 expression and elevated CREB phosphorylation. Atorvastatin
inhibited the PDGF-induced VSMC proliferation, suppressed Nur77 expression. After
silencing of Nur77 gene, the PDGF-induced VSMC proliferation was decreased. It
was concluded that PDGF-induced VSMC proliferation was related to the Nur77
expression and CREB phosphorylation. Atorvastatin reduced the Nur77 expression
and, at the same time, inhibited the VSMC proliferation.

PMID: 21505978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Mol Cells. 2011 May;31(5):483-9. doi: 10.1007/s10059-011-1036-0. Epub 2011 Apr
14.

Lysophosphatidic acid induces neurite retraction in differentiated neuroblastoma 
cells via GSK-3ß activation.

Sun Y(1), Kim NH, Yang H, Kim SH, Huh SO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Institute of Natural
Medicine, Hallym University, Chunchon 200-702, Korea.

Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is a lipid growth factor that exerts diverse
biological effects, including rapid neurite retraction and cell migration.
Alterations in cell morphology, including neurite retraction, in
neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease involve
hyperphosphorylation of the cytoskeletal protein tau. Since LPA has been shown to
induce neurite retraction in various cultured neural cells and the detailed
underlying molecular mechanisms have not yet been elucidated, we investigated
whether LPA induced neurite retraction through taumediated signaling pathways in 
differentiated neuroblastoma cells. When Neuro2a cells differentiated with
retinoic acid (RA) were exposed to LPA, cells exhibited neurite retraction in a
time-dependent manner. The retraction of neurites was accompanied by the
phosphorylation of tau. The LPA-induced neurite retraction and tau
phosphorylation in differentiated Neuro2a cells were significantly abolished by
the glycogen synthase kinase-3ß (GSK-3ß) inhibitor lithium chloride.
Interestingly, the LPA-stimulated tau phosphorylation and neurite retraction were
markedly prevented by the administration of H89, an inhibitor of both cyclic-AMP 
dependent protein kinase (PKA) and cyclic-AMP response element-binding protein
(CREB). Transfection of the dominant-negative CREBs, K-CREB and A-CREB, failed to
prevent LPA-induced tau phosphorylation and neurite retraction in differentiated 
Neuro2a cells. Taken together, these results suggest that GSK-3ß and PKA, rather 
than CREB, play important roles in tau phosphorylation and neurite retraction in 
LPA-stimulated differentiated Neuro2a cells.

PMCID: PMC3887612
PMID: 21499833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2011 May;43(5):743-52. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e3182155d21.

Advances in exercise, fitness, and performance genomics in 2010.

Hagberg JM(1), Rankinen T, Loos RJ, Pérusse L, Roth SM, Wolfarth B, Bouchard C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kinesiology, School of Public Health, University of Maryland,
College Park, MD, USA.

This review of the exercise genomics literature emphasizes the strongest articles
published in 2010 as defined by sample size, quality of phenotype measurements,
quality of the exercise program or physical activity exposure, study design,
adjustment for multiple testing, quality of genotyping, and other related study
characteristics. One study on voluntary running wheel behavior was performed in
448 mice from 41 inbred strains. Several quantitative trait loci for running
distance, speed, and duration were identified. Several studies on the alpha-3
actinin (ACTN3) R577X nonsense polymorphism and the angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE) I/D polymorphism were reported with no clear evidence for a joint effect,
but the studies were generally underpowered. Skeletal muscle RNA abundance at
baseline for 29 transcripts and 11 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were
both found to be predictive of the V<U+02D9>O2max response to exercise training in one
report from multiple laboratories. None of the 50 loci associated with adiposity 
traits are known to influence physical activity behavior. However, physical
activity seems to reduce the obesity-promoting effects of at least 12 of these
loci. Evidence continues to be strong for a role of gene-exercise interaction
effects on the improvement in insulin sensitivity after exposure to regular
exercise. SNPs in the cAMP-responsive element binding position 1 (CREB1) gene
were associated with training-induced HR response, in the C-reactive protein
(CRP) gene with training-induced changes in left ventricular mass, and in the
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene with carotid stiffness in
low-fit individuals. We conclude that progress is being made but that
high-quality research designs and replication studies with large sample sizes are
urgently needed.

© 2011 by the American College of Sports Medicine

PMCID: PMC3951763
PMID: 21499051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2011 Jun 15;47(1):12-22. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2011.03.003.
Epub 2011 Apr 15.

Regulation of <U+03B3>-globin gene expression involves signaling through the p38
MAPK/CREB1 pathway.

Ramakrishnan V(1), Pace BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson, TX 75080, USA.

In response to sodium butyrate and trichostatin A treatment in erythroid cells,
p38 mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) mediates fetal hemoglobin (HbF)
induction by activating cAMP response element binding protein 1 (CREB1). To
expand on this observation, we completed studies to determine the role of p38
MAPK in steady-state <U+03B3>-globin regulation. We propose that p38 signaling regulates
G<U+03B3>-globin transcription during erythroid maturation through its downstream
effector CREB1 which binds the G<U+03B3>-globin cAMP response element (G-CRE). We
demonstrated that a loss of p38 or CREB1 function by siRNA knockdown resulted in 
target gene silencing. Moreover, gain of p38 or CREB1 function augments <U+03B3>-globin 
transcription. These regulatory effects were conserved under physiological
conditions tested in primary erythroid cells. When the G-CRE was mutated in a
stable chromatin environment G<U+03B3>-globin promoter activity was nearly abolished.
Furthermore, introduction of mutations in the G-CRE abolished G<U+03B3>-globin
activation via p38 MAPK/CREB1 signaling. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
(ChIP) demonstrated that CREB1 and its binding partner CREB binding protein (CBP)
co-localize at the G-CRE region. These data support the role of p38 MAPK/CREB1
signaling in G<U+03B3>-globin gene transcription under steady-state conditions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3695476
PMID: 21497119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 11;6(4):e18136. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018136.

Phosphodiesterase 10A upregulation contributes to pulmonary vascular remodeling.

Tian X(1), Vroom C, Ghofrani HA, Weissmann N, Bieniek E, Grimminger F, Seeger W, 
Schermuly RT, Pullamsetti SS.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Clinic II/V, University Hospital, Giessen, Germany.

Phosphodiesterases (PDEs) modulate the cellular proliferation involved in the
pathophysiology of pulmonary hypertension (PH) by hydrolyzing cAMP and cGMP. The 
present study was designed to determine whether any of the recently identified
PDEs (PDE7-PDE11) contribute to progressive pulmonary vascular remodeling in PH. 
All in vitro experiments were performed with lung tissue or pulmonary arterial
smooth muscle cells (PASMCs) obtained from control rats or monocrotaline
(MCT)-induced pulmonary hypertensive (MCT-PH) rats, and we examined the effects
of the PDE10 inhibitor papaverine (Pap) and specific small interfering RNA
(siRNA). In addition, papaverine was administrated to MCT-induced PH rats from
day 21 to day 35 by continuous intravenous infusion to examine the in vivo
effects of PDE10A inhibition. We found that PDE10A was predominantly present in
the lung vasculature, and the mRNA, protein, and activity levels of PDE10A were
all significantly increased in MCT PASMCs compared with control PASMCs.
Papaverine and PDE10A siRNA induced an accumulation of intracellular cAMP,
activated cAMP response element binding protein and attenuated PASMC
proliferation. Intravenous infusion of papaverine in MCT-PH rats resulted in a
40%-50% attenuation of the effects on pulmonary hypertensive hemodynamic
parameters and pulmonary vascular remodeling. The present study is the first to
demonstrate a central role of PDE10A in progressive pulmonary vascular
remodeling, and the results suggest a novel therapeutic approach for the
treatment of PH.

PMCID: PMC3073929
PMID: 21494592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Oral Sci. 2011 Mar;53(1):77-86.

Calcium hydroxide regulates bone sialoprotein gene transcription in human
osteoblast-like Saos2 cells.

Wang S(1), Sasaki Y, Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry, Chiba,
China.

Bone sialoprotein (BSP) is a mineralized tissue-specific protein expressed in
differentiated osteoblasts that appears to function in the initial mineralization
of bone. Calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH)(2)) is a basic salt that has been widely used 
for a variety of applications in dentistry, due to its antimicrobial effects and 
its capability of inducing hard tissue formation. However, details of the
mechanism involved in the mineralization induced by Ca(OH)(2) are still unclear. 
In the present study, Ca(OH)(2) (0.4 mM) was found to increase the levels of BSP 
and Runx2 mRNA at 3 h in human osteoblast-like Saos2 cells. Transient
transfection assays were performed using chimeric constructs of the human BSP
gene promoter linked to a luciferase reporter gene. Treatment of Saos2 cells with
Ca(OH)(2) (0.4 mM) increased the luciferase activities of the constructs between 
-60LUC and -927LUC at 12 h. Gel shift analysis showed that Ca(OH)(2) (0.4 mM)
increased the binding of nuclear protein to CRE1, CRE2 and FRE. Antibodies
against CREB1, c-Fos, c-Jun, JunD, Fra2 and P300 disrupted the formation of the
CRE1- and CRE2-protein complexes, and antibodies against Dlx5, Msx2, Runx2 and
Smad1 disrupted the formation of the FRE-protein complex. These findings
demonstrate that Ca(OH)(2) stimulates BSP transcription by targeting the CRE1,
CRE2 and FRE elements in the human BSP gene promoter.

PMID: 21467818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Toxicol In Vitro. 2011 Aug;25(5):1085-8. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2011.03.022. Epub
2011 Apr 3.

Involvement of PI3K/Akt/CREB and redox changes in mitochondrial defect of
osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells.

Choi EM(1), Lee YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food and Nutrition, Kyung Hee University, 1, Hoegi-Dong,
Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea. cheunmi@hanmail.net

Antimycin A (AMA) is an inhibitor of mitochondrial electron transport via its
binding to complex III. In the present study, the mechanisms involved in
AMA-induced cell damage were investigated. Treatment of osteoblastic MC3T3-E1
cells with AMA decreased adenosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate (cAMP) level,
activities of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and Akt (protein kinase B), and
phosphorylated CREB (cAMP-response element-binding protein). To examine whether
AMA-induced cell damage involves altered metabolism of pyridine nucleotides, the 
levels of NAD(+), NADH, NADP(+), and NADPH were measured. Treatment with AMA
significantly decreased the levels of NAD(+) and NADPH. Moreover, the activities 
of aconitase and thioredoxin reductase were decreased by AMA treatment. These
results suggest that PI3K/Akt/CREB pathway and pyridine nucleotide (NAD(+) and
NADPH) are related to mitochondria function of osteoblasts.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21466842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Breast Cancer Res. 2011 Apr 1;13(2):R36. doi: 10.1186/bcr2858.

Synergy between inhibitors of androgen receptor and MEK has therapeutic
implications in estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer.

Naderi A(1), Chia KM, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Princess Alexandra
Hospital, Ipswich Road, Brisbane, Queensland 4102, Australia. a.naderi@uq.edu.au

INTRODUCTION: Estrogen receptor-negative (ER-) breast cancer is a heterogeneous
disease with limited therapeutic options. The molecular apocrine subtype
constitutes 50% of ER-tumors and is characterized by overexpression of steroid
response genes including androgen receptor (AR). We have recently identified a
positive feedback loop between the AR and extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK) signaling pathways in the molecular apocrine subtype. In this feedback
loop, AR regulates ERK phosphorylation through the mediation of ErbB2 and, in
turn, ERK-CREB1 signaling regulates the transcription of AR in molecular apocrine
cells. In this study, we investigated the therapeutic implications of the AR-ERK 
feedback loop in molecular apocrine breast cancer.
METHODS: We examined a synergy between the AR inhibitor flutamide and the MEK
inhibitor CI-1040 in the molecular apocrine cell lines MDA-MB-453, HCC-1954 and
HCC-202 using MTT cell viability and annexin V apoptosis assays. Synergy was
measured using the combination index (CI) method. Furthermore, we examined in
vivo synergy between flutamide and the MEK inhibitor PD0325901 in a xenograft
model of the molecular apocrine subtype. The effects of in vivo therapies on
tumor growth, cell proliferation and angiogenesis were assessed.
RESULTS: We demonstrate synergistic CI values for combination therapy with
flutamide and CI-1040 across three molecular apocrine cell lines at four dose
combinations using both cell viability and apoptosis assays. Furthermore, we show
in vivo that combination therapy with flutamide and MEK inhibitor PD0325901 has a
significantly higher therapeutic efficacy in reducing tumor growth, cellular
proliferation and angiogenesis than monotherapy with these agents. Moreover, our 
data suggested that flutamide and CI-1040 have synergy in trastuzumab resistance 
models of the molecular apocrine subtype. Notably, the therapeutic effect of
combination therapy in trastuzumab-resistant cells was associated with the
abrogation of an increased level of ERK phosphorylation that was developed in the
process of trastuzumab resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we demonstrate in vitro and in vivo synergies between
AR and MEK inhibitors in molecular apocrine breast cancer. Furthermore, we show
that combination therapy with these inhibitors can overcome trastuzumab
resistance in molecular apocrine cells. Therefore, a combination therapy strategy
with AR and MEK inhibitors may provide an attractive therapeutic option for the
ER-/AR+ subtype of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3219199
PMID: 21457548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Exp Med. 2011 Apr 11;208(4):841-51. doi: 10.1084/jem.20102608. Epub 2011 Mar
28.

Genetic determination of the cellular basis of the sympathetic regulation of bone
mass accrual.

Kajimura D(1), Hinoi E, Ferron M, Kode A, Riley KJ, Zhou B, Guo XE, Karsenty G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA.

The sympathetic nervous system, whose activity is regulated by leptin signaling
in the brain, is a major regulator of bone mass accrual. To determine the
identity of the cell type in which the sympathetic tone signals to inhibit bone
mass accrual, we performed a systematic, cell-specific analysis of the function
of the ß2 adrenergic receptor (Adrß2) and various genes implicated in the pathway
in the mouse. This was followed by leptin intracerebroventricular (ICV) infusion 
and bone histomorphometric analyses of bone parameters. We show that the
sympathetic tone signals in the osteoblasts to inhibit CREB (cAMP-responsive
element-binding protein) phosphorylation and thus decrease osteoblast
proliferation and to promote ATF4 phosphorylation and thus increase RANKL
(receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B ligand) expression, which then stimulates osteoclast
differentiation. Leptin ICV infusion in various mouse models established that
leptin-dependent inhibition of bone mass accrual relies on both transcriptional
events taking place in osteoblasts. Thus, this study formally identifies the
osteoblast as the major cell type in which the molecular events triggered by the 
sympathetic regulation of bone mass accrual take place. As such, it suggests that
inhibiting sympathetic signaling could be beneficial in the treatment of low bone
mass conditions.

PMCID: PMC3135354
PMID: 21444660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Exp Dermatol. 2011 May;20(5):445-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2010.01236.x. Epub
2011 Mar 22.

5,7-dimethoxyflavone induces melanogenesis in B16F10 melanoma cells through
cAMP-dependent signalling.

Kang YG, Choi EJ, Choi Y, Hwang JK.

Melanin protects the skin against ultraviolet radiation (UVR) and diverse free
radicals. Agents that increase melanin synthesis in melanocytes may reduce
UVR-induced skin damage and skin cancer. In the present study, we evaluated the
effects of 5,7-dimethoxyflavone (5,7-DMF) on melanogenic protein expression and
signalling pathways. We found that 5,7-DMF significantly increased melanin
content by upregulating microphthalmia-associated transcription factor and
related melanogenic proteins. Additionally, 5,7-DMF increased cAMP levels, which 
activates a cascade of reactions, such as cAMP responsive element-binding protein
and Akt/glycogen synthase kinase-3ß (GSK-3ß) signalling. Thus, 5,7-DMF may be an 
effective pigmentation stimulator for photoprotection and hypopigmentation
disorders.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21426409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Hum Pathol. 2011 Sep;42(9):1359-63. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.12.003. Epub 2011
Mar 15.

Reticular angiomatoid "malignant" fibrous histiocytoma--a case report with
cytogenetics and molecular genetic analyses.

Moura RD(1), Wang X, Lonzo ML, Erickson-Johnson MR, García JJ, Oliveira AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Anatomic Pathology, Hospital das Clinicas, Sao Paulo University
School of Medicine, Sao Paulo 05410-000, Brazil.

Angiomatoid "malignant" fibrous histiocytoma is a rare sarcoma of low malignant
potential that occurs most commonly in the extremities of children and young
adults. Herein, we present a case of angiomatoid malignant fibrous histiocytoma
with unusual histologic features arising in the mediastinum of an 80-year-old
man. The tumor exhibited a reticular growth pattern and myxoid stroma. The tumor 
cells expressed epithelial membrane antigen and desmin. Cytogenetic analysis
revealed the translocation t(2;22)(q33;q12). Molecular genetic analysis confirmed
the rearrangement of the EWSR1 locus and the presence of the EWSR1/CREB1 fusion. 
This report expands the clinicopathologic spectrum of angiomatoid malignant
fibrous histiocytoma and underscores the value of integrating morphologic,
immunophenotypic, and molecular findings in the identification of its unusual
morphologic variants.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21411119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 8;6(3):e17843. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017843.

cAMP response element binding protein is required for differentiation of
respiratory epithelium during murine development.

Bird AD(1), Flecknoe SJ, Tan KH, Olsson PF, Antony N, Mantamadiotis T, Mollard R,
Hooper SB, Cole TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia. daniel.bird@monash.edu

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(1). doi:10.1371/annotation/ec04ad74-63cc-4fbe-9ad8-074a1d62fdf4.
Mollard, Richard [added].

The cAMP response element binding protein 1 (Creb1) transcription factor
regulates cellular gene expression in response to elevated levels of
intracellular cAMP. Creb1(-/-) fetal mice are phenotypically smaller than
wildtype littermates, predominantly die in utero and do not survive after birth
due to respiratory failure. We have further investigated the respiratory defect
of Creb1(-/-) fetal mice during development. Lungs of Creb1(-/-) fetal mice were 
pale in colour and smaller than wildtype controls in proportion to their reduced 
body size. Creb1(-/-) lungs also did not mature morphologically beyond E16.5 with
little or no expansion of airway luminal spaces, a phenotype also observed with
the Creb1(-/-) lung on a Crem(-/-) genetic background. Creb1 was highly expressed
throughout the lung at all stages examined, however activation of Creb1 was
detected primarily in distal lung epithelium. Cell differentiation of E17.5
Creb1(-/-) lung distal epithelium was analysed by electron microscopy and showed 
markedly reduced numbers of type-I and type-II alveolar epithelial cells.
Furthermore, immunomarkers for specific lineages of proximal epithelium including
ciliated, non-ciliated (Clara), and neuroendocrine cells showed delayed onset of 
expression in the Creb1(-/-) lung. Finally, gene expression analyses of the E17.5
Creb1(-/-) lung using whole genome microarray and qPCR collectively identified
respiratory marker gene profiles and provide potential novel Creb1-regulated
genes. Together, these results demonstrate a crucial role for Creb1 activity for 
the development and differentiation of the conducting and distal lung epithelium.

PMCID: PMC3050929
PMID: 21408140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Endocrinology. 2011 May;152(5):1829-38. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0828. Epub 2011 Mar 
15.

Inhibition of glyceroneogenesis by histone deacetylase 3 contributes to
lipodystrophy in mice with adipose tissue inflammation.

Zhang J(1), Henagan TM, Gao Z, Ye J.

Author information: 
(1)Antioxidant and Gene Regulation Laboratory, Pennington Biomedical Research
Center, Antioxidant and Gene Regulation, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70808, USA.
yej@pbrc.edu

We have reported that the nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) induces chronic inflammation 
in the adipose tissue of p65 transgenic (Tg) mice, in which the NF-<U+03BA>B subunit p65
(RelA) is overexpressed from the adipocyte protein 2 (aP2) gene promoter. Tg mice
suffer a mild lipodystrophy and exhibit deficiency in adipocyte differentiation. 
To understand molecular mechanism of the defect in adipocytes, we investigated
glyceroneogenesis by examining the activity of cytosolic phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase (PEPCK) in adipocytes. In aP2-p65 Tg mice, Pepck expression is
inhibited at both the mRNA and protein levels in adipose tissue. The mRNA
reduction is a consequence of transcriptional inhibition but not alteration in
mRNA stability. The Pepck gene promoter is inhibited by NF-<U+03BA>B, which enhances the
corepressor activity through activation of histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) in the
nucleus. HDAC3 suppresses Pepck transcription by inhibiting the transcriptional
activators, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3>, and cAMP response
element binding protein. The NF-<U+03BA>B activity is abolished by Hdac3 knockdown or
inhibition of HDAC3 catalytic activity. In a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay,
HDAC3 interacts with peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> and cAMP
response element binding protein in the Pepck promoter when NF-<U+03BA>B is activated by
TNF-a. These results suggest that HDAC3 mediates NF-<U+03BA>B activity to repress Pepck 
transcription. This mechanism is responsible for inhibition of glyceroneogenesis 
in adipocytes, which contributes to lipodystrophy in the aP2-p65 Tg mice.

PMCID: PMC3075929
PMID: 21406501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Neoplasia. 2011 Feb;13(2):154-66.

A feedback loop between androgen receptor and ERK signaling in estrogen
receptor-negative breast cancer.

Chia KM(1), Liu J, Francis GD, Naderi A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Princess Alexandra Hospital,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

Estrogen receptor (ER)-negative breast cancer is heterogeneous, and the biology
of this disease has remained poorly understood. Molecular apocrine is a subtype
of ER-negative breast cancer that is characterized by the overexpression of
steroid-response genes such as AR and a high rate of ErbB2 amplification. In this
study, we have identified a positive feedback loop between the AR and
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling pathways in molecular
apocrine breast cancer. In this process, AR regulates ERK phosphorylation and
kinase activity. In addition, AR inhibition results in the down-regulation of ERK
target proteins phospho-RSK1, phospho-Elk-1, and c-Fos using an in vivo molecular
apocrine model. Furthermore, we show that AR-mediated induction of ERK requires
ErbB2, and AR activity, in turn, regulates ErbB2 expression as an AR target gene.
These findings suggest that ErbB2 is an upstream connector between the AR and ERK
signaling pathways. Another feature of this feedback loop is an ERK-mediated
regulation of AR. In this respect, the inhibition of ERK phosphorylation reduces 
AR expression and CREB1-mediated transcriptional regulation of AR acts as a
downstream connector between the AR and ERK signaling pathways in molecular
apocrine cells. Finally, we demonstrate that AR-positive staining is associated
with the overexpression of ERK signaling targets phospho-Elk-1 and c-Fos in
ER-negative breast tumors, which further supports a cross-regulation between the 
AR and ERK signaling pathways in molecular apocrine subtype. This study
demonstrates an AR-ERK feedback loop in ER-negative breast cancer with
significant biologic and therapeutic implications in this disease.

PMCID: PMC3033594
PMID: 21403841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Cell Signal. 2011 Jul;23(7):1179-87. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2011.03.005. Epub
2011 Mar 21.

Functional regulation of transient receptor potential canonical 7 by
cGMP-dependent protein kinase Ia.

Yuasa K(1), Matsuda T, Tsuji A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, The University of Tokushima
Graduate School, 21 Minamijosanjima, Tokushima, Japan.
yuasa@bio.tokushima-u.ac.jp

The cGMP/cGMP-dependent protein kinase (cGK) signaling pathway is implicated in
the functional regulation of intracellular calcium levels. In the present study, 
we investigated the regulation of transient receptor potential canonical 7
(TRPC7) by the cGMP/cGK-I pathway. TRPC7 contains three putative cGK
phosphorylation sites (Arg-Arg/Lys-Xaa-Ser/Thr). However, the role of cGK-I in
the regulation of TRPC7 activity remains unclear. In vitro and in vivo kinase
assays have revealed that cGK-Ia phosphorylates mouse TRPC7 but not mouse TRPC3. 
Site-directed mutagenesis analysis revealed that TRPC7 was phosphorylated by
cGK-Ia at threonine 15. Phosphorylation of TRPC7 significantly suppressed
carbachol-induced calcium influx and CREB phosphorylation. Furthermore,
co-immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated that cGK-Ia interacted with the ankyrin
repeat domain in the N terminus of TRPC7. cGK-Iß also bound to TRPC7, while the
type II regulatory subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase did not bind. These
data indicate that cGK-Ia interacts with and phosphorylates TRPC7, contributing
to the quick and accurate regulation of calcium influx and CREB phosphorylation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21402151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Neurosci. 2011 Mar 2;31(9):3295-308. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4540-10.2011.

Identification of cis-elements and transcription factors regulating neuronal
activity-dependent transcription of human BDNF gene.

Pruunsild P(1), Sepp M, Orav E, Koppel I, Timmusk T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, 12618 Tallinn,
Estonia. priit.pruunsild@ttu.ee

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is an important mediator of
activity-dependent functions of the nervous system and its expression is
dysregulated in several neuropsychiatric disorders. Regulation of rodent BDNF
neuronal activity-dependent transcription has been relatively well characterized.
Here, we have studied regulation of human BDNF (hBDNF) transcription by membrane 
depolarization of cultured mouse or rat primary cortical neurons expressing hBDNF
gene or transfected with hBDNF promoter constructs, respectively. We identified
an asymmetric E-box-like element, PasRE [basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-PAS
transcription factor response element], in hBDNF promoter I and demonstrate that 
binding of this element by bHLH-PAS transcription factors ARNT2 (aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator 2) and NPAS4 (neuronal PAS domain protein 4) is
crucial for neuronal activity-dependent transcription from promoter I. We show
that binding of CREB (cAMP response element-binding protein) to the
cAMP/Ca(2+)-response element (CRE) in hBDNF promoter IV is critical for
activity-dependent transcription from this promoter and that upstream stimulatory
factor (USF) transcription factors also contribute to the activation by binding
to the upstream stimulatory factor binding element (UBE) in hBDNF promoter IV.
However, we report that full induction of hBDNF exon IV mRNA transcription is
dependent on ARNT2 and NPAS4 binding to a PasRE in promoter IV. Finally, we
demonstrate that CRE and PasRE elements in hBDNF promoter IX are required for the
induction of this promoter by neuronal activity. Together, the results of this
study have identified the cis-elements and transcription factors regulating
neuronal activity-dependent transcription of human BDNF gene.

PMID: 21368041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Jul 1;91(1):80-9. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvr067. Epub 2011 Mar 2.

Angiotensin II increases periostin expression via Ras/p38 MAPK/CREB and
ERK1/2/TGF-ß1 pathways in cardiac fibroblasts.

Li L(1), Fan D, Wang C, Wang JY, Cui XB, Wu D, Zhou Y, Wu LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Peking University Health Science
Center, and Key Laboratory of Molecular Cardiovascular Sciences, Ministry of
Education, Beijing 100191, China.

AIMS: Angiotensin II (AngII) is involved in extracellular matrix (ECM)
accumulation contributing to heart failure. Periostin, a 90 kDa ECM protein, is a
key regulator of cardiac fibrosis, and its expression is significantly higher in 
failing hearts. We determined the modulatory effect of AngII on periostin level
and explored the possible signal transduction mechanism.
METHODS AND RESULTS: AngII (400 ng/kg/min) or normal saline was infused
subcutaneously for 28 days into rats; AngII antagonism was with losartan (10
mg/kg/day orally). AngII infusion induced cardiac fibrosis and increased
periostin expression, which was attenuated by losartan. In cultured adult rat
cardiac fibroblasts, AngII promoted the mRNA and protein expression of periostin.
AngII provoked activation of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB), and
CREB small interfering RNA (siRNA) suppressed AngII-induced periostin expression.
Inhibition of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK) with SB202190
attenuated AngII-induced CREB activation and periostin expression. Transfection
with Ras guanyl-releasing protein 1 siRNA or RasN17 dominant-negative plasmid
prevented AngII-induced p38 MAPK phosphorylation and periostin expression.
Transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß1 antibody decreased the stimulatory effect of 
AngII on periostin expression. The extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2
(ERK1/2) inhibitor PD98059 attenuated AngII-induced TGF-ß1 expression, Smad2/3
nuclear accumulation, and periostin expression.
CONCLUSION: The activation of the Ras/p38 MAPK/CREB pathway is required for
AngII-induced periostin expression. ERK1/2 also participates in AngII-induced
periostin expression by regulating TGF-ß1/Smad signalling.

PMID: 21367774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Dec;226(12):3261-9. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22687.

Mapping the CRF-urocortins system in human osteoarthritic and rheumatoid synovial
fibroblasts: effect of vasoactive intestinal peptide.

Pérez-García S(1), Juarranz Y, Carrión M, Gutiérrez-Cañas I, Margioris A, Pablos 
JL, Tsatsanis C, Gomariz RP.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Celular, Facultad de Biología, Universidad
Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

In addition to the brain and pituitary gland, the corticotrophin-releasing factor
(CRF) system is expressed in peripheral tissues. In this study we characterize
the expression of CRF, urocortins (UCN1, UCN2, and UCN3), and their receptors
(CRFR1 and CRFR2) in osteoarthritis (OA) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS). Moreover, we analyze the vasoactive
intestinal peptide (VIP) effect on the CRF system, as well as its physiological
consequences on mediators of inflammatory/destructive processes. CRF and UCNs
exhibit differential pattern in OA and RA-FLS. By real-time PCR we detected more 
expression of CRF and UCN1 in RA, and UCN2 and UCN3 in OA, while the CRFR2
expression was similar. In RA-FLS VIP treatment resulted in a significant
decrease of the proinflammatory peptides, CRF and UCN1, and a significant
increase of the potential anti-inflammatory agents, UCN3 and CRFR2. Using Western
blot assays, we showed that the ratio between phospho-CREB (p-CREB) and c-AMP
response element-binding (CREB) is higher in OA and significantly lower in RA-FLS
after VIP treatment, with consequences upon cAMP response element in CRF and UCN1
genes. Real-time PCR and EIA proved that VIP significantly inhibits
cycloxygenase-2 (COX-2) and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) in RA-FLS. In all cases, we
consider significant data when P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05. These data indicate a role of endogenous
CRF, UCNs, and CRFR2 in the OA and RA joint microenvironment. We confirm the
anti-inflammatory function of VIP, through the modulation of the expression of
CRF system that impacts in a reduction of mediators with inflammatory/destructive
functions, supporting its therapeutic potential in rheumatic diseases.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21360527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Am J Pathol. 2011 Mar;178(3):1153-66. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2010.11.052.

ß-Caryophyllene inhibits dextran sulfate sodium-induced colitis in mice through
CB2 receptor activation and PPAR<U+03B3> pathway.

Bento AF(1), Marcon R, Dutra RC, Claudino RF, Cola M, Leite DF, Calixto JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Biological Sciences Center, Federal University of 
Santa Catarina Florianópolis, Santa Catarina, Brazil.

Cannabinoid receptor 2 (CB2) activation is suggested to trigger the peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) pathway, and agonists of both receptors
improve colitis. Recently, the plant metabolite (E)-ß-caryophyllene (BCP) was
shown to bind to and activate CB2. In this study, we examined the
anti-inflammatory effect of BCP in dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis
and analyzed whether this effect was mediated by CB2 and PPAR<U+03B3>. Oral treatment
with BCP reduced disease activity, colonic macro- and microscopic damage,
myeloperoxidase and N-acetylglucosaminidase activities, and levels and mRNA
expression of colonic tumor necrosis factor-a, IL-1ß, interferon-<U+03B3>, and
keratinocyte-derived chemokine. BCP treatment also inhibited the activation of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2, nuclear factor <U+03BA>B, I<U+03BA>B-kinase a/ß,
cAMP response element binding and the expression of caspase-3 and Ki-67.
Moreover, BCP enhanced IL-4 levels and forkhead box P3 mRNA expression in the
mouse colon and reduced cytokine levels (tumor necrosis factor-a,
keratinocyte-derived chemokine, and macrophage-inflammatory protein-2) in a
culture of macrophages stimulated with lipopolysaccharide. The use of the CB2
antagonist AM630 or the PPAR<U+03B3> antagonist GW9662 significantly reversed the
protective effect of BCP. Confirming our results, AM630 reversed the beneficial
effect of BCP on pro-inflammatory cytokine expression in IEC-6 cells. These
results demonstrate that the anti-inflammatory effect of BCP involves CB2 and the
PPAR<U+03B3> pathway and suggest BCP as a possible therapy for the treatment of
inflammatory bowel disease.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3070571
PMID: 21356367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Nutr Biochem. 2012 Jan;23(1):18-26. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2010.10.007. Epub
2011 Feb 17.

Zinc differentially regulates mitogen-activated protein kinases in human T cells.

Hönscheid A(1), Dubben S, Rink L, Haase H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, 52074
Aachen, Germany.

Zinc is an essential nutrient with remarkable importance for immunity, in
particular for T-cell function. This is, at least in part, based on an
involvement of zinc ions in immune cell signal transduction; dynamic changes of
the intracellular free zinc concentration have recently been recognized as
signaling events. Because the molecular targets of zinc signals remain
incompletely understood, we investigated the impact of elevated intracellular
free zinc on mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) activity and MAPK-dependent 
cytokine production in human T-cells. p38 was activated by treatment with zinc
and the ionophore pyrithione, whereas ERK1/2 and c-Jun N-terminal kinases were
unaffected. In contrast, after T-cell receptor stimulation with antibodies
against CD3, ERK1/2-phosphorylation was selectively suppressed by intracellular
zinc. Mechanisms that had been shown to mediate zinc-effects in other cells, such
as activation of the Src kinase Lck, inhibition of the protein tyrosine
phosphatase CD45 or MAPK phosphatases and cyclic nucleotide/protein kinase A
signaling were not involved. This indicates that the differential impact of zinc 
on the MAPK families in T-cells is mediated by mechanisms that differ from the
ones observed in other cell types. Further investigation of the activation of p38
by zinc demonstrated that this MAPK is responsible for the zinc-mediated
activation of CREB and mRNA expression of the Th1 cytokines interferon-gamma and 
interleukin-2. In conclusion, regulation of MAPK activity contributes to the
impact of zinc on T-cell function.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21333516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Mar;112(3):756-60. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23002.

Nuclear protein isoforms: implications for cancer diagnosis and therapy.

Shen F(1), Kirmani KZ, Xiao Z, Thirlby BH, Hickey RJ, Malkas LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Post-translational modifications (PTMs) of nuclear proteins play essential roles 
in the regulation of gene transcription and signal transduction pathways.
Numerous studies have demonstrated a correlation between specific nuclear protein
isoforms and cellular malignant process. This communication reviews the impact of
major PTM events such as phosphorylation, acetylation, methylation,
ubiquitination, and sumoylation on several important nuclear proteins including
p53, histones, proliferating cellular nuclear antigen (PCNA), and retinoblastoma 
protein (Rb) in the process. In addition, the implications of the PTMs as cancer 
biomarkers and therapeutic targets are considered.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3080020
PMID: 21328449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Apr;112(4):1046-54. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23017.

Effects of p-CREB-1 on transforming growth factor-ß3 auto-regulation in hepatic
stellate cells.

Deng L(1), Li Y, Huang JM, Zhou Gy, Qian W, Xu Ks.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical Collage,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, PR China.

Previous studies have demonstrated that transforming growth factor-ß3 (TGF-ß3)
protected liver against fibrosis in vivo and vitro, but its regulation is poorly 
understood. In addition, the cAMP-responsive element (CRE) in TGF-ß3 promoter is 
recognized as an important regulatory site for TGF-ß3 auto-regulation. Thus, we
hypothesize that transcription factor CRE-binding protein-1 (CREB-1) regulates
the auto-induction of TGF-ß3 in hepatic stellate cells (HSCs). We used exogenous 
TGF-ß3 to activate the signal pathway of TGF-ß3 auto-regulation in HSCs, results 
indicated that exogenous TGF-ß3 could up-regulate the protein and mRNA
expressions of TGF-ß3, and provoke the phosphorylation of CREB-1 on Ser-133,
besides, it could induce the DNA binding activity of p-CREB-1 and activate TGF-ß3
promoter as well. Additionally, we used pGenesil-1.1-shRNA-CREB-1 and pRSV-CREB-1
expression vector to silence and up-regulate CREB-1 gene expression respectively,
and the results indicated that inhibition of CREB-1 suppressed exogenous TGF-ß3
stimulation of TGF-ß3 mRNA and protein expressions in HSCs, whereas up-regulation
of CREB-1 induced this stimulation. Our results indicate that exogenous TGF-ß3
up-regulates the activity of TGF-ß3 promoter by activating CREB-1, then induces
the mRNA and protein expressions of TGF-ß3. Especially, p-CREB-1 is a critical
transcription factor in mediating TGF-ß3 auto-induction.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21308733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Mar 4;406(1):79-84. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.01.114. Epub 2011 Feb 3.

CREB represses p53-dependent transactivation of MDM2 through the complex
formation with p53 and contributes to p53-mediated apoptosis in response to
glucose deprivation.

Okoshi R(1), Kubo N, Nakashima K, Shimozato O, Nakagawara A, Ozaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Anti-tumor Research, Chiba Cancer Center Research Institute,
Chiba 260-8717, Japan.

Recently, we have described that CREB (cAMP-responsive element-binding protein)
has the ability to transactivate tumor suppressor p53 gene in response to glucose
deprivation. In this study, we have found that CREB forms a complex with p53 and 
represses p53-mediated transactivation of MDM2 but not of p21(WAF1).
Immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that CREB interacts with p53 in response to
glucose deprivation. Forced expression of CREB significantly attenuated the
up-regulation of the endogenous MDM2 in response to p53. By contrast, the mutant 
form of CREB lacking DNA-binding domain (CREB<U+0394>) had an undetectable effect on the
expression level of the endogenous MDM2. During the glucose deprivation-mediated 
apoptosis, there existed an inverse relationship between the expression levels of
MDM2 and p53/CREB. Additionally, p53/CREB complex was dissociated from MDM2
promoter in response to glucose deprivation. Collectively, our present results
suggest that CREB preferentially down-regulates MDM2 and thereby contributing to 
p53-mediated apoptosis in response to glucose deprivation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21295542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Ann Neurol. 2011 Jan;69(1):34-46. doi: 10.1002/ana.22234. Epub 2010 Nov 17.

5-lipoxygenase as an endogenous modulator of amyloid ß formation in vivo.

Chu J(1), Praticò D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Comment in
    Ann Neurol. 2011 Apr;69(4):739; author reply 739-40.

OBJECTIVE: The 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO) enzymatic pathway is widely distributed
within the central nervous system, and is upregulated in Alzheimer's disease.
However, the mechanism whereby it may influence the disease pathogenesis remains 
elusive.
METHODS: We evaluated the molecular mechanism by which 5-LO regulates amyloid ß
(Aß) formation in vitro and in vivo by pharmacological and genetic approaches.
RESULTS: Here we show that 5-LO regulates the formation of Aß by activating the
cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB), which in turn increases
transcription of the <U+03B3>-secretase complex. Preventing CREB activation by
pharmacologic inhibition or dominant negative mutants blocks the 5-LO-dependent
elevation of Aß formation and the increase of <U+03B3>-secretase mRNA and protein
levels. Moreover, 5-LO targeted gene disruption or its in vivo selective
pharmacological inhibition results in a significant reduction of Aß, CREB and
<U+03B3>-secretase levels.
INTERPRETATION: These data establish a novel functional role for 5-LO in
regulating endogenous formation of Aß levels in the central nervous system. Thus,
5-LO pharmacological inhibition may be beneficial in the treatment and prevention
of Alzheimer's disease.

Copyright © 2010 American Neurological Association.

PMCID: PMC3051361
PMID: 21280074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2011 Oct;45(4):692-703. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2010-0240OC.
Epub 2011 Jan 28.

Treprostinil inhibits the adhesion and differentiation of fibrocytes via the
cyclic adenosine monophosphate-dependent and Ras-proximate protein-dependent
inactivation of extracellular regulated kinase.

Nikam VS(1), Wecker G, Schermuly R, Rapp U, Szelepusa K, Seeger W, Voswinckel R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Lung Development and Remodeling, Max Planck Institute for Heart 
and Lung Research, Parkstrasse 1, 61231 Bad Nauheim, Germany.

Fibrocytes comprise a recently described cell type of blood-derived,
fibroblast-like cells that are recruited from the circulation to sites of wound
repair, vascular remodeling, or fibrotic tissue remodeling. We recently showed
that the stable prostacyclin analogue treprostinil, a clinically approved drug
for pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), significantly reduced the recruitment 
of fibrocytes to sites of vascular remodeling in experimental hypoxic pulmonary
hypertension. Here we report on the molecular mechanism underlying the inhibitory
action of treprostinil on the adhesion and differentiation of human fibrocytes.
Human fibrocytes expressed the prostanoid receptors, prostaglandin I (IP)
receptors and prostaglandin E subtype receptors (EP2 and EP4). The generation of 
intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) by treprostinil reduced the
expression of the integrins CD49 and CD29 when freshly isolated human peripheral 
blood mononuclear cells were treated with treprostinil. Cell-matrix adhesion was 
significantly impaired by treatment with treprostinil. We present evidence for a 
treprostinil/cAMP-induced downstream suppression of extracellular regulated
kinase (ERK) that is transmitted via a protein kinase A-independent pathway
through Rap proteins, which sequester Ras. The resulting dephosphorylated state
of c-Raf limits the activity of ERK. The cell-matrix adhesion assay with the ERK 
inhibitor further confirmed that the adhesion of fibrocytes was impaired. Thus
our data suggest that treprostinil inhibits the adhesion and differentiation of
fibrocytes by limiting the activity of ERK via the cAMP-Rap axis.

PMID: 21278326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Gene. 2011 May 1;476(1-2):46-55. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2011.01.016. Epub 2011 Jan
26.

Transcriptional regulation of bone sialoprotein gene by interleukin-11.

Wang S(1), Sasaki Y, Zhou L, Matsumura H, Araki S, Mezawa M, Takai H, Chen Z,
Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Chiba, 271-8587, Japan.

Interleukin-11 (IL-11) is a stromal cell-derived cytokine that belongs to the
interleukin-6 family of cytokines. IL-11 has many biological activities and has
roles in hematopoiesis, immune responses, the nervous system and bone metabolism.
Bone sialoprotein (BSP) is a mineralized tissue-specific protein expressed in
differentiated osteoblasts that appears to function in the initial mineralization
of bone. IL-11 (20 ng/ml) increased BSP mRNA and protein levels at 12h in
osteoblast-like ROS 17/2.8 cells. In a transient transfection assay, IL-11 (20
ng/ml) increased luciferase activity of the construct (-116 to +60) in ROS 17/2.8
cells and rat bone marrow stromal cells. Introduction of 2 bp mutations to the
luciferase constructs showed that the effects of IL-11 were mediated by a cAMP
response element (CRE), a fibroblast growth factor 2 response element (FRE) and a
homeodomain protein-binding site (HOX). Luciferase activities induced by IL-11
were blocked by protein kinase A inhibitor, tyrosine kinase inhibitor and ERK1/2 
inhibitor. Gel shift analyses showed that IL-11 (20 ng/ml) increased nuclear
protein binding to CRE, FRE and HOX. CREB1, phospho-CREB1, c-Fos, c-Jun, JunD and
Fra2 antibodies disrupted the formation of CRE-protein complexes. Dlx5, Msx2,
Runx2 and Smad1 antibodies disrupted FRE- and HOX-protein complex formations.
These studies demonstrate that IL-11 stimulates BSP transcription by targeting
CRE, FRE and HOX sites in the proximal promoter of the rat BSP gene. Moreover,
phospho-CREB1, c-Fos, c-Jun, JunD, Fra2, Dlx5, Msx2, Runx2 and Smadl
transcription factors appear to be key regulators of IL-11 effects on BSP
transcription.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21276840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2011 Nov;14(10):1315-25. doi:
10.1017/S1461145710001628. Epub 2011 Jan 28.

MicroRNA expression in rat brain exposed to repeated inescapable shock:
differential alterations in learned helplessness vs. non-learned helplessness.

Smalheiser NR(1), Lugli G, Rizavi HS, Zhang H, Torvik VI, Pandey GN, Davis JM,
Dwivedi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Psychiatric Institute, Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

MicroRNA (miRNA) expression was measured within frontal cortex of male Holtzman
rats subjected to repeated inescapable shocks at days 1 and 7, tested for learned
helplessness (LH) at days 2 and 8, and sacrificed at day 15. We compared rats
that did vs. did not exhibit LH, as well as rats that were placed in the
apparatus and tested for avoidance but not given shocks (tested controls, TC).
Non-learned helpless (NLH) rats showed a robust adaptive miRNA response to
inescapable shock whereas LH rats showed a markedly blunted response. One set of 
12 miRNAs showed particularly large, significant down-regulation in NLH rats
relative to tested controls (mir-96, 141, 182, 183, 183*, 298, 200a, 200a*, 200b,
200b*, 200c, 429). These were encoded at a few shared polycistronic loci,
suggesting that the down-regulation was coordinately controlled at the level of
transcription. Most of these miRNAs are enriched in synaptic fractions. Moreover,
almost all of these share 5'-seed motifs with other members of the same set,
suggesting that they will hit similar or overlapping sets of target mRNAs.
Finally, half of this set is predicted to hit Creb1 as a target. We also
identified a core miRNA co-expression module consisting of 36 miRNAs that are
highly correlated with each other across individuals of the LH group (but not in 
the NLH or TC groups). Thus, miRNAs participate in the alterations of gene
expression networks that underlie the normal (NLH) as well as aberrant (LH)
response to repeated shocks.

PMID: 21275079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2011 Jun;31(6):1412-23. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2010.230.
Epub 2011 Jan 19.

Prophylactic neuroprotection against stroke: low-dose, prolonged treatment with
deferoxamine or deferasirox establishes prolonged neuroprotection independent of 
HIF-1 function.

Zhao Y(1), Rempe DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Center for Neural Development and Disease, The
Interdepartmental Graduate Program in Neuroscience, University of Rochester
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

Prophylactic neuroprotection against stroke could reduce stroke burden in
thousands of patients at high risk of stroke, including those with recent
transient ischemic attacks (TIAs). Prolyl hydroxylase inhibitors (PHIs), such as 
deferoxamine (DFO), reduce stroke volume when administered at high doses in the
peristroke period, which is largely mediated by the hypoxia-inducible
transcription factor (HIF-1). Yet, in vitro experiments suggest that PHIs may
also induce neuroprotection independent of HIF-1. In this study, we examine
chronic, prophylactic, low-dose treatment with DFO, or another iron chelator
deferasirox (DFR), to determine whether they are neuroprotective with this
paradigm and mediate their effects through a HIF-1-dependent mechanism. In fact, 
prophylactic administration of low-dose DFO or DFR significantly reduces stroke
volume. Surprisingly, DFO remained neuroprotective in mice haploinsufficient for 
HIF-1 (HIF-1+/-) and transgenic mice with conditional loss of HIF-1 function in
neurons and astrocytes. Similarly, DFR was neuroprotective in HIF-1+/- mice.
Neither DFO nor DFR induced expression of HIF-1 targets. Thus, low-dose chronic
administration of DFO or DFR induced a prolonged neuroprotective state
independent of HIF-1 function. As DFR is an orally administered and
well-tolerated medication in clinical use, it has promise for prophylaxis against
stroke in patients at high risk of stroke.

PMCID: PMC3130314
PMID: 21245873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Virus Res. 2011 Mar;156(1-2):81-90. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2011.01.001. Epub
2011 Jan 12.

The X protein of HBV induces HIV-1 long terminal repeat transcription by
enhancing the binding of C/EBPß and CREB1/2 regulatory proteins to the long
terminal repeat of HIV-1.

Mu Y(1), Yu Y, Yue X, Musarat I, Gong R, Zhu C, Liu Y, Liu F, Zhu Y, Wu J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, and Chinese-French
Liver Disease Research Institute at Zhongnan Hospital, Wuhan University, Wuhan
430072, PR China.

Due to share the route of transmission, the prevalence of co-infection of
hepatitis B virus (HBV) and human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) is high with
chronic HBV infection affecting nearly 10% of HIV-infected patient world wide,
which has become a significant global health problem. However, the cellular and
molecular mechanisms associated with HBV/HIV-1 co-infection are largely unclear. 
In this study, we provided evidence that HBV induces HIV-1 transcription through 
its X protein (HBx). We further explored the mechanism by which HBx activates
HIV-1 transcription. Our results showed that C/EBP and CRE cis-regulatory
elements in the long terminal repeats (LTR) of HIV-1 are required for the
activation of HIV-1 transcription mediated by HBx. We also demonstrated that HBx 
regulates HIV-1 transcription through stimulating the binding of transcriptional 
regulatory proteins C/EBPß, CREB1, and CREB2 to HIV-1 LTR and that co-activator
CBP is required for such regulation. These findings provide new insights into our
understanding the effect of HBx on the activation of HIV-1 transcription and also
provide evidence of the potential role of HBV in HIV-1 replication during the
course of HBV/HIV-1 co-infection.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 21237225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2011 Nov;14(10):1289-300. doi:
10.1017/S1461145710001550. Epub 2011 Jan 12.

Antidepressants elevate GDNF expression and release from C6 glioma cells in a
ß-arrestin1-dependent, CREB interactive pathway.

Golan M(1), Schreiber G, Avissar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty for Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University
of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel. golanmor@bgu.ac.il

Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), essential for neuronal
survival, plasticity and development, has been implicated in the mechanism of
action of antidepressant drugs (ADs). ß-arrestin1, a member of the arrestin
protein family, was found to play a role in AD mechanism of action. The present
study aimed at evaluating whether the effect of ADs on GDNF in C6 rat glioma
cells is exerted through a ß-arrestin1-dependent, CREB-interactive pathway. For
chronic treatment, C6 rat glioma cells were treated for 3 d with different
classes of ADs: imipramine - a non-selective monoamine reuptake inhibitor,
citalopram - a serotonin selective reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) or desipramine - a
norepinephrine selective reuptake inhibitor (NSRI) and compared to mood
stabilizers (lithium and valproic acid) or to the antipsychotic haloperidol. Only
ADs significantly elevated ß-arrestin1 levels in the cytosol, while reducing
phospho-ß-arrestin1 levels in the cell nuclear fraction. ADs significantly
increased both GDNF expression and release from the cells, but were unable to
induce such effects in ß-arrestin1 knock-down cells. Chronic AD treatment
significantly increased CREB phosphorylation without altering the level of total 
CREB in the nuclear fraction of the cells. Moreover, treatment with ADs
significantly increased ß-arrestin1/CREB interaction. These findings support the 
involvement of ß-arrestin1 in the mechanism of action of ADs. We suggest that
following AD treatment, ß-arrestin1 generates a transcription complex involving
CREB essential for GDNF expression and release, thus enhancing GDNF's
neuroprotective action that promotes cellular survival and plasticity when the
survival and function of neurons is compromised as occurs in major depression.

PMID: 21223624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Biol Psychiatry. 2011 Apr 15;69(8):762-71. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2010.11.019.
Epub 2011 Jan 7.

The CREB1-BDNF-NTRK2 pathway in depression: multiple gene-cognition-environment
interactions.

Juhasz G(1), Dunham JS, McKie S, Thomas E, Downey D, Chase D, Lloyd-Williams K,
Toth ZG, Platt H, Mekli K, Payton A, Elliott R, Williams SR, Anderson IM, Deakin 
JF.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience and Psychiatry Unit, University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom. gabriella.juhasz@manchester.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: The neuroplastic pathway, which includes cyclic adenosine
monophosphate response element-binding protein 1 (CREB1), brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF), and its receptor (neurotrophic tyrosine kinase
receptor, type 2 [NTRK2]), plays a crucial role in the adaptation of brain to
stress, and thus variations of these genes are plausible risk factors for
depression.
METHODS: A population-based sample was recruited, subsets of which were
interviewed and underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging. We investigated 
the association of nine polymorphisms throughout the CREB1-BDNF-NTRK2 pathway
with lifetime depression, rumination, current depression severity, negative life 
events, and sad face emotion processing in a three-level design.
RESULTS: In the population study, BDNF-rs6265 and CREB1-rs2253206 major alleles
were significantly associated with rumination and through rumination with current
depression severity. However, childhood adversity increased the risk of lifetime 
depression in the minor allele carriers of BDNF-rs6265 and CREB1-rs2253206 and in
alleles of six other single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). We validated our
findings in the interviewed subjects using structural equation modeling. Finally,
using functional magnetic resonance imaging, we found that viewing sad faces
evoked greater activity in depression-related areas in healthy control subjects
possessing the minor alleles of BDNF-rs6265 and CREB1-rs2253206.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic variation associated with reduced function in the
CREB1-BDNF-NTRK2 pathway has multiple, sometimes opposing, influences on risk
mechanisms of depression, but almost all the SNPs studied amplified the effect of
childhood adversity. The use of cognitive and neural intermediate phenotypes
together with a molecular pathway approach may be critical to understanding how
genes influence risk of depression.

Copyright © 2011 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 21215389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 11;286(10):8094-105. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.178186. Epub
2011 Jan 5.

Lack of cAMP-response element-binding protein 1 in the hypothalamus causes
obesity.

Chiappini F(1), Cunha LL, Harris JC, Hollenberg AN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

The melanocortin system in the hypothalamus controls food intake and energy
expenditure. Its disruption causes severe obesity in mice and humans.
cAMP-response element-binding protein 1 (CREB1) has been postulated to play an
important role downstream of the melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R), but this
hypothesis has never been confirmed in vivo. To test this, we generated mice that
lack CREB1 in SIM1-expressing neurons, of the paraventricular nucleus (PVN),
which are known to be MC4R-positive. Interestingly, CREB1(<U+0394>SIM1) mice developed
obesity as a result of decreased energy expenditure and impairment in maintaining
their core body temperature and not because of hyperphagia, defining a new role
for CREB1 in the PVN. In addition, the lack of CREB1 in the PVN caused a
reduction in vasopressin expression but did not affect adrenal or thyroid
function. Surprisingly, MC4R function tested pharmacologically was normal in
CREB1(<U+0394>SIM1) mice, suggesting that CREB1 is not required for intact MC4R
signaling. Thus CREB1 may affect other pathways that are implicated in the
regulation of body weight.

PMCID: PMC3048696
PMID: 21209091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Immunol. 2011 Feb 1;186(3):1816-27. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000193. Epub 2011
Jan 3.

Endothelial ICAM-1 protein induction is regulated by cytosolic phospholipase A2a 
via both NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB transcription factors.

Hadad N(1), Tuval L, Elgazar-Carmom V, Levy R, Levy R.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease and Immunology Laboratory, Clinical Biochemistry
Department, Faculty of Health Sciences, Soroka Medical University Center and
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel.

Comment in
    J Immunol. 2011 Sep 1;187(5):2041; author reply 2041.

The regulated expression of ICAM-1 plays an important role in inflammatory
processes and immune responses. The present study aimed to determine the in vivo 
involvement of cytosolic phospholipase A(2)a (cPLA(2)a) in ICAM-1 overexpression 
during inflammation and to elucidate the cPLA(2)a-specific role in signal events 
leading to ICAM-1 upregulation in endothelial cells. cPLA(2)a and ICAM-1
upregulation were detected in inflamed paws of mice with collagen-induced
arthritis and in periepididymal adipose tissue of mice fed a high-fat diet.
Intravenous injection of 2 mg/kg oligonucleotide antisense against cPLA(2)a (AS) 
that reduced cPLA(2)a upregulation also decreased ICAM-1 overexpression,
suggesting a key role of cPLA(2)a in ICAM-1 upregulation during inflammation.
Preincubation of endothelial ECV-304 cells that express ICAM-1 and of HUVEC that 
express ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 with 1 µM AS prevented cPLA(2)a and the adhesion
molecule upregulation induced by TNF-a and inhibited their adherence to phagocyte
like-PLB cells. Whereas AS did not inhibit NADPH oxidase 4-NADPH oxidase
activity, inhibition of oxidase activity attenuated cPLA(2)a activation,
suggesting that NADPH oxidase acts upstream to cPLA(2)a. Attenuating cPLA(2)a
activation by AS or diphenylene iodonium prevented the induction of
cyclooxygenase-2 and the production of PGE(2) that were essential for ICAM-1
upregulation. Inhibition of cPLA(2)a activity by AS inhibited the phosphorylation
of both p65 NF-<U+03BA>B on Ser(536) and protein kinase A-dependent CREB. To our
knowledge, our results are the first to show that CREB activation is involved in 
ICAM-1 upregulation and suggest that cPLA(2)a activated by NADPH oxidase is
required for sequential phosphorylation of NF-<U+03BA>B by an undefined kinase and CREB 
activation by PGE(2)-mediated protein kinase A.

PMID: 21199900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Front Biosci (Schol Ed). 2011 Jan 1;3:276-85.

WNT signaling and the regulation of ovarian steroidogenesis.

Lapointe E(1), Boerboom D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Reproduction Animale, Faculte de Medecine Veterinaire, 
Universite de Montreal, Saint-Hyacinthe, Quebec, Canada, J2S 7C6.

One of the major functions of the ovary is the biosynthesis of steroid hormones, 
which are essential for the development of secondary sexual characteristics at
puberty, for subsequent ovarian function, and for the establishment and
maintenance of pregnancy. Increases in our understanding of the molecular
mechanisms governing the control of ovarian steroidogenesis have greatly improved
our understanding of the female reproductive cycle, as well as the pathogenesis
of reproductive disorders such as polycystic ovarian syndrome and premature
ovarian failure. The pituitary gonadotropins follicle stimulating hormone (FSH)
and luteinizing hormone (LH) are the main endocrine regulators of ovarian
steroidogenesis, and act by directly or indirectly modulating the activity of a
multitude of intracellular signaling pathways. The WNT/CTNNB1 pathway, which is
now believed to be a significant contributor to the regulation of ovarian
steroidogenesis, could be one of the pathways modulated by gonadotropin
signaling. This review will focus on the emerging role of WNT/CTNNB1 signaling in
the regulation of steroidogenesis, with emphasis on potential mechanisms of
interaction with FSH/LH signaling in ovarian granulosa and luteal cells.

PMID: 21196376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Mol Cells. 2011 Feb;31(2):159-64. doi: 10.1007/s10059-011-0019-5. Epub 2010 Dec
22.

A critical time window for the survival of neural progenitor cells by HDAC
inhibitors in the hippocampus.

Kim BW(1), Yang S, Lee CH, Son H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hanyang University, Seoul,
Korea.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) that modulate gene expression by
inhibiting HDAC enzymes may contribute to the survival of immature hippocampal
neurons. However, it remains unknown how and when HDACIs regulate the survival of
newly generated immature hippocampal neurons. In the present study, if the
treatment of valproic acid (VPA) and sodium butyrate (SBt) in the specific time
window during the development of newly generated n eurons r esulted in the i
ncreased survival of bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU)(+) neurons in the dentate gyrus
(DG) of hippocampus in mice was investigated. It was found that the number of
BrdU(+) cells, the expressions of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members and pCREB
[D1] were increased by HDACIs when HDACIs were treated no later than 2-3 weeks
after BrdU labeling. This suggests that epigenetic modification within a specific
time window is critical for the survival of newborn hippocampal neurons by
inhibiting the apoptotic pathway.

PMCID: PMC3932680
PMID: 21191817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. BMC Syst Biol. 2010 Dec 27;4:175. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-175.

Bio-informatics analysis of a gene co-expression module in adipose tissue
containing the diet-responsive gene Nnat.

Li X(1), Thomason PA, Withers DJ, Scott J.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Medicine Department, Imperial College
London, South Kensington, Exhibition Road, London SW7 2AZ, UK.
xinzhong.li@imperial.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Obesity causes insulin resistance in target tissues - skeletal
muscle, adipose tissue, liver and the brain. Insulin resistance predisposes to
type-2 diabetes (T2D) and cardiovascular disease (CVD). Adipose tissue
inflammation is an essential characteristic of obesity and insulin resistance.
Neuronatin (Nnat) expression has been found to be altered in a number of
conditions related to inflammatory or metabolic disturbance, but its
physiological roles and regulatory mechanisms in adipose tissue, brain,
pancreatic islets and other tissues are not understood.
RESULTS: We identified transcription factor binding sites (TFBS) conserved in the
Nnat promoter, and transcription factors (TF) abundantly expressed in adipose
tissue. These include transcription factors concerned with the control of:
adipogenesis (Ppar<U+03B3>, Klf15, Irf1, Creb1, Egr2, Gata3); lipogenesis (Mlxipl,
Srebp1c); inflammation (Jun, Stat3); insulin signalling and diabetes
susceptibility (Foxo1, Tcf7l2). We also identified NeuroD1 the only documented TF
that controls Nnat expression. We identified KEGG pathways significantly
associated with Nnat expression, including positive correlations with
inflammation and negative correlations with metabolic pathways (most prominently 
oxidative phosphorylation, glycolysis and gluconeogenesis, pyruvate metabolism)
and protein turnover. 27 genes, including; Gstt1 and Sod3, concerned with
oxidative stress; Sncg and Cxcl9 concerned with inflammation; Ebf1, Lgals12 and
Fzd4 involved in adipogenesis; whose expression co-varies with Nnat were
identified, and conserved transcription factor binding sites identified on their 
promoters. Functional networks relating to each of these genes were identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis shows that Nnat is an acute diet-responsive gene in
white adipose tissue and hypothalamus; it may play an important role in
metabolism, adipogenesis, and resolution of oxidative stress and inflammation in 
response to dietary excess.

PMCID: PMC3022651
PMID: 21187013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Apr;39(8):3156-65. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq1142. Epub 2010
Dec 20.

A novel regulatory circuit in base excision repair involving AP endonuclease 1,
Creb1 and DNA polymerase beta.

Pei DS(1), Yang XJ, Liu W, Guikema JE, Schrader CE, Strauss PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

DNA repair is required to maintain genome stability in stem cells and early
embryos. At critical junctures, oxidative damage to DNA requires the base
excision repair (BER) pathway. Since early zebrafish embryos lack the major
polymerase in BER, DNA polymerase ß, repair proceeds via replicative polymerases,
even though there is ample polb mRNA. Here, we report that Polb protein fails to 
appear at the appropriate time in development when AP endonuclease 1 (Apex), the 
upstream protein in BER, is knocked down. Because polb contains a Creb1 binding
site, we examined whether knockdown of Apex affects creb1. Apex knockdown results
in loss of Creb1 and Creb complex members but not Creb1 phosphorylation. This
effect is independent of p53. Although both apex and creb1 mRNA rescue Creb1 and 
Polb after Apex knockdown, Apex is not a co-activator of creb1 transcription.
This observation has broad significance, as similar results occur when Apex is
inhibited in B cells from apex(+/-) mice. These results describe a novel
regulatory circuit involving Apex, Creb1 and Polb and provide a mechanism for
lethality of Apex loss in higher eukaryotes.

PMCID: PMC3082881
PMID: 21172930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Biol Rhythms. 2010 Dec;25(6):410-20. doi: 10.1177/0748730410381229.

CREB influences timing and entrainment of the SCN circadian clock.

Lee B(1), Li A, Hansen KF, Cao R, Yoon JH, Obrietan K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.

The transcriptional feedback circuit, which is at the core of the suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN) circadian (i.e., 24 h) clock, is tightly coupled to both external
entrainment cues, such as light, as well as rhythmic cues that arise on a
system-wide level within the SCN. One potential signaling pathway by which these 
cues are conveyed to the molecular clock is the CREB/CRE transcriptional cascade.
In this study, we employed a tetracycline-inducible CREB repressor mouse strain, 
in which approximately 60% of the SCN neurons express the transgene, to test CREB
functionality in the clock and its effects on overt rhythmicity. We show that
attenuated CREB signaling in the SCN led to a significant reduction in
light-evoked clock entrainment. An examination of circadian timing revealed that 
CREB repressor mice exhibited normal free-running rhythms in the absence of
external lighting cues. However, under conditions of constant light, which
typically leads to a lengthening of the circadian period, CREB repressor mice
exhibited a dramatic arrhythmic phenotype, which could be reversed with
doxycycline. At a cellular level, the repression of CREB led to a significant
reduction in both the expression of the circadian clock proteins PERIOD1 and
PERIOD2 and the clock output hormones AVP and VIP. Together, these data support
the idea that the CRE transcriptional pathway orchestrates transcriptional events
that are essential for both the maintenance of SCN timing and light entrainment
of the circadian clock.

PMCID: PMC3529591
PMID: 21135157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 11;286(6):4690-702. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.169334. Epub 2010
Dec 2.

Azadirachtin interacts with retinoic acid receptors and inhibits retinoic
acid-mediated biological responses.

Thoh M(1), Babajan B, Raghavendra PB, Sureshkumar C, Manna SK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics,
Nampally, Hyderabad 500001, India.

Retraction in
    J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 22;288(12):8563.

Considering the role of retinoids in regulation of more than 500 genes involved
in cell cycle and growth arrest, a detailed understanding of the mechanism and
its regulation is useful for therapy. The extract of the medicinal plant Neem
(Azadirachta indica) is used against several ailments especially for
anti-inflammatory, anti-itching, spermicidal, anticancer, and insecticidal
activities. In this report we prove the detailed mechanism on the regulation of
retinoic acid-mediated cell signaling by azadirachtin, active components of neem 
extract. Azadirachtin repressed all trans-retinoic acid (ATRA)-mediated nuclear
transcription factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) activation, not the DNA binding but the
NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent gene expression. It did not inhibit I<U+03BA>Ba degradation, I<U+03BA>Ba kinase
activity, or p65 phosphorylation and its nuclear translocation but inhibited
NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent reporter gene expression. Azadirachtin inhibited TRAF6-mediated, 
but not TRAF2-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B activation. It inhibited ATRA-induced Sp1 and CREB
(cAMP-response element-binding protein) DNA binding. Azadirachtin inhibited ATRA 
binding with retinoid receptors, which is supported by biochemical and in silico 
evidences. Azadirachtin showed strong interaction with retinoid receptors. It
suppressed ATRA-mediated removal of retinoid receptors, bound with DNA by
inhibiting ATRA binding to its receptors. Overall, our data suggest that
azadirachtin interacts with retinoic acid receptors and suppresses ATRA binding, 
inhibits falling off the receptors, and activates transcription factors like
CREB, Sp1, NF-<U+03BA>B, etc. Thus, azadirachtin exerts anti-inflammatory and
anti-metastatic responses by a novel pathway that would be beneficial for further
anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer therapies.

PMCID: PMC3039373
PMID: 21127062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Apr 1;90(1):105-12. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvq379. Epub 2010 Nov
30.

T-type Ca²+ signalling regulates aldosterone-induced CREB activation and cell
death through PP2A activation in neonatal cardiomyocytes.

Ferron L(1), Ruchon Y, Renaud JF, Capuano V.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Recherche Médicale, Remodelage tissulaire et fonctionnel:
signalisation et physiopathologie CNRS-UMR8162, Le Plessis Robinson, France.

AIMS: We have investigated Ca²(+) signalling generated by aldosterone-induced
T-type current (I(CaT)), the effects of I(CaT) in neonatal cardiomyocytes, and a 
putative role for I(CaT) in cardiomyocytes during cardiac pathology induced by
stenosis in an adult rat.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Neonatal rat cardiomyocytes treated with aldosterone showed 
an increase in I(CaT) density, principally due to the upregulation of the T-type 
channel Ca(v)3.1 (by 80%). Aldosterone activated cAMP-response element-binding
protein (CREB), and this activation was enhanced by blocking I(CaT) or by
inhibiting protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) activity. Aldosterone induced PP2A
activity, an induction that was prevented upon I(CaT) blockade. I(CaT) exerted a 
negative feedback regulation on the transcription of the Ca(v)3.1 gene, and the
activation of PP2A by I(CaT) led to increased levels of the pro-apoptotic markers
caspase 9 and Bcl-x(S) and decreased levels of the anti-apoptotic marker Bcl-2.
These findings were corroborated by flow cytometry analysis for apoptosis and
necrosis. Similarly, in a rat model of cardiac disease, I(CaT) re-emergence was
associated with a decrease in CREB activation and was correlated with increases
in caspase 9 and Bcl-x(S) and a decrease in Bcl-2 levels.
CONCLUSION: Our findings establish PP2A/CREB as targets of I(CaT)-generated
Ca²(+) signalling and identify an important role for I(CaT) in cardiomyocyte cell
death.

PMCID: PMC3058735
PMID: 21123217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Control Release. 2011 Feb 28;150(1):23-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2010.11.016.
Epub 2010 Nov 23.

A designer network coordinating bovine artificial insemination by
ovulation-triggered release of implanted sperms.

Kemmer C(1), Fluri DA, Witschi U, Passeraub A, Gutzwiller A, Fussenegger M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH Zurich, Mattenstrasse
26, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland.

Synthetic biology has been successfully used to program novel metabolic function 
in mammalian cells and to design the first-generation of prosthetic networks that
have shown the potential for the treatment of obesity, hormone-related disorders 
and hyperuricemia in small-animal model systems. By functionally rewiring
luteinizing hormone receptor signaling to CREB1 (cAMP-responsive element binding 
protein 1)-mediated transgene expression via the common cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) second messenger pool we have designed an artificial
insemination device which enables lutropin-triggered in-utero release of sperms
protected inside cellulose-based implants. Swiss dairy cows treated with such
in-utero implants containing spermatozoa and mammalian cells transgenic for
luteinizing hormone receptor and CREB1-inducible expression of an engineered
cellulase showed ovulation-triggered implant degradation and sperm release
leading to successful fertilization of the animals. Synthetic devices plugged
into endogenous control circuitry enable the body to automatically control
spatio-temporal metabolic activities that could improve the economics of cattle
breeding and provide novel opportunities for future therapeutic interventions.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21108977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Life Sci. 2011 Jan 17;88(3-4):194-200. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2010.11.013. Epub 2010 
Nov 18.

A mechanism by which the osmotic laxative magnesium sulphate increases the
intestinal aquaporin 3 expression in HT-29 cells.

Ikarashi N, Mochiduki T, Takasaki A, Ushiki T, Baba K, Ishii M, Kudo T, Ito K,
Toda T, Ochiai W, Sugiyama K.

AIMS: We have suggested that an osmotic laxative, magnesium sulphate (MgSO(4)),
may act as a cathartic in a very rational manner by increasing the aquaporin 3
(AQP3) expression level and by changing osmotic pressure in the colon. In this
study, we examined the mechanism by which MgSO(4) increases the intestinal AQP3
expression level by using the human colon cancer HT-29 cell line.
MAIN METHODS: After the addition of MgSO(4) to HT-29 cells, the expression levels
of AQP3 mRNA and protein were measured using real-time RT-PCR and western
blotting, respectively. The intracellular Mg(2+) concentration, adenylate cyclase
(AC) activity and protein kinase A (PKA) activity were also determined. The
phosphorylated cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) expression levels
were determined by western blotting.
KEY FINDINGS: The AQP3 mRNA expression level started to increase significantly at
1 h after MgSO(4) addition and peaked at 9 h, at a level 3 times as high as the
control levels. The AQP3 protein expression level started to increase 6 h after
the addition and reached a level almost twice as high as the control levels by
hour 12. In the HT-29 cells treated with MgSO(4), there was a 1.4-fold increase
in the intracellular Mg(2+) concentration, a 1.5-fold increase in AC activity, a 
1.6-fold increase in PKA activity, and a significant increase in phosphorylation 
of the CREB.
SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest that the AC activation caused by an increase 
in the intracellular Mg(2+) concentration may trigger CREB phosphorylation
through PKA activation and promote AQP3 gene transcription.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21094173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jan 7;404(1):68-73. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.11.064. Epub 2010 Nov 19.

Acetylation of EGF receptor contributes to tumor cell resistance to histone
deacetylase inhibitors.

Song H(1), Li CW, Labaff AM, Lim SO, Li LY, Kan SF, Chen Y, Zhang K, Lang J, Xie 
X, Wang Y, Huo LF, Hsu SC, Chen X, Zhao Y, Hung MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Alteration of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is involved in various
human cancers and has been intensively investigated. A plethora of evidence
demonstrates that posttranslational modifications of EGFR play a pivotal role in 
controlling its function and metabolism. Here, we show that EGFR can be
acetylated by CREB binding protein (CBP) acetyltransferase. Interestingly, EGFR
acetylation affects its tyrosine phosphorylation, which may contribute to cancer 
cell resistance to histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs). Since there is an
increasing interest in using HDACIs to treat various cancers in the clinic, our
current study provides insights and rationale for selecting effective therapeutic
regimen. Consistent with the previous reports, we also show that HDACI combined
with EGFR inhibitors achieves better therapeutic outcomes and provides a
molecular rationale for the enhanced effect of combination therapy. Our results
unveil a critical role of EGFR acetylation that regulates EGFR function, which
may have an important clinical implication.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3049249
PMID: 21094134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Immunol. 2010 Dec 1;185(11):6413-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001829.

The role of the transcription factor CREB in immune function.

Wen AY(1), Sakamoto KM, Miller LS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Critical Care, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

CREB is a transcription factor that regulates diverse cellular responses,
including proliferation, survival, and differentiation. CREB is induced by a
variety of growth factors and inflammatory signals and subsequently mediates the 
transcription of genes containing a cAMP-responsive element. Several
immune-related genes possess this cAMP-responsive element, including IL-2, IL-6, 
IL-10, and TNF-a. In addition, phosphorylated CREB has been proposed to directly 
inhibit NF-<U+03BA>B activation by blocking the binding of CREB binding protein to the
NF-<U+03BA>B complex, thereby limiting proinflammatory responses. CREB also induces an
antiapoptotic survival signal in monocytes and macrophages. In T and B cells,
CREB activation promotes proliferation and survival and differentially regulates 
Th1, Th2, and Th17 responses. Finally, CREB activation is required for the
generation and maintenance of regulatory T cells. This review summarizes current 
advances involving CREB in immune function--a role that is continually being
defined.

PMID: 21084670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 2;5(11):e15384. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015384.

Hepatocyte growth factor modulates interleukin-6 production in bone marrow
derived macrophages: implications for inflammatory mediated diseases.

Coudriet GM(1), He J, Trucco M, Mars WM, Piganelli JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

The generation of the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-6, TNF-a, and IL-1ß fuel the 
acute phase response (APR). To maintain body homeostasis, the increase of
inflammatory proteins is resolved by acute phase proteins via presently unknown
mechanisms. Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is transcribed in response to IL-6.
Since IL-6 production promotes the generation of HGF and induces the APR, we
posited that accumulating HGF might be a likely candidate for quelling excess
inflammation under non-pathological conditions. We sought to assess the role of
HGF and how it influences the regulation of inflammation utilizing a well-defined
model of inflammatory activation, lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulation of bone
marrow derived macrophages (BMM). BMM were isolated from C57BL6 mice and were
stimulated with LPS in the presence or absence of HGF. When HGF was present,
there was a decrease in production of the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-6, along
with an increase in the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. Altered cytokine
production correlated with an increase in phosphorylated GSK3ß, increased
retention of the phosphorylated NF<U+03BA>B p65 subunit in the cytoplasm, and an
enhanced interaction between CBP and phospho-CREB. These changes were a direct
result of signaling through the HGF receptor, MET, as effects were reversed in
the presence of a selective inhibitor of MET (SU11274) or when using BMM from
macrophage-specific conditional MET knockout mice. Combined, these data provide
compelling evidence that under normal circumstances, HGF acts to suppress the
inflammatory response.

PMCID: PMC2970559
PMID: 21072211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Br J Pharmacol. 2011 Mar;162(5):1096-108. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2010.01101.x.

Metformin inhibits P-glycoprotein expression via the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway and CRE
transcriptional activity through AMPK activation.

Kim HG(1), Hien TT, Han EH, Hwang YP, Choi JH, Kang KW, Kwon KI, Kim BH, Kim SK, 
Song GY, Jeong TC, Jeong HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, Chungnam National University,
Daejeon, Korea.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The expression of P-glycoprotein (P-gp), encoded by the
multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1) gene, is associated with the emergence of the MDR
phenotype in cancer cells. We investigated whether metformin
(1,1-dimethylbiguanide hydrochloride) down-regulates MDR1 expression in
MCF-7/adriamycin (MCF-7/adr) cells.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: MCF-7 and MCF-7/adr cells were incubated with metformin
and changes in P-gp expression were determined at the mRNA, protein and
functional level. Transient transfection assays were performed to assess its gene
promoter activities, and immunoblot analysis to study its molecular mechanisms of
action.
KEY RESULTS: Metformin significantly inhibited MDR1 expression by blocking MDR1
gene transcription. Metformin also significantly increased the intracellular
accumulation of the fluorescent P-gp substrate rhodamine-123. Nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B
(NF-<U+03BA>B) activity and the level of I<U+03BA>B degradation were reduced by metformin
treatment. Moreover, transduction of MCF-7/adr cells with the p65 subunit of
NF-<U+03BA>B induced MDR1 promoter activity and expression, and this effect was
attenuated by metformin. The suppression of MDR1 promoter activity and protein
expression was mediated through metformin-induced activation of AMP-activated
protein kinase (AMPK). Small interfering RNA methods confirmed that reduction of 
AMPK levels attenuates the inhibition of MDR1 activation associated with
metformin exposure. Furthermore, the inhibitory effects of metformin on MDR1
expression and cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation
were reversed by overexpression of a dominant-negative mutant of AMPK.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: These results suggest that metformin activates AMPK
and suppresses MDR1 expression in MCF-7/adr cells by inhibiting the activation of
NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB. This study reveals a novel function of metformin as an anticancer
agent.

© 2011 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2011 The British
Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC3051382
PMID: 21054339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Neurochem. 2011 Jan;116(1):1-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.07080.x. Epub
2010 Dec 2.

CREB: a multifaceted regulator of neuronal plasticity and protection.

Sakamoto K(1), Karelina K, Obrietan K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Since its initial characterization over 20 years ago, there has been intense and 
unwavering interest in understanding the role of the transcription factor
cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) in nervous system physiology.
Through an array of experimental approaches and model systems, researchers have
begun to unravel the complex and multifaceted role of this transcription factor
in such diverse processes as neurodevelopment, synaptic plasticity, and
neuroprotection. Here we discuss current insights into the molecular mechanisms
by which CREB couples synaptic activity to long-term changes in neuronal
plasticity, which is thought to underlie learning and memory. We also discuss
work showing that CREB is a critical component of the neuroprotective
transcriptional network, and data indicating that CREB dysregulation contributes 
to an array of neuropathological conditions.

PMCID: PMC3575743
PMID: 21044077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Chin Med J (Engl). 2010 Sep;123(17):2440-5.

Intracellular CMTM2 negatively regulates human immunodeficiency virus type-1
transcription through targeting the transcription factors AP-1 and CREB.

Song HS(1), Shi S, Lu XZ, Gao F, Yan L, Wang Y, Zhuang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing
100191, China.

BACKGROUND: The CKLF-like MARVEL transmembrane domain-containing family (CMTM) is
a novel family of proteins linking chemokines and TM4SF. Different members
exhibit diverse biological functions. In this study, the effect of intracellular 
CMTM2 on regulating human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) transcription was
evaluated.
METHODS: The effects of CMTM2 on regulating full-length HIV-1 provirus and the
HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR)-directed transcription were assessed by
luciferase assay. Transcription factor assays, using the luciferase reporter
plasmids of AP-1, CRE, and NF-<U+03BA>B were conducted to explore the signaling
pathway(s) that may be regulated by CMTM2. The potential relationship between
CMTM2 and the transcription factor AP-1 was further analyzed by Western blotting 
analyses to investigate the effect of CMTM2 on PMA-induced ERK1/2
phosphorylation.
RESULTS: The results from the current study revealed that CMTM2 acts as a
negative regulator of HIV-1 transcription. CMTM2 exerted a suppressive action on 
both full-length HIV-1 provirus and HIV-1 LTR-directed transcription.
Transcription factor assays showed that CMTM2 selectively inhibited basal AP-1
and CREB activity. Co-expression of HIV-1 Tat, a potent AP-1 and CREB activator, 
can not reverse CMTM2-mediated AP-1 and CREB inhibition, suggesting a potent and 
specific effect of CMTM2 on negatively regulating these two signaling pathways.
CONCLUSION: Intracellular CMTM2 can negatively regulate HIV-1 transcription, at
least in part, by targeting the AP-1 and CREB pathways. Exploring the mechanisms 
further may lead to new ways to control HIV-1 replication.

PMID: 21034562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Gene. 2011 Jan 15;471(1-2):1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2010.09.009. Epub 2010 Oct
19.

cAMP and fibroblast growth factor 2 regulate bone sialoprotein gene expression in
human prostate cancer cells.

Li Z(1), Sasaki Y, Mezawa M, Wang S, Li X, Yang L, Wang Z, Zhou L, Araki S,
Matsumura H, Takai H, Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Chiba 271-8587, Japan; Tianjin Stomatology Hospital, Tianjin, China.

Bone sialoprotein (BSP) is a noncollagenous protein of the extracellular matrix
in mineralized connective tissues that has been implicated in the nucleation of
hydroxyapatite. Forskolin (FSK), an activator of adenylate cyclase, increased the
intracellular cAMP level, which stimulates the proliferation and differentiation 
of osteoblasts. Fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) is a potent mitogen in many
cell types, including osteoblasts. In human prostate cancer DU145 cells, FSK (1
µM) and FGF2 (10 ng/ml) increased BSP and Runx2 mRNA and protein levels at 3 and 
12h, respectively. Transient transfection analyses were performed using chimeric 
constructs of the human BSP gene promoter linked to a luciferase reporter gene.
Treatment of DU145 cells with FSK (1 µM) and FGF2 (10 ng/ml) increased the
luciferase activities of constructs between -60LUC to -927LUC and -108LUC to
-927LUC, including the human BSP gene promoter. Effects of FSK and FGF2 abrogated
in constructs included 2bp mutations in the two cAMP response elements (CRE1 and 
CRE2). Luciferase activities induced by FSK and FGF2 were blocked by protein
kinase A and tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Gel mobility shift analyses showed that 
FSK and FGF2 increased the binding of CRE1 and CRE2. CRE1-protein complexes were 
supershifted by phospho-CREB1 and c-Fos antibodies, and disrupted by CREB1,
c-Jun, JunD, Fra2, p300, Runx2, Dlx5 and Smad1 antibodies. CRE2-protein complexes
were disrupted by CREB1, phospho-CREB1, c-Fos, c-Jun, JunD, Fra2, p300, Runx2,
Dlx5 and Smad1 antibodies. These studies demonstrate that FSK and FGF2 stimulate 
BSP transcription in DU145 human prostate cancer cells by targeting the CRE1 and 
CRE2 elements in the human BSP gene promoter.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20965237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2010 Dec 5;153B(8):1365-72. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.31133. Epub 2010 Oct 18.

Effects of the A(-115)G variant on CREB1 promoter activity in two brain cell
lines: Interactions with gonadal steroids.

Zubenko GS(1), Hughes HB 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. zubenkog@pitt.edu

Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a leading contributor to disease burden
worldwide. Previous genetic studies have revealed significant evidence of linkage
of the CREB1 region to mood disorders among women from families with recurrent,
early-onset MDD (RE-MDD), a severe and familial subtype of MDD. Systematic
resequencing of the CREB1 gene in affected members of these families has
identified rare sequence variants at positions -656 and -115 that appear to
cosegregate with unipolar mood disorders in two large multigenerational families 
and three small nuclear families, respectively. Results from previous
transfection experiments that employed constructs containing the wild-type or
variant CREB1 promoters coupled to a reporter gene support the hypothesis that
the A(-656) allele contributes to the development of MDD in women by selectively 
increasing the activity of the CREB1 promoter in brain cell lines exposed to 17
ß-estradiol. Analogous transfection experiments described in the current study
revealed that the G(-115) promoter variant reduced promoter activity in CATH.a
neuronal cells regardless of the hormonal environment, consistent with the
observation that increased risk for unipolar mood disorders conferred by this
allele was not limited by sex. The effects of CREB1 promoter variants on promoter
activity, their influence on the development of mood disorders and related
clinical features, and the interaction of their phenotypic expression with sex
seem likely to be complex and allele-specific rather than a general property of
the CREB1 locus. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3078048
PMID: 20957653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Jan;31(1):226-36. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00821-10. Epub 2010 Oct
18.

Genomic collaboration of estrogen receptor alpha and extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 2 in regulating gene and proliferation programs.

Madak-Erdogan Z(1), Lupien M, Stossi F, Brown M, Katzenellenbogen BS.

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois, Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology,
407 South Goodwin Ave., Urbana, IL 61801-3704, USA.

The nuclear hormone receptor, estrogen receptor a (ERa), and mitogen-activated
protein kinases (MAPKs) play key roles in hormone-dependent cancers, and yet
their interplay and the integration of their signaling inputs remain poorly
understood. In these studies, we document that estrogen-occupied ERa activates
and interacts with extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 (ERK2), a downstream
effector in the MAPK pathway, resulting in ERK2 and ERa colocalization at
chromatin binding sites across the genome of breast cancer cells. This genomic
colocalization, predominantly at conserved distal enhancer sites, requires the
activation of both ERa and ERK2 and enables ERK2 modulation of estrogen-dependent
gene expression and proliferation programs. The ERK2 substrate CREB1 was also
activated and recruited to ERK2-bound chromatin following estrogen treatment and 
found to cooperate with ERa/ERK2 in regulating gene transcription and cell cycle 
progression. Our study reveals a novel paradigm with convergence of ERK2 and ERa 
at the chromatin level that positions this kinase to support nuclear receptor
activities in crucial and direct ways, a mode of collaboration likely to underlie
MAPK regulation of gene expression by other nuclear receptors as well.

PMCID: PMC3019850
PMID: 20956553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2010;73(21-22):1451-64. doi:
10.1080/15287394.2010.511551.

Upregulation of cyclooxygenase-2 by 4-nonylphenol is mediated through the cyclic 
amp response element activation pathway.

Han EH(1), Hwang YP, Kim HG, Park JH, Jeong TC, Jeong HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, Chungnam National University,
Daejeon, South Korea.

The organic compound nonylphenol (NP) belongs to the family of alkylphenols and
is a product of industrial synthesis formed during phenol alkylation. Nonylphenol
is considered to be an endocrine disruptor due to weak ability to mimic estrogen 
and subsequently to disrupt the natural balance of hormones in a given organism. 
Since the endocrine and immune systems share portions of common signaling
pathways, it is conceivable that NP may also affect immune system functions.
However, the influence of NP on inflammation and macrophages responsiveness to NP
is unclear. Thus, the effects of NP were investigated on cyclooxygenase (COX)-2
expression in cultured macrophages. NP induced COX-2 protein and gene expression 
in murine macrophage RAW264.7 cells and enhanced COX-2 promoter activity and
prostaglandin E(2) production. Transfection of RAW264.7 cells with hCOX-2 or
various deletion and mutation promoter constructs revealed that the cyclic AMP
response element (CRE) was the predominant mediator responsive to NP-induced
effects. Moreover, transfection with pCRE-Luc plasmid followed by immunoblotting 
demonstrated that NP activated CRE sites and CRE binding protein (CREB)
phosphorylation. NP also increased nuclear CREB accumulation and CREB binding to 
the COX-2 promoter. Phosphatidylinositol 3 (PI3)-kinase, Akt, and the
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAP kinases) p38 and JNK were also
significantly activated by NP. Our data demonstrate that NP induces COX-2
expression through the PI3-kinase/Akt/MAP kinases/CRE pathway. These findings
provide insight into the signal transduction pathways involved in the
inflammatory responses induced by NP in macrophages.

PMID: 20954072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Cell Microbiol. 2011 Jan;13(1):123-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2010.01525.x.
Epub 2010 Oct 14.

Cell cycle arrest induced by the bacterial adenylate cyclase toxins from Bacillus
anthracis and Bordetella pertussis.

Gray MC(1), Hewlett EL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Box 800419, School of Medicine, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Bacillus anthracis oedema toxin (ET) and Bordetella pertussis adenylate cyclase
toxin (ACT) enter host cells and produce cAMP. To understand the cellular
consequences, we exposed J774 cells to these toxins at ng ml(-1) (pM)
concentrations, then followed cell number and changes in cell signalling
pathways. Under these conditions, both toxins produce a concentration-dependent
inhibition of cell proliferation without cytotoxicity. ET and ACT increase the
proportion of cells in G(1) /G(0) and reduce S phase, such that a single addition
of ET or ACT inhibits cell division for 3-6 days. Treatment with ET or ACT
produces striking changes in proteins controlling cell cycle, including virtual
elimination of phosphorylated ERK 1/2 and Cyclin D1 and increases in phospho-CREB
and p27(Kip1) . Importantly, PD98059, a MEK inhibitor, elicits a comparable
reduction in Cyclin D1 to that produced by the toxins and blocks proliferation.
These data show that non-lethal concentrations of ET and ACT impose a prolonged
block on the proliferation of J774 cells by impairment of the progression from
G(1) /G(0) to S phase in a process involving cAMP-mediated increases in
phospho-CREB and p27(Kip1) and reductions in phospho-ERK 1/2 and Cyclin D1. This 
phenomenon represents a new mechanism by which these toxins affect host cells.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4137770
PMID: 20946259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Histochem Cell Biol. 2010 Nov;134(5):453-68. doi: 10.1007/s00418-010-0740-8. Epub
2010 Oct 13.

Neurogenic transdifferentiation of human adipose-derived stem cells? A critical
protocol reevaluation with special emphasis on cell proliferation and cell cycle 
alterations.

Kompisch KM(1), Lange C, Steinemann D, Skawran B, Schlegelberger B, Müller R,
Schumacher U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy II: Experimental Morphology, Center for Experimental
Medicine, University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Martinistr. 52, 20246, Hamburg, 
Germany. anatomie@uke.uni-hamburg.de

Adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) are reported to display multilineage
differentiation potential, including neuroectodermal pathways. The aim of the
present study was to critically re-evaluate the potential neurogenic
(trans-)differentiation capacity of ASCs using a neurogenic induction protocol
based on the combination of isobutylmethylxanthine (IBMX), indomethacin and
insulin. ASCs isolated from lipo-aspirate samples of five healthy female donors
were characterized and potential neurogenic (trans-)differentiation was assessed 
by means of immunohistochemistry and gene expression analyses. Cell proliferation
and cell cycle alterations were studied, and the expression of CREB/ATF
transcription factors was analyzed. ASCs expressed CD59, CD90 and CD105, and were
tested negative for CD34 and CD45. Under neurogenic induction, ASCs adopted a
characteristic morphology comparable to neur(on)al progenitors and expressed
musashi1, ß-III-tubulin and nestin. Gene expression analyses revealed an
increased expression of ß-III-tubulin, GFAP, vimentin and BDNF, as well as SOX4
in induced ASCs. Cell proliferation was significantly reduced under neurogenic
induction; cell cycle analyses showed a G2-cell cycle arrest accompanied by
differential expression of key regulators of cell cycle progression. Differential
expression of CREB/ATF transcription factors could be observed on neurogenic
induction, pointing to a decisive role of the cAMP-CREB/ATF system. Our findings 
may point to a potential neurogenic (trans-)differentiation of ASCs into early
neur(on)al progenitors, but do not present definite evidence for it. Especially, 
the adoption of a neural progenitor cell-like morphology must not automatically
be misinterpreted as a specific characteristic of a respective
(trans-)differentiation process, as this may as well be caused by alterations of 
cell cycle progression.

PMID: 20945072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2011 Jan;21(1):63-70. doi:
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2010.09.009. Epub 2010 Oct 12.

Epistatic interaction of CREB1 and KCNJ6 on rumination and negative emotionality.

Lazary J(1), Juhasz G, Anderson IM, Jacob CP, Nguyen TT, Lesch KP, Reif A, Deakin
JF, Bagdy G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapy, Semmelweis University,
Budapest, Hungary. lazaryjudit@yahoo.com

G protein-activated K+ channel 2 (GIRK2) and cAMP-response element binding
protein (CREB1) are involved in synaptic plasticity and their genes have been
implicated depression and memory processing. Excessive rumination is a core
cognitive feature of depression which is also present in remission. High scores
on the Ruminative Response Scale (RRS) questionnaire are predictive of relapse
and recurrence. Since rumination involves memory, we tested the hypothesis that
variation in the genes encoding GIRK2 (KCNJ6) and CREB1 mechanisms would
influence RRS scores. GIRK2 and CREB1 polymorphisms were studied in two
independent samples (n=651 and n=1174) from the general population. Strongly
significant interaction between the TT genotype of rs2070995 (located in KCNJ6)
and the GG genotype of rs2253206 (located in CREB1) on RRS were found in both
samples. These results were validated in an independent third sample (n=565;
individuals with personality disorders) showing significant main effect of the
variants mentioned as well as significant interaction on a categorical diagnosis 
of Cluster C personality disorder (obsessional-compulsive, avoidant and
dependent) in which rumination is a prominent feature. Our results suggest that
genetic epistasis in post-receptor signaling pathways in memory systems may have 
relevance for depression and its treatment.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. and ECNP. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20943350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Cell Cycle. 2010 Oct 1;9(19):4013-24. Epub 2010 Oct 11.

ß-Arrestin-1 links mitogenic sonic hedgehog signaling to the cell cycle exit
machinery in neural precursors.

Parathath SR(1), Mainwaring LA, Fernandez-L A, Guldal CG, Nahlé Z, Kenney AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Nov 1;9(21):4260-1.

Development of the cerebellum, a brain region regulating posture and
coordination, occurs post-natally and is marked by rapid proliferation of granule
neuron precursors (CGNPs), stimulated by mitogenic Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
signaling. ß-Arrestin (ßArr) proteins play important roles downstream of
Smoothened, the Shh signal transducer. However, whether Shh regulates ßArrs and
what role they play in Shh-driven CGNP proliferation remains to be determined.
Here, we report that Shh induces ßArr1 accumulation and localization to the
nucleus, where it participates in enhancing expression of the cyclin dependent
kinase (cdk) inhibitor p27, whose accumulation eventually drives CGNP cell cycle 
exit. ßArr1 knockdown enhances CGNP proliferation and reduces p27 expression.
Thus, Shh-mediated ßArr1 induction represents a novel negative feedback loop
within the Shh mitogenic pathway, such that ongoing Shh signaling, while required
for CGNPs to proliferate, also sets up a cell-intrinsic clock programming their
ultimate exit from the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC3047755
PMID: 20935513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Int J Cardiol. 2012 Jan 26;154(2):147-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2010.09.003. Epub
2010 Oct 5.

Down-regulation of CREB-binding protein expression blocks thrombin-mediated
endothelial activation by inhibiting acetylation of NF-<U+03BA>B.

Chen J(1), Jiang H, Yang J, Chen SS, Xu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060,
China.

OBJECTIVES: CREB-binding protein (CBP) belongs to a unique class of transcription
co-activators possessing histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity. The aim of the
present study was to evaluate the role of CBP in thrombin-induced endothelial
activation, and also explore the underlying mechanism.
METHODS: Leukocyte-endothelial adhesion was calculated as the proportion of the
labeled-neutrophils that adhered to ECs relative to all neutrophils applied.
Levels of adhesion molecules were analyzed by real-time RT-PCR and western blot. 
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay and NF-<U+03BA>B reporter assay were performed to
evaluate NF-<U+03BA>B activation. Acetylation of NF-<U+03BA>B was measured with
immunoprecipitation and western blot assay. To detect the CBP-HAT activity,
acetyl residues on an acetylated histone H4 was analyzed.
RESULTS: Leukocyte-endothelial adhesion induced by thrombin was markedly
attenuated in endothelial cells with CBP knockdown. The decreased adhesion was
paralleled by the reduction of vascular cell adhesion molecule-1, intercellular
adhesion molecule-1 and E-selectin. Furthermore, CBP silencing suppressed
thrombin-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B activation, and this inhibitory effect was associated
with decreased acetylation of NF-<U+03BA>B and CBP-HAT activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that CBP is involved in the regulation of
endothelial activation via NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent pathway. Down-regulation of CBP may
play a role in returning ECs from a pre-inflammatory status to a quiescent state 
in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20926146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010 Nov 15;10(10):1056-66. doi: 10.4161/cbt.10.10.13373. Epub 
2010 Nov 15.

The induction of S100p expression by the Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)/EP4 receptor
signaling pathway in colon cancer cells.

Chandramouli A(1), Mercado-Pimentel ME, Hutchinson A, Gibadulinová A, Olson ER,
Dickinson S, Shañas R, Davenport J, Owens J, Bhattacharyya AK, Regan JW,
Pastorekova S, Arumugam T, Logsdon CD, Nelson MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Arizona Cancer Center, Tucson, USA.

BACKGROUND: Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) levels are frequently elevated in colorectal 
carcinomas. PGE2 is perceived via four transmembrane G protein coupled receptors 
(EP1-4), among which the EP4 receptor is most relevant. PGE2/EP4-receptor
interaction activates CREB via the ERK/MEK pathway. However, the downstream
target genes activated by this pathway remained to be investigated.
METHODOLOGY/PRINICIPAL FINDINGS: Here, we have identified S100P (an EF-hand
calcium binding protein) as a novel downstream target. We show by realtime RT-PCR
that S100P mRNA levels are elevated in 14/17 (82%) colon tumor tissues as
compared to paired adjacent normal colonic tissues. S100P expression is
stimulated in the presence of PGE2 in a time dependent manner at mRNA and protein
levels in colon, breast and pancreatic cancer cells. Pharmacological and
RNAi-mediated inhibition of the EP4 receptor attenuates PGE2-dependent S100P mRNA
induction. RNA(i)-mediated knockdown of CREB inhibits endogenous S100P
expression. Furthermore, using luciferase reporter analysis and EMSA we show that
mutation and/or deletion of the CRE sequence within the S100P promoter abolished 
PGE2-mediated transcriptional induction. Finally, we demonstrate that
RNA(i)-mediated knockdown of S100P compromised invadopodia formation, colony
growth and motility of colon cancer cells. Interestingly, endogenous knock down
of S100P decreases ERK expression levels, suggesting a role for ERK in regulating
S100P mediated cell growth and motility.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Together, our findings show for the first time that
S100P expression is regulated by PGE2/EP4-receptor signaling and may participate 
in a feedback signaling that perpetuates tumor cell growth and migration.
Therefore, our data suggest that dysregulated S100P expression resulting from
aberrant PGE2/EP4 receptor signaling may have important consequences relevant to 
colon cancer pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3047097
PMID: 20890108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 23;5(9):e12976. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012976.

Global microRNA characterization reveals that miR-103 is involved in IGF-1
stimulated mouse intestinal cell proliferation.

Liao Y(1), Lönnerdal B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of California Davis, Davis, California,
United States of America.

MicroRNAs play extensive roles in cellular development. Analysis of the microRNA 
expression pattern during intestinal cell proliferation in early life is likely
to unravel molecular mechanisms behind intestinal development and have
implications for therapeutic intervention. In this study, we isolated mouse
intestinal crypt cells, examined the differences in microRNA expression upon
IGF-1 stimulated proliferation and identified miR-103 as a one of the key
regulators. Mouse intestinal crypt cells were cultured and treated with IGF-1 for
24 h. MicroRNA microarray showed that multiple microRNAs are regulated by IGF-1, 
and miR-103 was the most sharply down-regulated. Expression of miR-103 in mouse
intestinal crypt cells was confirmed by real-time Q-PCR. Sequence analyses showed
that, among the 1040 predicted miR-103 target genes, CCNE1, CDK2, and CREB1
contain complementary sequences to the miR-103 seed region that are conserved
between human and mouse. We further demonstrated that miR-103 controls the
expression level of these three genes in mouse crypt cells by luciferase assay
and immunoblotting assay. Taken together, our data suggest that in mouse
intestinal crypt cells, miR-103 is part of the G1/S transition regulatory
network, which targets CCNE1, CDK2, and CREB1 during IGF-1 stimulated
proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2944884
PMID: 20886090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Am J Pathol. 2010 Nov;177(5):2357-65. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.091131. Epub 2010 
Sep 23.

Hepatocyte proliferation during liver regeneration is impaired in mice with
methionine diet-induced hyperhomocysteinemia.

Liu WH(1), Zhao YS, Gao SY, Li SD, Cao J, Zhang KQ, Zou CG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-Resources, Yunnan
University, and the Department of General Surgery, The First People's Hospital of
Kunming, Kunming, Yunnan 650091, China.

Elevated homocysteine levels are defined as hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy), a
disorder that is associated with cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases as
well as with hepatic fibrosis. Recent studies have shown that HHcy promotes
hepatic injury by increasing oxidative stress. Although homocysteine induces cell
cycle arrest in a variety of different cell types, it is not known whether HHcy
has a definitive role in hepatocyte proliferation during liver regeneration. In
this report, we investigated the effect of homocysteine on liver regeneration.
Our results demonstrated that mice with HHcy exhibited an impairment in liver
regeneration after partial hepatectomy, as measured by immunohistochemical
staining of proliferation cell nuclear antigen and bromodeoxyuridine
incorporation. Impaired proliferation was also correlated with reduced cyclin D1 
induction and elevated expression levels of both p53 and p21Cip1. In addition,
the phosphorylation of Akt, which plays an essential role in normal regeneration 
responses, was attenuated during the early phases of liver regeneration in HHcy
mice. Our results also indicated that the cAMP/protein kinase A pathway mediated 
the inhibitory effect of homocysteine on liver regeneration. These findings
provide evidence that impairment of liver regeneration by HHcy may result in
delayed recovery from liver injury induced by homocysteine itself.

PMCID: PMC2966794
PMID: 20864682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Nat Med. 2010 Oct;16(10):1152-6. doi: 10.1038/nm.2214. Epub 2010 Sep 19.

Cryptochrome mediates circadian regulation of cAMP signaling and hepatic
gluconeogenesis.

Zhang EE(1), Liu Y, Dentin R, Pongsawakul PY, Liu AC, Hirota T, Nusinow DA, Sun
X, Landais S, Kodama Y, Brenner DA, Montminy M, Kay SA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell & Developmental Biology, Division of Biological Sciences,
University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2010 Oct;16(10):1074-6.

During fasting, mammals maintain normal glucose homeostasis by stimulating
hepatic gluconeogenesis. Elevations in circulating glucagon and epinephrine, two 
hormones that activate hepatic gluconeogenesis, trigger the cAMP-mediated
phosphorylation of cAMP response element-binding protein (Creb) and
dephosphorylation of the Creb-regulated transcription coactivator-2 (Crtc2)--two 
key transcriptional regulators of this process. Although the underlying mechanism
is unclear, hepatic gluconeogenesis is also regulated by the circadian clock,
which coordinates glucose metabolism with changes in the external environment.
Circadian control of gene expression is achieved by two transcriptional
activators, Clock and Bmal1, which stimulate cryptochrome (Cry1 and Cry2) and
Period (Per1, Per2 and Per3) repressors that feed back on Clock-Bmal1 activity.
Here we show that Creb activity during fasting is modulated by Cry1 and Cry2,
which are rhythmically expressed in the liver. Cry1 expression was elevated
during the night-day transition, when it reduced fasting gluconeogenic gene
expression by blocking glucagon-mediated increases in intracellular cAMP
concentrations and in the protein kinase A-mediated phosphorylation of Creb. In
biochemical reconstitution studies, we found that Cry1 inhibited accumulation of 
cAMP in response to G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) activation but not to
forskolin, a direct activator of adenyl cyclase. Cry proteins seemed to modulate 
GPCR activity directly through interaction with G(s)a. As hepatic overexpression 
of Cry1 lowered blood glucose concentrations and improved insulin sensitivity in 
insulin-resistant db/db mice, our results suggest that compounds that enhance
cryptochrome activity may provide therapeutic benefit to individuals with type 2 
diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2952072
PMID: 20852621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Oct 26;107(43):18487-92. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1001252107. Epub 2010 Sep 17.

Induction of long interspersed nucleotide element-1 (L1) retrotransposition by
6-formylindolo[3,2-b]carbazole (FICZ), a tryptophan photoproduct.

Okudaira N(1), Iijima K, Koyama T, Minemoto Y, Kano S, Mimori A, Ishizaka Y.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8655,
Japan.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Oct 26;107(43):18239-40.

Long interspersed nucleotide element-1 (L1) is a retroelement comprising about
17% of the human genome, of which 80-100 copies are competent as mobile elements 
(retrotransposition: L1-RTP). Although the genetic structures modified during
L1-RTP have been clarified, little is known about the cellular signaling cascades
involved. Herein we found that 6-formylindolo[3,2-b]carbazole (FICZ), a
tryptophan photoproduct postulated as a candidate physiological ligand of the
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), induces L1-RTP. Notably, RNA-interference
experiments combined with back-transfection of siRNA-resistant cDNAs revealed
that the induction of L1-RTP by FICZ is dependent on AhR nuclear translocator-1
(ARNT1), a binding partner of AhR, and the activation of cAMP-responsive
element-binding protein. However, our extensive analyses suggested that AhR is
not required for L1-RTP. FICZ stimulated the interaction of the L1-encoded open
reading frame-1 (ORF1) and ARNT1, and recruited ORF1 to chromatin in a manner
dependent on the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase. Along with our
additional observations that the cellular cascades for FICZ-induced L1-RTP were
different from those of L1-RTP triggered by DNA damage, we propose that the
presence of the cellular machinery of ARNT1 mediates L1-RTP. A possible role of
ARNT1-mediated L1-RTP in the adaptation of living organisms to environmental
changes is discussed.

PMCID: PMC2973001
PMID: 20852066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Hippocampus. 2011 Nov;21(11):1169-79. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20844. Epub 2010 Sep 16.

Extinction of spatial memory alters CREB phosphorylation in hippocampal CA1.

Porte Y(1), Trifilieff P, Wolff M, Micheau J, Buhot MC, Mons N.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Neurosciences Intégratives et Cognitives, Talence, France.

Although the importance of cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB)
phosphorylation in long-term memory formation is well documented for
hippocampus-dependent tasks, little is known about the changes in phosphorylated 
CREB (pCREB) that occur during the process of extinction. The purpose of this
study was to characterize the temporal patterns of pCREB in the CA1 and the
amygdala after the extinction of previously acquired spatial information in the
water maze. Mice were trained to find a hidden platform located at a fixed
position and then were given extinction sessions in which the platform was either
absent (NoPF) or relocated every day (RandomPF). We show that water maze spatial 
training evoked a biphasic response of pCREB in the CA1, with two different peaks
occurring 15 min and 8 h postacquisition. The extinction of the original spatial 
preference significantly reduced the two peaks of CA1 pCREB in both RandomPF and 
NoPF groups whereas CA1 pCREB at 60 min post-training remained unaffected.
Moreover, the early and late phases of extinction training produced regionally
dissociable effects on pCREB in the CA1 and the lateral nucleus of the amygdala. 
These findings provide new insights on the molecular dynamics and anatomical
dissociations underlying spatial memory and extinction learning.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 20848600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Circ Res. 2010 Nov 12;107(10):1275-89. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.229054. Epub
2010 Sep 16.

Loss of PI3K<U+03B3> enhances cAMP-dependent MMP remodeling of the myocardial N-cadherin
adhesion complexes and extracellular matrix in response to early biomechanical
stress.

Guo D(1), Kassiri Z, Basu R, Chow FL, Kandalam V, Damilano F, Liang W, Izumo S,
Hirsch E, Penninger JM, Backx PH, Oudit GY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Mazankowski Alberta Heart
Institute, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

RATIONALE: Mechanotransduction and the response to biomechanical stress is a
fundamental response in heart disease. Loss of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)<U+03B3>,
the isoform linked to G protein-coupled receptor signaling, results in increased 
myocardial contractility, but the response to pressure overload is controversial.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize molecular and cellular responses of the PI3K<U+03B3> knockout
(KO) mice to biomechanical stress.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In response to pressure overload, PI3K<U+03B3>KO mice deteriorated 
at an accelerated rate compared with wild-type mice despite increased basal
myocardial contractility. These functional responses were associated with
compromised phosphorylation of Akt and GSK-3a. In contrast, isolated single
cardiomyocytes from banded PI3K<U+03B3>KO mice maintained their hypercontractility,
suggesting compromised interaction with the extracellular matrix as the primary
defect in the banded PI3K<U+03B3>KO mice. ß-Adrenergic stimulation increased cAMP levels
with increased phosphorylation of CREB, leading to increased expression of
cAMP-responsive matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), MMP2, MT1-MMP, and MMP13 in
cardiomyocytes and cardiofibroblasts. Loss of PI3K<U+03B3> resulted in increased cAMP
levels with increased expression of MMP2, MT1-MMP, and MMP13 and increased MMP2
activation and collagenase activity in response to biomechanical stress.
Selective loss of N-cadherin from the adhesion complexes in the PI3K<U+03B3>KO mice
resulted in reduced cell adhesion. The ß-blocker propranolol prevented the
upregulation of MMPs, whereas MMP inhibition prevented the adverse remodeling
with both therapies, preventing the functional deterioration in banded PI3K<U+03B3>KO
mice. In banded wild-type mice, long-term propranolol prevented the adverse
remodeling and systolic dysfunction with preservation of the N-cadherin levels.
CONCLUSIONS: The enhanced propensity to develop heart failure in the PI3K<U+03B3>KO mice
is attributable to a cAMP-dependent upregulation of MMP expression and activity
and disorganization of the N-cadherin/ß-catenin cell adhesion complex. ß-Blocker 
therapy prevents these changes thereby providing a novel mechanism of action for 
these drugs.

PMID: 20847309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2010 Aug;35(8):833-9. doi:
10.3969/j.issn.1672-7347.2010.08.010.

[Change of p-CREB after surgical incisional pain in rat spinal cord].

[Article in Chinese]

Cui Y(1), Xu J, Dai R, Li C, Liu D, Yang L, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha 410011, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the role of phosphorylation of cAMP response element
binding protein (CREB) in the incision-induced pain hypersensitivity.
METHODS: A longitudinal incision was made in one plantar hind paw of
isoflurane-anesthetized rats. Spinal cords were removed at various postoperative 
time after behavior test. Phosphorylation of CREB was determined by
immunohistochemistry and double-labeling immunofluorescence. Morphine and
gabapentin were intraperitoneally injected before the behavior test and were used
to determine the interaction between phosphorylation of CREB and morphine and
gabapentin.
RESULTS: After the hind-paw incision, phosphorylation of CREB was enhanced in the
ipsilateral lumbar spinal cord (P<0.05). The enhancement of p-CREB was mainly in 
the neurons in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. All these were shown by
double-labeling technique and p-CREB was mainly in the neurons. Intraperitoneal
injection of morphine prevented the increased phosphorylation of CREB in the
spinal cord and inhibited the mechanical allodynia induced by the incision
(P>0.05). Gabapentin didn't inhibit the phosphorylation of CREB (P<0.05) but
partly inhibited the mechanical allodynia.
CONCLUSION: Incision induces the phosphorylation of CREB in the spinal cord, and 
the increase of p-CREB is mainly in the neurons. Phosphorylation of CREB in the
spinal cord contributes to the pain hypersensitivity induced by surgical
incision.

PMID: 20818076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Psychopharmacol. 2011 Jul;25(7):982-94. doi: 10.1177/0269881110376692. Epub
2010 Sep 3.

Knocking down the transcript of protein kinase C-lambda modulates hypothalamic
glutathione peroxidase, melanocortin receptor and neuropeptide Y gene expression 
in amphetamine-treated rats.

Hsieh YS(1), Yang SF, Chen PN, Chu SC, Chen CH, Kuo DY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Chung Shan Medical University
Hospital, Taiwan, R.O.C.

It has been reported that neuropeptide Y (NPY) contributes to the behavioral
response of amphetamine (AMPH), a psychostimulant. The present study examined
whether protein kinase C (PKC)-<U+03BB> signaling was involved in this action. Moreover,
possible roles of glutathione peroxidase (GP) and melanocortin receptor 4 (MC4R) 
were also examined. Rats were given AMPH daily for 4 days. Hypothalamic NPY,
PKC<U+03BB>, GP and MC4R were determined and compared. Pretreatment with
a-methyl-para-tyrosine could block AMPH-induced anorexia, revealing that
endogenous catecholamine was involved in regulating AMPH anorexia. PKC<U+03BB>, GP and
MC4R were increased with maximal response on Day 2 during AMPH treatment, which
were concomitant with the decreases in NPY. cAMP response element binding protein
(CREB) DNA binding activity was increased during AMPH treatment, revealing the
involvement of CREB-dependent gene transcription. An interruption of cerebral
PKC<U+03BB> transcript could partly block AMPH-induced anorexia and partly reverse NPY, 
MC4R and GP mRNA levels to normal. These results suggest that PKC<U+03BB> participates
in regulating AMPH-induced anorexia via a modulation of hypothalamic NPY gene
expression and that increases of GP and MC4R may contribute to this modulation.
Our results provided molecular evidence for the regulation of AMPH-induced
behavioral response.

PMID: 20817751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Neurotoxicology. 2010 Dec;31(6):647-53. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2010.08.006. Epub
2010 Sep 8.

Does early life toluene exposure alter the expression of NMDA receptor subunits
and signal transduction pathway in infant mouse hippocampus?

Win-Shwe TT(1), Yoshida Y, Kunugita N, Tsukahara S, Fujimaki H.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Environmental Studies, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

We aim to investigate the critical window of susceptibility to toluene exposure
during brain development and the effects of fetal and neonatal toluene exposure
on the expression of N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor subunits and related
transduction pathway in infant mice hippocampus. Pregnant mice (GD 14), male
offspring (postnatal day; PND 2) or PND 8 were exposed to either a filtered air
control (0ppm), or 5, or 50ppm of toluene for 6h per day for 5 consecutive days. 
On PND 21, the expression levels of NMDA receptor subunits, cyclic AMP responsive
element binding protein (CREB)-1, calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase
(CaMK)-IV, and apoptotic related genes (Bax, Bcl) mRNAs in the hippocampus were
estimated using quantitative real-time RT-PCR and immunohistochemical analyses.
NR2B, CaMKIV and CREB1 mRNAs increased significantly in the hippocampus of mice
exposed to 50ppm toluene on PND 2-6. In contrast, almost all memory
function-related gene mRNAs and proapoptotic and anti-apoptotic ratio increased
significantly in mice exposed to 5 or 50ppm toluene on PND 8-12. However, mice
exposed to toluene on GD 14-18 showed no significant change. Increased active
caspase-3 immunoreactive cells were found in hippocampal CA1 area of PND 21 male 
mice exposed to 5ppm toluene during PND 8-12. Our results suggest that late
postnatal period may be a vulnerable and critical period to toluene exposure.
Then, we have also examined the effect of toluene exposure in brain development
on learning ability in young adult mice and found that poor spatial learning
performance in PND 49 male mice exposed to 5ppm toluene during critical period.
This is the first study to show that the early toluene exposure induces
persistent of the alteration of memory function-related genes in infant mice and 
memory deficit in later life via modulating the synaptic morphology and function.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20804784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2011 Jan;46(1):79-88. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2010.08.008. Epub
2010 Aug 27.

CREB signalling regulates early survival, neuronal gene expression and
morphological development in adult subventricular zone neurogenesis.

Herold S(1), Jagasia R, Merz K, Wassmer K, Lie DC.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Adult Neurogenesis and Neural Stem Cells, Institute of
Developmental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for
Environmental Health, 85764 Munich-Neuherberg, Germany.

Neural stem cells in the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the lateral ventricles give
rise to new interneurons of the olfactory bulb (OB) throughout life. SVZ/OB
neurogenesis is influenced by olfactory network activity, which modulates the
survival of new neurons during their integration into the OB network. Previous
work suggested that such activity-dependent survival is regulated via the CREB
signalling pathway. Curiously, CREB signalling is already active during the early
developmental stages of adult SVZ/OB neurogenesis. To investigate the role of
cell autonomous CREB signalling during early stages of adult SVZ/OB neurogenesis,
we ablated CREB-pathway activity in the SVZ/OB neurogenic lineage using a
retroviral strategy. Surprisingly, loss of CREB signalling resulted in increased 
cell death and loss of expression of the neurogenic transcription factor Pax 6,
and of a subset of neuronal proteins in migrating neurons of the RMS. Moreover,
post-migratory neurons in the OB displayed impaired dendritic development. These 
results demonstrate an essential role for CREB signalling in maturation of
newborn neurons in the OB and uncover a novel role for CREB signalling in the
survival and maintenance of neuronal gene expression during the early stages of
SVZ/OB neurogenesis.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20801218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Brain Res. 2010 Dec 10;1364:129-38. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.08.057. Epub
2010 Aug 25.

Kisspeptins: bridging energy homeostasis and reproduction.

Castellano JM(1), Bentsen AH, Mikkelsen JD, Tena-Sempere M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, University of Córdoba, 
Spain.

Body energy reserves and metabolic state are relevant modifiers of puberty onset 
and fertility; forms of metabolic stress ranging from persistent energy
insufficiency to morbid obesity are frequently linked to reproductive disorders. 
The mechanisms for such a close connection between energy balance and
reproduction have been the subject of considerable attention; however, our
understanding of the neurobiological basis for this phenomenon is still
incomplete. In mid 1990s, the adipose-hormone, leptin, was proven as an essential
signal for transmitting metabolic information onto the centers governing puberty 
and reproduction; yet, the ultimate mode of action of leptin on GnRH neurons has 
remained contentious for years. More recently, kisspeptins, a family of
neuropeptides encoded by the Kiss1 gene, have emerged as conduits for the
metabolic regulation of reproduction and putative effectors of leptin actions on 
GnRH neurons. This review recapitulates the experimental evidence obtained to
date, mostly in laboratory rodents, supporting the function of kisspeptins in
bridging energy balance and reproduction, with special emphasis on recent
developments in this field, such as the recognition of mTOR (mammalian target of 
rapamycin) and Crtc1 (Creb1-regulated transcription coactivator-1) as putative
mediators for leptin regulation of Kiss1 expression, as well as the
identification of other potential metabolic modulators of kisspeptin signaling,
such as ghrelin, neuropeptide Y (NPY) and melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH).

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20800054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Int J Cancer. 2011 Jun 1;128(11):2602-12. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25600. Epub 2010 Oct
8.

VEGF stimulates PKD-mediated CREB-dependent orphan nuclear receptor Nurr1
expression: role in VEGF-induced angiogenesis.

Zhao D(1), Desai S, Zeng H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterolgy, Center for Vascular Biology Research, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215.
dzhao@bidmc.harvard.edu

New vessel formation is critical for solid tumor growth and it is primarily
stimulated by the most potent angiogenic factor vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF or VEGF-A165). VEGF promotes endothelial cell proliferation by
initiating signaling cascades to increase gene transcription. Recent works showed
that VEGF potently and rapidly induces expression of orphan nuclear receptor
Nurr1 in endothelial cells. However, the signaling pathway for VEGF-induced Nurr1
expression and its role in VEGF-induced endothelial cell proliferation and
angiogenic response have not been examined. In our study, we first show that VEGF
significantly induces expression of Nurr1 mRNA, protein and its promoter activity
in cultured endothelial cells. Furthermore, the promoter analysis shows that
deletion of the putative cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) site in
the proximal region of the promoter markedly reduces VEGF-induced promoter
activity whereas deletion of the upstream NF-<U+03BA>B site has moderate effect.
Transfection of a dominant negative CREB mutant (K-CREB) or mutation of this
putative CREB site in the Nurr1 promoter attenuates VEGF-induced Nurr1
expression. VEGF also stimulates the binding of nuclear CREB protein to its site 
in the Nurr1 promoter in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, using pharmacological
inhibitors and molecular approaches, we show that VEGF-induced CREB activation is
largely mediated by protein kinase C-dependent protein kinase D activation.
Finally, our data indicate that knockdown of endogenous Nurr1 expression
attenuates VEGF-induced endothelial cell proliferation, migration and in vivo
matrigel angiogenesis, suggesting its potential importance in mediating
VEGF-induced tumor angiogenesis.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMID: 20715116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Brain Res. 2010 Oct 8;1355:141-50. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.07.098. Epub 2010
Aug 5.

Mismatch between changes in baicalein-induced memory-related biochemical
parameters and behavioral consequences in mouse.

Park SJ(1), Kim DH, Kim JM, Shin CY, Cheong JH, Ko KH, Ryu JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical Science, College of Pharmacy, Kyung 
Hee University, #1 Hoeki-dong, Dongdaemoon-Ku, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea.

Baicalein is one of the major flavonoids originally isolated from the roots of
Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi (Labiatae). Reports on baicalein-induced changes
in memory-related biochemical parameters including extracellular signal-regulated
kinases (ERK), Akt, cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB), and
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) have been scarce, and the action of
baicalein is controversial. Baicalein promotes phosphorylation of ERK under
normal conditions; on the other hand, it inhibits phosphorylation of ERK
extracellularly under oxidative conditions. In the present study, we observed
that baicalein (20mg/kg, p.o.) as compared to vehicle significantly increased the
expression of phosphorylated ERK (pERK), phosphorylated CREB (pCREB), and BDNF
but did not increase phosphorylated Akt expression in the hippocampus of naive
mice. Baicalein also significantly increased the expression of pERK and BDNF in
the cortex of naive mice. However, baicalein had no effect on memory acquisition 
in the step-through passive avoidance task. On the contrary, baicalein (20mg/kg, 
p.o.) co-injected with flumazenil (10mg/kg, i.p.) significantly increased the
retention latency in the passive avoidance task in comparison to the
flumazenil-treated group, baicalein-treated group, and vehicle-treated control
group. In addition, the number of platform crossings in the Morris water maze
test during the probe trial session was significantly increased by
co-administration of baicalein with flumazenil. Furthermore, the expressions
level of BDNF was significantly increased in the baicalein with
flumazenil-treated group compared to the baicalein- or flumazenil-treated groups 
in the hippocampus after an acquisition trial. These results suggest that the
reasons why baicalein does not exert cognitive enhancement although it enhances
the expression levels of pERK, pCREB, and BDNF are, in part, derived from its
GABA(A) receptor agonistic property which is antagonized by flumazenil.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20691671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Biochem Pharmacol. 2010 Nov 1;80(9):1365-72. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2010.07.032. Epub
2010 Aug 3.

Dimethylcelecoxib inhibits mPGES-1 promoter activity by influencing EGR1 and
NF-<U+03BA>B.

Deckmann K(1), Rörsch F, Steri R, Schubert-Zsilavecz M, Geisslinger G, Grösch S.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmazentrum Frankfurt/ZAFES, Institute for Clinical Pharmacology, Johann
Wolfgang Goethe-University Frankfurt, Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

DMC
(dimethylcelecoxib={4-[5-(2,5-dimethylphenyl)-3(trifluoromethyl)-1H-pyrazol-1-yl]
benzenesulfonamide}) is a close derivative of celecoxib, without cyclooxygenase
inhibiting properties up to very high concentrations. Nevertheless, after
stimulation of various human cell lines with IL-1ß/TNFa and simultaneous
treatment with DMC PGE(2) synthesis is inhibited [1]. Here we investigated the
effect of DMC on mPGES-1 promoter activity, using a reporter gene assay. Our data
demonstrate that DMC inhibits mPGES-1 promoter activity by blocking nuclear EGR1 
expression and repressing NF-<U+03BA>B transcriptional activity. Other putative
transcription factors, known to regulate mPGES-1 expression, such as SP1 or CREB 
are not affected by DMC. Over-expression of EGR1 completely prevents the
inhibitory effect of DMC on mPGES-1 promoter activity, indicating that the
repressing effect of DMC on mPGES-1 expression is mainly dependent on blocking
EGR1 expression. mPGES-1, EGR1 and NF-<U+03BA>B are important proteins involved in many 
pathological conditions such as inflammation and cancer. Therefore, DMC seems to 
be a promising substance to treat inflammatory and carcinogenic processes,
although it does not inhibit cyclooxygenases.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20688046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2010 Sep;17(9):1377-80. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00242-10. Epub
2010 Aug 4.

CREB is a positive transcriptional regulator of gamma interferon in latent but
not active tuberculosis infections.

Liu Y(1), Guo YL, Zhou SJ, Liu F, Du FJ, Zheng XJ, Jia HY, Zhang ZD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Mycobacteria, Beijing Tuberculosis and
Thoracic Tumor Research Institute, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) is a crucial cytokine for protection against
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, but the mechanism of IFN-gamma transcription is still
unclear. The cyclic AMP (cAMP) responsive element binding (CREB) proteins belong 
to the bZip (basic leucine zipper) family of transcription factors and are
essential for T-cell function and cytokine production. This study focused on the 
capacity of CREB proteins to regulate IFN-gamma transcription in CD3(+) T cells
obtained from tuberculosis (TB) patients and persons with latent tuberculosis
infection (LTBI) in China. The electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA),
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), and Western blotting were used to
demonstrate the regulatory role of CREB. EMSA (in vitro) and ChIP (in vivo)
experiments suggested CREB could bind to the IFN-gamma proximal promoter in
persons with LTBI, whereas no binding was detected in TB patients. Western
blotting confirmed the expression of CREB proteins, especially
serine-133-phosphorylated CREB, was markedly reduced in TB patients compared with
persons with LTBI. These results suggested that CREB could promote the
transcription and production of IFN-gamma through binding with the IFN-gamma
proximal promoter, but the regulatory role of CREB was decreased in tuberculosis 
patients owing to diminished expression of CREB proteins, which in turn reduced
the IFN-gamma production.

PMCID: PMC2944447
PMID: 20685939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 22;285(43):33018-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.137836. Epub
2010 Jul 30.

Pin1 associates with and induces translocation of CRTC2 to the cytosol, thereby
suppressing cAMP-responsive element transcriptional activity.

Nakatsu Y(1), Sakoda H, Kushiyama A, Ono H, Fujishiro M, Horike N, Yoneda M, Ohno
H, Tsuchiya Y, Kamata H, Tahara H, Isobe T, Nishimura F, Katagiri H, Oka Y,
Fukushima T, Takahashi S, Kurihara H, Uchida T, Asano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Science, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Hiroshima, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima City, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.

Pin1 is a unique regulator, which catalyzes the conversion of a specific
phospho-Ser/Thr-Pro-containing motif in target proteins. Herein, we identified
CRTC2 as a Pin1-binding protein by overexpressing Pin1 with Myc and FLAG tags in 
mouse livers and subsequent purification of the complex containing Pin1. The
association between Pin1 and CRTC2 was observed not only in overexpression
experiments but also endogenously in the mouse liver. Interestingly, Ser(136) in 
the nuclear localization signal of CRTC2 was shown to be involved in the
association with Pin1. Pin1 overexpression in HepG2 cells attenuated
forskolin-induced nuclear localization of CRTC2 and cAMP-responsive element (CRE)
transcriptional activity, whereas gene knockdown of Pin1 by siRNA enhanced both. 
Pin1 also associated with CRTC1, leading to their cytosol localization,
essentially similar to the action of CRTC2. Furthermore, it was shown that CRTC2 
associated with Pin1 did not bind to CREB. Taken together, these observations
indicate the association of Pin1 with CRTC2 to decrease the nuclear CBP·CRTC·CREB
complex. Indeed, adenoviral gene transfer of Pin1 into diabetic mice improved
hyperglycemia in conjunction with normalizing phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
mRNA expression levels, which is regulated by CRE transcriptional activity. In
conclusion, Pin1 regulates CRE transcriptional activity, by associating with
CRTC1 or CRTC2.

PMCID: PMC2963389
PMID: 20675384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Exp Med. 2010 Aug 2;207(8):1661-73. doi: 10.1084/jem.20092164. Epub 2010 Jul
26.

Elevated expression of TDP-43 in the forebrain of mice is sufficient to cause
neurological and pathological phenotypes mimicking FTLD-U.

Tsai KJ(1), Yang CH, Fang YH, Cho KH, Chien WL, Wang WT, Wu TW, Lin CP, Fu WM,
Shen CK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 704,
Taiwan.

TDP-43 is a multifunctional DNA/RNA-binding factor that has been implicated in
the regulation of neuronal plasticity. TDP-43 has also been identified as the
major constituent of the neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (NCIs) that are
characteristic of a range of neurodegenerative diseases, including the
frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin(+) inclusions (FTLD-U) and
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). We have generated a FTLD-U mouse model
(CaMKII-TDP-43 Tg) in which TDP-43 is transgenically overexpressed in the
forebrain resulting in phenotypic characteristics mimicking those of FTLD-U. In
particular, the transgenic (Tg) mice exhibit impaired learning/memory,
progressive motor dysfunction, and hippocampal atrophy. The cognitive and motor
impairments are accompanied by reduced levels of the neuronal regulators
phospho-extracellular signal-regulated kinase and phosphorylated cAMP response
element-binding protein and increased levels of gliosis in the brains of the Tg
mice. Moreover, cells with TDP-43(+), ubiquitin(+) NCIs and TDP-43-deleted nuclei
appear in the Tg mouse brains in an age-dependent manner. Our data provide direct
evidence that increased levels of TDP-43 protein in the forebrain is sufficient
to lead to the formation of TDP-43(+), ubiquitin(+) NCIs and neurodegeneration.
This FTLD-U mouse model should be valuable for the mechanistic analysis of the
role of TDP-43 in the pathogenesis of FTLD-U and for the design of effective
therapeutic approaches of the disease.

PMCID: PMC2916125
PMID: 20660618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Affect Disord. 2011 Jan;128(1-2):56-63. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2010.06.025.

A preliminary investigation of the influence of CREB1 gene on treatment
resistance in major depression.

Serretti A(1), Chiesa A, Calati R, Massat I, Linotte S, Kasper S, Lecrubier Y,
Antonijevic I, Forray C, Snyder L, Bollen J, Zohar J, De Ronchi D, Souery D,
Mendlewicz J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychiatry, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
alessandro.serretti@unibo.it

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor Cyclic adenosine monophosphate Response
Element Binding (CREB) protein has been repeatedly involved in the aetiology and 
pharmacotherapy of major depression (MD). The aim of this study was to
investigate the potential association of a set of single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in CREB1 gene and both MD and response, remission and treatment resistance
to antidepressants.
METHODS: One hundred-ninety MD patients collected in the context of a resistant
depression study and treated with antidepressants for at least 4weeks were
genotyped for 5 CREB1 SNPs (rs2709376, rs2253206, rs7569963, rs7594560, and
rs4675690). Response, remission and treatment resistance were recorded.
RESULTS: An allele of rs7569963 as well as rs2253206-rs7569963 A-A and
rs7569963-rs4675690 A-C haplotypes were associated with the status of treatment
resistance. Additionally, rs7569963 GG genotype was positively associated with
remission. No further significant associations were observed.
LIMITATIONS: Limitations of the present study include a relatively small sample
size and the incomplete ascertainment of data which could influence the outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results preliminary suggest that some genetic polymorphisms in
CREB1 could be associated to treatment resistance. Although such finding needs to
be replicated in larger samples, it increases current knowledge about the genetic
predictors of response to antidepressants that will probably lead to enhance
treatment outcomes by addressing each individual to the most appropriate
treatment strategy in the early stages of treatment.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20643483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Front Behav Neurosci. 2010 May 28;4:25. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2010.00025.
eCollection 2010.

Learning-Dependent Gene Expression of CREB1 Isoforms in the Molluscan Brain.

Sadamoto H(1), Kitahashi T, Fujito Y, Ito E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Functional Biology, Kagawa School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Tokushima Bunri University Sanuki, Japan.

Cyclic AMP-responsive element binding protein1 (CREB1) has multiple functions in 
gene regulation. Various studies have reported that CREB1-dependent gene
induction is necessary for memory formation and long-lasting behavioral changes
in both vertebrates and invertebrates. In the present study, we characterized
Lymnaea CREB1 (LymCREB1) mRNA isoforms of spliced variants in the central nervous
system (CNS) of the pond snail Lymnaea stagnalis. Among these spliced variants,
the three isoforms that code a whole LymCREB1 protein are considered to be the
activators for gene regulation. The other four isoforms, which code truncated
LymCREB1 proteins with no kinase inducible domain, are the repressors. For a
better understanding of the possible roles of different LymCREB1 isoforms, the
expression level of these isoform mRNAs was investigated by a real-time
quantitative RT-PCR method. Further, we examined the changes in gene expression
for all the isoforms in the CNS after conditioned taste aversion (CTA) learning
or backward conditioning as a control. The results showed that CTA learning
increased LymCREB1 gene expression, but it did not change the activator/repressor
ratio. Our findings showed that the repressor isoforms, as well as the activator 
ones, are expressed in large amounts in the CNS, and the gene expression of CREB1
isoforms appeared to be specific for the given stimulus. This was the first
quantitative analysis of the expression patterns of CREB1 isoforms at the mRNA
level and their association with learning behavior.

PMCID: PMC2901150
PMID: 20631825  [PubMed]


289. Brain Res. 2010 Sep 17;1352:108-17. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.06.058. Epub
2010 Jun 30.

Role of olfactory bulb serotonin in olfactory learning in the greater short-nosed
fruit bat, Cynopterus sphinx (Chiroptera: Pteropodidae).

Ganesh A(1), Bogdanowicz W, Haupt M, Marimuthu G, Rajan KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, School of Life Sciences, Bharathidasan
University, Tiruchirappalli, India.

The role of olfactory bulb (OB) serotonin [5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)] in
olfactory learning and memory was tested in the greater short-nosed fruit bat,
Cynopterus sphinx (family Pteropodidae). Graded concentrations (25, 40, and
60microg) of 5,7-dihydroxytryptamine (5,7-DHT) or saline were injected into the
OB of bats one day before training to the novel odor. In a behavioral test,
5,7-DHT (60microg) injected bats made significantly fewer feeding attempts and
bouts when compared to saline-injected bats during learning and in the memory
test. Subsequent biochemical analysis showed that 5-HT level was effectively
depleted in the OB of 5,7-DHT injected bats. To test odor-induced 5-HT mediated
changes in 5-HT receptors and second messenger cascade in the OB, we examined the
expression of 5-HT receptors and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/Erk
cascade after training to the novel odor. We found that odor stimulation
up-regulated the expression of 5-HT(1A) receptor, Erk1 and Creb1 mRNA, and
phosphorylation of ERK1 and CREB1. Odor stimulation failed to induce expression
in 5-HT-depleted bats, which is similar to control bats and significantly low
compared to saline-treated bats. Together these data revealed that the level of
5-HT in the OB may regulate olfactory learning and memory in C. sphinx through
Erk and CREB.

PMID: 20599808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Mol Cytogenet. 2010 Jul 2;3:12. doi: 10.1186/1755-8166-3-12.

Small blue round cell tumor of the interosseous membrane bearing a
t(2;22)(q34;q12)/EWS-CREB1 translocation: a case report.

Pacheco M(1), Horsman DE, Hayes MM, Clarkson PW, Huwait H, Nielsen TO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. torsten@interchange.ubc.ca.

BACKGROUND: The group of small blue round cell tumors encompasses a heterogeneous
group of neoplasms characterized by primitive appearing round cells with few
distinguishing histologic features.
RESULTS: We report the case of a small blue round cell tumor with an EWS gene
rearrangement detected by fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis that 
mimicked Ewing sarcoma, but with unusual histology and immunohistochemical
features. Multi-color karyotyping identified the presence of a t(2;22)(q34;q12)
that was initially expected to represent a variant EWSR1-FEV translocation. After
an extensive workup, the lesion is considered to represent a clear cell sarcoma
harboring an EWSR1-CREB1 fusion transcript.
CONCLUSIONS: This case appears to represent a rare variant of clear cell sarcoma 
arising in peripheral soft tissues with unusual histology and unique
immunophenotype. In this circumstance, FISH for all EWSR1 translocation partners 
or RT- PCR for a spectrum of possible transcript variants is critically important
for diagnosis, since cytogenetic analysis or clinical FISH assay using only
commercial EWSR1 probes will be misleading.

PMCID: PMC2908072
PMID: 20598147  [PubMed]


291. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Nov;225(3):801-9. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22288.

Leptin potentiates antiproliferative action of cAMP elevation via protein kinase 
A down-regulation in breast cancer cells.

Naviglio S(1), Di Gesto D, Illiano F, Chiosi E, Giordano A, Illiano G, Spina A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Second University of Naples,
Medical School, Naples, Italy. silvio.naviglio@unina2.it

Previously, we have shown that leptin potentiates the antiproliferative action of
cAMP elevating agents in breast cancer cells and that the protein kinase A (PKA) 
inhibitor KT-5720 prevented the antiproliferative effects induced by the leptin
plus cAMP elevation. The present experiments were designed to gain a better
understanding about the PKA role in the antitumor interaction between leptin and 
cAMP elevating agents and on the underlying signaling pathways. Here we show that
exposure of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells to leptin resulted in a strong
phosphorylation of both ERK1/2 and STAT3. Interestingly, intracellular cAMP
elevation upon forskolin pretreatment completely abrogated both ERK1/2 and STAT3 
phosphorylation in response to leptin and was accompanied by a consistent CREB
phosphorylation. Notably, leptin plus forskolin cotreatments resulted in a strong
decrease of both PKA regulatory RIa and catalytic subunits protein levels.
Importantly, pretreatment with the PKA inhibitor KT-5720 blocked the
forskolin-induced CREB phosphorylation and prevented both the inhibition by
forskolin of leptin-induced ERK1/2 and STAT3 phosphorylation and the PKA subunits
down-regulation induced by the combination of leptin and forskolin. Altogether,
our results indicate that leptin-dependent signaling pathways are influenced by
cAMP elevation and identify PKA as relevantly involved in the pharmacological
antitumor interaction between leptin and cAMP elevating drugs in MDA-MB-231
cells. We propose a molecular model by which PKA confers its effects. Potential
therapeutic applications by our data will be discussed.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20589829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Oral Sci. 2010 Jun;52(2):221-9.

Endothelin-1 regulates rat bone sialoprotein gene transcription.

Li X(1), Wang Z, Yang L, Li Z, Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Chiba, Japan.

Endothelin-1 (ET-1) was originally discovered as a vasoconstrictor protein
excreted by vascular endothelial cells. Recently, tumor-produced ET-1 has been
considered to stimulate osteoblasts to form new bone, and to be an important
mediator of osteoblastic bone metastasis. ET-1 has high affinity for two
different membrane receptors, ET(A)R and ET(B)R, which are expressed by many
types of cells including osteoblasts. Bone sialoprotein (BSP) is a phosphorylated
and sulfated glycoprotein associated with mineralized connective tissues. To
investigate the effects of ET-1 on BSP transcription, we used rat osteoblast-like
ROS17/2.8 cells. Levels of BSP and osteopontin mRNA were increased at 12 h after 
treatment with ET-1 (10 ng/ml), and ET-1 at the same concentration induced
luciferase activity of a -116 to +60 BSP promoter construct at 6 h.
Transcriptional activity of -84BSPLUC, which contains the cAMP response element
(CRE), was increased by ET-1. Furthermore, at 6 h, ET-1 (10 ng/ml) increased the 
binding of nuclear protein to CRE, the FGF2 response element (FRE) and the
homeodomain protein-binding site (HOX). Antibodies against CREB1, JunD and Fra2
disrupted the formation of CRE-protein complexes, while antibodies against Runx2 
and Dlx5 reduced the formation of FRE- and HOX-protein complexes. These findings 
indicate that ET-1 increases BSP transcription via the CRE, FRE and HOX sites in 
the rat BSP gene promoter.

PMID: 20587945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Jul 1;110(4):823-33. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22594.

Transcriptional regulation of bone sialoprotein gene by Porphyromonas gingivalis 
lipopolysaccharide.

Li X(1), Kato N, Mezawa M, Li Z, Wang Z, Yang L, Sasaki Y, Kaneko T, Takai H,
Yoshimura A, Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Chiba 271-8587, Japan.

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is a major mediator of inflammatory response.
Periodontopathic bacterium Porphyromonas gingivalis LPS has quite different
character from Escherichia coli LPS. E. coli LPS is agonist for Toll-like
receptor 4 (TLR4), whereas P. gingivalis LPS worked as antagonist for TLR4. Bone 
sialoprotein (BSP) is an early marker of osteoblast differentiation. To
investigate the effects of P. gingivalis LPS on BSP transcription, we used rat
osteoblast-like ROS17/2.8 cells. BSP mRNA levels were decreased by 0.1 microg/ml 
and increased by 0.01 microg/ml P. gingivalis LPS at 12 h. Results of luciferase 
assays showed that 0.1 microg/ml decreased and 0.01 microg/ml P. gingivalis LPS
increased BSP transcription in -116 to +60 BSP construct. The effects of P.
gingivalis LPS were abrogated by double mutations in cAMP response element (CRE) 
and FGF2 response element (FRE). Tyrosine kinase inhibitor herbimycin A, ERK1/2
inhibitor and antioxidant N-acetylcystein inhibited effects of P. gingivalis LPS.
Protein kinase A inhibitor and PI3-kinase/Akt inhibitor only abolished the effect
of 0.01 microg/ml P. gingivalis LPS. Furthermore, 0.1 microg/ml LPS decreased the
CRE- and FRE-protein complexes formation, whereas 0.01 microg/ml P. gingivalis
LPS increased the nuclear protein binding to CRE and FRE. ChIP assays revealed
increased binding of CREB1, JunD, Fra2, Runx2, Dlx5, and Smad1 to a chromatin
fragment containing the CRE and FRE by 0.01 microg/ml P. gingivalis LPS. These
studies therefore indicated that 0.1 microg/ml suppressed, and 0.01 microg/ml P. 
gingivalis LPS increased BSP gene transcription mediated through CRE and FRE
elements in the rat BSP gene promoter.

J. Cell. Biochem. 110: 823-833, 2010. (c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20564183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Behav Genet. 2010 Sep;40(5):680-93. doi: 10.1007/s10519-010-9374-9. Epub 2010 Jun
20.

De novo protein synthesis of syntaxin-1 and dynamin-1 in long-term memory
formation requires CREB1 gene transcription in Lymnaea stagnalis.

Guo CH(1), Senzel A, Li K, Feng ZP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON M5S 1A8, Canada.

Consolidation of aversive operant conditioning into long-term memory (LTM)
requires CREB-dependent de novo protein synthesis. The newly synthesized proteins
are distributed to the synapses in neurons that are involved in memory formation 
and storage. Accumulating evidence indicates that the presynaptic release
mechanisms also play a role in long-term synaptic plasticity. Our understanding
of whether the presynaptic proteins undergo de novo synthesis during long-term
memory formation is limited. In this study, we investigated the involvement of
syntaxin-1, a presynaptic exocytotic protein, and dynamin-1, an endocytotic
protein, in the formation of long-term memory. We took advantage of a
well-established aversive operant conditioning model of aerial respiratory
behavior in the fresh water pond snail Lymnaea stagnalis, and demonstrated that
the LTM formation is associated with increased expression of syntaxin-1 and
dynamin-1, coincident with elevated levels of CREB1. Partial knockdown of CREB1
gene by double stranded RNA inhibition (dsRNAi) prior to operant conditioning
prevented snails from memory consolidation, and reduced the expression of
syntaxin-1 and dynamin-1 at both mRNA and protein levels. These findings suggest 
that CREB1-mediated gene expression is required for the LTM-induced up-regulation
of synaptic proteins, syntaxin-1 and dynamin-1, in L. stagnalis. Our study thus
offers new insights into the molecular mechanisms that mediate CREB1-dependent
long-term memory formation.

PMID: 20563839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2010 Jun;3(3):229-31. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.110.957357.

cAMP responsive element binding protein 1: a missing link for heart rate
regulation?

Hagberg JM.

Comment on
    Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2010 Jun;3(3):294-9.

PMID: 20551419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Jun;27(3):263-6. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2010.0.006.

[Association of cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element-binding protein
gene and major depressive disorder].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu XH(1), Xu YF, Cui DH, Jiang SD, Qian YP, Yu SY, Jiang KD.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, 200030 
PR China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association between single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element-binding protein(CREB1) 
gene and major depressive disorder (MDD).
METHODS: We recruited 105 parent-offspring trios of Chinese descent, extracted
whole blood genomic DNA, and genotyped the SNPs in rs10932201 and rs6740584 loci.
Single-marker transmission disequilibrium test (TDT), pairwise SNP linkage
disequilibrium(LD) and haplotype-based TDT were performed.
RESULTS: No significant association with MDD was observed for SNPs rs10932201 and
rs6740584 (P=0.1004 and P=0.4986). However, there was strong positive association
between the rs10932201-rs6740584 haplotype and MDD (P=0.00003241), and both
haplotypes of A-C and A-T were significantly associated with MDD (P=0.020 and
P=0.00022).
CONCLUSION: The rs10932201-rs6740584 haplotype of the CREB1 gene may play an
important role in the pathogenesis of MDD.

PMID: 20533262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Hum Genet. 2010 Aug;128(2):205-12. doi: 10.1007/s00439-010-0843-2. Epub 2010 Jun 
9.

The CAG repeat in SCA12 functions as a cis element to up-regulate PPP2R2B
expression.

Lin CH(1), Chen CM, Hou YT, Wu YR, Hsieh-Li HM, Su MT, Lee-Chen GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, National Taiwan Normal University, 88 Ting-Chou
Road, Section 4, Taipei, 11677, Taiwan.

PPP2R2B, a protein widely expressed in neurons, regulates the protein phosphatase
2A (PP2A) activity for dephosphorylation of tau and other substrates. CAG repeat 
expansion at the 5'-end of the PPP2R2B gene causes autosomal dominant
spinocerebellar ataxia type 12. In the present study, we investigated the roles
of CAG repeats and flanking cis elements and the associated proteins in
controlling PPP2R2B expression. Deletion/site-directed mutagenesis, in silico
searches and cDNA overexpression revealed that CREB1 and SP1 bind to the
conserved sequence upstream the CAG repeats to up-regulate PPP2R2B expression,
whereas TFAP4 binds to the conserved sequence downstream the CAG repeats to
down-regulate PPP2R2B expression. The binding of CREB1, SP1, and TFAP4 to the
PPP2R2B promoter was further confirmed by DNA pull-down and ChIP-PCR assays. CAG 
repeats itself also function as a cis element to up-regulate PPP2R2B expression
as AT repeat length has no effect on PPP2R2B expression. Together, our data
provide evidence that CREB1, SP1, and TFAP4 play roles in modulating PPP2R2B
expression, thus offering a mechanism of regulating PP2A activity as the
treatment of neurodegenerative diseases associated with abnormal PP2A activity.

PMID: 20533062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. PLoS One. 2010 Jun 3;5(6):e10936. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010936.

"Topological significance" analysis of gene expression and proteomic profiles
from prostate cancer cells reveals key mechanisms of androgen response.

Vellaichamy A(1), Dezso Z, JeBailey L, Chinnaiyan AM, Sreekumar A, Nesvizhskii
AI, Omenn GS, Bugrim A.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, Internal Medicine, Human Genetics, School of
Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

BACKGROUND: The problem of prostate cancer progression to androgen independence
has been extensively studied. Several studies systematically analyzed gene
expression profiles in the context of biological networks and pathways,
uncovering novel aspects of prostate cancer. Despite significant research
efforts, the mechanisms underlying tumor progression are poorly understood. We
applied a novel approach to reconstruct system-wide molecular events following
stimulation of LNCaP prostate cancer cells with synthetic androgen and to
identify potential mechanisms of androgen-independent progression of prostate
cancer.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have performed concurrent measurements of gene
expression and protein levels following the treatment using microarrays and iTRAQ
proteomics. Sets of up-regulated genes and proteins were analyzed using our novel
concept of "topological significance". This method combines high-throughput
molecular data with the global network of protein interactions to identify nodes 
which occupy significant network positions with respect to differentially
expressed genes or proteins. Our analysis identified the network of growth factor
regulation of cell cycle as the main response module for androgen treatment in
LNCap cells. We show that the majority of signaling nodes in this network occupy 
significant positions with respect to the observed gene expression and proteomic 
profiles elicited by androgen stimulus. Our results further indicate that growth 
factor signaling probably represents a "second phase" response, not directly
dependent on the initial androgen stimulus.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We conclude that in prostate cancer cells the
proliferative signals are likely to be transmitted from multiple growth factor
receptors by a multitude of signaling pathways converging on several key
regulators of cell proliferation such as c-Myc, Cyclin D and CREB1. Moreover,
these pathways are not isolated but constitute an interconnected network module
containing many alternative routes from inputs to outputs. If the whole network
is involved, a precisely formulated combination therapy may be required to fight 
the tumor growth effectively.

PMCID: PMC2880599
PMID: 20532174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Pharmacogenomics. 2010 Jun;11(6):793-807. doi: 10.2217/pgs.10.64.

Pharmacogenomics of suicidal events.

Brent D(1), Melhem N, Turecki G.

Author information: 
(1)Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, 3811 O'Hara Street, Room 315
Bellefield Towers, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. brentda@upmc.edu

Pharmacogenomic studies of antidepressant treatment-emergent suicidal events in
depressed patients report associations with polymorphisms in genes involved in
transcription (CREB1), neuroprotection (BDNF and NTRK2), glutamatergic and
noradrenergic neurotransmission (GRIA3, GRIK2 and ADRA2A), the stress and
inflammatory responses (FKBP5 and IL28RA), and the synthesis of glycoproteins
(PAPLN). Nearly all of the reported events in these studies were modest one-time 
increases in suicidal ideation. In 3231 unique subjects across six studies, 424
(13.1%) patients showed increases in suicidal ideation, eight (0.25%) attempted
suicide and four (0.12%) completed suicide. Systems related to most of these
genes have also been implicated in studies of suicidal behavior irrespective of
treatment. Future pharmacogenomic studies should target events that are
clinically significant, related clinical phenotypes of response and medication
side effects, and biological pathways that are involved in these outcomes in
order to improve treatment approaches.

PMCID: PMC2921883
PMID: 20504254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Brain Res. 2010 Jul 23;1345:156-63. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.05.048. Epub
2010 May 24.

Differences in hippocampal CREB phosphorylation in trace fear conditioning of two
inbred mouse strains.

Hwang YK(1), Song JC, Han SH, Cho J, Smith DR, Gallagher M, Han JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Konkuk University, Seoul, South Korea.

The effects of genetic background on fear trace conditioning were evaluated in
relation to phosphorylated levels of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB)
in the hippocampus using two different inbred strains of mice, C57BL/6 and DBA/2.
The male mice received a trace fear conditioning protocol and unpaired control
groups were included to assess nonassociative effects on test performance. Both
C57BL/6 and DBA/2 mice with paired training displayed higher freezing responses
during testing than those with unpaired training, respectively. The C57BL/6 mice 
with paired training also displayed higher freezing responses to the tone-CS
during testing than the DBA/2 mice with paired training. Because much evidence
implicates the hippocampus as an important neural substrate for trace fear
conditioning, the engagement of the hippocampus was examined after testing by
measuring levels of CREB and phosphorylated CREB (pCREB). The results revealed
that hippocampal CREB levels in both strains of mice were not significantly
altered according to the type of training (unpaired vs. paired). However, the
hippocampal pCREB levels were significantly higher in the paired training group
than the unpaired control group in C57BL/6 mice, but not in DBA/2 mice. These
findings indicate that hippocampal pCREB is closely tied to this form of
associative conditioning only in C57BL/6 mice and that different neural
substrates may support trace conditioning in C57BL/6 and DBA/2 strains.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3219426
PMID: 20501325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Oncogene. 2010 Jul 29;29(30):4341-51. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.179. Epub 2010 May
24.

CCDC6 represses CREB1 activity by recruiting histone deacetylase 1 and protein
phosphatase 1.

Leone V(1), Mansueto G, Pierantoni GM, Tornincasa M, Merolla F, Cerrato A,
Santoro M, Grieco M, Scaloni A, Celetti A, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR c/o Dipartimento 
di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia
di Napoli, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy.

RET/papillary thyroid carcinoma 1 (PTC1) oncogene is frequently activated in
human PTCs. It is characterized by the fusion of the intracellular
kinase-encoding domain of RET to the first 101 amino acids of CCDC6. The aim of
our work is to characterize the function of the CCDC6 protein to better
understand the function of its truncation, that results in the loss of the
expression of one allele, in the process of thyroid carcinogenesis. Here, we
report that CCDC6 interacts with CREB1 and represses its transcriptional activity
by recruiting histone deacetylase 1 and protein phosphatase 1 proteins at the CRE
site of the CREB1 target genes. Finally, we show an increased CREB1
phosphorylation and activity in PTCs carrying the RET/PTC1 oncogene.
Consistently, an increased expression of two known CREB1 target genes, AREG and
cyclin A, was observed in this subgroup of thyroid papillary carcinomas.
Therefore, the repression of CREB1 activity by CCDC6 has a critical function in
the development of human thyroid papillary carcinomas carrying RET/PTC1
activation.

PMID: 20498639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Nat Med. 2010 Jun;16(6):671-7. doi: 10.1038/nm.2158. Epub 2010 May 23.

A genome-wide RNA interference screen reveals an essential CREB3L2-ATF5-MCL1
survival pathway in malignant glioma with therapeutic implications.

Sheng Z(1), Li L, Zhu LJ, Smith TW, Demers A, Ross AH, Moser RP, Green MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Programs in Gene Function and Expression and 
Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
Massachusetts, USA.

Activating transcription factor-5 (ATF5) is highly expressed in malignant glioma 
and has a key role in promoting cell survival. Here we perform a genome-wide RNAi
screen to identify transcriptional regulators of ATF5. Our results reveal an
essential survival pathway in malignant glioma, whereby activation of a
RAS-mitogen-activated protein kinase or phosphoinositide-3-kinase signaling
cascade leads to induction of the transcription factor cAMP response
element-binding protein-3-like-2 (CREB3L2), which directly activates ATF5
expression. ATF5, in turn, promotes survival by stimulating transcription of
myeloid cell leukemia sequence-1 (MCL1), an antiapoptotic B cell leukemia-2
family member. Analysis of human malignant glioma samples indicates that ATF5
expression inversely correlates with disease prognosis. The RAF kinase inhibitor 
sorafenib suppresses ATF5 expression in glioma stem cells and inhibits malignant 
glioma growth in cell culture and mouse models. Our results demonstrate that ATF5
is essential in malignant glioma genesis and reveal that the ATF5-mediated
survival pathway described here provides potential therapeutic targets for
treatment of malignant glioma.

PMCID: PMC2882506
PMID: 20495567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Learn Mem. 2010 May 21;17(6):280-3. doi: 10.1101/lm.1785510. Print 2010 Jun.

Dorsal hippocampal CREB is both necessary and sufficient for spatial memory.

Sekeres MJ(1), Neve RL, Frankland PW, Josselyn SA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neurosciences and Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Although the transcription factor CREB has been widely implicated in memory,
whether it is sufficient to produce spatial memory under conditions that do not
normally support memory formation in mammals is unknown. We found that locally
and acutely increasing CREB levels in the dorsal hippocampus using viral vectors 
is sufficient to induce robust spatial memory in two conditions that do not
normally support spatial memory, weakly trained wild-type (WT) mice and strongly 
trained mutant mice with a brain-wide disruption of CREB function. Together with 
previous results, these findings indicate that CREB is both necessary and
sufficient for spatial memory formation, and highlight its pivotal role in the
hippocampal molecular machinery underlying the formation of spatial memory.

PMID: 20495061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Psychiatr Res. 2010 Dec;44(16):1205-13. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2010.04.011. 
Epub 2010 May 14.

Clinical variations modulate patterns of gene expression and define blood
biomarkers in major depression.

Belzeaux R(1), Formisano-Tréziny C, Loundou A, Boyer L, Gabert J, Samuelian JC,
Féron F, Naudin J, Ibrahim EC.

Author information: 
(1)NICN-CNRS UMR 6184, Faculté de Médecine Nord-IFR Jean Roche, 51 Bd Pierre
Dramard, 13344 Marseille Cedex 15, France.

The aim of the study is to compare the expression level of candidate genes
between patients suffering from a severe major depressive episode (MDE) and
controls, and also among patients during MDE evolution. After a comprehensive
review of the biological data related to mood disorders, we initiated a
hypothesis-driven exploration of candidate mRNAs. Using RT-qPCR, we analyzed
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) mRNA obtained from a homogeneous
population of 11 patients who suffered from severe melancholic MDE. To assess the
evolution of MDE, we analyzed PBMC mRNAs that were collected on Day 1 and 8 weeks
later. Data from these patient samples were analyzed in comparison to age- and
sex-matched healthy controls. Among 40 candidate genes consistently transcribed
in PBMCs, 10 were differentially expressed in at least one comparison. We found
that variations of mRNA levels for NRG1, SORT1 and TPH1 were interesting
state-dependent biological markers of the disease. We also observed that
variations in other mRNA expression were associated with treatment efficacy or
clinical improvement (CREB1, HDAC5, HSPA2, HTR1B, HTR2A, and SLC6A4/5HTT).
Significantly, 5HTT exhibited a strong correlation with clinical score evolution.
We also found a state-independent marker, IL10. Moreover, the analysis of 2
separate MDEs concerning a same patient revealed comparable results for the
expression of CREB1, HSPA2, HTR1B, NRG1 and TPH1. Overall, our results indicate
that PBMCs obtained at different time points during MDE progression represent a
promising avenue to discover biological markers for depression.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20471034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Toxicol Lett. 2010 Aug 16;197(2):97-105. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2010.05.001. Epub 
2010 May 11.

Quercetin impairs learning and memory in normal mice via suppression of
hippocampal phosphorylated cyclic AMP response element-binding protein
expression.

Jung WY(1), Park SJ, Park DH, Kim JM, Kim DH, Ryu JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Kyung
Hee University, Hoeki-dong, Dongdaemoon-Ku, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea.

Quercetin is a naturally occurring dietary flavonol and several reports have
shown that quercetin substantially affects cognitive function in disease models, 
which suggests that quercetin might be a useful agent for treatment of memory
dysfunction. However, only one report has examined the effects of quercetin on
normal cognitive function. In the present study, we investigated the potential
deleterious effects of quercetin on normal cognitive function using Western blot 
assays and the following behavioral tasks: passive avoidance, Y-maze, and Morris 
water maze. In the passive avoidance task, pre-acquisition administration of
quercetin (10, 20, or 40 mg/kg, p.o.) caused significant cognitive impairments in
mice (P < 0.05 or P < 0.01). Quercetin-treated groups (10, 20, or 40 mg/kg, p.o.)
also showed significant memory impairments compared with the control group in the
Y-maze task (P < 0.05). In the Morris water maze task, there were no significant 
differences among the groups during training trial sessions, but at the probe
trial session, the quercetin-treated group (40 mg/kg, p.o.) spent significantly
less time in the target quadrant than did the control group (P < 0.05). In
Western blot assays of hippocampal tissue, we found that quercetin-treated groups
showed decreased expression of phosphorylated Akt (pAkt), phosphorylated
calcium-calmodulin kinase II (pCaMKII), and phosphorylated cyclic AMP response
element-binding protein (pCREB). These results suggest that acute administration 
of quercetin impairs cognitive function by suppression of pAkt and pCaMKII,
which, in turn, decreases pCREB expression in the hippocampus.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20466049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2010 Jun;298(6):C1445-56. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00508.2009. Epub 2010 Mar 24.

Prostaglandin E2 induces interleukin-6 expression in human chondrocytes via
cAMP/protein kinase A- and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-dependent NF-kappaB
activation.

Wang P(1), Zhu F, Konstantopoulos K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, The Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.

Elevated levels of prostaglandin (PG)E(2) and interleukin (IL)-6 have been
reported in the cartilage and synovial fluid from patients with arthritic
disorders. PGE(2) regulates IL-6 production in numerous different cells including
macrophages and synovial fibroblasts. Although PGE(2) stimulates IL-6 expression 
in human chondrocytes, the underlying signaling pathway of this process has yet
to be delineated. Here, we investigate the mechanism of IL-6 induction in human
T/C-28a2 chondrocytes treated with exogenously added PGE(2). PGE(2) induces IL-6 
mRNA and protein expression via a cAMP-dependent pathway, reaching maximal levels
after 60 min of stimulation before declining to baseline levels at 6 h.
Forskolin, an adenylyl cyclase activator, also stimulates IL-6 expression in
human chondrocytes in a dose- and time-dependent fashion. Inhibition of
downstream effectors of cAMP activity such as protein kinase A (PKA) or
phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI3K) blocks PGE(2)- and forskolin-induced IL-6
upregulation. Simultaneous inhibition of PKA and PI3K reduces IL-6 expression in 
stimulated chondrocytes well below the basal levels of untreated cells. Gel
shift, supershift, and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays reveal the activation
and binding of the nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB p65 subunit to the IL-6 promoter,
which is markedly suppressed by selective PI3K or PKA pharmacological inhibitors.
p65 knockdown completely abrogates IL-6 mRNA synthesis in PGE(2)- and
forskolin-primed chondrocytes. Cumulatively, our data show that PGE(2) and
forskolin induce IL-6 expression in human chondrocytes via cAMP/PKA and
PI3K-dependent pathways, which in turn regulate the activation and binding of p65
to the IL-6 promoter.

PMCID: PMC2889633
PMID: 20457835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Jul;30(7):1407-14. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.206425. Epub 2010 May 6.

Glucagon-like peptide 1 prevents reactive oxygen species-induced endothelial cell
senescence through the activation of protein kinase A.

Oeseburg H(1), de Boer RA, Buikema H, van der Harst P, van Gilst WH, Silljé HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, 9713AV Groningen, the Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Endothelial cell senescence is an important contributor to vascular
aging and is increased under diabetic conditions. Here we investigated whether
the antidiabetic hormone glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) could prevent oxidative 
stress-induced cellular senescence in endothelial cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In Zucker diabetic fatty rats, a significant 2-fold higher
level of vascular senescence was observed compared with control lean rats.
Dipeptidyl-peptidase 4 (DPP-4) inhibition significantly increased GLP-1 levels in
these animals and reduced senescence almost to lean animal levels. In vitro
studies with human umbilical vein endothelial cells showed that GLP-1 had a
direct protective effect on oxidative stress (H(2)O(2))-induced senescence and
was able to attenuate oxidative stress-induced DNA damage and cellular
senescence. The GLP-1 analogue exendin-4 provided similar results, whereas
exendin fragment 9-39, a GLP-1 receptor antagonist, abolished this effect.
Intracellular signaling by the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt survival
pathway did not appear to be involved. Further analysis revealed that GLP-1
activates the cAMP response element-binding (CREB) transcription factor in a
cAMP/protein kinase A (PKA)-dependent manner, and inhibition of the cAMP/PKA
pathway abolished the GLP-1 protective effect. Expression analysis revealed that 
GLP-1 can induce the oxidative defense genes HO-1 and NQO1.
CONCLUSIONS: Dipeptidyl-peptidase 4 inhibition protects against vascular
senescence in a diabetic rat model. In vitro studies with human umbilical vein
endothelial cells showed that reactive oxygen species-induced senescence was
attenuated by GLP-1 in a receptor-dependent manner involving downstream PKA
signaling and induction of antioxidant genes.

PMID: 20448207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Nitric Oxide. 2010 Sep 15;23(2):112-20. doi: 10.1016/j.niox.2010.04.009. Epub
2010 May 4.

Nitric oxide induction of IRE1-alpha-dependent CREB phosphorylation in human
glioma cells.

Kim YH(1), Joo HS, Kim DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, Yonsei 
University, Seoul 120-749, Republic of Korea. yeonhkim@yonsei.ac.kr

In this study, the function of nitric oxide (NO) in endoplasmic reticulum
(ER)-related cell death in human glioma cells was investigated. Treatment of
human CRT-MG cells with the NO donor S-nitroso-N-acetyl-d,l-penicillamine (SNAP) 
and thapsigargin, an ER stress inducer, increased cytosolic Ca(2+) and caused
apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner. Expression of the ER-associated molecules
inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1)-alpha, p-eIF, and Ero1-alpha were also
elevated in thapsigargin- or NO donor-treated cells. Furthermore, thapsigargin
and SNAP treatment increased IRE1-alpha nuclease activity, induced
IRE1-alpha/TRAF2 complex formation, and increased p-JNK1/2 levels, suggesting
that NO activates the IRE1-alpha/TRAF2/JNK pathway in the ER. Expression of
IRE1-alpha increased concomitantly with cAMP responsive element binding protein
(CREB) phosphorylation. siRNA knock down of IRE1-alpha reduced phospho-CREB
levels and abolished its nuclear translocation. The levels of phospho-CREB and
IRE1-alpha increased with NO donor concentration, which resulted in cell death.
IRE1-alpha and phospho-CREB levels in glioblastoma U87MG cells were higher than
those in normal astrocytes in response to NO. In addition, treatment with the
intracellular cytokine interleukin-1beta induced cell death associated with NO
and increased IRE1-alpha and p-CREB levels. These data reveal that intracellular 
NO affects IRE1-alpha-dependent CREB phosphorylation in human glioma cells.
Therefore, an IRE1-alpha-dependent phospho-CREB signaling pathway responsive to
NO/Ca(2+) may play an important role in regulating ER-related cell death in
glioma.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20447464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Med Sci (Paris). 2010 Apr;26(4):391-6. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2010264391.

[Adult T-cell leukemia induced by HTLV-1: before and after HBZ].

[Article in French]

Duc Dodon M(1), Mesnard JM, Barbeau B.

Author information: 
(1)virologie humaine, Inserm U758, 69364, Lyon Cedex 07, France.

Adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) is an often fatal leukemia of CD4+ T lymphocytes
associated with a complex retrovirus, human T-cell leukemia virus type 1
(HTLV-1). Although the viral Tax protein is involved in the proliferation of
infected cells during the preleukemic stages, Tax expression is not
systematically detected in primary leukemic cells. In 2002, we described the
characterization of a novel viral protein that we have termed HBZ for HTLV-1 bZIP
factor. This viral factor is encoded on the antisense strand of HTLV-1 proviral
DNA, demonstrating the existence of antisense transcription from a promoter
located in the 3' LTR. HBZ can negatively control the expression of the other
viral proteins by blocking the interaction between Tax and ATF/CREB factors and
the recruitment of CBP/p300 by Tax on the promoter. Moreover, recent studies
found that the viral HBZ gene was always expressed in leukemic cells, suggesting 
its involvement in the progression of the infected cells towards malignancy.

PMID: 20412744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Electrophoresis. 2010 Apr;31(8):1283-93. doi: 10.1002/elps.200900637.

Mapping of phosphorylation sites in human MSK1 activated by a novel interaction
with MRK-beta.

Wang W(1), Han G, Ye M, Shi H, Zou H, Huo K.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan
University, Shanghai, P. R. China.

The desire to map reliable phosphorylation signaling network has motivated the
development of high-performance techniques. Targeted biochemical studies and
updated methods employing MS techniques are most used in mapping the
phosphorylation sites and verifying novel interactions of kinases. Previously, we
have established a novel method to efficiently facilitate more comprehensive,
accurate phosphorylation site mapping of individual phosphoproteins by using
combination of multiple stage MS analysis with target-decoy database search
against the much smaller targeted database. In this study, by applying this
method, we have identified the phosphorylation sites in human MSK1 mitogen- and
stress-activated protein kinase 1, which has been proved to be a
multi-phosphorylated kinase that plays key roles in various cell functions,
activated by a novel interaction with MRK-beta. The results show that this method
can find out not only those previously identified active sites in MSK1, but also 
some novel phosphorylated sites, which correlates with biochemical evidence that,
besides p38 and extracellular signal-regulated kinase, MRK-beta could also
activate MSK1 through direct interaction. Hence, we conclude this method is
sensitive and reliable as expected and it can be further combined with automated 
screening and biochemical study in efficiently building up a more comprehensive
phosphoprotein network.

PMID: 20408143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2010 Apr;30(2):183-7. doi:
10.1007/s11596-010-0210-5. Epub 2010 Apr 21.

GHRP-6 induces CREB phosphorylation and growth hormone secretion via a protein
kinase Csigma-dependent pathway in GH3 cells.

Tian C(1), Ye F, Xu T, Wang S, Wang X, Wang H, Wan F, Lei T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, China.
chunleit.0223@yahoo.com.cn

This study examined the effect of GHRP-6, a known GHSs receptor agonist, on the
phosphorylation of cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB) and the underly
mechanism. GH3 cells were cultured and subjected to different treatments as
follows: GHRP-6, GHRP-6 plus GHRH, phorbol ester (PMA), an activator of PKC,
alone or in combination with GHRP-6, Gö6983, a general inhibitor of PKCs, in the 
presence or absence of GHRP-6, rottlerin, an inhibitor of PKCs, alone or plus
GHRP-6. The cells were transiently transfected with PKCsigma-specific siRNA and
then treated with GHRP-6. GH level was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA). The expression of phosphor-CREB, PKCsigma, PKCtheta and
phosphor-PKCsigma was determined by Western blotting. The results showed that
GHRP-6 stimulated GH secretion in both time- and dose-dependent manners and
enhanced the effect of GHRH on GH secretion. GHRP-6 was also found to induce CREB
phosphorylation. Moreover, GH secretion was enhanced by the PKC activator PMA and
reduced by the PKC inhibitors (Gö6983, rottlerin) and knockdown of PKCsigma.
PKCsigma could be activated by GHRP-6. It is concluded that PKC, especially
PKCsigma, mediates CREB phosphorylation and GHRP-6-induced GH secretion.

PMID: 20407870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2010 Jun;3(3):294-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.109.925644.
Epub 2010 Apr 20.

CREB1 is a strong genetic predictor of the variation in exercise heart rate
response to regular exercise: the HERITAGE Family Study.

Rankinen T(1), Argyropoulos G, Rice T, Rao DC, Bouchard C.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genomics Laboratory, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Louisiana
State University System, Baton Rouge, LA 70808-4124, USA. rankint@pbrc.edu

Comment in
    Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2010 Jun;3(3):229-31.

BACKGROUND: A genome-wide linkage scan identified a quantitative trait locus for 
exercise training-induced changes in submaximal exercise (50 W) heart rate
(DeltaHR50) on chromosome 2q33.3-q34 in the HERITAGE Family Study (n=472).
METHODS AND RESULTS: To fine-map the region, 1450 tag SNPs were genotyped between
205 and 215 Mb on chromosome 2. The strongest evidence of association with
DeltaHR50 was observed with 2 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located in
the 5' region of the cAMP-responsive element-binding protein 1 (CREB1) gene
(rs2253206: P=1.6x10(-5) and rs2360969: P=4.3x10(-5)). The associations remained 
significant (P=0.01 and P=0.023, respectively) after accounting for multiple
testing. Regression modeling of the 39 most significant SNPs in the single-SNP
analysis identified 9 SNPs that collectively explained 20% of the DeltaHR50
variance. CREB1 SNP rs2253206 had the strongest effect (5.45% of variance),
followed by SNPs in the FASTKD2 (3.1%), MAP2 (2.6%), SPAG16 (2.1%), ERBB4 (3 SNPs
approximately 1.4% each), IKZF2 (1.4%), and PARD3B (1.0%) loci. In conditional
linkage analysis, 6 SNPs from the final regression model (CREB1, FASTKD2, MAP2,
ERBB4, IKZF2, and PARD3B) accounted for the original linkage signal: The log of
the odds score dropped from 2.10 to 0.41 after adjusting for all 6 SNPs.
Functional studies revealed that the common allele of rs2253206 exhibits
significantly (P<0.05) lower promoter activity than the minor allele.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that functional DNA sequence variation in the CREB1
locus is strongly associated with DeltaHR50 and explains a considerable
proportion of the quantitative trait locus variance. However, at least 5
additional SNPs seem to be required to fully account for the original linkage
signal.

PMCID: PMC3045864
PMID: 20407090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Immunol. 2010 May 15;184(10):5545-52. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901293. Epub 2010 
Apr 16.

Calcium-activated pathways and oxidative burst mediate zymosan-induced signaling 
and IL-10 production in human macrophages.

Kelly EK(1), Wang L, Ivashkiv LB.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Cell Biology and Genetics, Weill Cornell Graduate School
of Medical Sciences, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Outside of the TLR paradigm, there is little understanding of how pathogen
recognition at the cell surface is linked to functional responses in cells of the
innate immune system. Recent work in this area demonstrates that the yeast
particle zymosan, by binding to the beta-glucan receptor Dectin-1, activates an
ITAM-Syk-dependent pathway in dendritic cells, which is required for optimal
cytokine production and generation of an oxidative burst. It remains unclear how 
activation of Syk is coupled to effector mechanisms. In human macrophages,
zymosan rapidly activated a calcium-dependent pathway downstream of Dectin-1 and 
Syk that led to activation of calmodulin-dependent kinase II and Pyk2.
Calmodulin-dependent kinase and Pyk2 transduced calcium signals into activation
of the ERK-MAPK pathway, CREB, and generation of an oxidative burst, leading to
downstream production of IL-10. These observations identify a new
calcium-mediated signaling pathway activated by zymosan and link this pathway to 
both inflammatory and anti-inflammatory responses in macrophages.

PMCID: PMC3016855
PMID: 20400701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Cancer Sci. 2010 Jun;101(6):1361-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01541.x. Epub
2010 Feb 24.

Human Arm protein lost in epithelial cancers, on chromosome X 1 (ALEX1) gene is
transcriptionally regulated by CREB and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling.

Iseki H(1), Takeda A, Andoh T, Takahashi N, Kurochkin IV, Yarmishyn A, Shimada H,
Okazaki Y, Koyama I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Digestive Surgery, Saitama Medical University, Saitama, Japan.

The aberrant activation of Wnt signaling is a key process in colorectal
tumorigenesis. Canonical Wnt signaling controls transcription of target genes via
beta-catenin and T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor family transcription
factor complex. Arm protein lost in epithelial cancers, on chromosome X 1 (ALEX1)
is a novel member of the Armadillo family which has two Armadillo repeats as
opposed to more than six repeats in the classical Armadillo family members. Here 
we examine cis-regulatory elements and trans-acting factors involved in the
transcriptional regulation of the ALEX1 gene. Site-directed mutations of a cyclic
AMP response element (CRE) and an E-box impaired the basal activity of human
ALEX1 promoter in colorectal and pancreatic cancer cell lines. Moreover,
overexpression of CRE-binding protein (CREB) increased the ALEX1 promoter
activity in these cell lines, whereas knockdown of CREB expression decreased the 
expression level of ALEX1 mRNA. Interestingly, luciferase reporter analysis and
quantitative real-time RT-PCR demonstrated that the ALEX1 promoter was
up-regulated in a CRE-dependent manner by continuous activation of
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling induced by a glycogen synthase kinase-3 inhibitor and 
overexpression of beta-catenin. These results indicate that the CRE and E-box
sites are essential cis-regulatory elements for ALEX1 promoter activity, and
ALEX1 expression is regulated by CREB and Wntk/beta-catenin signaling.

PMID: 20398052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Toxicol Lett. 2010 Jul 1;196(2):95-103. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2010.04.003. Epub
2010 Apr 10.

Gene markers in dendritic cells unravel pieces of the skin sensitization puzzle.

Lambrechts N(1), Vanheel H, Hooyberghs J, De Boever P, Witters H, Van Den Heuvel 
R, Van Tendeloo V, Nelissen I, Schoeters G.

Author information: 
(1)Flemish Institute for Technological Research (VITO N.V.), Environmental Risk
and Health Unit, Toxicology, Belgium. nathalie.lambrechts@vito.be
<nathalie.lambrechts@vito.be>

The underlying events of how dendritic cells (DC) are capable of evoking an
antigen-specific skin sensitization response are not yet understood. Recently, we
revealed a set of genes in human cord blood CD34(+) DC (CD34-DC) that show a
discriminating behaviour after skin sensitizing exposure. Based on their
differential expression, an in vitro assay was developed to identify chemicals as
sensitizing or not. This study was designed to investigate the genes' involvement
in the DC response to skin sensitizers and as such gain insights in the
sensitization cascade. Functional connection of the marker genes was inquired by 
constructing a molecular network using Ingenuity software. By real-time RT-qPCR, 
we established the effective expression of 3 additional gene transcripts in the
generated network in CD34-DC, of which CREB1 and TNF-alpha were significantly
altered in expression by sensitizing versus non-sensitizing exposure. Next, it
was tested whether the discriminating response of CCR2 and COX2 marker genes was 
translated at the protein level in CD34-DC exposed to 3 sensitizers versus 3
non-sensitizers. Significantly differential protein expression of CCR2 and COX2
was confirmed using flow cytometry. Our results indicate that the marker genes
may be functionally relevant in DC mediated skin sensitization.

PMID: 20385217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Eur J Neurosci. 2010 Apr;31(8):1465-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2010.07166.x.
Epub 2010 Apr 6.

Gene expression patterns in a rodent model for depression.

Lagus M(1), Gass N, Saharinen J, Saarela J, Porkka-Heiskanen T, Paunio T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Medicine FIMM, National Institute for Health and
Welfare, Biomedicum, Helsinki, Finland.

Disturbances in sleep are encountered in the majority of patients with
depression. To elucidate the possible molecular mechanisms behind this
relationship we examined gene expression changes in a rodent model for depression
and disturbed sleep. Animals were treated with daily injections of clomipramine
in their early infancy, after which gene expression in basal forebrain was
examined using Affymetrix Rat 230.2 chips. We tested the levels of both single
transcripts and involved pathways, and searched for common nominators (i.e.
transcription factors) that could explain these changes. We identified 72
differentially expressed gene transcripts, many of which are involved in
epigenetic regulation, such as DNMT2. Analysis of functional pathways revealed
statistically significant changes of the biological process of synaptic
transmission, the cellular compartment of the synapse and the molecular function 
of GABA signalling, showing that transcripts with altered expression are
functionally related. Finally, promoter analysis of the differentially expressed 
genes showed a clear enrichment of binding sites for the transcription factor
CREB1, a molecule also involved in epigenetic regulation (cAMP response
element-binding protein induces histone modifications). These results indicate
that CREB1 may constitute one of the major links between disturbed sleep and
mood. The results also highlight the molecular mechanisms in the murine
clomipramine model, previously shown to be a valid model for depression.

PMID: 20384783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat. 2010 Jun;92(1-4):77-84. doi:
10.1016/j.prostaglandins.2010.03.005. Epub 2010 Apr 8.

Effect of prostaglandin on luteinizing hormone-stimulated proliferation of theca 
externa cells from chicken prehierarchical follicles.

Jia Y(1), Lin J, Zeng W, Zhang C.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemic Etiology & Immunological Prevention of the
Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of Animal
Sciences, Zhejiang University, No. 268 Kaixuan Road, Hangzhou 310029, China.

The effect of prostaglandin (PG) on proliferation of chicken theca externa cells 
from prehierarchical small yellow follicles (SYF) was evaluated and involved
signaling pathways as well as mRNA expression of cAMP response element binding
protein (CREB1), cyclins (CCND1 and CCNE1) and cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs)
were investigated. Results showed that PGE(1) (1-100 ng/ml) manifested a similar 
proliferating effect as LH on theca externa cells, and this stimulating effect
was restrained by the prostaglandin receptor antagonist SC19220 at 10(-7) to
10(-5)M. Moreover, prostaglandin synthase inhibitor indomethacin (10(-7) to
10(-5)M) suppressed LH-induced increase in the cell number. In addition,
PGE(1)-stimulated cell proliferation was also predominantly hindered by H(89)
(PKA inhibitor) instead of H(7) (PKC inhibitor). Meanwhile, BrdU incorporation
experiment displayed similar changes with the cell number. Furthermore, H(89),
SC19220 and indomethacin abolished the PGE(1)-stimulated increase in the
expression of CREB1, CCND1/CDK6 and CCNE1/CDK2 mRNAs, indicating that
cAMP/PKA/CREB1 signaling cascade was involved in PGE(1)-stimulated DNA synthesis.
In conclusion, PG could promote proliferation of theca externa cells from
prehierarchical follicles through changes in cyclin D1/CDK6, cyclin E1/CDK2 and
CREB1 mRNA expression via cAMP/PKA and CREB1 signaling cascade. These results
suggest that PG may promote development of chicken prehierarchical follicles and 
is related to dominant follicle selection in laying hens.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20381633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Neurochem. 2010 Jun;113(6):1659-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06725.x. Epub
2010 Mar 31.

The exceptional properties of 9-methyl-beta-carboline: stimulation, protection
and regeneration of dopaminergic neurons coupled with anti-inflammatory effects.

Polanski W(1), Enzensperger C, Reichmann H, Gille G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Technical University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany.

Beta-carbolines (BCs) are potential endogenous and exogenous neurotoxins that may
contribute to the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease. However, we recently
demonstrated protective and stimulatory effects of 9-methyl-BC (9-me-BC) in
primary dopaminergic culture. In the present study, treatment with 9-me-BC
unmasked a unique tetrad of effects. First, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) expression 
was stimulated in pre-existing dopa decarboxylase immunoreactive neurons and
several TH-relevant transcription factors (Gata2, Gata3, Creb1, Crebbp) were
up-regulated. Neurite outgrowth of TH immunoreactive (THir) neurons was likewise 
stimulated. The interaction with tyrosine kinases (protein kinase A and C,
epidermal growth factor-receptor, fibroblast growth factor-receptor and neural
cell adhesion molecule) turned out to be decisive for these observed effects.
Second, 9-me-BC protected in acute toxicity models THir neurons against
lipopolysaccharide and 2,9-dime-BC(+) toxicity. Third, in a chronic toxicity
model when cells were treated with 9-me-BC after chronic rotenone administration,
a pronounced regeneration of THir neurons was observed. Fourth, 9-me-BC inhibited
the proliferation of microglia induced by toxin treatment and installed an
anti-inflammatory environment by decreasing the expression of inflammatory
cytokines and receptors. Finally, 9-me-BC lowered the content of alpha-synuclein 
protein in the cultures. The presented results warrant the exploration of 9-me-BC
as a novel potential anti-parkinsonian medication, as 9-me-BC interferes with
several known pathogenic factors in Parkinson's disease as outlined above.
Further investigations are currently under way.

PMID: 20374418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Neurochem. 2010 Nov;115(3):563-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06709.x. Epub 
2010 Aug 19.

Effects of the cell type-specific ablation of the cAMP-responsive transcription
factor in noradrenergic neurons on locus coeruleus firing and withdrawal behavior
after chronic exposure to morphine.

Parlato R(1), Cruz H, Otto C, Murtra P, Parkitna JR, Martin M, Bura SA,
Begus-Nahrmann Y, von Bohlen und Halbach O, Maldonado R, Schütz G, Lüscher C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology of the Cell I, German Cancer Research Center, 
Heidelberg, Germany. r.parlato@dkfz.de

Repeated exposure to opiates leads to cellular and molecular changes and
behavioral alterations reflecting a state of dependence. In noradrenergic
neurons, cyclic AMP (cAMP)-dependent pathways are activated during opiate
withdrawal, but their contribution to the activity of locus coeruleus
noradrenergic neurons and behavioral manifestations remains controversial. Here, 
we test whether the cAMP-dependent transcription factors cAMP responsive element 
binding protein (CREB) and cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) in
noradrenergic neurons control the cellular markers and the physical signs of
morphine withdrawal in mice. Using the Cre/loxP system we ablated the Creb1 gene 
in noradrenergic neurons. To avoid adaptive effects because of compensatory
up-regulation of CREM, we crossed the conditional Creb1 mutant mice with a
Crem-/- line. We found that the enhanced expression of tyrosine hydroxylase
normally observed during withdrawal was attenuated in CREB/CREM mutants.
Moreover, the withdrawal-associated cellular hyperactivity and c-fos expression
was blunted. In contrast, naloxone-precipitated withdrawal signs, such as
jumping, paw tremor, tremor and mastication were preserved. We conclude by a
specific genetic approach that the withdrawal-associated hyperexcitability of
noradrenergic neurons depends on CREB/CREM activity in these neurons, but does
not mediate several behavioral signs of morphine withdrawal.

© 2010 The Authors. Journal Compilation © 2010 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMID: 20367754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Arch Pharm Res. 2010 Mar;33(3):469-77. doi: 10.1007/s12272-010-0318-y. Epub 2010 
Mar 30.

Activation of CREB by St. John's wort may diminish deletorious effects of aging
on spatial memory.

Trofimiuk E(1), Holownia A, Braszko JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Bialystok,
Waszyngtona 15A, 15-274, Bialystok, Poland. e_trofim@umwb.edu.pl

St. John's wort (Hypericum perforatum) is one of the leading psychotherapeutic
phytomedicines. Beneficial effects of this herb in the treatment of mild to
moderate depression are well known. In this study we tested a hypothesis that St.
John's wort alleviates age-related memory impairments by increasing the levels of
cyclic adenosine 3', 5'-monophosphate response element binding protein (CREB) and
phosphorylated CREB (pCREB) in hippocampus. Middleaged rats (18 month-old)
displayed a decline in the acquisition of spatial working memory (p < 0.001) in
the Morris water maze (MWM). Chronic administration of Hypericum perforatum (HP) 
(350 mg/kg for 21 days), potently and significantly improved the processing of
spatial information in the aged rats (p < 0.001). Also the herb increased the
levels of pCREB in the aged rat's hippocampus (p < 0.01) as measured by western
immunoblotting. Aging caused significant locomotor impairments as tested in the
open field (p < 0.001) but not in the MWM test. However, these were unaffected by
treatment with HP. Thus, this study indicates that St. John's wort effectively
prevents aging-induced deterioration of spatial memory in 18 month-old rats,
possibly by the activation of CREB regulated genes associated with memory
formation. It appears that mechanism is probably inactive in young rats.

PMID: 20361314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Mar;12(3):177-80.

[Expression of CREB/Bcl-2 in bone marrow mononuclear cells of children with acute
leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wen C(1), Ma FT, Wan WQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha 410011, China. wc740317@tom.com

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression and role of cyclic-AMP response binding
protein (CREB) and Bcl-2 in children with acute leukemia.
METHODS: Ninety-two children with acute leukemia (leukemia group) and 30 children
with non-hematologic malignancies (control group) were enrolled. The mRNA and
protein expression of CREB and Bcl-2 in bone marrow mononuclear cells were
measured by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western 
blot.
RESULTS: The mRNA and protein expression of CREB and Bcl-2 in the leukemia group 
was significantly higher than that in the control group (p<0.01). There were no
significant differences in the expression of CREB and Bcl-2 between acute
lymphoblastic leukemia and acute myeloid leukemia subgroups. At the initial
diagnosis, the mRNA and protein expression of CREB and Bcl-2 in children with
extramedullary infiltration was higher than that in children without (p<0.05). In
the leukemia group, the mRNA and protein expression of CREB and Bcl-2 in the
complete remission subgroup was significantly lower than that in the non-complete
remission subgroup (p<0.01). High mRNA expression of CREB and Bcl-2 in the
leukemia group was positively correlated with peripheral blood leucocyte counts
(r=0.62, 0.71 respectively, p<0.05). There was a positive correlation between
mRNA and protein expression of CREB and Bcl-2 (r=0.75, 0.68 respectively;
p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of CREB and Bcl-2 may be correlated with the
pathogenesis and clinical prognosis of childhood leukemia, however, their
expression may not be associated with the classification of acute leukemia.

PMID: 20350424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Oral Sci. 2010 Mar;52(1):125-32.

Fibroblast growth factor 2 regulates bone sialoprotein gene transcription in
human breast cancer cells.

Li Z(1), Wang Z, Yang L, Li X, Sasaki Y, Wang S, Araki S, Mezawa M, Takai H,
Nakayama Y, Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Chiba, Japan.

Bone sialoprotein (BSP) is a major non-collagenous, extracellular matrix
glycoprotein associated with mineralized tissues. Fibroblast growth factor 2
(FGF2) is recognized as a potent mitogen for a variety of mesenchymal cells. FGF2
produced by osteoblasts accumulates in the bone matrix and acts as an
autocrine/paracrine regulator of osteoblasts. We previously reported that FGF2
regulates BSP gene transcription through the FGF2 response element (FRE) and
activator protein 1 (AP1) binding site overlapping with the glucocorticoid
response element in the rat BSP gene promoter. In the present study, FGF2 (10
ng/ml) increased BSP and Runx2 mRNA levels at 6 h in MCF7 human breast cancer
cells. Transient transfection analyses were performed using chimeric constructs
of the human BSP gene promoter linked to a luciferase reporter gene. Treatment of
MCF7 cells with FGF2 (10 ng/ml) increased the luciferase activity of the
constructs between -84LUC and -927LUC. Gel mobility shift analyses showed that
FGF2 increased the binding of AP1 and CRE2. The CRE2- and AP1-protein complexes
were disrupted by antibodies against CREB1, c-Fos, c-Jun, Fra2, p300 and Runx2.
These studies demonstrate that FGF2 stimulates BSP transcription in MCF7 human
breast cancer cells by targeting the AP1 and CRE2 elements in the human BSP gene 
promoter.

PMID: 20339243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. ASN Neuro. 2010 Feb 26;2(1):e00028. doi: 10.1042/AN20090055.

Olfactory discrimination training up-regulates and reorganizes expression of
microRNAs in adult mouse hippocampus.

Smalheiser NR(1), Lugli G, Lenon AL, Davis JM, Torvik VI, Larson J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and UIC Psychiatric Institute MC912, University of
Illinois at Chicago, 1601 W. Taylor Street, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. neils@uic.edu

Adult male mice (strain C57Bl/6J) were trained to execute nose-poke responses for
water reinforcement; then they were randomly assigned to either of two groups:
olfactory discrimination training (exposed to two odours with reward contingent
upon correctly responding to one odour) or pseudo-training (exposed to two odours
with reward not contingent upon response). These were run in yoked fashion and
killed when the discrimination-trained mouse reached a learning criterion of 70% 
correct responses in 20 trials, occurring after three sessions (a total of
approximately 40 min of training). The hippocampus was dissected bilaterally from
each mouse (N = 7 in each group) and profiling of 585 miRNAs (microRNAs) was
carried out using multiplex RT-PCR (reverse transcription-PCR) plates. A
significant global up-regulation of miRNA expression was observed in the
discrimination training versus pseudo-training comparison; when tested
individually, 29 miRNAs achieved significance at P = 0.05. miR-10a showed a
2.7-fold increase with training, and is predicted to target several
learning-related mRNAs including BDNF (brain-derived neurotrophic factor), CAMK2b
(calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IIß), CREB1
(cAMP-response-element-binding protein 1) and ELAVL2 [ELAV (embryonic lethal,
abnormal vision, Drosophila)-like; Hu B]. Analysis of miRNA pairwise correlations
revealed the existence of several miRNA co-expression modules that were specific 
to the training group. These in vivo results indicate that significant, dynamic
and co-ordinated changes in miRNA expression accompany early stages of learning.

PMCID: PMC2832745
PMID: 20309390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Immunol. 2010 Apr 15;184(8):4547-56. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902049. Epub 2010
Mar 17.

Access to the spleen microenvironment through lymph shows local cytokine
production, increased cell flux, and altered signaling of immune cells during
lipopolysaccharide-induced acute inflammation.

Semaeva E(1), Tenstad O, Skavland J, Enger M, Iversen PO, Gjertsen BT, Wiig H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

The spleen is involved in fluid volume regulation, immune responses, and
hematopoiesis. Yet, the composition of the fluid phase within the spleen
microenviroment, the migratory routes of lymphocytes as well as the splenic
response to bacterial endotoxin is incomplete. To address these issues, we
isolated postnodal lymph in rats by cannulating an efferent lymphatic draining
the spleen, and assessed the secretion of signaling substances during a septic
response induced by LPS. Spleen lymph flow increased 8-fold after LPS exposure.
The spleen exhibited a permeable microvasculature with low sieving of
macromolecules that was absent after exposure to LPS. Furthermore, after LPS
exposure the spleen contributed significantly to the production of pro- and
anti-inflammatory cytokines, and experiments in splenectomized rats suggested it 
may induce a protracted inflammation because of a dominant role in IL-6
production. A significant amount of lymphocytes exited via lymphatics draining
the spleen in control rats. LPS-induced inflammation resulted in increased T cell
and reduced B cell subset fractions, and gave a significant increase in CD4(+)
and CD8(+) subset T cell efflux and a reduced B cell efflux in spleen lymph.
Exposure of leukocytes to the spleen microenvironment affected their signaling
status, and by phosphorylation specific flow cytometry we could identify STAT3
and CREB as important mediators in the cellular signaling occurring during
endotoxemia. We conclude that analysis of spleen lymph may unravel immune cell
migration patterns and local signaling, and immune cells exit via lymph having
acquired specific activation signatures after exposure to the spleen
microenvironment.

PMID: 20237290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Neurochem. 2010 May;113(4):1046-59. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06668.x. Epub
2010 Mar 4.

Role of adrenoceptors in the regulation of dopamine/DARPP-32 signaling in
neostriatal neurons.

Hara M(1), Fukui R, Hieda E, Kuroiwa M, Bateup HS, Kano T, Greengard P, Nishi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume,
Fukuoka, Japan.

Studies in animal models of Parkinson's disease have revealed that degeneration
of noradrenaline neurons is involved in the motor deficits. Several types of
adrenoceptors are highly expressed in neostriatal neurons. However, the selective
actions of these receptors on striatal signaling pathways have not been
characterized. In this study, we investigated the role of adrenoceptors in the
regulation of dopamine/dopamine- and cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein of M(r) 32 kDa
(DARPP-32) signaling by analyzing DARPP-32 phosphorylation at Thr34 [protein
kinase A (PKA)-site] in mouse neostriatal slices. Activation of
beta(1)-adrenoceptors induced a rapid and transient increase in DARPP-32
phosphorylation. Activation of alpha(2)-adrenoceptors also induced a rapid and
transient increase in DARPP-32 phosphorylation, which subsequently decreased
below basal levels. In addition, activation of alpha(2)-adrenoceptors attenuated,
and blockade of alpha(2)-adrenoceptors enhanced dopamine D(1) and adenosine A(2A)
receptor/DARPP-32 signaling. Chemical lesioning of noradrenergic neurons mimicked
the effects of alpha(2)-adrenoceptor blockade. Under conditions of
alpha(2)-adrenoceptor blockade, the dopamine D(2) receptor-induced decrease in
DARPP-32 phosphorylation was attenuated. Our data demonstrate that beta(1)- and
alpha(2)-adrenoceptors regulate DARPP-32 phosphorylation in neostriatal neurons. 
G(i) activation by alpha(2)-adrenoceptors antagonizes G(s)/PKA signaling mediated
by D(1) and A(2A) receptors in striatonigral and striatopallidal neurons,
respectively, and thereby enhances D(2) receptor/G(i) signaling in
striatopallidal neurons. alpha(2)-Adrenoceptors may therefore be a therapeutic
target for the treatment of Parkinson's disease.

PMCID: PMC2861145
PMID: 20236221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Brain Res. 2010 May 6;1329:10-20. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.02.081. Epub 2010 
Mar 11.

DeltaFosB indirectly regulates Cck promoter activity.

Enwright JF 3rd(1), Wald M, Paddock M, Hoffman E, Arey R, Edwards S, Spencer S,
Nestler EJ, McClung CA.

Author information: 
(1)Austin College, Department of Biology, 900 N. Grand Ave., Sherman, TX 75090,
USA.

Some of the important biochemical, structural, and behavioral changes induced by 
chronic exposure to drugs of abuse appear to be mediated by the highly stable
transcription factor DeltaFosB. Previous work has shown that DeltaFosB
overexpression in mice for 2weeks leads to an increase in the expression of
numerous genes in striatum, most of which are later downregulated following
8weeks of FosB expression. Interestingly, a large number of these genes were also
upregulated in mice overexpressing the transcription factor CREB. It was unclear 
from this study, however, whether short-term DeltaFosB regulates these genes via 
CREB. Here, we find that 2weeks of DeltaFosB overexpression increases CREB
expression in striatum, an effect that dissipates by 8weeks. The early induction 
is associated with increased CREB binding to certain target gene promoters in
this brain region. Surprisingly, one gene that was a suspected CREB target based 
on previous reports, cholecystokinin (Cck), was not controlled by CREB in
striatum. To further investigate the regulation of Cck following DeltaFosB
overexpression, we confirmed that short-term DeltaFosB overexpression increases
both Cck promoter activity and gene expression. It also increases binding
activity at a putative CREB binding site (CRE) in the Cck promoter. However,
while the CRE site is necessary for normal basal expression of Cck, it is not
required for DeltaFosB induction of Cck. Taken together, these results suggest
that while short-term DeltaFosB induction increases CREB expression and activity 
at certain gene promoters, this is not the only mechanism by which genes are
upregulated under these conditions.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2876727
PMID: 20226774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 May;24(5):1052-61. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0488. Epub 2010 Mar 
4.

Induction of Galphas contributes to the paradoxical stimulation of cytosolic
phospholipase A2alpha expression by cortisol in human amnion fibroblasts.

Guo C(1), Li J, Myatt L, Zhu X, Sun K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, 220 Handan Road, Shanghai 200433,
People's Republic of China.

Cytosolic phospholipase A (cPLA(2alpha)) catalyzes the formation of arachidonic
acid in prostaglandin synthesis. In contrast to the well-described
down-regulation of cPLA(2alpha), up-regulation of cPLA(2alpha) by glucocorticoids
has been reported in human amnion fibroblasts, which may play a key role in
parturition. The mechanisms underlying this paradoxical induction of cPLA(2alpha)
by glucocorticoids remain largely unknown. Using cultured human amnion
fibroblasts, we found that the induction of cPLA(2alpha) by cortisol required
ongoing transcription and synthesis of at least one other protein. The induction 
of cPLA(2alpha) by cortisol was abolished by mutagenesis of a glucocorticoid
response element (GRE) in the promoter. The same GRE was found mediating the
classical inhibition of cPLA(2alpha) expression by cortisol in human fetal lung
fibroblasts (HFL-1). Cortisol increased Galpha(s) expression in amnion
fibroblasts but not in HFL-1 cells. Inhibition of Galpha(s) with NF449 attenuated
the phosphorylation of cAMP response element-binding protein-1 (CREB-1) and the
induction of cPLA(2alpha) by cortisol in amnion fibroblasts. Both glucocorticoid 
receptor (GR) and CREB-1 were found bound to the GRE upon cortisol stimulation of
amnion fibroblasts. The induction of cPLA(2alpha) by cortisol was blocked by GR
antagonist RU486 or protein kinase A inhibitor H89 or dominant-negative CREB-1.
In conclusion, cortisol activates the cAMP/protein kinase A/CREB-1 pathway via
Galpha(s) induction, and the phosphorylated CREB-1 interacts with GR at the GRE
to promote cPLA(2alpha) expression in amnion fibroblasts.

PMID: 20203101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Int J Oncol. 2010 Apr;36(4):941-53.

Bile acid regulates MUC2 transcription in colon cancer cells via positive
EGFR/PKC/Ras/ERK/CREB, PI3K/Akt/IkappaB/NF-kappaB and p38/MSK1/CREB pathways and 
negative JNK/c-Jun/AP-1 pathway.

Lee HY(1), Crawley S, Hokari R, Kwon S, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, College of Medicine, Kangnam CHA Hospital, CHA
University, Seoul, 650-9, Korea.

MUC2 is a major secretory mucin normally expressed by goblet cells of the
intestine, but is aberrantly expressed in colonic neoplasia. Bile acids have been
implicated in colorectal carcinogenesis and, therefore, we sought to determine
the effects of bile acids on MUC2 expression and regulation in colon cancer
cells. Since deoxycholic acid (DCA), a secondary bile acid, has been reported to 
be a potent mucin secretagogue and tumor promoter, DCA-treated HM3 colon cancer
cells were analyzed using promoter-reporter assays of the 5' flanking region of
the MUC2 gene. Chemical inhibitors, mutant reporter constructs and EMSA showed
that DCA upregulates MUC2 transcription via multiple pathways involving
activation of EGFR/PKC/Ras/Raf-1/MEK1/ERK/CREB, PI3/Akt/IkappaB/NF-kappaB and
p38/MSK1/CREB while DCA induced MUC2 transcription is inhibited by JNK/c-Jun/AP-1
pathway. These results provide new insight into the complex molecular mechanisms 
involved in the regulation of mucin gene by bile acids in colon cancer cells that
may contribute to further elucidation of colorectal carcinogenesis.

PMID: 20198339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Int J Oncol. 2010 Apr;36(4):883-8.

PKCepsilon induces Bcl-2 by activating CREB.

Shankar E(1), Krishnamurthy S, Paranandi R, Basu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Immunology, University of North Texas
Health Science Center and Institute for Cancer Research, Fort Worth, TX 76107,
USA.

Protein kinase C epsilon (PKCepsilon) is a transforming oncogene and an important
anti-apoptotic protein. We previously demonstrated that overexpression of
PKCepsilon in MCF-7 breast cancer cells caused an increase in anti-apoptotic
Bcl-2 and a decrease in pro-apoptotic Bid, attenuating tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)-mediated apoptosis. 
The objective of our present study was to determine the mode of induction of
Bcl-2 by PKCepsilon in breast cancer cells. siRNA silencing of either PKCepsilon 
or Akt in MCF-7 cells, which overexpress Akt, decreased Bcl-2 protein and mRNA
levels. However, knockdown of PKCepsilon, but not Akt, led to the decrease in
Bcl-2 at both protein and mRNA levels in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, which
overexpress PKCepsilon but contain little constitutively-active Akt. Knockdown of
PKCepsilon decreased phosphorylation of cAMP response element-binding protein
(CREB) at Ser133 in MDA-MB-231 cells, and depletion of CREB by siRNA decreased
Bcl-2 at both the protein and mRNA levels. In addition, knockdown of CREB
sensitized MDA-MB-231 cells to TRAIL-mediated cell death. These results suggest
that PKCepsilon regulates Bcl-2 induction through activation of the transcription
factor CREB.

PMID: 20198332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 7;285(19):14791-805. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.116905. Epub
2010 Feb 23.

cAMP/CREB-mediated transcriptional regulation of ectonucleoside triphosphate
diphosphohydrolase 1 (CD39) expression.

Liao H(1), Hyman MC, Baek AE, Fukase K, Pinsky DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

CD39 is a transmembrane enzyme that inhibits platelet reactivity and inflammation
by phosphohydrolyzing ATP and ADP to AMP. Cyclic AMP (cAMP), an essential second 
messenger, is particularly important in regulating genes controlling vascular
homeostasis. These experiments test the hypothesis that cAMP might positively
regulate the expression of CD39 and thereby modulate important vascular
homeostatic properties. Cd39 mRNA was induced by 13.8- fold in RAW cells treated 
with a membrane-permeant cAMP analogue (8-bromo-cyclic AMP; 8-Br-cAMP),
stimulation of adenylate cyclase, or prostanoids known to drive cAMP response.
Fluorescence-activated cell sorting, immunofluorescence, and TLC assays
demonstrated that both CD39 protein expression and enzymatic activity were
increased in cells treated with 8-Br-cAMP but not in cells transfected with short
hairpin RNA against CD39. This analogue drove a significant increase in
transcriptional activity at the Cd39 promoter although not when the promoter's
cAMP-response element sites were mutated. Pretreatment with cAMP-dependent
protein kinase (PKA), phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), or ERK inhibitors nearly 
obliterated the cAMP-driven increase in Cd39 mRNA, protein expression, and
promoter activity. 8-Br-cAMP greatly increased the phosphorylation of CREB1
(Ser(133)) and ATF2 (Thr(71)) in a PKA-, PI3K-, and ERK-dependent fashion.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that binding of phosphorylated 
CREB1 and ATF2 to cAMP-response element-like sites was significantly increased
with 8-Br-cAMP treatment and that binding was reduced with PKA, PI3K, and ERK
inhibition, whereas transfection of Creb1 and Atf2 overexpression constructs
enhanced cAMP-driven Cd39 mRNA expression. Transfection of RAW cells with mutated
Creb1 (S133A) reduced cAMP-driven Cd39 mRNA expression. Furthermore, the
cAMP-mediated induction of Cd39 mRNA, protein, and phosphohydrolytic activity was
replicated in primary peritoneal macrophages. These data identify cAMP as a
crucial regulator of macrophage CD39 expression and demonstrate that cAMP acts
through the PKA/CREB, PKA/PI3K/ATF2, and PKA/ERK/ATF2 pathways to control a key
vascular homeostatic mediator.

PMCID: PMC2863166
PMID: 20178980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Endocrinology. 2010 Mar;151(3):855-8. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-1503.

TORC: a new twist on corticotropin-releasing hormone gene expression.

Spencer RL(1), Weiser MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Colorado, UCB 345,
Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA. robert.spencer@colorado.edu

Comment on
    Endocrinology. 2010 Mar;151(3):1109-18.

PMCID: PMC3213758
PMID: 20172974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Neurosci Lett. 2010 Apr 5;473(2):82-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.02.020. Epub
2010 Feb 18.

cGMP-dependent protein kinase type I promotes CREB/CRE-mediated gene expression
in neurons of the lateral amygdala.

Paul C(1), Stratil C, Hofmann F, Kleppisch T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pharmakologie und Toxikologie der Technischen Universität
München, Biedersteiner Strasse 29, 80802 München, Germany.

The process transforming newly learned information into stable long-term memory
is called memory consolidation and, like the underlying long-term synaptic
plasticity, critically depends on de novo RNA and protein synthesis. We have
shown recently that the cGMP-dependent protein kinase Type I (cGKI) plays an
important role for the consolidation of amygdala-dependent fear memory and
long-term potentiation (LTP) in the lateral amygdala. Signalling downstream of
cGKI at the level of transcriptional regulation remained unclear. A transcription
factor of major importance for learning and memory is the cAMP-response element
binding protein (CREB). The representation of fear memory in the lateral amygdala
strikingly depends on the activity of CREB in individual neurons. Moreover,
findings from in vitro experiments demonstrate CREB phosphorylation by cGK. In
the hippocampus, CREB phosphorylation increases following activation of NO/cGMP
signalling contributing to the late phase of LTP. To demonstrate a link from cGKI
to activation of CREB and CREB-dependent transcription in neurons of the lateral 
amygdala as a possible mechanism for cGKI-mediated fear memory consolidation, we 
examined the effect of cGMP on activation of CREB/CRE using immunohistochemical
staining specific for phospho-CREB and a reporter gene in control and
cGKI-deficient mice, respectively. Supporting our hypothesis, marked CREB
phosphorylation and CRE-mediated transcription was induced by cGMP in the lateral
amygdala of control mice, but not in cGKI-deficient mice. It has been proposed
that activation of cGKI is followed by its nuclear translocation that would allow
direct phosphorylation of CREB. Therefore, we examined the cellular localisation 
of cGKI in neurons of the lateral amygdala in the presence of cGMP by double
staining for cGKI and a nuclear marker in sections from areas showing prominent
CREB phosphorylation, and did not observe prominent nuclear translocation of the 
enzyme. In summary, we provide evidence that cytosolic cGKI can support fear
memory consolidation and LTP in neurons of the lateral amygdala via activation of
CREB and CRE-dependent transcription.

PMID: 20171263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Aging (Albany NY). 2009 Aug 15;1(9):771-83.

Diet and exercise signals regulate SIRT3 and activate AMPK and PGC-1alpha in
skeletal muscle.

Palacios OM(1), Carmona JJ, Michan S, Chen KY, Manabe Y, Ward JL 3rd, Goodyear
LJ, Tong Q.

Author information: 
(1)USDA/ARS Children's Nutrition Research Center, Department of Pediatrics,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

SIRT3 is a member of the sirtuin family of NAD(+)-dependent deacetylases, which
is localized to the mitochondria and is enriched in kidney, brown adipose tissue,
heart, and other metabolically active tissues. We report here that SIRT3 responds
dynamically to both exercise and nutritional signals in skeletal muscle to
coordinate downstream molecular responses. We show that exercise training
increases SIRT3 expression as well as associated CREB phosphorylation and
PGC-1alpha up-regulation. Furthermore, we show that SIRT3 is more highly
expressed in slow oxidative type I soleus muscle compared to fast type II
extensor digitorum longus or gastrocnemius muscles. Additionally, we find that
SIRT3 protein levels in skeletal muscle are sensitive to diet, for SIRT3
expression increases by fasting and caloric restriction, yet it is decreased by
high-fat diet. Interestingly, the caloric restriction regimen also leads to
phospho-activation of AMPK in muscle. Conversely in SIRT3 knockout mice, we find 
that the phosphorylation of both AMPK and CREB and the expression of PGC-1alpha
are down regulated, suggesting that these key cellular factors may be important
components of SIRT3-mediated biological signals in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2815736
PMID: 20157566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Biochem J. 2010 Apr 14;427(3):377-90. doi: 10.1042/BJ20091755.

Genomic organization and regulation of the human orexin (hypocretin) receptor 2
gene: identification of alternative promoters.

Chen J(1), Randeva HS.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Sciences Research Institute, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK.

Orexins (hypocretins), acting via their receptors, are involved in the control of
feeding behaviour, sleep, arousal and energy homoeostasis. However, regulation of
the human orexin receptor 2 (hOX2R) gene remains unknown. We have identified four
transcripts arising from alternative splicing from three exons. These exon 1
variants were designated exons 1A, 1B and 1C on the basis of their 5'-3' order.
RT (reverse transcription)-PCR demonstrates the differential expression in
various human tissues. The alternative 5'-UTRs (untranslated regions) possessed
by these isoforms have different translational efficiencies, which regulate the
level of protein expression. In the present study, we have demonstrated that the 
hOX2R gene is regulated by two promoters and the novel transcripts are regulated 
by the distal promoter located upstream of exon 1A. We have demonstrated that the
AP-1 (activator protein 1) motif is critical for sustaining the basal activity of
distal promoter. Analysis of the proximal promoter revealed the region regulating
promoter activity contained putative binding elements including those for CREB
(cAMP-response-element-binding protein), GATA-2 and Oct-1. Using the chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay, we demonstrated that CREB, GATA-2 and Oct-1
transcription factors bind to these critical regulatory promoter elements.
Mutational studies suggested that these motifs functioned independently, but have
a compound effect regulating hOX2R gene transcription. Furthermore, proximal
promoter activity is enhanced by both PKA (protein kinase A) and PKC (protein
kinase C) pathway activation, via binding of CREB and GATA-2 transcription
factors. In conclusion, we have demonstrated that expression of hOX2R is
regulated by a complex involving a proximal PKA/PKC-regulated promoter and a
distal promoter regulating tissue-specific expression of alternative transcripts 
which in turn post-transcriptionally regulate receptor levels.

PMID: 20156195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Apr;30(4):733-41. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.109.199133. Epub 2010 Feb 11.

CREB downregulation in vascular disease: a common response to cardiovascular
risk.

Schauer IE(1), Knaub LA, Lloyd M, Watson PA, Gliwa C, Lewis KE, Chait A, Klemm
DJ, Gunter JM, Bouchard R, McDonald TO, O'Brien KD, Reusch JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado at Denver-Anschutz Medical
Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the impact of low-density lipoprotein (LDL), an established
mediator of atherosclerosis, on the transcription factor cAMP-response
element-binding protein (CREB), which is a regulator of vascular smooth muscle
cell (VSMC) quiescence.
METHODS AND RESULTS: VSMC CREB content is diminished in rodent models of diabetes
and pulmonary hypertension. We examined aortic CREB content in rodent models of
aging, hypertension, and insulin resistance, and we determined nuclear CREB
protein in the medial VSMC of high-fat-fed LDL receptor-null mice. There was
significant loss of CREB protein in all models. In vitro, primary culture rat
aortic VSMC exposed to LDL and oxidized LDL exhibited a rapid, transient increase
in CREB phosphorylation and transient phosphorylation/activation of Akt, ERK,
JNK, ans p38 MAPK. Exposure to oxidized LDL, but not to LDL, for 24 to 48 hours
decreased CREB protein in a dose-dependent fashion and led to nuclear exclusion
of CREB. Pharmacological reactive oxygen species scavengers and inhibition of ERK
activation blocked oxidized LDL-mediated CREB downregulation.
CONCLUSIONS: These data support a model wherein loss of VSMC CREB protein, which 
renders these cells more susceptible to activation and apoptosis, is a common
pathological response to vascular injury and potentially contributes to plaque
progression.

PMCID: PMC2841720
PMID: 20150559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Nat Neurosci. 2010 Mar;13(3):291-301. doi: 10.1038/nn.2486. Epub 2010 Jan 31.

An NGF-responsive element targets myo-inositol monophosphatase-1 mRNA to
sympathetic neuron axons.

Andreassi C(1), Zimmermann C, Mitter R, Fusco S, De Vita S, Saiardi A, Riccio A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratory for Molecular and Cell Biology, University
College London, London, UK.

Erratum in
    Nat Neurosci. 2010 Aug;13(8):1033. Devita, Serena [corrected to De Vita, Serena].

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2010 Mar;13(3):273-5.

mRNA localization is an evolutionary conserved mechanism that underlies the
establishment of cellular polarity and specialized cell functions. To identify
mRNAs localized in subcellular compartments of developing neurons, we took an
original approach that combines compartmentalized cultures of rat sympathetic
neurons and sequential analysis of gene expression (SAGE). Unexpectedly, the most
abundant transcript in axons was mRNA for myo-inositol monophosphatase-1 (Impa1),
a key enzyme that regulates the inositol cycle and the main target of lithium in 
neurons. A novel localization element within the 3' untranslated region of Impa1 
mRNA specifically targeted Impa1 transcript to sympathetic neuron axons and
regulated local IMPA1 translation in response to nerve growth factor (NGF).
Selective silencing of IMPA1 synthesis in axons decreased nuclear CREB activation
and induced axonal degeneration. These results provide insights into mRNA
transport in axons and reveal a new NGF-responsive localization element that
directs the targeting and local translation of an axonal transcript.

PMID: 20118926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Am J Pathol. 2010 Mar;176(3):1364-76. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.090647. Epub 2010 
Jan 21.

Enhanced metabolic flexibility associated with elevated adiponectin levels.

Asterholm IW(1), Scherer PE.

Author information: 
(1)Touchstone Diabetes Center, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390-8549,
USA.

Metabolically healthy individuals effectively adapt to changes in nutritional
state. Here, we focus on the effects of the adipocyte-derived secretory molecule 
adiponectin on adipose tissue in mouse models with genetically altered
adiponectin levels. We found that higher adiponectin levels increased sensitivity
to the lipolytic effects of adrenergic receptor agonists. In parallel,
adiponectin-overexpressing mice also display enhanced clearance of circulating
fatty acids and increased expansion of subcutaneous adipose tissue with chronic
high fat diet (HFD) feeding. These adaptive changes to the HFD were associated
with increased mitochondrial density in adipocytes, smaller adipocyte size, and a
general transcriptional up-regulation of factors involved in lipid storage
through efficient esterification of free fatty acids. The physiological response 
to adiponectin overexpression resembles in many ways the effects of chronic
exposure to beta3-adrenergic agonist treatment, which also results in
improvements in insulin sensitivity. In addition, using a novel computed
tomography-based method for measurements of hepatic lipids, we resolved the
temporal events taking place in the liver in response to acute HFD exposure in
both wild-type and adiponectin-overexpressing mice. Increased levels of
adiponectin potently protect against HFD-induced hepatic lipid accumulation and
preserve insulin sensitivity. Given these profound effects of adiponectin, we
propose that adiponectin is a factor that increases the metabolic flexibility of 
adipose tissue, enhancing its ability to maintain proper function under
metabolically challenging conditions.

PMCID: PMC2832156
PMID: 20093494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Eur J Neurosci. 2009 Dec;30(12):2368-78. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2009.07029.x.
Epub 2009 Dec 10.

A mental retardation gene, motopsin/neurotrypsin/prss12, modulates hippocampal
function and social interaction.

Mitsui S(1), Osako Y, Yokoi F, Dang MT, Yuri K, Li Y, Yamaguchi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Kochi Medical School, Okoh, Nankoku,
Japan. smitsui@kochi-u.ac.jp

Motopsin is a mosaic serine protease secreted from neuronal cells in various
brain regions, including the hippocampus. The loss of motopsin function causes
nonsyndromic mental retardation in humans and impairs long-term memory formation 
in Drosophila. To understand motopsin's function in the mammalian brain, motopsin
knockout (KO) mice were generated. Motopsin KO mice did not have significant
deficits in memory formation, as tested using the Morris water maze, passive
avoidance and Y-maze tests. A social recognition test showed that the motopsin KO
mice had the ability to recognize two stimulator mice, suggesting normal social
memory. In a social novelty test, motopsin KO mice spent a longer time
investigating a familiar mouse than wild-type (WT) mice did. In a
resident-intruder test, motopsin KO mice showed prolonged social interaction as
compared with WT mice. Consistent with the behavioral deficit, spine density was 
significantly decreased on apical dendrites, but not on basal dendrites, of
hippocampal pyramidal neurons of motopsin KO mice. In contrast, pyramidal neurons
at the cingulate cortex showed normal spine density. Spatial learning and social 
interaction induced the phosphorylation of cAMP-responsive element-binding
protein (CREB) in hippocampal neurons of WT mice, whereas the phosphorylation of 
CREB was markedly decreased in mutant mouse brains. Our results indicate that an 
extracellular protease, motopsin, preferentially affects social behaviors, and
modulates the functions of hippocampal neurons.

PMCID: PMC2854837
PMID: 20092579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 Feb;34(2):216-22. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181c7d8b2.

Cutaneous clear cell sarcoma: a clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical, and
molecular analysis of 12 cases emphasizing its distinction from dermal melanoma.

Hantschke M(1), Mentzel T, Rütten A, Palmedo G, Calonje E, Lazar AJ, Kutzner H.

Author information: 
(1)Dermatopathologie Fried richshafen, Siemensstrasse 6/1, D-88048
Friedrichshafen, Germany. hantschke@dermpath.de

Clear cell sarcoma (CCS) of tendons and aponeuroses/malignant melanoma (MM) of
soft parts is a rare tumor and in the majority of cases presents a characteristic
reciprocal translocation t(12;22)(q13;q12) that results in fusion of the EWS and 
ATF1 genes. Although the melanocytic differentiation of CCS is indisputable, its 
precise lineage remains unclear. Typically, the slowly growing tumor affects the 
extremities of adolescents or young adults, especially around the ankle and foot.
CCS is classically regarded as a deep soft tissue tumor associated with tendons
or aponeuroses. This traditional view is put into perspective by the description 
of primary CCS of the gastrointestinal tract that may have a variant fusion gene 
EWSR1-CREB1. We describe 12 cases of cutaneous CCS and discuss the differential
diagnoses. These 12 cases share an identical immunohistochemical profile with MM 
and thus can easily be confused with a dermal variant of spindle cell MM or
metastasis of MM. The patients' ages ranged from 6 to 74 years (median: 25 y),
and there was a female predominance (10 females, 2 males). Most tumors (n = 9)
were located on the extremities, 2 tumors arose on the back, and 1 on the
abdomen. The mean tumor size was 0.97 cm (range, 0.4 to 1.7 cm). Six cases showed
invasion of the subcutis, the other 6 cases were entirely dermal. Tumor necrosis 
was evident in 2 cases, melanin pigment in 2 cases, and ulceration in 1 tumor.
All cases showed uniform nests and fascicles of pale spindled or slightly
epitheloid cells with finely granular eosinophilic or clear cytoplasm. There was 
fair pleomorphism with plump spindled nuclei and significantly prominent
nucleoli. Multinucleated wreath-like tumor giant cells were observed in
two-thirds of cases, but were usually present only focally. The dense cellular
aggregates were encased by delicate fibrous septa. The stroma showed a sclerotic 
reticulated pattern. Partly, the nests of spindle cells bordered the epidermis,
prima vista mimicking junctional nests of melanocytes. The specific translocation
pattern was confirmed in all cases by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Local
recurrences and metastases developed in 2 and 3 patients, respectively, and 1
patient died of the disease.

PMID: 20087159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Endocrinology. 2010 Mar;151(3):1109-18. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0963. Epub 2010 Jan 
15.

Involvement of transducer of regulated cAMP response element-binding protein
activity on corticotropin releasing hormone transcription.

Liu Y(1), Coello AG, Grinevich V, Aguilera G.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Endocrine Physiology, Developmental Endocrinology Branch, National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
10 Center Drive, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2010 Mar;151(3):855-8.

We have recently shown that phospho-cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) 
is essential but not sufficient for activation of CRH transcription, suggesting
the requirement of a coactivator. Here, we test the hypothesis that the CREB
coactivator, transducer of regulated CREB activity (TORC), is required for
activation of CRH transcription, using the cell line 4B and primary cultures of
hypothalamic neurons. Immunohistochemistry and Western blot experiments in 4B
cells revealed time-dependent nuclear translocation of TORC1,TORC 2, and TORC3 by
forskolin [but not by the phorbol ester, phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)]
in a concentration-dependent manner. In reporter gene assays, cotransfection of
TORC1 or TORC2 potentiated the stimulatory effect of forskolin on CRH promoter
activity but had no effect in cells treated with PMA. Knockout of endogenous TORC
using silencing RNA markedly inhibited forskolin-activated CRH promoter activity 
in 4B cells, as well as the induction of endogenous CRH primary transcript by
forskolin in primary neuronal cultures. Coimmunoprecipitation and chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments in 4B cells revealed association of CREB and TORC
in the nucleus, and recruitment of TORC2 by the CRH promoter, after 20-min
incubation with forskolin. These studies demonstrate a correlation between
nuclear translocation of TORC with association to the CRH promoter and activation
of CRH transcription. The data suggest that TORC is required for transcriptional 
activation of the CRH promoter by acting as a CREB coactivator. In addition,
cytoplasmic retention of TORC during PMA treatment is likely to explain the
failure of phorbolesters to activate CRH transcription in spite of efficiently
phosphorylating CREB.

PMCID: PMC2840689
PMID: 20080871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Immunity. 2009 Dec 18;31(6):932-40. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.10.006.

Development of Foxp3(+) regulatory t cells is driven by the c-Rel enhanceosome.

Ruan Q(1), Kameswaran V, Tone Y, Li L, Liou HC, Greene MI, Tone M, Chen YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Regulatory T (Treg) cells are essential for maintaining immune homeostasis.
Although Foxp3 expression marks the commitment of progenitors to Treg cell
lineage, how Treg cells are generated during lymphocyte development remains
enigmatic. We report here that the c-Rel transcription factor controlled
development of Treg cells by promoting the formation of a Foxp3-specific
enhanceosome. This enhanceosome contained c-Rel, p65, NFAT, Smad, and CREB.
Although Smad and CREB first bound to Foxp3 enhancers, they later moved to the
promoter to form the c-Rel enhanceosome. c-Rel-deficient mice had up to 90%
reductions of Treg cells compared to wild-type mice, and c-Rel-deficient T cells 
were compromised in Treg cell differentiation. Thus, Treg cell development is
controlled by a c-Rel enhanceosome, and strategies targeting Rel-NF-kappaB can be
effective for manipulating Treg cell function.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2807990
PMID: 20064450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2010 Mar;298(3):F617-24. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00636.2009. Epub 2010 Jan 6.

CREB trans-activation of disruptor of telomeric silencing-1 mediates forskolin
inhibition of CTGF transcription in mesangial cells.

Yu Z(1), Kong Q, Kone BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Renal Diseases and Hypertension, The
University of Texas Medical School at Houston, Houston, Texas 77006, USA.

Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) participates in diverse fibrotic processes
including glomerulosclerosis. The adenylyl cyclase agonist forskolin inhibits
CTGF expression in mesangial cells by unclear mechanisms. We recently reported
that the histone H3K79 methyltransferase disruptor of telomeric silencing-1
(Dot1) suppresses CTGF gene expression in collecting duct cells (J Clin Invest
117: 773-783, 2007) and HEK 293 cells (J Biol Chem In press). In the present
study, we characterized the involvement of Dot1 in mediating the inhibitory
effect of forskolin on CTGF transcription in mouse mesangial cells.
Overexpression of Dot1 or treatment with forskolin dramatically suppressed basal 
CTGF mRNA levels and CTGF promoter-luciferase activity, while hypermethylating
H3K79 in chromatin associated with the CTGF promoter. siRNA knockdown of Dot1
abrogated the inhibitory effect of forskolin on CTGF mRNA expression. Analysis of
the Dot1 promoter sequence identified a CREB response element (CRE) at -384/-380.
Overexpression of CREB enhanced forskolin-stimulated Dot1 promoter activity. A
constitutively active CREB mutant (CREB-VP16) strongly induced Dot1
promoter-luciferase activity, whereas overexpression of CREBdLZ-VP16, which lacks
the CREB DNA-binding domain, abolished this activation. Mutation of the -384/-380
CRE resulted in 70% lower levels of Dot1 promoter activity. ChIP assays confirmed
CREB binding to the Dot1 promoter in chromatin. We conclude that forskolin
stimulates CREB-mediated trans-activation of the Dot1 gene, which leads to
hypermethylation of histone H3K79 at the CTGF promoter, and inhibition of CTGF
transcription. These data are the first to describe regulation of the Dot1 gene, 
and disclose a complex network of genetic and epigenetic controls on CTGF
transcription.

PMCID: PMC2838603
PMID: 20053791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 12;285(11):8395-407. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.038638. Epub
2010 Jan 4.

GADD45beta enhances Col10a1 transcription via the MTK1/MKK3/6/p38 axis and
activation of C/EBPbeta-TAD4 in terminally differentiating chondrocytes.

Tsuchimochi K(1), Otero M, Dragomir CL, Plumb DA, Zerbini LF, Libermann TA, Marcu
KB, Komiya S, Ijiri K, Goldring MB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cartilage Biology, Research Division, The Hospital for Special 
Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York 10021, USA.

GADD45beta (growth arrest- and DNA damage-inducible) interacts with upstream
regulators of the JNK and p38 stress response kinases. Previously, we reported
that the hypertrophic zone of the Gadd45beta(-/-) mouse embryonic growth plate is
compressed, and expression of type X collagen (Col10a1) and matrix
metalloproteinase 13 (Mmp13) genes is decreased. Herein, we report that
GADD45beta enhances activity of the proximal Col10a1 promoter, which contains
evolutionarily conserved AP-1, cAMP-response element, and C/EBP half-sites, in
synergism with C/EBP family members, whereas the MMP13 promoter responds to
GADD45beta together with AP-1, ATF, or C/EBP family members. C/EBPbeta expression
also predominantly co-localizes with GADD45beta in the embryonic growth plate.
Moreover, GADD45beta enhances C/EBPbeta activation via MTK1, MKK3, and MKK6, and 
dominant-negative p38alphaapf, but not JNKapf, disrupts the combined
trans-activating effect of GADD45beta and C/EBPbeta on the Col10a1 promoter.
Importantly, GADD45beta knockdown prevents p38 phosphorylation while decreasing
Col10a1 mRNA levels but does not affect C/EBPbeta binding to the Col10a1 promoter
in vivo, indicating that GADD45beta influences the transactivation function of
DNA-bound C/EBPbeta. In support of this conclusion, we show that the
evolutionarily conserved TAD4 domain of C/EBPbeta is the target of the
GADD45beta-dependent signaling. Collectively, we have uncovered a novel molecular
mechanism linking GADD45beta via the MTK1/MKK3/6/p38 axis to C/EBPbeta-TAD4
activation of Col10a1 transcription in terminally differentiating chondrocytes.

PMCID: PMC2832989
PMID: 20048163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Pol J Vet Sci. 2010;13(4):629-38.

Transcriptional pattern of TGF-beta1 inhibitory effect on mouse C2C12 myoblasts
differentiation.

Wicik Z(1), Sadkowski T, Jank M, Motyl T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Warsaw
University of Life Sciences - SGGW, Nowoursynowska 159, 02-776 Warsaw, Poland.

The aim of the present study was to define the effect of TGF-beta1 on C2C12
myoblasts myogenesis. TGF-beta1 together with its receptor is a negative
auto-paracrine regulator of myogenesis, which influences the proliferation,
differentiation, and functions of muscle cells. TGF-beta1 exerts highly
significant inhibitory effect on differentiation of C2C12 mouse myoblasts
manifested by the impairment of cell fusion and very low expression of myosin
heavy chain. The study of differentiating C2C12 mouse myoblasts treated with
TGF-beta1 revealed 502 genes (436 down-regulated and 66 up-regulated) with
statistically different expression. TGF-beta1-regulated genes were identified to 
be involved in 29 biological processes, 29 molecular functions groups and 59
pathways. The strongest inhibiting effect of TGF-beta1 was observed in the
cadherin and Wnt pathways. The key-genes that could play the role of TGF-beta1
targets during myoblasts differentiation was identified such as: Max, Creb1,
Ccna2, Bax, MdfL, Tef, Tubg1, Cxcl5, Rho, Calca and Lgals4.

PMID: 21370740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Cardiovasc Res. 2010 May 1;86(2):302-10. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvp400. Epub 2009 Dec
23.

PPARgamma agonists inhibit angiogenesis by suppressing PKCalpha- and
CREB-mediated COX-2 expression in the human endothelium.

Scoditti E(1), Massaro M, Carluccio MA, Distante A, Storelli C, De Caterina R.

Author information: 
(1)CNR Institute of Clinical Physiology, Lecce, Italy.

AIMS: The activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)gamma is
known to inhibit angiogenesis. As a potential mechanism for this, we aimed at
examining the effects of PPARgamma agonists on the pro-angiogenic enzyme
cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 in human endothelium.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Cultured endothelial cells were pre-incubated with the
PPARgamma agonists rosiglitazone (RSG) or GW1929 before stimulation with vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) or phorbol myristate acetate (PMA). RSG and
GW1929 attenuated VEGF- and PMA-stimulated COX-2 activity, as well as protein and
mRNA expression. This effect was abolished by the PPARgamma antagonists bisphenol
A diglycidyl ether and GW9662 as well as by PPARgamma small-interfering RNAs
(siRNAs). Transient transfection experiments revealed that the induction of COX-2
promoter was significantly inhibited by RSG through an interference with the cAMP
response element (CRE) site. COX-2 downregulation after siRNA targeting
CRE-binding protein (CREB) confirmed the role of CREB in mediating COX-2
transcription. Correspondingly, PPARgamma agonists attenuated CREB activation. As
both protein kinase C (PKC)alpha and beta are involved in VEGF-induced COX-2
expression and CREB activation, we investigated which isoform(s) of PKC was
affected by RSG. RSG only reduced VEGF- and PMA-stimulated PKCalpha membrane
translocation.
CONCLUSION: VEGF induces CREB-mediated COX-2 expression through a
PKCalpha-dependent pathway in human endothelium. The anti-angiogenic effect of
PPARgamma agonists is due, at least in part, to an interference with the
VEGF-stimulated PKCalpha-mediated activation of CREB and the related expression
of COX-2.

PMID: 20032081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Oncogene. 2010 Feb 25;29(8):1179-89. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.404. Epub 2009 Dec 14.

NF-kappaB signaling mediates the induction of MTA1 by hepatitis B virus
transactivator protein HBx.

Bui-Nguyen TM(1), Pakala SB, Sirigiri RD, Xia W, Hung MC, Sarin SK, Kumar V,
Slagle BL, Kumar R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The George Washington
University, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

Metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1), a master chromatin modifier, has been
shown to regulate cancer progression and is widely upregulated in human cancer,
including hepatitis B virus-associated hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs). Here we 
provide evidence that hepatitis B virus transactivator protein HBx stimulates the
expression of MTA1 but not of MTA2 or MTA3. The underlying mechanism of HBx
stimulation of MTA1 involves HBx targeting of transcription factor nuclear factor
(NF)-kappaB and the recruitment of HBx/p65 complex to the NF-kappaB consensus
motif on the relaxed MTA1 gene chromatin. We also discovered that MTA1 depletion 
in HBx-expressing cells severely impairs the ability of HBx to stimulate
NF-kappaB signaling and the expression of target proinflammatory molecules.
Furthermore, the presence of HBx in HBx-infected HCCs correlated well with
increased MTA1 and NF-kappaB-p65. Collectively, these findings revealed a
previously unrecognized integral role of MTA1 in HBx stimulation of NF-kappaB
signaling and consequently, the expression of NF-kappaB targets gene products
with functions in inflammation and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3621706
PMID: 20010875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. BMC Genomics. 2009 Dec 10;10:595. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-595.

Deciphering the transcriptional circuitry of microRNA genes expressed during
human monocytic differentiation.

Schmeier S(1), MacPherson CR, Essack M, Kaur M, Schaefer U, Suzuki H, Hayashizaki
Y, Bajic VB.

Author information: 
(1)South African National Bioinformatics Institute, University of the Western
Cape, Modderdam Road, Bellville, South Africa. sebastian.schmeier@kaust.edu.sa

BACKGROUND: Macrophages are immune cells involved in various biological processes
including host defence, homeostasis, differentiation, and organogenesis.
Disruption of macrophage biology has been linked to increased pathogen infection,
inflammation and malignant diseases. Differential gene expression observed in
monocytic differentiation is primarily regulated by interacting transcription
factors (TFs). Current research suggests that microRNAs (miRNAs) degrade and
repress translation of mRNA, but also may target genes involved in
differentiation. We focus on getting insights into the transcriptional circuitry 
regulating miRNA genes expressed during monocytic differentiation.
RESULTS: We computationally analysed the transcriptional circuitry of miRNA genes
during monocytic differentiation using in vitro time-course expression data for
TFs and miRNAs. A set of TF-->miRNA associations was derived from predicted TF
binding sites in promoter regions of miRNA genes. Time-lagged expression
correlation analysis was utilised to evaluate the TF-->miRNA associations. Our
analysis identified 12 TFs that potentially play a central role in regulating
miRNAs throughout the differentiation process. Six of these 12 TFs (ATF2, E2F3,
HOXA4, NFE2L1, SP3, and YY1) have not previously been described to be important
for monocytic differentiation. The remaining six TFs are CEBPB, CREB1, ELK1,
NFE2L2, RUNX1, and USF2. For several miRNAs (miR-21, miR-155, miR-424, and
miR-17-92), we show how their inferred transcriptional regulation impacts
monocytic differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: The study demonstrates that miRNAs and their transcriptional
regulatory control are integral molecular mechanisms during differentiation.
Furthermore, it is the first study to decipher on a large-scale, how miRNAs are
controlled by TFs during human monocytic differentiation. Subsequently, we have
identified 12 candidate key controllers of miRNAs during this differentiation
process.

PMCID: PMC2797535
PMID: 20003307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Blood. 2010 Mar 25;115(12):2520-32. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-07-233478. Epub 2009 
Nov 23.

Vascular endothelial growth factor activation of endothelial cells is mediated by
early growth response-3.

Suehiro J(1), Hamakubo T, Kodama T, Aird WC, Minami T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo 153-8904, Japan.

Comment in
    Blood. 2010 Mar 25;115(12):2336-7.

Endothelial cell activation and dysfunction underlie many vascular disorders,
including atherosclerosis, tumor growth, and sepsis. Endothelial cell activation,
in turn, is mediated primarily at the level of gene transcription. Here, we show 
that in response to several activation agonists, including vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF), tumor necrosis factor-alpha, and thrombin, endothelial
cells demonstrate rapid and profound induction of the early growth response (Egr)
genes egr-1 and egr-3. In VEGF-treated endothelial cells, induction of Egr-3 was 
far greater and more prolonged compared with Egr-1. VEGF-mediated stimulation of 
Egr-3 involved the inducible binding of NFATc, serum response factor, and CREB to
their respective consensus motifs in the upstream promoter region of Egr-3.
Knockdown of Egr-3 markedly impaired VEGF-mediated proliferation, migration, and 
tube formation of endothelial cells and blocked VEGF-induced monocyte adhesion.
Egr-3 knockdown abrogated VEGF-mediated vascular outgrowth from ex vivo aortic
rings and attenuated Matrigel plug vascularization and melanoma tumor growth in
vivo. Together, these findings suggest that Egr-3 is a critical determinant of
VEGF signaling in activated endothelial cells. Thus, Egr-3 represents a potential
therapeutic target in VEGF-mediated vasculopathic diseases.

PMCID: PMC2845904
PMID: 19965691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Int J Oncol. 2010 Jan;36(1):181-92.

ICAM-3 enhances the migratory and invasive potential of human non-small cell lung
cancer cells by inducing MMP-2 and MMP-9 via Akt and CREB.

Park JK(1), Park SH, So K, Bae IH, Yoo YD, Um HD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Radiation Tumor Physiology, Korea Institute of Radiological and 
Medical Sciences, 215-4 Gongneung-Dong, Nowon-Gu, Seoul 139-706.
jkpark@kcch.re.kr

We have previously reported that intercellular adhesion molecule-3 (ICAM-3) is
associated with an increase of cellular radio-resistance and cancer cell
proliferation. In this study, we hypothesized that ICAM-3 has an additional
effect on cancer cell migration and invasion because molecules induced by ICAM-3 
are known as regulators of cell migration and invasion. To examine this
hypothesis, we used NCI-H1299 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell line (p53
and PTEN null cell) and constructed an ICAM-3-over-expressing stable
transfectant, which exhibited increased cell migration and invasion. The
increased migration and invasion resulted from up-regulation of expression and
activities of MMP-2 and MMP-9. ICAM-3 also increased Akt phosphorylation, which
caused an increase in cellular migration/invasion and MMP activities. Activity of
several transcriptional factors located downstream in the Akt pathway was also
tested, and constitutive activation of adenosine 3', 5'-monophosphate response
element-binding protein (CREB) by ICAM-3 was detected. Blockage of the Akt
pathway attenuated CREB activation, and a decrease in CREB expression reduced
cellular migration/invasion and activity of MMPs. This result indicates that CREB
functions in the signaling pathway between Akt and MMP. We also showed
ICAM-3-induced cell migration and invasion in NCI-H460 NSCLC cells (wild-type p53
and PTEN cell) through the same signaling pathway. Taken together, our findings
suggest that ICAM-3 stimulates cancer cell migration/invasion via
ICAM-3/Akt/CREB/MMP pathway regardless of p53 and PTEN status, and this reflects 
the possibility that ICAM-3 could be considered as a candidate for anti-cancer
drug development and as a cancer diagnostic marker.

PMID: 19956847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Arch Dermatol Res. 2010 May;302(4):283-94. doi: 10.1007/s00403-009-1007-x. Epub
2009 Nov 24.

A single UVB exposure increases the expression of functional KIT in human
melanocytes by up-regulating MITF expression through the phosphorylation of
p38/CREB.

Mizutani Y(1), Hayashi N, Kawashima M, Imokawa G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Tokyo Women's Medical University, 8-1 Kawadacho,
Shinjyuku, Tokyo, 162-8666, Japan.

KIT is an essential receptor that modulates melanocyte function and whose
function is disrupted in several pigmentary disorders. However, little is known
about the effects of a single UVB exposure on the expression of KIT and two
important regulatory transcription factors, MITF and AP-2 alpha, in human
melanocytes. We found that a single UVB exposure of human melanocytes induces an 
early decrease and a subsequent increase in functional KIT expression in concert 
with up-regulated MITF expression. The increased MITF expression was accompanied 
by a markedly stimulated and prolonged phosphorylation of p38/CREB. The
UVB-stimulated expression of KIT could be completely abolished by a p38
inhibitor, concomitant with a reduced phosphorylation of CREB and a
down-regulation of MITF expression. Interestingly, in non-UVB exposed human
melanocytes, a MEK inhibitor stimulated the phosphorylation of p38/CREB which was
associated with an increased production of MITF and KIT in a pattern similar to
that induced by UVB. These findings indicate that UVB stimulates functional KIT
expression in human melanocytes via the up-regulation of MITF which is, in turn, 
due to the activation of p38 and CREB.

PMID: 19937254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Neurotoxicology. 2010 Jan;31(1):85-93. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2009.11.004. Epub
2009 Nov 22.

Up-regulation of neurotrophin-related gene expression in mouse hippocampus
following low-level toluene exposure.

Win-Shwe TT(1), Tsukahara S, Yamamoto S, Fukushima A, Kunugita N, Arashidani K,
Fujimaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Environmental Risk, National Institute for Environmental
Studies, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

To investigate the role of strain differences in sensitivity to low-level toluene
exposure on neurotrophins and their receptor levels in the mouse hippocampus,
8-week-old male C3H/HeN, BALB/c and C57BL/10 mice were exposed to 0, 5, 50, or
500 ppm toluene for 6h per day, 5 days per week for 6 weeks in an inhalation
chamber. We examined the expressions of neurotrophin-related genes and receptors 
in the mouse hippocampus using real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR). The expression of nerve growth factor (NGF), brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF), tyrosine kinase (Trk) A, and TrkB mRNAs in the
C3H/HeN mice hippocampus was significantly higher in the mice exposed to 500 ppm 
toluene. Among the three strains of mice, the C3H/HeN mice seemed to be sensitive
to toluene exposure. To examine the combined effect of toluene exposure and
allergic challenge, the C3H/HeN mice stimulated with ovalbumin were exposed to
toluene. The allergy group of C3H/HeN mice showed significantly elevated level of
NGF mRNA in the hippocampus following exposure to 50 ppm toluene. Then, we also
examined the expression of transcription factor, dopamine markers and oxidative
stress marker in the hippocampus of sensitive strain C3H/HeN mice and found that 
the expression of CREB1 mRNA was significantly increased at 50 ppm toluene. In
immunohistochemical analysis, the density of the NGF-immunoreactive signal was
significantly stronger in the hippocampal CA3 region of the C3H/HeN mice exposed 
to 500 ppm toluene in non-allergy group and 50 ppm in allergy group. Our results 
indicate that low-level toluene exposure may induce up-regulation of
neurotrophin-related gene expression in the mouse hippocampus depending on the
mouse strain and an allergic stimulation in sensitive strain may decrease the
threshold for sensitivity at lower exposure level.

2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19932712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jan 1;391(1):634-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.11.111. Epub 2009 Nov 22.

cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB) positively regulates mouse
adiponectin gene expression in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Kim HB(1), Kim WH, Han KL, Park JH, Lee J, Yeo J, Jung MH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Korean Medicine, Pusan National University, Pusan National
University School, #30 Beomeo-ri, Mulguem-eup, Yangsan-Si, Gyeongnam 609-735,
South Korea.

Adiponectin is expressed in adipose tissue by adipogenic transcription factors
including PPARgamma, C/EBPalpha, and ADD1/SREBP1c. Because cAMP-response element 
binding protein (CREB) is also a central transcriptional activator of adipocyte
differentiation, we evaluated CREB to determine if it stimulates adiponectin gene
expression. To accomplish this, we evaluated the effects of activated CREB on the
promoter activity of the mouse adiponectin gene, and identified the cAMP-response
element (CRE) in the promoter. The constitutively active form of CREB increased
the promoter activity of the mouse adiponectin gene. In addition, transfection
studies using 5' serial deleted promoters revealed the presence of a putative CRE
located between the -1250 and -1000bp region. Furthermore, an electrophoresis
mobility shift assay (EMSA) and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis
demonstrated that CREB bound to the region between -1022 and -995 in the
adiponectin promoter. Insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1), which activate CREB,
increased the adiponectin promoter activity. However, this stimulation was
prevented by the dominant negative form of CREB (ACREB) and pretreatment with
PD098059, indicating that IGF-1 stimulate adiponectin expression through CREB
phosphorylation via the ERK pathway. Importantly, the transactivation of
adiponectin expression by CREB was inhibited by ATF3. Coimmunoprecipitation and
GST pull-down assay revealed that ATF3 bound to CREB and prevented CREB
phosphorylation induced during differentiation of 3T3-L1 adipocytes.
Collectively, these findings demonstrate that CREB is a positive regulator of
mouse adiponectin gene expression in adipocytes, which play an important role in 
the regulation of adiponectin expression in response to growth factor.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19932681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Genes Cells. 2009 Dec;14(12):1429-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01359.x. Epub
2009 Nov 20.

Transcriptional regulation of tumor suppressor p53 by cAMP-responsive
element-binding protein/AMP-activated protein kinase complex in response to
glucose deprivation.

Okoshi R(1), Ando K, Suenaga Y, Sang M, Kubo N, Kizaki H, Nakagawara A, Ozaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry, Chiba Cancer Center Research Institute, Chiba
260-8717, Japan.

Tumor suppressor p53 plays a pivotal role in the regulation of cell fate
determination in response to a variety of cellular stress including carbon source
depletion. In this study, we found that cAMP-responsive element-binding protein
(CREB) collaborates with AMP-activated protein kinase alpha (AMPKalpha) to
regulate the transcription of p53. Luciferase reporter assays showed that the
genomic fragment spanning from -531 to -239 of human p53 gene is required for the
transactivation of p53 in response to glucose deprivation. Within this region, we
found out a putative CREB-binding site. siRNA-mediated knockdown of CREB resulted
in a significant inhibition of the up-regulation of p53 and apoptosis under
glucose deprivation. Consistent with these observations, glucose deprivation
induced the transcription of p53 and CREB. Additionally, glucose deprivation led 
to an efficient recruitment of CREB onto the promoter region of p53 gene carrying
the canonical CREB-binding site, indicating that CREB has an ability to bind to
the promoter region of p53 gene and transactivate p53. Furthermore, the amounts
of CREB/phospo-AMPKalpha complex increased in response to glucose deprivation.
Taken together, our present findings suggest that p53 is transcriptionally
regulated by CREB/phospho-AMPKalpha complex and thereby contributing to the
induction of apoptosis under carbon source depletion.

PMID: 19930465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Immunology. 2010 Mar;129(3):375-85. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03188.x. Epub
2009 Nov 16.

The ceramide-1-phosphate analogue PCERA-1 modulates tumour necrosis factor-alpha 
and interleukin-10 production in macrophages via the cAMP-PKA-CREB pathway in a
GTP-dependent manner.

Avni D(1), Philosoph A, Meijler MM, Zor T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Life Sciences Institute, Tel-Aviv University,
Tel-Aviv, Israel.

The synthetic phospho-ceramide analogue-1 (PCERA-1) down-regulates production of 
the pro-inflammatory cytokine tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and
up-regulates production of the anti-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-10 (IL-10) 
in lipopolysaccharide (LPS) -stimulated macrophages. We have previously reported 
that PCERA-1 increases cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels. The
objective of this study was to delineate the signalling pathway leading from
PCERA-1 via cAMP to modulation of TNF-alpha and IL-10 production. We show here
that PCERA-1 elevates intra-cellular cAMP level in a guanosine
triphosphate-dependent manner in RAW264.7 macrophages. The cell-permeable
dibutyryl cAMP was able to mimic the effects of PCERA-1 on cytokine production,
whereas 8-chloro-phenylthio-methyladenosine-cAMP, which specifically activates
the exchange protein directly activated by cAMP (EPAC) but not protein kinase A
(PKA), failed to mimic PCERA-1 activities. Consistently, the PKA inhibitor H89
efficiently blocked PCERA-1-driven cytokine modulation as well as
PCERA-1-stimulated phosphorylation of cAMP response element binding protein
(CREB) on Ser-133. Finally, PCERA-1 activated cAMP-responsive transcription of a 
luciferase reporter, in synergism with the phosphodiesterase (PDE)-4 inhibitor
rolipram. Our results suggest that PCERA-1 activates a G(s) protein-coupled
receptor, leading to elevation of cAMP, which acts via the PKA-CREB pathway to
promote TNF-alpha suppression and IL-10 induction in LPS-stimulated macrophages. 
Identification of the PCERA-1 receptor is expected to set up a new target for
development of novel anti-inflammatory drugs.

PMCID: PMC2826682
PMID: 19922425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 12;4(11):e7820. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007820.

Dramatic co-activation of WWOX/WOX1 with CREB and NF-kappaB in delayed loss of
small dorsal root ganglion neurons upon sciatic nerve transection in rats.

Li MY(1), Lai FJ, Hsu LJ, Lo CP, Cheng CL, Lin SR, Lee MH, Chang JY, Subhan D,
Tsai MS, Sze CI, Pugazhenthi S, Chang NS, Chen ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology & Anatomy, National Cheng Kung University Medical
College, Tainan, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Tumor suppressor WOX1 (also named WWOX or FOR) is known to
participate in neuronal apoptosis in vivo. Here, we investigated the functional
role of WOX1 and transcription factors in the delayed loss of axotomized neurons 
in dorsal root ganglia (DRG) in rats.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Sciatic nerve transection in rats rapidly induced
JNK1 activation and upregulation of mRNA and protein expression of WOX1 in the
injured DRG neurons in 30 min. Accumulation of p-WOX1, p-JNK1, p-CREB, p-c-Jun,
NF-kappaB and ATF3 in the nuclei of injured neurons took place within hours or
the first week of injury. At the second month, dramatic nuclear accumulation of
WOX1 with CREB (>65% neurons) and NF-kappaB (40-65%) occurred essentially in
small DRG neurons, followed by apoptosis at later months. WOX1 physically
interacted with CREB most strongly in the nuclei as determined by FRET analysis. 
Immunoelectron microscopy revealed the complex formation of p-WOX1 with p-CREB
and p-c-Jun in vivo. WOX1 blocked the prosurvival CREB-, CRE-, and AP-1-mediated 
promoter activation in vitro. In contrast, WOX1 enhanced promoter activation
governed by c-Jun, Elk-1 and NF-kappaB. WOX1 directly activated
NF-kappaB-regulated promoter via its WW domains. Smad4 and p53 were not involved 
in the delayed loss of small DRG neurons.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Rapid activation of JNK1 and WOX1 during the acute
phase of injury is critical in determining neuronal survival or death, as both
proteins functionally antagonize. In the chronic phase, concurrent activation of 
WOX1, CREB, and NF-kappaB occurs in small neurons just prior to apoptosis. Likely
in vivo interactions are: 1) WOX1 inhibits the neuroprotective CREB, which leads 
to eventual neuronal death, and 2) WOX1 enhances NF-kappaB promoter activation
(which turns to be proapoptotic). Evidently, WOX1 is the potential target for
drug intervention in mitigating symptoms associated with neuronal injury.

PMCID: PMC2771921
PMID: 19918364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Neuropharmacology. 2010 May;58(6):911-20. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2009.11.002. 
Epub 2009 Nov 14.

Anti-depressant natural flavonols modulate BDNF and beta amyloid in neurons and
hippocampus of double TgAD mice.

Hou Y(1), Aboukhatwa MA, Lei DL, Manaye K, Khan I, Luo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Maryland, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Increasing evidence suggests that depression may be both a cause and consequence 
of neurological disorders such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), and that
anti-depressants could provide an alternative strategy to current AD therapies.
Association of side effect and herbal-drug interaction with conventional
anti-depressant and St. John's wort warrant investigating new anti-depressant
drugs. Anti-depressant effects of ginkgo biloba extract (EGb 761) have been
demonstrated in animal models of depression and in human volunteers. We report
here that ginkgo flavonols quercetin and kaempferol stimulates depression-related
signaling pathways involving brain-derived neurotrophic factor
BDNF/phosphorylation of cyclic AMP response element binding protein
CREB/postsynaptic density proteins PSD95, and reduces amyloid-beta peptide
(Abeta) in neurons isolated from double transgenic AD mouse (TgAPPswe/PS1e9). In 
addition, enhanced BDNF expression and reduction of Abeta oligomers was confirmed
in hippocampus of the double transgenic mice administered with flavonol, which
correlates with cognitive improvement behaviors in these mice. The present
results suggest that stimulating BDNF and reducing Abeta toxicity by natural
flavonols provide a therapeutic implication for treatment of AD.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2838959
PMID: 19917299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Affect Disord. 2010 Jul;124(1-2):164-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2009.10.017. Epub
2009 Nov 13.

Altered levels of extracellular signal-regulated kinase signaling proteins in
postmortem frontal cortex of individuals with mood disorders and schizophrenia.

Yuan P(1), Zhou R, Wang Y, Li X, Li J, Chen G, Guitart X, Manji HK.

Author information: 
(1)Biomarker Laboratory, National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

BACKGROUND: The extracellular-regulated protein kinase (ERK) pathway has been
implicated in processes such as neuronal plasticity and resilience in psychiatric
disorders including major depressive disorder (MDD), bipolar disorder (BPD), and 
schizophrenia. The extent of the possible involvement of this pathway in
psychiatric disorders remains unknown, as does its potential utility as a
pharmacological target for the future development of novel therapeutics.
METHODS: Western blot analyses were used to measure levels of different
proteins-Rap1, B-Raf, MEK1, MEK2, ERK1/2, RSK1, CREB, NSE, and beta-actin-in the 
postmortem frontal cortex of individuals with schizophrenia, MDD, and BPD, as
well as healthy non-psychiatric controls.
RESULTS: Levels of most studied protein members of the ERK cascade were lower in 
individuals with psychiatric disorders than controls; differences between
psychiatric groups were not statistically significant. In general, protein levels
were lower in individuals with schizophrenia than in those with BPD or MDD, but
protein levels varied across groups.
LIMITATIONS: The small number of individuals in each diagnostic group may limit
our interpretation of the results. Factors such as postmortem interval,
medication status at time of death, and mood state at time of death may also have
influenced the findings.
DISCUSSION: The results are consistent with the hypothesis that the ERK pathway
is implicated in reduced neuronal plasticity associated with the course of these 
psychiatric illnesses. The results warrant an expanded investigation into the
activity of other members of this pathway as well as other brain areas of
interest.

PMCID: PMC2875351
PMID: 19913919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Jan 1;109(1):173-83. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22395.

Profiling and comparing transcription factors activated in non-metastatic and
metastatic nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells.

Su B(1), Xiang B, Wang L, Cao L, Xiao L, Li X, Li X, Wu M, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Central South University, Changsha 410078, Hunan,
People's Republic of China.

Transcription factors (TFs) are modulators of gene expression that are critically
important in the establishment and progression of human cancers. In the current
study, the activity profiles of TFs in a normal nasopharyngeal epithelial cell
line and in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) cell lines were studied using
oligonucleotide array-based TF assays. Compared to the normal epithelial cell
line NP69, nine TFs in the non-metastatic NPC cell line (6-10B) and eight TFs in 
a metastatic NPC cell line (5-8F) were upregulated. Among upregulated TFs, Sp1,
AP2, and ATF/CREB families exhibited relatively high activities in NPC cell
lines. Transcription levels of Sp1, ATF-1, ATF-2, AP2alpha, AP2gamma, and CREB1
were higher in 5-8F cells than in 6-10B cells. In addition, higher expression of 
the Sp1 target genes MMP-9 and VEGF was observed in 5-8F cells. Sp1 silencing
reduced VEGF and MMP-9 expression. Inhibition of Sp1 expression and activity in
5-8F cells by mithramycin resulted in downregulated expression and secretion of
MMP-9 and VEGF, concomitant with inhibition of cell migration and invasion. These
results suggest that dynamic changes in TF activities occur in NPC cells and that
these changes may play important roles in regulating the expression of genes
associated with the development and progression of NPC.

PMID: 19911387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Neurosci Res. 2010 Apr;88(5):957-70. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22262.

Differing in vitro survival dependency of mouse and rat NG2+ oligodendroglial
progenitor cells.

Horiuchi M(1), Lindsten T, Pleasure D, Itoh T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, Davis, School of Medicine, 
Sacramento, California, USA.

NG2 chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan is a surface marker of oligodendroglial
progenitor cells (OPCs) in various species. In contrast to well-studied rat OPCs,
however, we found that purified mouse NG2 surface positive cells (NG2(+) cells)
require additional activation of cyclic AMP (cAMP) signaling for survival in a
medium containing 30% B104 neuroblastoma conditioned medium supplemented with
fibroblast growth factor-2 (B104CM+FGF2), whereas B104CM+FGF2 alone is sufficient
for survival and selective proliferation of rat OPCs. After induction of in vitro
differentiation, more than 90% of mouse NG2(+) cells became O4-positive, and a
majority expressed myelin basic protein by 5 day of differentiation, which
confirmed the identity of isolated mouse NG2(+) cells as OPCs. In comparison to
rat OPCs, mouse OPCs in B104CM+FGF2 were less motile, and demonstrated lower
basal phosphorylation levels of ERK1/2 and cAMP response element-binding protein 
(CREB) and a higher incidence of apoptosis mediated by the intrinsic pathway.
Transient up-regulation of cAMP-CREB signaling partially inhibited apoptosis of
mouse OPCs independently of the ERK pathway. This study demonstrates a difference
in trophic requirements between mouse and rat OPCs, with an essential role for
cAMP signaling to preserve viability of mouse OPCs.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2872551
PMID: 19908280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Neurosci Methods. 2010 Jan 30;186(1):60-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2009.11.004.
Epub 2009 Nov 10.

Differentiation of mouse Neuro 2A cells into dopamine neurons.

Tremblay RG(1), Sikorska M, Sandhu JK, Lanthier P, Ribecco-Lutkiewicz M,
Bani-Yaghoub M.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenesis and Brain Repair Group, Neurobiology Program, Institute for
Biological Sciences, National Research Council Canada, Ottawa, ON, K1A 0R6,
Canada.

Neuro 2A (N2a) is a mouse neural crest-derived cell line that has been
extensively used to study neuronal differentiation, axonal growth and signaling
pathways. A convenient characteristic of these cells is their ability to
differentiate into neurons within a few days. However, most differentiation
methods reported for N2a cells do not provide information about the neuronal
types obtained after each treatment. In this study, we evaluated the generation
of N2a dopamine neurons following treatment with a number of factors known to
induce neuronal differentiation. Our results showed that N2a cells express
Nurr-related factor 1 (Nurr1) and produce low levels of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)
and dopamine. Both TH and dopamine levels were significantly enhanced in the
presence of dibutyryl cyclic adenosine monophosphate (dbcAMP), as evidenced by
Western blot, immunocytochemistry and high performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC). In contrast to dbcAMP, other factors such as transforming growth factor
beta1 (TGF beta 1), bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4), glial cell-derived
neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and retinoic acid (RA) did not increase TH expression.
Further investigation confirmed that the effect of dbcAMP on production of
TH-positive neurons was mediated through cyclic AMP (cAMP) responsive element
binding protein (CREB) and it was antagonized by RA. Thus, although various
treatments can be used to generate N2a neurons, only dbcAMP significantly
enhanced the formation of dopamine neurons. Taken together, this study provided a
simple and reliable method to generate dopamine neurons for rapid and efficient
physiological and pharmacological assays.

(c) 2009. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19903493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Quintessence Int. 2009 Nov-Dec;40(10):857-63.

Activation of cyclic AMP response element-binding protein (CREB) in aggressive
periodontal disease.

Buchmann R(1), Roessler R, Sculean A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Periodontology, Medical Faculty, University of Düsseldorf,
Düsseldorf, Germany. rainer.buchmann@med.uni-duesseldorf.de

OBJECTIVES: To report a novel observation of neutrophil signal transduction
abnormalities in patients with localized aggressive periodontitis (LAP) that are 
associated with an enhanced phosphorylation of the nuclear signal transduction
protein cyclic AMP response element-binding factor (CREB).
METHOD AND MATERIALS: Peripheral venous blood neutrophils of 18 subjects, 9
patients with LAP and 9 race-, sex-, and age-matched healthy controls, were
isolated and prepared using the Ficoll-Hypaque density-gradient technique.
Neutrophils (5.4 x 10(6)/mL) were stimulated with the chemoattractant FMLP
(10(-6) mol/L) for 5 minutes and lysed. Aliquots of these samples were separated 
by SDS-PAGE (60 microg/lane) on 9.0% (w/v) polyacrylamide slab gels and
transferred electrophoretically to polyvinyl difluoride membranes. The cell
lysates were immunoblotted with a 1:1,000 dilution of rabbit-phospho-CREB
antibody that recognizes only the phosphorylated form of CREB at Ser133. The
activated CREB was visualized with a luminol-enhanced chemoluminescence detection
system and evaluated by laser densitometry.
RESULTS: In patients with LAP, the average activation of CREB displayed an
overexpression for the unstimulated peripheral blood neutrophils of 80.3%
(17.5-fold) compared to healthy controls (4.6%).
CONCLUSION: LAP neutrophils who express their phenotype appear to be
constitutively primed, as evidenced by activated CREB in resting cells compared
to normal individuals. The genetically primed neutrophil phenotype may contribute
to neutrophil-mediated tissue damage in the pathogenesis of LAP.

PMID: 19898718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jan 8;285(2):1529-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.033407. Epub 2009
Nov 6.

Chromosome 21-derived microRNAs provide an etiological basis for aberrant protein
expression in human Down syndrome brains.

Kuhn DE(1), Nuovo GJ, Terry AV Jr, Martin MM, Malana GE, Sansom SE, Pleister AP, 
Beck WD, Head E, Feldman DS, Elton TS.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Division of Pharmacology, Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Retraction in
    J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 8;288(6):4228.

Comment in
    NIH Guide Grants Contracts. 2013 Jan 18;:NOT-OD-13-023.

Down syndrome (DS), or Trisomy 21, is the most common genetic cause of cognitive 
impairment and congenital heart defects in the human population. Bioinformatic
annotation has established that human chromosome 21 (Hsa21) harbors five microRNA
(miRNAs) genes: miR-99a, let-7c, miR-125b-2, miR-155, and miR-802. Our laboratory
recently demonstrated that Hsa21-derived miRNAs are overexpressed in DS brain and
heart specimens. The aim of this study was to identify important Hsa21-derived
miRNA/mRNA target pairs that may play a role, in part, in mediating the DS
phenotype. We demonstrate by luciferase/target mRNA 3'-untranslated region
reporter assays, and gain- and loss-of-function experiments that miR-155 and -802
can regulate the expression of the predicted mRNA target, the methyl-CpG-binding 
protein (MeCP2). We also demonstrate that MeCP2 is underexpressed in DS brain
specimens isolated from either humans or mice. We further demonstrate that, as a 
consequence of attenuated MeCP2 expression, transcriptionally activated and
silenced MeCP2 target genes, CREB1/Creb1 and MEF2C/Mef2c, are also aberrantly
expressed in these DS brain specimens. Finally, in vivo silencing of endogenous
miR-155 or -802, by antagomir intra-ventricular injection, resulted in the
normalization of MeCP2 and MeCP2 target gene expression. Taken together, these
results suggest that improper repression of MeCP2, secondary to trisomic
overexpression of Hsa21-derived miRNAs, may contribute, in part, to the
abnormalities in the neurochemistry observed in the brains of DS individuals.
Finally these results suggest that selective inactivation of Hsa21-derived miRNAs
may provide a novel therapeutic tool in the treatment of DS.

PMCID: PMC2801278
PMID: 19897480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Bioelectromagnetics. 2010 Apr;31(3):237-45. doi: 10.1002/bem.20554.

Signal transduction of the melatonin receptor MT1 is disrupted in breast cancer
cells by electromagnetic fields.

Girgert R(1), Hanf V, Emons G, Gründker C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University of Göttingen, Göttingen,
Germany.

The growth of estrogen-receptor positive breast cancer cells is inhibited by the 
pineal gland hormone, melatonin. Concern has been raised that power-line
frequency and microwave electromagnetic fields (EMFs) could reduce the efficiency
of melatonin on breast cancer cells. In this study we investigated the impact of 
EMFs on the signal transduction of the high-affinity receptor MT1 in parental
MCF-7 cells and MCF-7 cells transfected with the MT1 gene. The binding of the
cAMP-responsive element binding (CREB) protein to a promoter sequence of BRCA-1
after stimulation with melatonin was analyzed by a gel-shift assay and the
expression of four estrogen-responsive genes was measured in sham-exposed breast 
cancer cells and cells exposed to a sinusoidal 50 Hz EMF of 1.2 microT for 48 h. 
In sham-exposed cells, binding of CREB to the promoter of BRCA-1 was increased by
estradiol and subsequently diminished by treatment with melatonin. In cells
exposed to 1.2 microT, 50 Hz EMF, binding of CREB was almost completely omitted. 
Expression of BRCA-1, p53, p21(WAF), and c-myc was increased by estradiol
stimulation and subsequently decreased by melatonin treatment in both cell lines,
except for p53 expression in the transfected cell line, thereby proving the
antiestrogenic effect of melatonin at molecular level. In contrast, in breast
cancer cells transfected with MT1 exposed to 1.2 microT of the 50 Hz EMF, the
expression of p53 and c-myc increased significantly after melatonin treatment but
for p21(WAF) the increase was not significant. These results convincingly prove
the negative effect of EMF on the antiestrogenic effect of melatonin in breast
cancer cells.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19882681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Psychiatr Serv. 2009 Nov;60(11):1446-57. doi: 10.1176/appi.ps.60.11.1446.

Pharmacogenetics studies in STAR*D: strengths, limitations, and results.

Laje G(1), Perlis RH, Rush AJ, McMahon FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Basis of Mood and Anxiety Disorders Unit, National Institute of Mental
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. gonzalo.laje@nih.gov

Several lines of evidence support an important genetic contribution to the wide
individual variation in therapeutic response to antidepressant medications. The
Sequenced Treatment Alternatives to Relieve Depression (STAR*D) study provided
the largest cohort assembled to date of DNA from patients with nonpsychotic major
depressive disorder, uniformly treated with citalopram and followed prospectively
for up to 12 weeks. This pivotal study changed the face of pharmacogenetics
research by increasing the sample size by an order of magnitude as well as by
providing detailed prospective information about antidepressant response and
tolerability. Several groups have identified markers in genes and tested the
replication of previous findings of genes associated with outcome and side
effects of antidepressant treatment. Variants in HTR2A, GRIK4, and KCNK2 were
associated with citalopram treatment outcome. Replication was achieved in markers
in the FKBP5 gene. Other findings in PDE11A and BDNF were not successfully
replicated, and reports of potential confounders in previous associations with
serotonin transporter variation (SLC6A4) were identified. Polymorphisms in
pharmacokinetic genes involved in metabolism and transmembrane transport were
also not associated with antidepressant response. Adverse events were also
tested. Treatment-emergent suicidal ideation was associated with GRIK2, GRIA3,
PAPLN, IL28RA, and CREB1. Sexual dysfunction was linked with variation in GRIN3A,
GRIA1 GRIA3, and GRIK2. Reported and future findings of pharmacogenetics studies 
in STAR*D could help elucidate pathways involved in major depression and those
pertinent to antidepressant outcome and side effects. Replication of these
findings in independent samples could lead to the development of new treatments
and to optimization of available treatments.

PMCID: PMC3775610
PMID: 19880459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Biol Bull. 2009 Oct;217(2):202-12.

Ionizing radiation induces apoptotic signal through protein kinase Cdelta (delta)
and survival signal through Akt and cyclic-nucleotide response element-binding
protein (CREB) in Jurkat T cells.

Cataldi A(1), Di Giacomo V, Rapino M, Zara S, Rana RA.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biomorfologia, Universitá G. d'Annunzio, Chieti-Pescara,
Italy. cataldi@unich.it

Although ionizing radiation induces a loss of proliferative capacity as well as
cell death by apoptosis and necrosis, cells can oppose the damaging effects by
activating survival signal pathways. Here we report the effect of 1.5- and 6-Gy
doses of ionizing radiation on apoptotic protein kinase Cdelta (PKCdelta) and
survival cyclic-nucleotide response element-binding protein (CREB) signal in
Jurkat T cells. Cell cycle analysis, performed by flow cytometry, showed a
significant G2M arrest 24 h after exposure to 6 Gy. This arrest was accompanied
by dead cells, which increased in number up to 7 days, when cell viability was
further reduced. The response was apparently promoted by caspase-3-mediated
PKCdelta activation, and thus apoptosis. Moreover, the presence of viable cells
up to 7 days in samples exposed to 6 Gy is explained by Akt activation, which may
influence the nuclear transcription factor CREB, leading to resistance to
ionizing radiation. Thus, the knowledge of apoptotic and survival pathways
activated in tumor cells may help in establishing specific therapies by combining
selective inhibitors or stimulators of key signaling proteins with conventional
chemotherapy, hormone therapy, and radiotherapy.

PMID: 19875824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Cell Mol Med. 2011 Jan;15(1):152-65. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2009.00956.x.

Involvement of neuropeptide Y and its Y1 and Y5 receptors in maintaining
self-renewal and proliferation of human embryonic stem cells.

Son MY(1), Kim MJ, Yu K, Koo DB, Cho YS.

Author information: 
(1)Development & Differentiation Research Center, KRIBB, Eoeundong, Yuseong-gu,
Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

Neuropeptide Y (NPY) and NPY receptors are widely expressed in various organs and
cell types and have been shown to have pleiotropic functions. However, their
presence or role in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) remains unknown. We now
show that undifferentiated hESCs primarily express NPY and its Y1 and Y5
receptors. Inhibition of NPY signalling using either the selective NPY Y1 or Y5
receptor antagonist reduces the maintenance of self-renewal and proliferation of 
undifferentiated hESCs. We also provide compelling evidence that exogenous NPY
supports the long-term growth of undifferentiated hESCs in the absence of feeder 
cell factors using only knockout serum replacement media. Further, NPY
facilitates the use of chemically defined medium made up of N2/B27 supplement and
basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) for hESC feeder-free culture. Our results
indicate that both Y1 and Y5 receptors appear to be involved in the NPY-mediated 
activation of AKT/protein kinase B and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 
(ERK1/2) in hESCs. Notably, only Y1 receptor, but not Y5 receptor, is responsible
for the NPY-induced activation of cAMP-response element binding (CREB) in hESCs. 
These results provide the first evidence that NPY and its Y1 and Y5 receptors
have potential role in maintaining hESC self-renewal and pluripotency. We
demonstrate the underlying importance of NPY signalling and its usefulness in the
development of a defined and xeno-free culture condition for the large-scale
propagation of undifferentiated hESCs.

© 2011 The Author Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3822502
PMID: 19874423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2010 Jan 15;44(1):7-15. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2009.10.002.
Epub 2009 Oct 27.

cJun modulates Ggamma-globin gene expression via an upstream cAMP response
element.

Kodeboyina S(1), Balamurugan P, Liu L, Pace BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Texas at Dallas, PO
Box 830688, FO 3.1, Richardson, TX 75083, USA.

The upstream Ggamma-globin gene cAMP response element (G-CRE) was previously
shown to play a role in drug-mediated fetal hemoglobin induction. This effect is 
achieved via p38 mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK)-dependent CREB1 and
ATF-2 phosphorylation and G-CRE transactivation. Since this motif is also a
predicted consensus binding site for cJun we extended our analysis to determine
the ability of cJun to transactivate gamma-globin through the G-CRE. Using
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays we showed comparable in vivo cJun and CREB1 
binding to the G-CRE region. Protein-protein interactions were confirmed between 
cJun/ATF-2 and CREB1/ATF-2 but not between CREB1 and cJun. However, we observed
cJun and CREB1 binding to the G-CRE in vitro by electrophoretic mobility shift
assay. Promoter pull-down assay followed by sequential western blot analysis
confirmed co-localization of cJun, CREB1, and ATF-2 on the G-CRE. To show
functional relevance, enforced expression studies with pLen-cJun and a
Ggamma-promoter (-1500 to +36) luciferase reporter were completed; we observed a 
concentration-dependent increase in luciferase activity with pLen-cJun similar to
that produced by CREB1 enforced expression. Moreover, the G/A mutation at -1225
in the G-CRE abolished cJun transactivation. Finally, enforced cJun expression in
K562 cells and normal primary erythroid progenitors enhanced endogenous
gamma-globin gene expression. We conclude that these data indicate that cJun
activates the Ggamma-globin promoter via the G-CRE in a manner comparable with
CREB1 and propose a model for gamma-globin activation based on DNA-protein
interactions in the G-CRE.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2818355
PMID: 19861239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Mol Psychiatry. 2009 Dec;14(12):1105-18. doi: 10.1038/mp.2009.92. Epub 2009 Oct
20.

Sequence variations of ABCB1, SLC6A2, SLC6A3, SLC6A4, CREB1, CRHR1 and NTRK2:
association with major depression and antidepressant response in
Mexican-Americans.

Dong C(1), Wong ML, Licinio J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Center for Pharmacogenomics,
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.

We studied seven genes that reflect events relevant to antidepressant action at
four sequential levels: (1) entry into the brain, (2) binding to monoaminergic
transporters, and (3) distal effects at the transcription level, resulting in (4)
changes in neurotrophin and neuropeptide receptors. Those genes are ATP-binding
cassette subfamily B member 1 (ABCB1), the noradrenaline, dopamine, and serotonin
transporters (SLC6A2, SLC6A3 and SLC6A4), cyclic AMP-responsive element binding
protein 1 (CREB1), corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor 1 (CRHR1) and
neurotrophic tyrosine kinase type 2 receptor (NTRK2). Sequence variability for
those genes was obtained in exonic and flanking regions. A total of 56 280 000 bp
across were sequenced in 536 unrelated Mexican Americans from Los Angeles (264
controls and 272 major depressive disorder (MDD)). We detected in those
individuals 419 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs); the nucleotide diversity 
was 0.00054 + or - 0.0001. Of those, a total of 204 novel SNPs were identified,
corresponding to 49% of all previously reported SNPs in those genes: 72 were in
untranslated regions, 19 were in coding sequences of which 7 were non-synonymous,
86 were intronic and 27 were in upstream/downstream regions. Several SNPs or
haplotypes in ABCB1, SLC6A2, SLC6A3, SLC6A4, CREB1 and NTRK2 were associated with
MDD, and in ABCB1, SLC6A2 and NTRK2 with antidepressant response. After
controlling for age, gender and baseline 21-item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale
(HAM-D21) score, as well as correcting for multiple testing, the relative
reduction of HAM-D21 score remained significantly associated with two
NTRK2-coding SNPs (rs2289657 and rs56142442) and the haplotype CAG at rs2289658
(splice site), rs2289657 and rs2289656. Further studies in larger independent
samples will be needed to confirm these associations. Our data indicate that
extensive assessment of sequence variability may contribute to increase
understanding of disease susceptibility and drug response. Moreover, these
results highlight the importance of direct re-sequencing of key candidate genes
in ethnic minority groups in order to discover novel genetic variants that cannot
be simply inferred from existing databases.

PMCID: PMC2834349
PMID: 19844206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Endocrine. 2009 Dec;36(3):491-7. doi: 10.1007/s12020-009-9241-8. Epub 2009 Oct
20.

Arachidonic acid induces acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1 expression via activation of
CREB1.

Peng Y(1), Lei T, Yuan J, Chen X, Long Q, Zhang J, Lei P, Feng B, Yang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of
Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong
Agricultural University, 430070 Wuhan, People's Republic of China.
py_rimidine@yahoo.com.cn

Erratum in
    Endocrine. 2010 Feb;37(1):239. Zhan, Jian [corrected to Zhang, Jian].

Acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC; EC 6.4.1.2) is the major enzyme of fatty acid
synthesis and oxidation in response to dietary changes. In animals, there are two
major isoforms of ACCs, ACC1 and ACC2, which are encoded by different genes and
display distinct tissue and cellular distribution. We examined the effect of high
concentration of arachidonic acid (AA) on the expression of ACC1 mRNA in HepG2
hepatoma cells cultured in the absence of insulin. After 12 h of treatment, AA
was found to significantly up-regulate ACC1 mRNA level as well as that of cAMP
regulatory element binding protein 1 (CREB1), implying the possible interactions 
between ACC1 and CREB1. In support of the hypothesis, several potential CREB1
binding sites were identified within the PII promoter of ACC1. Further
experiments demonstrated that transient over-expression of CREB1 in HepG2 cells
activates ACC1 PII promoter and induces the production of triacylglycerol in
response to AA, indicating that the effect of AA on ACC1 is possibly regulated
via CREB1.

PMID: 19842072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2009 Jul-Sep;22(3):679-88.

Regulation of CREB activation by p38 mitogen activated protein kinase during
human primary erythroblast differentiation.

Di Giacomo V(1), Sancilio S, Caravatta L, Rana RA, Di Pietro R, Cataldi A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biomorfologia, Università G. d'Annunzio, Chieti-Pescara,
Italy. v.digiacomo@unich.it

Among the molecular events underlying erythroid differentiation, we analyzed the 
signalling pathway leading to cAMP response element binding (CREB) nuclear
transcription factor activation. Normal donor blood light density cells
differentiated to pro-erythroblasts during the proliferative phase (10 days) of
the human erythroblast massive amplification (HEMA) culture, and to
orthochromatic erythroblasts, during the differentiation phase (4 additional
days) of the culture. Since erythropoietin was present all over the culture, also
pro-erythroblasts left in proliferative medium for 14 days continued their
maturation without reaching the final steps of differentiation. p38 mitogen
activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK) and CREB maximal activation occurred upon 4
days of differentiation induction, whereas a lower activation was detectable in
the cells maintained in parallel in proliferative medium (14 days).
Interestingly, when SB203580, a specific p38 MAPK inhibitor, was added to the
culture the percentage of differentiated cells decreased along with p38 MAPK and 
CREB phosphorylation. All in all, our results evidence a role for p38 MAPK in
activating CREB metabolic pathway in the events leading to erythroid
differentiation.

PMID: 19822084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Am J Pathol. 2009 Nov;175(5):2197-206. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.090400. Epub 2009
Oct 8.

Activated cAMP response element binding protein is overexpressed in human
mesotheliomas and inhibits apoptosis.

Shukla A(1), Bosenberg MW, MacPherson MB, Butnor KJ, Heintz NH, Pass HI, Carbone 
M, Testa JR, Mossman BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Vermont College of Medicine,
Burlington, VT 05405-0068, USA. Arti.Shukla@uvm.edu

Little is known about the cellular mechanisms contributing to the development and
chemoresistance of malignant mesothelioma (MM), an aggressive asbestos-associated
tumor. A human mesothelial cell line (LP9/TERT-1) and isolated human pleural
mesothelial cells showed rapid and protracted asbestos-induced cAMP response
element binding protein (CREB1) phosphorylation, which was inhibited in
LP9/TERT-1 cells by small molecule inhibitors of epidermal growth factor receptor
phosphorylation and protein kinase A. Asbestos increased expression of several
CREB target genes (c-FOS, EGR-1, MKP1, BCL2, and MMP13) and apoptosis, which was 
enhanced using small interfering CREB. Human MM tissue arrays showed elevated
endogenous levels of phosphorylated nuclear CREB1 as compared with reactive
mesothelial hyperplasias and normal lung tissue. Significantly increased
phosphorylated CREB1 and mRNA levels of BCL2, c-FOS, MMP9, and MMP13 were also
observed in MM cells in vitro, which were further augmented after addition of
Doxorubicin (Dox). Small interfering CREB inhibited migration of MMs, increased
apoptosis by Dox, and decreased BCL2 and BCL-xL expression, suggesting a role for
these molecules in CREB-induced MM survival. These data indicate that CREB1 and
its target genes are up-regulated in asbestos-exposed human mesothelial cells
through an epidermal growth factor receptor/protein kinase A pathway. Since
activated CREB1 also is increased endogenously in human MM and modifies migration
and resistance to Dox-induced apoptosis, inhibition of CREB1 may be a new
strategy for MM therapy.

PMCID: PMC2774081
PMID: 19815709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Neurosci. 2009 Oct 7;29(40):12702-10. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1166-09.2009.

Autocrine activation of neuronal NMDA receptors by aspartate mediates dopamine-
and cAMP-induced CREB-dependent gene transcription.

Almeida LE(1), Murray PD, Zielke HR, Roby CD, Kingsbury TJ, Krueger BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Cancer Center,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

cAMP can stimulate the transcription of many activity-dependent genes via
activation of the transcription factor, cAMP response element-binding protein
(CREB). However, in mouse cortical neuron cultures, prior to synaptogenesis,
neither cAMP nor dopamine, which acts via cAMP, stimulated CREB-dependent gene
transcription when NR2B-containing NMDA receptors (NMDARs) were blocked.
Stimulation of transcription by cAMP was potentiated by inhibitors of excitatory 
amino acid uptake, suggesting a role for extracellular glutamate or aspartate in 
cAMP-induced transcription. Aspartate was identified as the extracellular
messenger: enzymatic scavenging of l-aspartate, but not glutamate, blocked
stimulation of CREB-dependent gene transcription by cAMP; moreover, cAMP induced 
aspartate but not glutamate release. Together, these results suggest that cAMP
acts via an autocrine or paracrine pathway to release aspartate, which activates 
NR2B-containing NMDARs, leading to Ca(2+) entry and activation of transcription. 
This cAMP/aspartate/NMDAR signaling pathway may mediate the effects of
transmitters such as dopamine on axon growth and synaptogenesis in developing
neurons or on synaptic plasticity in mature neural networks.

PMCID: PMC2804479
PMID: 19812345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 Oct;8(10):2780-90. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-09-0549. Epub
2009 Oct 6.

Triptolide is an inhibitor of RNA polymerase I and II-dependent transcription
leading predominantly to down-regulation of short-lived mRNA.

Vispé S(1), DeVries L, Créancier L, Besse J, Bréand S, Hobson DJ, Svejstrup JQ,
Annereau JP, Cussac D, Dumontet C, Guilbaud N, Barret JM, Bailly C.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Oncologie Expérimentale, Institut de Recherche Pierre
Fabre, 3 rue des satellites, BP94244, Toulouse Cedex 4, 31432 France.
stephane.vispe@pierre-fabre.com

Triptolide, a natural product extracted from the Chinese plant Tripterygium
wilfordii, possesses antitumor properties. Despite numerous reports showing the
proapoptotic capacity and the inhibition of NF-kappaB-mediated transcription by
triptolide, the identity of its cellular target is still unknown. To clarify its 
mechanism of action, we further investigated the effect of triptolide on RNA
synthesis in the human non-small cell lung cancer cell line A549. Triptolide
inhibited both total RNA and mRNA de novo synthesis, with the primary action
being on the latter pool. We used 44K human pan-genomic DNA microarrays and
identified the genes primarily affected by a short treatment with triptolide.
Among the modulated genes, up to 98% are down-regulated, encompassing a large
array of oncogenes including transcription factors and cell cycle regulators. We 
next observed that triptolide induced a rapid depletion of RPB1, the RNA
polymerase II main subunit that is considered a hallmark of a transcription
elongation blockage. However, we also show that triptolide does not directly
interact with the RNA polymerase II complex nor does it damage DNA. We thus
conclude that triptolide is an original pharmacologic inhibitor of RNA polymerase
activity, affecting indirectly the transcription machinery, leading to a rapid
depletion of short-lived mRNA, including transcription factors, cell cycle
regulators such as CDC25A, and the oncogenes MYC and Src. Overall, the data shed 
light on the effect of triptolide on transcription, along with its novel
potential applications in cancers, including acute myeloid leukemia, which is in 
part driven by the aforementioned oncogenic factors.

PMID: 19808979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Mod Pathol. 2010 Jan;23(1):93-7. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.138. Epub 2009 Oct
2.

Utility of FISH in the diagnosis of angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma: a series of
18 cases.

Tanas MR(1), Rubin BP, Montgomery EA, Turner SL, Cook JR, Tubbs RR, Billings SD, 
Goldblum JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Institute,
The Cleveland Clinic and The Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine of Case 
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma is a mesenchymal neoplasm of intermediate
malignancy and uncertain histogenesis/line of differentiation, which occurs most 
commonly in the extremities of children to young adults. It has a characteristic 
appearance characterized by a proliferation of histiocytoid cells with a lymphoid
cuff and fibrous pseudocapsule, simulating the appearance of a neoplasm occurring
within a lymph node. However, these classic histological features are not always 
present. Given the variable appearance of the neoplastic cells and the lack of
consistently positive immunohistochemical markers, diagnosis can be problematic. 
Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma has been found to harbor three related
translocations, a t(12;16)(q13;p11) resulting in a FUS/ATF1 fusion gene,
t(12;22)(q13;q12) resulting in a EWSR1/ATF1 fusion, and t(2;22)(q33;q12)
resulting in a EWSR1/CREB1 fusion. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
probes to EWSR1 and FUS, in theory, should detect all three translocations/gene
fusions. We evaluated 18 cases of angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma for
rearrangements of EWSR1 and FUS by FISH, the largest series to date. We found
that 13 of 17 (76%) cases of angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma harbored
rearrangements of EWSR1; rearrangements of FUS were not detected in any of the
cases. This study affirms that the rearrangement of EWSR1 is a common genetic
event in angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma, and is thus useful diagnostically.
This study supports the fact that the rearrangement of FUS is present in only a
small minority of angiomatoid fibrous histiocytomas. Interestingly, 24% of the
cases were translocation negative, and did not contain rearrangements of EWSR1 or
FUS by FISH. Although it is possible that these cases contained cryptic
rearrangements of EWSR1 or FUS that were not detectable by our FISH probes, it
also raises the possibility that another translocation/gene fusion may be present
in angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma. Finally, we discuss some of the potential
pitfalls of this technique, including confusion with other mesenchymal neoplasms 
containing rearrangement of EWSR1, in particular Ewing's sarcoma/PNET.

PMID: 19801966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Neuroscience. 2010 Jan 13;165(1):16-27. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.09.068. 
Epub 2009 Sep 30.

Serotonergic potentiation of photic phase shifts: examination of receptor
contributions and early biochemical/molecular events.

Smith VM(1), Hagel K, Antle MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Calgary, AB, Canada.

The 5-HT mixed agonist/antagonist
1-(2-methoxyphenyl)4-[4-(phthalimido)butyl]-piperazine hydrobromide (NAN-190) has
been shown to greatly potentiate photic phase shifts in hamsters. The mechanism
of this potentiation has yet to be determined. NAN-190 is believed to act
primarily through the 5-HT(1A) receptor, but also binds to several other
receptors, making it uncertain as to which receptor underlies its potentiation of
photic phase shifts. Also uncertain are the intracellular changes in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) which are associated with such enhanced phase
shifting. Here we examine the role of the 5-HT(1A) receptor as well as the
physiological underpinnings, in terms of both gene expression and biochemical
activation, in the behavioral responses to photic stimuli following pretreatment 
with NAN-190. Administration of NAN-190 to wildtype mice significantly
potentiated late subjective night photic phase shifts, while mice lacking the
5-HT(1A) receptor (knockouts) exhibited an attenuated behavioral response to
light when pretreated with NAN-190. In wildtype mice, the protein product of the 
immediate-early gene c-fos, induced following photic stimulation, was found to be
significantly decreased with NAN-190 pretreatment. Similarly, the levels of
phosphorylated CREB protein, involved in a biochemical pathway leading to gene
transcription, were also attenuated by NAN-190 in the wildtype mice. However,
activation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase I/II (ERK) pathway in
wildtype mice, following the light pulse, was not affected by NAN-190
pretreatment, nor was the expression of the circadian clock components Period1
and Period2. These findings suggest that the 5-HT(1A) receptor plays a critical
role in the potentiation effect observed with NAN-190, and that NAN-190 may
potentiate photic phase shifts at least partly by down-regulating the activity of
some (but not all) genes and biochemical pathways involved in coupling the light 
signal to the output of the circadian clock.

PMID: 19799970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Nov;23(11):1839-49. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0201. Epub 2009 Oct
1.

Paradoxical stimulation of cyclooxygenase-2 expression by glucocorticoids via a
cyclic AMP response element in human amnion fibroblasts.

Zhu XO(1), Yang Z, Guo CM, Ni XT, Li JN, Ge YC, Myatt L, Sun K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, 220 Handan Road, Shanghai 200433,
People's Republic of China.

Human amnion fibroblasts produce abundant prostaglandins toward the end of
gestation, which is one of the major events leading to parturition. In marked
contrast to its well-described antiinflammatory effect, glucocorticoids have been
shown to up-regulate cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression in human amnion
fibroblasts. The mechanisms underlying this paradoxical induction of COX-2 by
glucocorticoids have not been resolved. Using cultured human amnion fibroblasts, 
we found that the induction of COX-2 mRNA expression by cortisol was a
glucocorticoid receptor (GR)-dependent process requiring ongoing transcription.
Upon transfection of a COX-2 promoter-driven reporter gene into the amnion
fibroblasts, cortisol stimulated the COX-2 promoter activity. This was abolished 
by mutagenesis of a cAMP response element (CRE) at -53 to approximately -59bp as 
well as by cotransfection of a plasmid expressing dominant-negative CRE-binding
protein (CREB). The phosphorylation level of CREB-1 was significantly increased
by cortisol treatment of the amnion fibroblasts, whereas the effect was
attenuated either by the protein kinase A inhibitor H89 or the p38 -MAPK
inhibitor SB203580. The induction of the COX-2 promoter activity and the
phosphorylation of CREB-1 were also blocked by the GR antagonist RU486. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay revealed that the binding of CREB-1 to the CRE
of the COX-2 promoter was increased by cortisol treatment of the amnion
fibroblasts. In conclusion, cortisol, via binding to GR, stimulated COX-2
expression by increasing phosphorylated CREB-1 binding to the CRE of the COX-2
gene. Cortisol may phosphorylate CREB-1 by activating either protein kinase A or 
p38-MAPK in the amnion fibroblasts.

PMID: 19797430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Anesth Analg. 2009 Oct;109(4):1127-34. doi: 10.1213/ANE.0b013e3181b5a1b8.

Isoflurane inhibits cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element-binding
protein phosphorylation and calmodulin translocation to the nucleus of SH-SY5Y
cells.

Zhang J(1), Sutachan JJ, Montoya-Gacharna J, Xu CF, Xu F, Neubert TA, Recio-Pinto
E, Blanck TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, NYU School of Medicine, 550 1st Ave., New York, 
NY 10016, USA.

BACKGROUND: Calmodulin (CaM) activation by Ca(2+), its translocation to the
nucleus, and stimulation of phosphorylation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate
response element-binding protein (CREB) (P-CREB) are necessary for new gene
expression and have been linked to long-term potentiation, a process important in
memory formation. Because isoflurane affects memory, we tested whether isoflurane
interfered with the translocation of CaM to the neuronal cell nucleus and
attenuated the formation P-CREB.
METHODS: SH-SY5Y cells, a human neuroblastoma cell line, were cultured. Cells
were depolarized with KCl and the phosphorylation of CREB examined by Western
blotting, enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay, and immunocytochemistry. The
translocation of CaM from the cytosol to the nucleus was also examined after
depolarization. Cells were depolarized and lysed and fractionated by
centrifugation to determine the amount of CaM translocated to the nucleus. CaM
was localized by immunocytochemistry and quantitated by Western blotting and
imaging. Before and during KCl depolarization, cells were exposed to isoflurane, 
isoflurane plus Bay K 8644, nitrendipine, and omega-conotoxin GVIa, respectively.
RESULTS: P-CREB increased after KCl depolarization. The increase of P-CREB peaked
at depolarization duration of 30 s. The increase in P-CREB formation was
inhibited by nitrendipine, but not omega-conotoxin, and by isoflurane in a
concentration-dependent fashion. Pretreatment with the L-type Ca(2+) channel
agonist, Bay K 8644, attenuated the inhibition of P-CREB formation by isoflurane.
CaM presence in the nucleus occurred after KCl depolarization. CaM translocation 
was inhibited by nitrendipine and attenuated by isoflurane. Bay K 8644
pretreatment decreased the isoflurane inhibition of CaM translocation to the
nucleus.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that isoflurane inhibits CaM translocation and 
P-CREB formation. This most likely occurs through isoflurane inhibition of
Ca(2+)entry through L-type Ca(2+) channels.

PMCID: PMC4503314
PMID: 19762740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Mol Biol Rep. 2010 Jul;37(6):2797-802. doi: 10.1007/s11033-009-9826-6. Epub 2009 
Sep 16.

Transcriptional regulation of human mucin gene MUC4 in pancreatic cancer cells.

Zhang J(1), Zhang X, Zhu Y, Chen Z, Xu Z, Miao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing
Medical University, Guangzhou Rd. #300, 210029 Nanjing, People's Republic of
China.

The human mucin gene MUC4 is overexpressed in pancreatic cancer and cancer cell
lines, while remaining undetectable in the normal pancreas, indicating its
important role in pancreatic cancer pathogenesis. The molecular mechanisms
involved in the regulation of MUC4 gene expression are not fully understood. In
this report, we used pancreatic cancer cell line (Bxpc-3) to explore the
potential transcription factors regulating MUC4 transcriptional activity. Through
promoter screening, overexpressing methods and luciferase reporter studies, we
found that transcription factors CREB, Ets-1, Elk-1 and STAT1 can positively
regulate MUC4 expression at the promoter and mRNA level. Our findings will be
helpful for better understanding the transcriptional regulation of MUC4 in
pancreatic cancer cells and identifying key biologically relevant factors that
may account for its aberrant expression in pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 19757157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Nov;1793(11):1749-58. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2009.09.007. Epub 2009 Sep 10.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors repress macrophage migration inhibitory factor
(MIF) expression by targeting MIF gene transcription through a local chromatin
deacetylation.

Lugrin J(1), Ding XC, Le Roy D, Chanson AL, Sweep FC, Calandra T, Roger T.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Service, Department of Medicine, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire Vaudois and University of Lausanne, CH-1011 Lausanne, Switzerland.

The cytokine macrophage migration inhibitory factor plays a central role in
inflammation, cell proliferation and tumorigenesis. Moreover, macrophage
migration inhibitory factor levels correlate with tumor aggressiveness and
metastatic potential. Histone deacetylase inhibitors are potent antitumor agents 
recently introduced in the clinic. Therefore, we hypothesized that macrophage
migration inhibitory factor would represent a target of histone deacetylase
inhibitors. Confirming our hypothesis, we report that histone deacetylase
inhibitors of various chemical classes strongly inhibited macrophage migration
inhibitory factor expression in a broad range of cell lines, in primary cells and
in vivo. Nuclear run on, transient transfection with macrophage migration
inhibitory factor promoter reporter constructs and transduction with macrophage
migration inhibitory factor expressing adenovirus demonstrated that trichostatin 
A (a prototypical histone deacetylase inhibitor) inhibited endogenous, but not
episomal, MIF gene transcription. Interestingly, trichostatin A induced a local
and specific deacetylation of macrophage migration inhibitory factor
promoter-associated H3 and H4 histones which did not affect chromatin
accessibility but was associated with an impaired recruitment of RNA polymerase
II and Sp1 and CREB transcription factors required for basal MIF gene
transcription. Altogether, this study describes a new molecular mechanism by
which histone deacetylase inhibitors inhibit MIF gene expression, and suggests
that macrophage migration inhibitory factor inhibition by histone deacetylase
inhibitors may contribute to the antitumorigenic effects of histone deacetylase
inhibitors.

PMID: 19747950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Nov;29(21):5828-42. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00945-09. Epub 2009 Aug 
31.

The hypoxia-inducible factor 1/NOR-1 axis regulates the survival response of
endothelial cells to hypoxia.

Martorell L(1), Gentile M, Rius J, Rodríguez C, Crespo J, Badimon L,
Martínez-González J.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center (CSIC-ICCC), Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant
Pau, c/Sant Antoni Maria Claret #167, 08025 Barcelona, Spain.

Hypoxia induces apoptosis but also triggers adaptive mechanisms to ensure cell
survival. Here we show that the prosurvival effects of hypoxia-inducible factor 1
(HIF-1) in endothelial cells are mediated by neuron-derived orphan receptor 1
(NOR-1). The overexpression of NOR-1 decreased the rate of endothelial cells
undergoing apoptosis in cultures exposed to hypoxia, while the inhibition of
NOR-1 increased cell apoptosis. Hypoxia upregulated NOR-1 mRNA levels in a time- 
and dose-dependent manner. Blocking antibodies against VEGF or SU5614 (a VEGF
receptor 2 inhibitor) did not prevent hypoxia-induced NOR-1 expression,
suggesting that NOR-1 is not induced by the autocrine secretion of VEGF in
response to hypoxia. The reduction of HIF-1 alpha protein levels by small
interfering RNAs, or by inhibitors of the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase
(PI3K)/Akt pathway or mTOR, significantly counteracted hypoxia-induced NOR-1
upregulation. Intracellular Ca(2+) was involved in hypoxia-induced PI3K/Akt
activation and in the downstream NOR-1 upregulation. A hypoxia response element
mediated the transcriptional activation of NOR-1 induced by hypoxia as we show by
transient transfection and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Finally, the
attenuation of NOR-1 expression reduced both basal and hypoxia-induced cIAP2
(cellular inhibitor of apoptosis protein 2) mRNA levels, while NOR-1
overexpression upregulated cIAP2. Therefore, NOR-1 is a downstream effector of
HIF-1 signaling involved in the survival response of endothelial cells to
hypoxia.

PMCID: PMC2772740
PMID: 19720740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Br J Pharmacol. 2009 Sep;158(1):198-208. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2009.00344.x.

The signal transduction cascade regulating the expression of the gap junction
protein connexin43 by beta-adrenoceptors.

Salameh A(1), Krautblatter S, Karl S, Blanke K, Gomez DR, Dhein S, Pfeiffer D,
Janousek J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Cardiology, University of Leipzig, Heart Centre,
Leipzig, Germany. aida.salameh@med.uni-leipzig.de

Comment in
    Br J Pharmacol. 2009 Sep;158(1):195-7.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: In mammalian heart, connexin43 (Cx43) represents the
predominant connexin in the working myocardium. As the beta-adrenoceptor is
involved in many cardiac diseases, we wanted to clarify the pathway by which
beta-adrenoceptor stimulation may control Cx43 expression.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Cultured neonatal rat cardiomyocytes were stimulated with 
isoprenaline. Cx43 expression as well as activation of p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK), p42/44 MAPK, JUN NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK) and nuclear
translocation of the transcription factors activator protein 1 (AP1) and
CRE-binding protein (CREB) were investigated. Additionally, we assessed Cx43
expression and distribution in left ventricular biopsies from patients without
any significant heart disease, and from patients with either congestive heart
failure [dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)] or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM).
KEY RESULTS: Isoprenaline exposure caused about twofold up-regulation of Cx43
protein with a pEC(50) of 7.92 +/- 0.11, which was inhibited by propranolol,
SB203580
(4-(4-fluorophenyl)-2-(4-methylsulphinylphenyl)-5-(4-pyridyl)-1H-imidazole) (p38 
inhibitor), PD98059 2-(2-amino-3-methoxyphenyl)-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one) (MAPK 1
kinase inhibitor) (Alexis Biochemicals, San Diego, CA, USA) or cyclosporin A.
Similar findings were obtained for Cx43 mRNA. Furthermore, Cx43 up-regulation was
accompanied by phosphorylation of p38, p42/44 and JNK, and by translocation of
AP1 and CREB to the nucleus. Analysis of Cx43 protein and mRNA in ventricular
biopsies revealed that in patients with DCM, Cx43 content was significantly
lower, and in patients with HCM, Cx43 content was significantly higher, relative 
to patients without any cardiomyopathy. More importantly, Cx43 distribution also 
changed with more Cx43 being localized at the lateral border of the
cardiomyocytes.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATION: Beta-adrenoceptor stimulation up-regulated cardiac
Cx43 expression via a protein kinase A and MAPK-regulated pathway, possibly
involving AP1 and CREB. Cardiomyopathy altered Cx43 expression and distribution.

PMCID: PMC2795252
PMID: 19719782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Nov 1;108(4):974-81. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22330.

Upregulation of MUC5AC gene expression by IL-4 through CREB in human airway
epithelial cells.

Kim CH(1), Kim KE, Yoon JH, Song KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, Kwandong University, Koyang,
Korea.

Mucus hypersecretion is an important characteristic feature of the pathogenesis
of allergy. Although interleukin (IL)-4 is known to be an inflammatory mediator
in respiratory diseases, the mechanism by which IL-4 induces MUC5AC gene
expression has not been fully explored. The aim of this study was to investigate 
the mechanism by which IL-4 induces MUC5AC gene expression in the airway. We
examined the role of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling on MUC5AC 
gene expression in airway epithelium. We showed that phosphorylation of ERK1/2
increased after treatment of cells with IL-4, whereas phosphorylation of p38 and 
JNK was not detected. In addition, pharmacologic and genetic inhibition of ERK1/2
abolished IL-4-induced MUC5AC gene expression. Moreover, we investigated the
activation of p90 ribosomal S6 kinase 1 (RSK1) as a downstream signaling target
of ERK1/2 in IL-4 signaling. The activation of RSK1 was prevented by pretreatment
with PD98059 or plasmid expressing a MEK1 dominant-negative mutant. We also found
that RSK1 mediated the IL-4-induced phosphorylation of cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB) and the transcription of MUC5AC. Furthermore, the 
cAMP-response element (CRE) in the MUC5AC promoter appears to be important for
IL-4-induced MUC5AC gene expression in NCI-H292 cells.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19718656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2009;21(7):909-22. doi: 10.1071/RD09027.

Involvement of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma in gonadal
steroidogenesis and steroidogenic acute regulatory protein expression.

Kowalewski MP(1), Dyson MT, Manna PR, Stocco DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX, USA.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) gamma belongs to the PPAR
family of nuclear transcription factors whose ligands, such as eicosanoids, fatty
acids and prostaglandins, are known to affect gonadal function. Although several 
of these enhance the expression of the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein
(STAR) and steroid production, the role of PPARgamma in regulating STAR-mediated 
steroidogenesis remains unclear. In the present study, we used ciglitazone to
selectively activate PPARgamma and examine its role in STAR-mediated
steroidogenesis in immortalised KK1 mouse granulosa cells and MA-10 mouse Leydig 
tumour cells. Cotreatment with both dibutyryl-cAMP and ciglitazone revealed a
dose-dependent, significant increase in progesterone synthesis, Star promoter
activity, Star mRNA and STAR protein relative to either compound alone. The
overexpression of PPARgamma further increased Star-promoter activity. The
ciglitazone-induced activity of the Star-promoter appears to be mediated through 
the cAMP-response element half-sites located within its proximal 151 bp. Combined
treatment with ciglitazone and dibutyryl-cAMP significantly increased the
expression and activity of transcriptional pathways impacted by the activator
protein-1 family member c-JUN. The present study demonstrates that ciglitazone
and dibutyryl-cAMP synergistically enhance STAR expression in MA-10 and KK1
cells. Ciglitazone-activated PPARgamma appears to increase the sensitivity of
Leydig and granulosa cells to cAMP stimulation, possibly via upregulation of
c-JUN expression.

PMID: 19698295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Exp Cell Res. 2010 Jan 15;316(2):216-31. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.08.006. Epub
2009 Aug 15.

Limited Ca2+ and PKA-pathway dependent neurogenic differentiation of human adult 
mesenchymal stem cells as compared to fetal neuronal stem cells.

Lepski G(1), Jannes CE, Maciaczyk J, Papazoglou A, Mehlhorn AT, Kaiser S,
Teixeira MJ, Marie SK, Bischofberger J, Nikkhah G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Eberhard-Karls-Univesity, Hoppe-Seyler-Str 3,
72076 Tübingen, Germany. guilherme.lepski@med.uni-tuebingen.de

The ability of mesenchymal stem cells to generate functional neurons in culture
is still a matter of controversy. In order to assess this issue, we performed a
functional comparison between neuronal differentiation of human MSCs and
fetal-derived neural stem cells (NSCs) based on morphological,
immunocytochemical, and electrophysiological criteria. Furthermore, possible
biochemical mechanisms involved in this process were presented. NF200
immunostaining was used to quantify the yield of differentiated cells after
exposure to cAMP. The addition of a PKA inhibitor and Ca(2+) blockers to the
differentiation medium significantly reduced the yield of differentiated cells.
Activation of CREB was also observed on MSCs during maturation. Na(+)-, K(+)-,
and Ca(2+)-voltage-dependent currents were recorded from MSCs-derived cells. In
contrast, significantly larger Na(+) currents, firing activity, and spontaneous
synaptic currents were recorded from NSCs. Our results indicate that the initial 
neuronal differentiation of MSCs is induced by cAMP and seems to be dependent
upon Ca(2+) and the PKA pathway. However, compared to fetal neural stem cells,
adult mesenchymal counterparts are limited in their neurogenic potential. Despite
the similar yield of neuronal cells, NSCs achieved a more mature functional
state. Description of the underlying mechanisms that govern MSCs' differentiation
toward a stable neuronal phenotype and their limitations provides a unique
opportunity to enhance our understanding of stem cell plasticity.

PMID: 19686736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Mol Biol. 2009 Oct 23;393(2):261-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.08.024. Epub 2009 
Aug 14.

Cell cycle regulatory effects of retinoic Acid and forskolin are mediated by the 
cyclin C gene.

Makkonen KM(1), Malinen M, Ropponen A, Väisänen S, Carlberg C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, University of Kuopio, Finland.

As a partner of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 3, Cyclin C controls cellular
proliferation and, together with CDK8, represses gene transcription. In this
study, we showed that the highly expressed Cyclin C gene is a direct target of
the nuclear hormone all-trans retinoic acid (RA) in HEK293 human embryonal kidney
cells. The RA receptor (RAR) gamma associates with a Cyclin C promoter region
containing two RAR binding sites. The Cyclin C gene also directly responds to the
cAMP activator Forskolin via the transcription factor CREB1 (cAMP response
element-binding protein 1), for which we identified four binding sites within the
first 2250 bp of its promoter. RARgamma and CREB1 show functional convergence via
the corepressor NCoR1, which controls in particular the Forskolin response of
Cyclin C. The histone deacetylases 1, 5, 6, 7 and 11 are involved in the basal
expression of Cyclin C, but in HEK293 and MCF-7 human breast carcinoma cells the 
antiproliferative effects of the histone deacetylase inhibitor SAHA
(suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid) are not mediated by Cyclin C. However, cell
cycle progressing effects of all-trans RA and Forskolin are dependent on Cyclin C
expression levels. This suggests that the primary regulation of Cyclin C by
all-trans RA and Forskolin mediates some of the cell cycle control actions of
these compounds.

PMID: 19683536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Cell Death Differ. 2009 Dec;16(12):1681-93. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2009.108. Epub 2009 
Aug 14.

TRPC channel-mediated neuroprotection by PDGF involves Pyk2/ERK/CREB pathway.

Yao H(1), Peng F, Fan Y, Zhu X, Hu G, Buch SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5880, USA.

Platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF) has been reported to provide tropic
support for neurons in the central nervous system. The protective role of PDGF on
dopaminergic neurons, especially in the context of HIV-associated dementia (HAD),
however, remains largely unknown. Here, we show that exogenous PDGF was
neuroprotective against toxicity induced by HIV-1 Tat in primary midbrain
neurons. Furthermore, we report the involvement of transient receptor potential
canonical (TRPC) channels in PDGF-mediated neuroprotection. TRPC channels are
Ca(2+)-permeable, nonselective cation channels with a variety of physiological
functions. Blocking TRPC channels with either a blocker or short-interfering RNAs
(specific for TRPC 5 and 6) in primary neurons resulted in suppression of both
PDGF-mediated neuroprotection as well as elevations in intracellular Ca(2+).
PDGF-mediated neuroprotection involved parallel but distinct ERK/CREB and
PI3K/Akt pathways. TRPC channel blocking also resulted in suppression of
PDGF-induced Pyk2/ERK/CREB activation, but not Akt activation. Relevance of these
findings in vivo was further corroborated by intrastriatal injections of PDGF and
HIV-1 Tat in mice. Administration of PDGF was able to rescue the dopaminergic
neurons in the substantia nigra from Tat-induced neurotoxicity. This effect was
attenuated by pre-treatment of mice with the TRP blocker, thus underscoring the
novel role of TRPC channels in the neuroprotection mediated by PDGF.

PMCID: PMC2783976
PMID: 19680266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2009 Nov;34(12):2609-17. doi: 10.1038/npp.2009.91. Epub 
2009 Aug 12.

Stress-induced potentiation of cocaine reward: a role for CRF R1 and CREB.

Kreibich AS(1), Briand L, Cleck JN, Ecke L, Rice KC, Blendy JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104-3403, USA.

Both clinical and preclinical research have shown that stress can potentiate drug
use; however, the underlying mechanisms of this interaction are unknown.
Previously, we have shown that a single exposure to forced swim (FS) reinstates
extinguished conditioned place preference (CPP) to cocaine and that cAMP response
element binding protein (CREB) is necessary for this response. CREB can be
activated by corticotropin releasing factor (CRF) receptor type 1 (CRF(R1))
binding, which mediates neuroendocrine and behavioral responses to stress as well
as to drugs of abuse. The present experiments investigate whether changes in
cocaine reward elicited by previous exposure to stress are mediated by CREB
and/or CRF(R1). Chronic exposure to FS in advance of conditioning enhances
cocaine CPP in wild-type mice, but this is blocked in CREB-deficient mice. In
addition, pretreatment with the CRF(R1) antagonist, antalarmin, before FS
exposure blocks this stress-induced enhancement of cocaine CPP. Furthermore,
FS-induced increase in phosphorylated CREB (pCREB), specifically in the lateral
septum (LS) and nucleus accumbens (NAc) is also blocked by antalarmin. Taken
together, these studies suggest that both CREB and CRF(R1) activation are
necessary for stress-induced potentiation of drug reward.

PMCID: PMC4034179
PMID: 19675537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Cereb Cortex. 2010 Apr;20(4):941-52. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhp159. Epub 2009 Aug 7.

Deletion of CREB1 from the dorsal telencephalon reduces motivational properties
of cocaine.

McPherson CS(1), Mantamadiotis T, Tan SS, Lawrence AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Florey Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville, 3010 Victoria,
Australia.

Transcriptional changes in neurons underpin the long-lived cellular response to
environmental stimuli, and cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB1) has
been implicated in this process. Exposure to psychostimulants such as cocaine
results in persistent neuronal plasticity in cortical circuitry that likely
modulates the motivation to use the drug again. To examine whether CREB1 in
cortical glutamatergic neurons was implicated in cocaine use, we developed
conditional CREB1 mutants that exhibit ablation of functional CREB1 in the cortex
and hippocampus. Here we report that CREB1 mutants show normal locomotor
responses to acute and chronic cocaine and develop a place preference for
cocaine. However, CREB1 mutants demonstrate a diminished drive to self-administer
cocaine under operant conditions. We conclude that there is a specific role for
CREB1 in telencephalic glutamatergic neurons regulating the motivational
properties of cocaine.

PMID: 19666831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Neurosci. 2009 Aug 5;29(31):9683-99. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1145-09.2009.

5-HT4 receptor-mediated neuroprotection and neurogenesis in the enteric nervous
system of adult mice.

Liu MT(1), Kuan YH, Wang J, Hen R, Gershon MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, New
York 10032, USA. ml27@columbia.edu

Although the mature enteric nervous system (ENS) has been shown to retain stem
cells, enteric neurogenesis has not previously been demonstrated in adults. The
relative number of enteric neurons in wild-type (WT) mice and those lacking
5-HT(4) receptors [knock-out (KO)] was found to be similar at birth; however, the
abundance of ENS neurons increased during the first 4 months after birth in WT
but not KO littermates. Enteric neurons subsequently decreased in both WT and KO 
but at 12 months were significantly more numerous in WT. We tested the hypothesis
that stimulation of the 5-HT(4) receptor promotes enteric neuron survival and/or 
neurogenesis. In vitro, 5-HT(4) agonists increased enteric neuronal
development/survival, decreased apoptosis, and activated CREB (cAMP response
element-binding protein). In vivo, in WT but not KO mice, 5-HT(4) agonists
induced bromodeoxyuridine incorporation into cells that expressed markers of
neurons (HuC/D, doublecortin), neural precursors (Sox10, nestin, Phox2b), or stem
cells (Musashi-1). This is the first demonstration of adult enteric neurogenesis;
our results suggest that 5-HT(4) receptors are required postnatally for ENS
growth and maintenance.

PMCID: PMC2749879
PMID: 19657021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Inhal Toxicol. 2009 Aug;21(10):828-36. doi: 10.1080/08958370802538068.

Extracellular glutamate level and NMDA receptor subunit expression in mouse
olfactory bulb following nanoparticle-rich diesel exhaust exposure.

Win-Shwe TT(1), Mitsushima D, Yamamoto S, Fujitani Y, Funabashi T, Hirano S,
Fujimaki H.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Environmental Studies, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
tin.tin.win.shwe@nies.go.jp

In this present study, we aimed to investigate the extracellular glutamate level 
and memory function-related gene expression in the mouse olfactory bulb after
exposure of the animals to nanoparticle-rich diesel exhaust (NRDE) with or
without bacterial cell wall component. Lipoteichoic acid (LTA), a cell wall
component derived from Staphylococcus aureus, was used to induce systemic
inflammation. Male BALB/c mice were exposed to clean air (particle concentration,
4.58 microg/m(3)) or NRDE (148.86 microg/m(3)) 5 h per day on 5 consecutive days 
of the week for 4 wk with or without weekly intraperitoneal injection of LTA. We 
examined the extracellular glutamate levels in the olfactory bulb using in vivo
microdialysis and high-performance liquid chromatography assay. Then, we
collected the olfactory bulb to examine the expression of N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptor subunits (NR1, NR2A, and NR2B) and calcium/calmodulin-dependent
protein kinase (CaMK) IV and cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CREB)-1
using real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). NRDE
and/or LTA caused significantly increased extracellular glutamate levels in the
olfactory bulb of mice. Moreover, the exposure of mice to NRDE upregulates NR1,
NR2A, NR2B, and CaMKIV mRNAs in the olfactory bulb, while LTA upregulates only
NR2B and CREB1 mRNAs. These findings suggest that NRDE and LTA cause
glutamate-induced neurotoxicity separately and accompanied by changes in the
expression of NMDA receptor subunits and related kinase and transcription factor 
in the mouse olfactory bulb. This is the first study to show the correlation
between glutamate toxicity and memory function-related gene expressions in the
mouse olfactory bulb following exposure to NRDE.

PMID: 19653804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009 Nov;50(11):5355-63. doi: 10.1167/iovs.09-3741.
Epub 2009 Jul 30.

CREB1/ATF1 activation in photoreceptor degeneration and protection.

Beltran WA(1), Allore HG, Johnson E, Towle V, Tao W, Acland GM, Aguirre GD, Zeiss
CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Ophthalmology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

PURPOSE: The cAMP response element binding protein 1 (CREB1) and activating
transcription factor 1 (ATF1) are closely related members of the bZIP superfamily
of transcription factors. Both are activated in response to a wide array of
stimuli, including cellular stress. This study was conducted to assess the
CREB1/ATF1 pathway in photoreceptor disease and protection.
METHODS: The expression levels of p-CREB1, CREB1, and ATF1 were examined by
immunoblot and immunohistochemistry in normal canine retina and retinas of
several canine models of retinal degeneration (rcd1, rcd2, erd, prcd, XLPRA1,
XLPRA2, T4R RHO). Humans retinas affected with age-related macular degeneration
(AMD) were also examined. p-CREB1/ATF1 immunolabeling was assessed in normal and 
rcd1 dogs treated with ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF), to examine the effect 
of a neuroprotective stimulus on activation of CREB1/ATF1.
RESULTS: Native CREB1 and ATF1 as well as phosphorylated CREB1/ATF1 was examined 
in normal canine retina by immunoblot. The p-CREB1 antibody identified
phosphorylated CREB1 and ATF1 and labeled the inner retina only in normal dogs.
In degenerate canine and human retinas, strong immunolabeling appeared in rod and
cone photoreceptors, indicating increased expression of native CREB1 and ATF1, as
well as increased phosphorylation of these proteins. Retinal protection by CNTF
in rcd1 dogs was accompanied by a significant increase in the number of
p-CREB1/ATF1-labeled photoreceptor nuclei.
CONCLUSIONS: Positive association of CREB1/ATF1 phosphorylation with
photoreceptor protection suggests that it may contribute to an innate protective 
response. These data identify a signaling mechanism in rods and cones of
potential importance for therapies of RP and AMD.

PMCID: PMC3172238
PMID: 19643965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Biol Chem. 2009 Sep 18;284(38):26194-206. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.019836. Epub
2009 Jul 24.

Silencing cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) identifies CYR61 as a
tumor suppressor gene in melanoma.

Dobroff AS(1), Wang H, Melnikova VO, Villares GJ, Zigler M, Huang L, Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Metastatic progression of melanoma is associated with overexpression and activity
of cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB). However, the mechanism by which 
CREB contributes to tumor progression and metastasis remains unclear. Here, we
demonstrate that stably silencing CREB expression in two human metastatic
melanoma cell lines, A375SM and C8161-c9, suppresses tumor growth and
experimental metastasis. Analysis of cDNA microarrays revealed that CREB
silencing leads to increased expression of cysteine-rich protein 61 (CCN1/CYR61) 
known to mediate adhesion, chemostasis, survival, and angiogenesis. Promoter
analysis and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that CREB acts as 
a negative regulator of CCN1/CYR61 transcription by directly binding to its
promoter. Re-expression of CREB in CREB-silenced cells rescued the low CCN1/CYR61
expression phenotype. CCN1/CYR61 overexpression resulted in reduced tumor growth 
and metastasis and inhibited the activity of matrix metalloproteinase-2.
Furthermore, its overexpression decreased melanoma cell motility and invasion
through Matrigel, which was abrogated by silencing CCN1/CYR61 in low metastatic
melanoma cells. Moreover, a significant decrease in angiogenesis as well as an
increase in apoptosis was seen in tumors overexpressing CCN1/CYR61. Our results
demonstrate that CREB promotes melanoma growth and metastasis by down-regulating 
CCN1/CYR61 expression, which acts as a suppressor of melanoma cell motility,
invasion and angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2758018
PMID: 19632997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Neuroscience. 2009 Nov 10;163(4):1031-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.07.037.
Epub 2009 Jul 24.

Differential gene expression in the rat hippocampus during learning of an operant
conditioning task.

Rapanelli M(1), Frick LR, Zanutto BS.

Author information: 
(1)IBYME-CONICET, Laboratorio de Biologia del Comportamiento, Vuelta de Obligado 
2490, Ciudad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. rapanelli@dna.uba.ar

Changes in transcription levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF),
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) response element binding (CREB), Synapsin
I, Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CamKII), activity-regulated
cytoskeleton-associated protein (Arc), c-jun and c-fos have been associated to
several learning paradigms in different brain areas. In this study, we measured
mRNA expression in the hippocampus by real time (RT)-PCR mRNA levels of BDNF,
CREB, Synapsin I, CamKII, Arc, c-jun and c-fos, during learning and operant
conditioning task. Experimental groups were as follows: control (C, the animals
never left the bioterium), when the animals reached 50-65% of the expected
response (Incompletely Trained, IT), when animals reached 100% of the expected
response with a latency time lower than 5 s (Trained, Tr), Box Control of
Incompletely Trained (BCIT), animals spent the same time as the IT in the operant
conditioning box and Box Control of Trained (BCTr) animals spent the same time as
the Tr in the operant conditioning box. All rats were killed at the same time by 
cervical dislocation 15 min after training and hippocampi were removed and
processed. We found increments of mRNA levels of most genes (BDNF, CREB, Synapsin
I, Arc, c-jun and c-fos) in IT and Tr groups compared to their box controls, but 
increments in Tr were smaller compared with IT. These results describe a
differential gene expression in the rat hippocampus when the animals are learning
and when animals have already learned. Taking together the results presented
herein with the known functions of these genes, we propose a link between changes
in gene expression in the hippocampus and different degrees of cellular
activation and plasticity during learning of an operant conditioning task.

PMID: 19632308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Mol Biol Rep. 2010 Apr;37(4):1891-6. doi: 10.1007/s11033-009-9629-9. Epub 2009
Jul 21.

CREB, a possible upstream regulator of Bcl-2 in trichosanthin-induced HeLa cell
apoptosis.

Wang P(1), Xu J, Zhang C.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, Ningbo University, 315211, Ningbo, China. pinoav@hotmail.com

Our previous reports indicated that cyclic AMP response element-binding (CREB)
protein was involved in the regulation of Bcl-2 expression in apoptotic HeLa
cells induced by trichosanthin (TCS). Here we presented that blockade the binding
site of CREB to Bcl-2 by a CRE decoy oligonucleotide abrogated the TCS-decreased 
Bcl-2 expression. Furthermore, overexpression of phosphorylated CREB (p-CREB) in 
cells transfected with p-CREB/GFP fusion construct resulted in an increase of
Bcl-2 protein content, however, this increase was attenuated by TCS treatment.
Therefore, this data supports the hypothesis that CREB is a possible upstream
regulator of Bcl-2 in apoptotic HeLa cells induced by TCS. The study provides new
insights into understanding the mechanism of TCS in the treatment of cervical
cancer.

PMID: 19626458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Genesis. 2009 Oct;47(10):688-96. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20548.

Generation of a conditional CREB Ser133Ala knockin mouse.

Wingate AD(1), Martin KJ, Hunter C, Carr JM, Clacher C, Arthur JS.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of
Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom.

Phosphorylation of Ser133 in the transcription factor CREB is an important
mechanism for regulating its transcriptional activity, however recent work has
suggested significant roles for other regulatory inputs into CREB. To allow study
of this in vivo, we have generated a Ser133 to alanine knockin mutation in the
mouse CREB locus. As CREB knockout is perinatal lethal, a minigene strategy was
used to allow conditional knockin of the Ser133Ala mutation in adult mice using
Cre recombinase. While some expression of the mutated protein was observed prior 
to Cre expression, following Cre expression in either T cells or neurons only the
mutated CREB protein was detected.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19621437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Sep;29(18):5181-92. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00545-09. Epub 2009 Jul 
20.

HOXA9 modulates its oncogenic partner Meis1 to influence normal hematopoiesis.

Hu YL(1), Fong S, Ferrell C, Largman C, Shen WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
CA 94143, USA.

While investigating the mechanism of action of the HOXA9 protein, we
serendipitously identified Meis1 as a HOXA9 regulatory target. Since HOXA9 and
MEIS1 play key developmental roles, are cooperating DNA binding proteins and
leukemic oncoproteins, and are important for normal hematopoiesis, the regulation
of Meis1 by its partner protein is of interest. Loss of Hoxa9 caused
downregulation of the Meis1 mRNA and protein, while forced HOXA9 expression
upregulated Meis1. Hoxa9 and Meis1 expression was correlated in hematopoietic
progenitors and acute leukemias. Meis1(+/-) Hoxa9(-/-) deficient mice, generated 
to test HOXA9 regulation of endogenous Meis1, were small and had reduced bone
marrow Meis1 mRNA and significant defects in fluorescence-activated cell
sorting-enumerated monocytes, mature and pre/pro-B cells, and functional B-cell
progenitors. These data indicate that HOXA9 modulates Meis1 during normal murine 
hematopoiesis. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis did not reveal direct
binding of HOXA9 to Meis1 promoter/enhancer regions. However, Creb1 and Pknox1,
whose protein products have previously been reported to induce Meis1, were shown 
to be direct targets of HOXA9. Loss of Hoxa9 resulted in a decrease in Creb1 and 
Pknox1 mRNA, and forced expression of CREB1 in Hoxa9(-/-) bone marrow cells
increased Meis1 mRNA almost as well as HOXA9, suggesting that CREB1 may mediate
HOXA9 modulation of Meis1 expression.

PMCID: PMC2738281
PMID: 19620287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Development. 2009 Aug;136(16):2747-56. doi: 10.1242/dev.033571. Epub 2009 Jul 15.

Regulation of bone formation and remodeling by G-protein-coupled receptor 48.

Luo J(1), Zhou W, Zhou X, Li D, Weng J, Yi Z, Cho SG, Li C, Yi T, Wu X, Li XY, de
Crombrugghe B, Höök M, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Biomedical Sciences and School of Life Sciences, East China
Normal University, Shanghai, China.

G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) 48 (Gpr48; Lgr4), a newly discovered member of 
the glycoprotein hormone receptor subfamily of GPCRs, is an orphan GPCR of
unknown function. Using a knockout mouse model, we have characterized the
essential roles of Gpr48 in bone formation and remodeling. Deletion of Gpr48 in
mice results in a dramatic delay in osteoblast differentiation and
mineralization, but not in chondrocyte proliferation and maturation, during
embryonic bone formation. Postnatal bone remodeling is also significantly
affected in Gpr48(-/-) mice, including the kinetic indices of bone formation
rate, bone mineral density and osteoid formation, whereas the activity and number
of osteoclasts are increased as assessed by tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase
staining. Examination of the molecular mechanism of Gpr48 action in bone
formation revealed that Gpr48 can activate the cAMP-PKA-CREB signaling pathway to
regulate the expression level of Atf4 in osteoblasts. Furthermore, we show that
Gpr48 significantly downregulates the expression levels of Atf4 target
genes/proteins, such as osteocalcin (Ocn; Bglap2), bone sialoprotein (Bsp; Ibsp) 
and collagen. Together, our data demonstrate that Gpr48 regulates bone formation 
and remodeling through the cAMP-PKA-Atf4 signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC2730404
PMID: 19605502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Neuroscience. 2009 Oct 20;163(3):741-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.07.014. 
Epub 2009 Jul 25.

Long-term green tea catechin administration prevents spatial learning and memory 
impairment in senescence-accelerated mouse prone-8 mice by decreasing Abeta1-42
oligomers and upregulating synaptic plasticity-related proteins in the
hippocampus.

Li Q(1), Zhao HF, Zhang ZF, Liu ZG, Pei XR, Wang JB, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Peking
University, No. 38, Xueyuan Road, Beijing 100191, PR China.

The senescence-accelerated mouse prone-8 (SAMP8) is characterized by early onset 
of learning and memory deficits along with spontaneous overproduction of soluble 
beta-amyloid peptide (Abeta) in the brain. In our study, 4 month old male SAMP8
mice were orally administered 0.05% and 0.1% green tea catechins (GTC, w/v) in
drinking water for 6 months. We found that a supplementation with 0.05% or 0.1%
GTC prevented spatial learning and memory impairments of mice in the Morris water
maze. Better performance of GTC-treated mice was associated with decreased levels
of Abeta(1-42) oligomers in the hippocampus. The activity of the protein kinase
A/cAMP-response element binding protein (PKA/CREB) pathway, one of the molecular 
targets of Abeta oligomers which is crucial for late long-term potentiation and
long-term memory formation, was significantly increased after GTC administration.
We also found that chronic 0.05% or 0.1% GTC consumption prevented the reductions
of three representative proteins of synaptic function and synaptic structure,
including brain-derived neurotrophic factor(BDNF), post-synaptic density
protein-95 (PSD95) and Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII).
These results demonstrated that long-term 0.05% or 0.1% green tea catechin
administration may prevent spatial learning and memory decline of SAMP8 mice by
decreasing Abeta(1-42) oligomers and upregulating synaptic plasticity-related
proteins in the hippocampus.

PMID: 19596052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Endocrinology. 2009 Oct;150(10):4653-62. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0609. Epub 2009 Jul
9.

Impact of melatonin and molecular clockwork components on the expression of
thyrotropin beta-chain (Tshb) and the Tsh receptor in the mouse pars tuberalis.

Unfried C(1), Ansari N, Yasuo S, Korf HW, von Gall C.

Author information: 
(1)Emmy Noether-Nachwuchsgruppe, Institut für Anatomie II, Goethe-Universität,
D-60590 Frankfurt/M, Germany.

Photoperiodic regulation of reproduction in birds and mammals involves
thyrotropin beta-chain (TSHb), which is secreted from the pars tuberalis (PT) and
controls the expression of deiodinase type 2 and 3 in the ependymal cell layer of
the infundibular recess (EC) via TSH receptors (TSHRs). To analyze the impact of 
melatonin and the molecular clockwork on the expression of Tshb and Tshr, we
investigated melatonin-proficient C3H wild-type (WT), melatonin receptor
1-deficient (MT1-/-) or clockprotein PERIOD1-deficient (mPER1-/-) mice.
Expression of Tshb and TSHb immunoreactivity in PT were low during day and high
during the night in WT, high during the day and low during the night in
mPER1-deficient, and equally high during the day and night in MT1-deficient mice.
Melatonin injections into WT acutely suppressed Tshb expression. Transcription
assays showed that the 5' upstream region of the Tshb gene could be controlled by
clockproteins. Tshr levels in PT were low during the day and high during the
night in WT and mPER1-deficient mice and equally low in MT1-deficient mice. Tshr 
expression in the EC did not show a day/night variation. Melatonin injections
into WT acutely induced Tshr expression in PT but not in EC. TSH stimulation of
hypothalamic slice cultures of WT induced phosphorylated cAMP response
element-binding protein in PT and EC and deiodinase type 2 in the EC. Our data
suggest that Tshb expression in PT is controlled by melatonin and the molecular
clockwork and that melatonin activates Tshr expression in PT but not in EC. They 
also confirm the functional importance of TSHR in the PT and EC.

PMID: 19589858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Life Sci. 2009 Aug 12;85(7-8):334-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2009.06.014. Epub 2009
Jul 2.

Molecular mechanisms regulating urogenital expression of nitric oxide synthase in
spontaneously hypertensive rats.

Yono M(1), Yoshida M, Yamamoto Y, Imanishi A, Fukagawa A, Latifpour J, Eto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto
University, 1-1-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan.

AIMS: Although doxazosin, but not nifedipine, can partially prevent a decrease in
urogenital expression of nitric oxide synthase (NOS) in spontaneously
hypertensive rats (SHRs), the mechanisms involved in the regulated expression of 
NOS are not known. Therefore, we identified differential gene expression profiles
in SHRs to elucidate the molecular mechanisms regulating urogenital expression of
NOS.
MAIN METHODS: SHRs and normotensive Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rats received doxazosin
(30 mg/kg/day) or nifedipine (30 mg/kg/day) orally for 4 weeks. Microarray
expression data of key transcripts were verified by real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis.
KEY FINDINGS: RT-PCR data, in accord with the microarray analysis, indicated that
untreated SHRs had lower mRNA expression levels of cAMP responsive element
binding protein 1 (Creb1) in the pelvic ganglion and vascular endothelial growth 
factor A (Vegfa) and kinase insert domain protein receptor (Kdr) in the penis,
and higher mRNA expression levels of brain derived neurotrophic factor and
neurotrophin 3 (Ntf3) in the bladder and Ntf3, Rho-kinases (Rock1 and Rock2) and 
caveolin 1 (Cav1) in the penis than untreated WKY rats. In SHRs, doxazosin and
nifedipine caused a significant decrease in penile expression of Rock1 and Rock2,
whereas the differential alterations in urogenital expression of Creb1, Vegfa,
Kdr and Cav1 were attenuated by treatment with doxazosin, but not nifedipine.
SIGNIFICANCE: Our data suggest that differential alterations in the expression of
several genes related to pathways that mediate NOS expression in the urogenital
tissues of SHRs, which can be attenuated by doxazosin treatment, may play an
important role in regulating urogenital expression of NOS.

PMID: 19576905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Sep;30(9):1606-13. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp161. Epub 2009 Jul
1.

Activation of thromboxane A(2) receptors induces orphan nuclear receptor Nurr1
expression and stimulates cell proliferation in human lung cancer cells.

Li X(1), Tai HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of
Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536-0082, USA.

Previous studies implicate that activation of thromboxane A(2) receptor (TP)
induced cell proliferation and transformation in several cell lines. We report
here that the activation of TP by its agonist, [1S-[1alpha, 2alpha (Z), 3beta
(1E, 3S*), 4alpha]]-7-[3-[3-hydroxy-4-(4-iodophenoxy)-1-butenyl]-7-oxabicyclo
[2.2.1] hept-2-yl]-5-heptenoic acid (I-BOP), induced Nurr1 expression and
stimulated proliferation of human lung cancer cells. Nurr1, an orphan nuclear
receptor in the nuclear receptor subfamily 4A subfamily, has been implicated in
cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. I-BOP markedly induced Nurr1
messenger RNA and protein levels as compared with other subfamily members, Nur77 
and Nor-1. The signaling pathways of I-BOP-induced Nurr1 expression were examined
by using various inhibitors of signaling molecules. The induction of Nurr1
expression by I-BOP appeared to be mediated through protein kinase A (PKA)/cAMP
response element binding (CREB), protein kinase C and mitogen-activated protein
kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathways and not related to
epidermal growth factor receptor and prostaglandin E(2) pathways. Transcriptional
activation of Nurr1 gene by I-BOP was further investigated at the promoter level 
in H157 cells. 5'-Deletion analysis, site-directed mutagenesis and luciferase
reporter assay demonstrated that Nurr1 expression was induced by I-BOP in a
PKA/CREB-dependent manner. Further studies have revealed that Nurr1 may mediate
cyclin D1 expression and I-BOP-induced cell proliferation in H157 cells since
small interfering RNA of Nurr1 blocked I-BOP-induced cyclin D1 expression and
cell proliferation and also decreased cell growth rate. These results provide
strong evidence that Nurr1 plays a significant role in cell proliferation and may
mediate TP agonist-induced proliferation in lung cancer cells.

PMID: 19570744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Jul;60(7):2142-55. doi: 10.1002/art.24620.

Pivotal role of connective tissue growth factor in lung fibrosis: MAPK-dependent 
transcriptional activation of type I collagen.

Ponticos M(1), Holmes AM, Shi-wen X, Leoni P, Khan K, Rajkumar VS, Hoyles RK,
Bou-Gharios G, Black CM, Denton CP, Abraham DJ, Leask A, Lindahl GE.

Author information: 
(1)Royal Free and University College Medical School, London, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF; CCN2) is overexpressed in
systemic sclerosis (SSc) and has been hypothesized to be a key mediator of the
pulmonary fibrosis frequently observed in this disease. CTGF is induced by
transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) and is a mediator of some profibrotic
effects of TGFbeta in vitro. This study was undertaken to investigate the role of
CTGF in enhanced expression of type I collagen in bleomycin-induced lung
fibrosis, and to delineate the mechanisms of action underlying the effects of
CTGF on Col1a2 (collagen gene type I alpha2) in this mouse model and in human
pulmonary fibroblasts.
METHODS: Transgenic mice that were carrying luciferase and beta-galactosidase
reporter genes driven by the Col1a2 enhancer/promoter and the CTGF promoter,
respectively, were injected with bleomycin to induce lung fibrosis (or saline as 
control), and the extracted pulmonary fibroblasts were incubated with CTGF
blocking agents. In vitro, transient transfection, promoter/reporter constructs, 
and electrophoretic mobility shift assays were used to determine the mechanisms
of action of CTGF in pulmonary fibroblasts.
RESULTS: In the mouse lung tissue, CTGF expression and promoter activity peaked 1
week after bleomycin challenge, whereas type I collagen expression and Col1a2
promoter activity peaked 2 weeks postchallenge. Fibroblasts isolated from the
mouse lungs 14 days after bleomycin treatment retained a profibrotic expression
pattern, characterized by greatly elevated levels of type I collagen and CTGF
protein and increased promoter activity. In vitro, inhibition of CTGF by specific
small interfering RNA and neutralizing antibodies reduced the collagen protein
expression and Col1a2 promoter activity. Moreover, in vivo, anti-CTGF antibodies 
applied after bleomycin challenge significantly reduced the Col1a2 promoter
activity by approximately 25%. The enhanced Col1a2 promoter activity in
fibroblasts from bleomycin-treated lungs was partly dependent on Smad signaling, 
whereas CTGF acted on the Col1a2 promoter by a mechanism that was independent of 
the Smad binding site, but was, instead, dependent on the ERK-1/2 and JNK MAPK
pathways. The CTGF effect was mapped to the proximal promoter region surrounding 
the inverted CCAAT box, possibly involving CREB and c-Jun. In human lung
fibroblasts, the human COL1A2 promoter responded in a similar manner, and the
mechanisms of action also involved ERK-1/2 and JNK signaling.
CONCLUSION: Our results clearly define a direct profibrotic effect of CTGF and
demonstrate its contribution to lung fibrosis through transcriptional activation 
of Col1a2. Blocking strategies revealed the signaling mechanisms involved. These 
findings show CTGF to be a rational target for therapy in fibrotic diseases such 
as SSc.

PMID: 19565505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Mod Pathol. 2009 Sep;22(9):1201-9. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.85. Epub 2009 Jun 
26.

Detection and characterization of EWSR1/ATF1 and EWSR1/CREB1 chimeric transcripts
in clear cell sarcoma (melanoma of soft parts).

Wang WL(1), Mayordomo E, Zhang W, Hernandez VS, Tuvin D, Garcia L, Lev DC, Lazar 
AJ, López-Terrada D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030-2313, USA.

Unlike melanoma, clear cell sarcoma harbors either a t(12;22)(q13;q12) recurrent 
translocation, resulting in an EWSR1/ATF1 chimeric gene, or less commonly a
t(2;22)(q34;q12) translocation fusing EWSR1 and CREB1. Few studies have examined 
the prevalence of all chimeric types and variants to assess the usage of
ancillary genetic testing in routine diagnosis. We investigated rearrangement
prevalence in 17 clear cell sarcomas, two positive control cell lines, and two
melanomas (negative controls). Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis
using the LSI EWSR1 break-apart probe and a reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay optimized for formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
tissue to detect all four reported EWSR1/ATF1 clear cell sarcoma chimeric types
and the EWSR1/CREB1 variant was performed. All 15 cases available for testing by 
FISH were positive for EWSR1 rearrangement including two cases with insufficient 
RNA for RT-PCR. Thirteen of 15 cases successfully tested by RT-PCR harbored a
type 1 chimeric transcript (EWSR1 exon 8/ATF1 exon 4), of which five tumors
simultaneously carried a type 2 chimeric transcript (EWSR1 exon 7/ATF1 exon 5).
One case carried a type 2 transcript alone and one case contained an EWSR1/CREB1 
transcript. Both control cases were positive by both techniques with one case
carrying both types 1 and 2 chimeric transcripts and the other types 2 and 3
(EWSR1 exon 10/ATF1 exon 5). Consequently, both techniques are equally effective 
in assessing for an EWSR1 rearrangement and are useful ancillary diagnostic tests
for clear cell sarcoma. They also reinforce the prevalence of this translocation 
in these tumors. In addition, EWSR1-CREB1 was identified in a clear cell sarcoma 
of soft tissue providing further evidence that this chimeric variant is not
exclusive to gastrointestinal clear cell sarcomas and should be included in
RT-PCR assays of soft tissue clear cell sarcomas.

PMID: 19561568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Virol. 2009 Sep;83(17):8893-904. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02239-08. Epub 2009 Jun 24.

The CREB site in the proximal enhancer is critical for cooperative interaction
with the other transcription factor binding sites to enhance transcription of the
major intermediate-early genes in human cytomegalovirus-infected cells.

Lashmit P(1), Wang S, Li H, Isomura H, Stinski MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, 51
Newton Rd., Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

One of the two SP1 sites in the proximal enhancer of the human cytomegalovirus
(HCMV) major immediate-early (MIE) promoter is essential for transcription in
human fibroblast cells (H. Isomura, M. F. Stinski, A. Kudoh, T. Daikoku, N.
Shirata, and T. Tsurumi, J. Virol. 79:9597-9607, 2005). Upstream of the two SP1
sites to -223 relative to the +1 transcription start site, there are an
additional five DNA binding sites for eukaryotic transcription factors. We
determined the effects of the various transcription factor DNA binding sites on
viral MIE RNA transcription, viral gene expression, viral DNA synthesis, or
infectious virus production. We prepared recombinant HCMV bacterial artificial
chromosome (BAC) DNAs with either one site missing or one site present upstream
of the two SP1 sites. Infectious recombinant HCMV BAC DNAs were transfected into 
various cell types to avoid the effect of the virion-associated transactivators. 
Regardless of the cell type, which included human fibroblast, endothelial, and
epithelial cells, the CREB site had the most significant and independent effect
on the MIE promoter. The other sites had a minor independent effect. However, the
combination of the different transcription factor DNA binding sites was
significantly stronger than multiple duplications of the CREB site. These
findings indicate that the CREB site in the presence of the other sites has a
major role for the replication of HCMV.

PMCID: PMC2738179
PMID: 19553322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Cell Sci. 2009 Jul 15;122(Pt 14):2524-33. doi: 10.1242/jcs.044891. Epub 2009
Jun 23.

Coordinate pathways for nucleotide and EGF signaling in cultured adult neural
progenitor cells.

Grimm I(1), Messemer N, Stanke M, Gachet C, Zimmermann H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Biocenter, J. W.
Goethe-University, 60438 Frankfurt, Germany.

The adult subventricular zone (SVZ) contains astrocyte-like stem cells capable of
generating new neurons for the olfactory bulb. Adult neurogenesis is driven by a 
variety of signal systems that can induce synergistic or opposing cellular
responses. It is therefore important to gain insight into the underlying
downstream signaling pathways. We have previously shown that the nucleotides
ADPbetaS and UTP induce rapid Ca2+ transients in cultured SVZ-derived adult
neural progenitors and augment growth-factor-mediated progenitor cell
proliferation. Here, we investigated signaling pathways elicited by ADPbetaS, UTP
and epidermal growth factor (EGF). All three agonists elicit ERK1/2 and CREB
phosphorylation but the temporal characteristics differ between the nucleotides
and EGF. Differentiation of the progenitors alters the receptor profile.
Oligodendrocytes and young neurons, but not astrocytes, lose responsiveness to
the agonists. Inhibition experiments are indicative of an ADPbetaS-elicited EGF
receptor transactivation. Whereas UTP acts via the P2Y2 receptor, ADPbetaS exerts
its function via the P2Y1 receptor and the P2Y13 receptor. Our data demonstrate
that nucleotides and EGF induce converging, but also differential, intracellular 
signaling pathways and suggest that they carry the potential to act
synergistically in the control of cell proliferation and cell survival in adult
neurogenesis.

PMID: 19549686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2010 Mar 5;153B(2):468-76. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.31002.

A population-based association study of candidate genes for depression and sleep 
disturbance.

Utge S(1), Soronen P, Partonen T, Loukola A, Kronholm E, Pirkola S, Nyman E,
Porkka-Heiskanen T, Paunio T.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Genomics Unit, National Institute for Health and Welfare,
Helsinki, Finland.

The clinical manifestation of depression comprises a variety of symptoms,
including early morning awakenings and fatigue, features also indicating
disturbed sleep. The presence or absence of these symptoms may reflect
differences in neurobiological processes leading to prolonged depression. Several
neurobiological mechanisms have been indicated in the induction of depression,
including disturbances in serotonergic and glutamatergic neurotransmission and in
the action of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. The same
transmitters have also been linked to sleep regulation. We hypothesized that
depression without simultaneous symptoms of disturbed sleep would partly have a
different genetic background than depression with symptoms of disturbed sleep. We
tested this hypothesis using a systematic population-based association study of
14 candidate genes related to depression and disturbed sleep. Association of
genetic variants with either depression alone, depression with early morning
awakenings, or depression with fatigue was investigated using permutation-based
allelic association analysis of a sample of 1,654 adults recruited from Finland's
population-based program. The major findings were associations of TPH2
(rs12229394) with depression accompanied by fatigue in women and CREB1
(rs11904814) with depression alone in men. We also found suggestive associations 
in women for GAD1, GRIA3, and BDNF with depression accompanied by fatigue, and
for CRHR1 with depression accompanied by early morning awakenings. The results
indicate sex-dependent and symptom-specific differences in the genetic background
of depression. These differences may partially explain the broad spectrum of
depressive symptoms, and their systematic monitoring could potentially be used
for diagnostic purposes.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19548263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Korean J Intern Med. 2009 Jun;24(2):113-22. doi: 10.3904/kjim.2009.24.2.113. Epub
2009 Jun 8.

Cilostazol protects endothelial cells against lipopolysaccharide-induced
apoptosis through ERK1/2- and P38 MAPK-dependent pathways.

Lim JH(1), Woo JS, Shin YW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Pusan National University College of
Medicine, Seo-gu, Busan, Korea.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: We examined the effects of cilostazol on mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) activity and its relationship with cilostazol-mediated
protection against apoptosis in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-treated endothelial
cells.
METHODS: Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were exposed to LPS and 
cilostazol with and without specific inhibitors of MAPKs; changes in MAPK
activity in association with cell viability and apoptotic signaling were
investigated.
RESULTS: Cilostazol protected HUVECs against LPS-induced apoptosis by suppressing
the mitochondrial permeability transition, cytosolic release of cytochrome c, and
subsequent activation of caspases, stimulating extracellullar signal-regulated
kinase (ERK1/2) and p38 MAPK signaling, and increasing phosphorylated
cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB) and Bcl-2 expression, while
suppressing Bax expression. These cilostazol-mediated cellular events were
effectively blocked by MAPK/ERK kinase (MEK1/2) and p38 MAPK inhibitors.
CONCLUSIONS: Cilostazol protects HUVECs against LPS-induced apoptosis by
suppressing mitochondria-dependent apoptotic signaling. Activation of ERK1/2 and 
p38 MAPKs, and subsequent stimulation of CREB phosphorylation and Bcl-2
expression, may be responsible for the cellular signaling mechanism of
cilostazol-mediated protection.

PMCID: PMC2698619
PMID: 19543489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Nature. 2009 Jul 23;460(7254):534-7. doi: 10.1038/nature08111. Epub 2009 Jun 21.

The CREB coactivator CRTC2 links hepatic ER stress and fasting gluconeogenesis.

Wang Y(1), Vera L, Fischer WH, Montminy M.

Author information: 
(1)Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology, The Salk Institute for
Biological Studies, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037,
USA.

In fasted mammals, circulating pancreatic glucagon stimulates hepatic
gluconeogenesis in part through the CREB regulated transcription coactivator 2
(CRTC2, also referred to as TORC2). Hepatic glucose production is increased in
obesity, reflecting chronic increases in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress that
promote insulin resistance. Whether ER stress also modulates the gluconeogenic
program directly, however, is unclear. Here we show that CRTC2 functions as a
dual sensor for ER stress and fasting signals. Acute increases in ER stress
triggered the dephosphorylation and nuclear entry of CRTC2, which in turn
promoted the expression of ER quality control genes through an association with
activating transcription factor 6 alpha (ATF6alpha, also known as ATF6)--an
integral branch of the unfolded protein response. In addition to mediating CRTC2 
recruitment to ER stress inducible promoters, ATF6alpha also reduced hepatic
glucose output by disrupting the CREB-CRTC2 interaction and thereby inhibiting
CRTC2 occupancy over gluconeogenic genes. Conversely, hepatic glucose output was 
upregulated when hepatic ATF6alpha protein amounts were reduced, either by RNA
interference (RNAi)-mediated knockdown or as a result of persistent stress in
obesity. Because ATF6alpha overexpression in the livers of obese mice reversed
CRTC2 effects on the gluconeogenic program and lowered hepatic glucose output,
our results demonstrate how cross-talk between ER stress and fasting pathways at 
the level of a transcriptional coactivator contributes to glucose homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC2730924
PMID: 19543265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2010 Jan 5;153B(1):10-6. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.30987.

Genetic linkage of region containing the CREB1 gene to depressive disorders in
families with recurrent, early-onset, major depression: a re-analysis and
confirmation of sex-specific effect.

Maher BS(1), Hughes HB 3rd, Zubenko WN, Zubenko GS.

Author information: 
(1)Virginia Institute for Psychiatric and Behavioral Genetics, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia, USA.

A previously published model-free linkage analysis of chromosome 2q33-35,
highlighted by previous case-control studies and supported by within-family
analyses employing the transmission disequilibrium test, revealed evidence of
sex-specific linkage of the CREB1-containing region of 2q to unipolar mood
disorders among women in 81 recurrent, early-onset, major depressive disorder
(RE-MDD) families. Since it has been reported that the LODPAL program from
S.A.G.E. v.4.0 used to conduct this previous linkage analysis suffers from an
increased type I error rate that is exacerbated by covariates such as sex, we
re-analyzed the evidence for this sex-specific linkage result using a simulation 
approach to estimate the empirical significance of our previous results. The
results continue to support sex-specific linkage of the CREB1 region to mood
disorders among women from families with RE-MDD. Moreover, these results have
been supported by a host of additional published findings that implicate sequence
variations in CREB1 in the sex-dependent development of syndromic mood disorders,
as well as related clinical features and disorders.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3150557
PMID: 19517574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Physiol. 2009 Aug 1;587(Pt 15):3911-20. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2009.172916. Epub
2009 Jun 8.

Endothelial nitric oxide synthase phosphorylation in treadmill-running mice: role
of vascular signalling kinases.

Zhang QJ(1), McMillin SL, Tanner JM, Palionyte M, Abel ED, Symons JD.

Author information: 
(1)College of Health, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.

The intracellular signalling kinases Akt/protein kinase B (Akt), protein kinase A
(PKA) and adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) are
phosphorylated in response to increased mechanical force or perfusion rate in
cultured endothelial cells or isolated blood vessels. All three kinases
phosphorylate endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) on serine (S) 1177, while 
Akt and PKA additionally phosphorylate eNOS on S617 and S635 respectively.
Although these kinases might contribute to subsequent activation of eNOS during
dynamic exercise, the specific mediators of exercise-induced eNOS phosphorylation
and activation in vivo are unknown. We determined the impact of 50 min of
treadmill running on the phosphorylation of Akt, AMPK, cyclic adenosine
monophosphate response element binding protein (CREB - a target of PKA) and eNOS 
(S 1177, 635 and 617 and threonine (T) 495) in the presence or absence of
pharmacological inhibition of PI3 kinase (PI3K) and Akt signalling using
wortmannin. Compared to arteries from sedentary mice, eNOS enzyme activity was
greater in vessels from treadmill-running animals and was associated with
increased phosphorylation of Akt (S473), CREB (S133), AMPK (T172), and eNOS at
S1177 and S617 but not at S635 or T495. These data suggest that Akt signalling is
a major mediator of eNOS activation. To confirm this, treadmill-running was
performed in the presence of vehicle (DMSO) or PI3K inhibition. Compared to
results from sedentary mice, vascular Akt phosphorylation and eNOS
phosphorylation at S617 during treadmill-running were prevented by wortmannin but
not vehicle treatment, whereas exercise-related increases in AMPK and CREB
phosphorylation were similar between groups. Arterial eNOS phosphorylation at
S1177 increased during exercise after wortmannin treatment relative to values
obtained from sedentary animals, but the elevation was blunted by approximately
50% compared to results from vehicle-treated mice. These findings indicate that
Akt and AMPK contribute importantly to vascular eNOS S1177 phosphorylation during
treadmill-running, and that AMPK is sufficient to activate p-eNOS S1177 in the
presence of PI3K inhibition.

PMCID: PMC2746618
PMID: 19505983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Blood. 2009 Jul 30;114(5):1016-25. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-03-136770. Epub 2009
Jun 3.

HTLV-1-Tax and ICAM-1 act on T-cell signal pathways to polarize the
microtubule-organizing center at the virological synapse.

Nejmeddine M(1), Negi VS, Mukherjee S, Tanaka Y, Orth K, Taylor GP, Bangham CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Wright-Fleming Institute, Imperial College, Norfolk 
Pl, London W2 1PG London, United Kingdom.

Human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) spreads directly between lymphocytes
and other cells via a specialized cell-cell contact, termed the virological
synapse. The formation of the virological synapse is accompanied by the
orientation of the microtubule-organizing center (MTOC) in the infected T cell
toward the cell contact region with the noninfected target cell. We previously
demonstrated that the combination of intracellular Tax protein expression and the
stimulation of the intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) on the cell surface
is sufficient to trigger MTOC polarization in the HTLV-1-infected T cell.
However, the mechanism by which Tax and ICAM-1 cause the MTOC polarization is not
fully understood. Here we show that the presence of Tax at the MTOC region and
its ability to stimulate cyclic AMP-binding protein-dependent pathways are both
required for MTOC polarization in the HTLV-1-infected T cell at the virological
synapse. Furthermore, we show that the MTOC polarization induced by ICAM-1
engagement depends on activation of the Ras-MEK-ERK signaling pathway. Our
findings indicate that efficient MTOC polarization at the virological synapse
requires Tax-mediated stimulation of T-cell activation pathways in synergy with
ICAM-1 cross-linking. The results also reveal differences in the signaling
pathways used to trigger MTOC polarization between the immunologic synapse and
the virological synapse.

PMID: 19494354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. J Neurosci Res. 2009 Nov 1;87(14):3107-19. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22134.

Aberrant expression of synaptic plasticity-related genes in the NF1+/- mouse
hippocampus.

Park CS(1), Zhong L, Tang SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, Center for Neurobiology of Learning
and Memory, University of California, Irvine, California, USA.

Neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) is a common single-gene disorder that causes learning
impairments in patients. Neurofibromin encoded by the NF1 causal gene regulates
Ras/MAPK and cAMP signaling pathways. These signaling pathways play critical
roles in controlling gene transcription during synaptic plasticity and memory
formation. We hypothesized that NF1 mutations disturb the expression of genes
important for memory formation. To test this hypothesis, we performed DNA
microarray analysis on the hippocampus of NF1(+/-) mice, the mouse model for NF1 
learning disabilities. Our results indicated that genes involved in a wide
spectrum of biological processes are dysregulated in the NF1(+/-) hippocampus.
Many of the NF1-affected genes play critical roles in synaptic plasticity, such
as Rabs, synaptotagmins, NMDAR1, CaMKII, and CREB1. Because NF1-associated
learning disabilities can be reversed by lovastatin, we also determined the
effect of lovastatin treatment on genome-wide expression patterns of the NF1(+/-)
hippocampus. We found that lovastatin altered the expression of a large number of
genes, including those disturbed by NF1 mutations. Our results reveal a
genome-wide overview of the molecular abnormalities in the NF1(+/-) hippocampus
and should be useful for further identifying the novel molecular pathways that
cause NF1 learning deficits.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19475561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2009 Aug;297(2):L326-39. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.90624.2008. Epub 2009 May 22.

Dimethylfumarate inhibits NF-{kappa}B function at multiple levels to limit airway
smooth muscle cell cytokine secretion.

Seidel P(1), Merfort I, Hughes JM, Oliver BG, Tamm M, Roth M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research and Pneumology, University Hospital Basel, Switzerland.

The antipsoriatic dimethylfumarate (DMF) has been anecdotically reported to
reduce asthma symptoms and to improve quality of life of asthma patients. DMF
decreases the expression of proinflammatory mediators by inhibiting the
transcription factor NF-kappaB and might therefore be of interest for the therapy
of inflammatory lung diseases. In this study, we determined the effect of DMF on 
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-BB- and TNFalpha-induced asthma-relevant
cytokines and NF-kappaB activation by primary human asthmatic and nonasthmatic
airway smooth muscle cells (ASMC). Confluent nonasthmatic and asthmatic ASMC were
incubated with DMF (0.1-100 microM) and/or dexamethasone (0.0001-0.1 microM),
NF-kappaB p65 siRNA (100 nM), the NF-kappaB inhibitor helenalin (1 microM) before
stimulation with PDGF-BB or TNFalpha (10 ng/ml). Cytokine release was measured by
ELISA. NF-kappaB, mitogen and stress-activated kinase (MSK-1), and CREB
activation was determined by immunoblotting and EMSA. TNFalpha-induced eotaxin,
RANTES, and IL-6 as well as PDGF-BB-induced IL-6 expression was inhibited by DMF 
and by dexamethasone from asthmatic and nonasthmatic ASMC, but the combination of
both drugs showed no glucocorticoid sparing effect in either of the two groups.
NF-kappaB p65 siRNA and/or the NF-kappaB inhibitor helenalin reduced PDGF-BB- and
TNFalpha-induced cytokine expression, suggesting the involvement of NF-kappaB
signaling. DMF inhibited TNFalpha-induced NF-kappaB p65 phosphorylation,
NF-kappaB nuclear entry, and NF-kappaB-DNA complex formation, whereas PDGF-BB
appeared not to activate NF-kappaB within 60 min. Both stimuli induced the
phosphorylation of MSK-1, NF-kappaB p65 at Ser276, and CREB, and all were
inhibited by DMF. These data suggest that DMF downregulates cytokine secretion
not only by inhibiting NF-kappaB but a wider range of NF-kappaB-linked signaling 
proteins, which may explain its potential beneficial effect in asthma.

PMID: 19465513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Endocrinol. 2009 Aug;202(2):207-15. doi: 10.1677/JOE-09-0099. Epub 2009 May 21.

Gsalpha signalling suppresses PPARgamma2 generation and inhibits 3T3L1
adipogenesis.

Zhang L(1), Paddon C, Lewis MD, Grennan-Jones F, Ludgate M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Centre for Endocrine and Diabetes Sciences, Cardiff
University, Heath Park, Cardiff, UK.

Since TSH receptor (TSHR) expression increases during adipogenesis and signals
via cAMP/phospho-cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB), reported to be
necessary and sufficient for adipogenesis, we hypothesised that TSHR activation
would induce preadipocyte differentiation. Retroviral vectors introduced
constitutively active TSHR (TSHR*) into 3T3L1 preadipocytes; despite increased
cAMP (RIA) and phospho-CREB (western blot) there was no spontaneous adipogenesis 
(assessed morphologically, using oil red O and QPCR measurement of adipogenesis
markers). We speculated that Gbetagamma signalling may be inhibitory but failed
to induce adipogenesis using activated Gsalpha (gsp*). Inhibition of
phosphodiesterases did not promote adipogenesis in TSHR* or gsp* populations.
Furthermore, differentiation induced by adipogenic medium with pioglitazone was
reduced in TSHR* and abolished in gsp* expressing 3T3L1 cells. TSHR* and gsp* did
not inactivate PPARgamma (PPARG as listed in the HUGO database) by
phosphorylation but expression of PPARgamma1 was reduced and PPARgamma2
undetectable in gsp*. FOXO1 phosphorylation (required to inactivate this
repressor of adipogenesis) was lowest in gsp* despite the activation of AKT by
phosphorylation. PROF is a mediator that facilitates FOXO1 phosphorylation by
phospho-Akt. Its transcript levels remained constantly low in the gsp*
population. In most measurements, the TSHR* cells were between the gsp* and
control 3T3L1 preadipocytes. The enhanced down-regulation of PREF1 (adipogenesis 
inhibitor) permits retention of some adipogenic potential in the TSHR*
population. We conclude that Gsalpha signalling impedes FOXO1 phosphorylation and
thus inhibits PPARgamma transcription and the alternative promoter usage required
to generate PPARgamma2, the fat-specific transcription factor necessary for
adipogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2710974
PMID: 19460852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Neuroscience. 2009 Sep 15;162(4):1220-31. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.05.019. Epub 2009 May 14.

Sorafenib inhibits nuclear factor kappa B, decreases inducible nitric oxide
synthase and cyclooxygenase-2 expression, and restores working memory in APPswe
mice.

Echeverria V(1), Burgess S, Gamble-George J, Zeitlin R, Lin X, Cao C, Arendash
GW.

Author information: 
(1)Bay Pines VA Healthcare System, 10,000 Bay Pines Boulevard, Building 23, Room 
123, Bay Pines, FL 33744, USA. Valentina.Echeverria@va.gov

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by memory loss and the upregulation of 
pro-neuroinflammatory factors such as cRaf-1, cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2), and the
nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB), as well as a downregulation of protein kinase
A (PKA) activity and the activation by phosphorylation of its downstream factor
CREB. We investigated the effect of the anti-cancer cRaf-1 inhibitor, sorafenib
tosylate (Nexavar), on the expression of these factors and on the cognitive
performance of aged APPswe mice. We found that chronic treatment with sorafenib
stimulated PKA and CREB phosphorylation and inhibited cRaf-1 and NF-kappaB in the
brains of APPswe mice. NF-kappaB controls the expression of several genes related
to AD pathology, including iNOS and Cox-(2)Concurrent with NF-kappaB inhibition, 
sorafenib treatment decreased the cerebral expression of Cox-2 and iNOS in APPswe
mice. It has recently been observed that Cox-2 inhibition prevents cognitive
impairment in a mouse model of AD and amyloid beta peptide (Abeta)-induced
inhibition of long-term potentiation (LTP). Consistent with the idea that Cox-2
inhibition can improve cognitive abilities, we found that sorafenib restored
working memory abilities in aged APPswe mice without reducing Abeta levels in the
brain. These findings suggest that sorafenib reduced AD pathology by reducing
neuroinflammation.

PMID: 19447162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Neurosci Lett. 2009 Jun 19;457(1):53-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2009.04.003. Epub
2009 Apr 7.

Time-dependent induction of CREB phosphorylation in the hippocampus by the
endogenous cannabinoid.

Isokawa M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Texas at Brownsville, 80 
Fort Brown, Brownsville, TX 78520, USA.

The involvement of the endogenous cannabinoid system has been implicated in the
rewarding actions of several drugs of abuse. Recent evidence indicates that the
transcription factor CREB (cAMP response element-binding protein) may be an
important biochemical substrate for behavioral plasticity that has been
associated with the chronic administration of drugs of abuse and addiction.
Increased CREB activity was reported as a chronic effect of drugs of abuse in the
neurons of the nucleus accumbens, a brain reward region that expresses
high-density levels in the CB1 cannabinoid receptors. However, little is known
whether a similar change occurs in the hippocampus, a region of the brain that
also expresses high-density levels of the CB1 cannabinoid receptors and has
intimate synaptic connections with the brain's reward regions. The present study 
revealed that CREB activities were present in the hippocampal neurons of cultured
slice preparations in response to acute and chronic applications of endogenous
cannabinoid, anandamide and R(+)-methanandamide (a non-hydrolyzing form of
anandamide). When administered acutely at a dose effective for inducing
self-administration in vivo, anandamide and R(+)-methanandamide stimulated the
expression of pCREB in our hippocampal slice culture. Interestingly, a
sub-threshold dose of R(+)-methanandamide, which was not effective in producing
acute changes in the CREB activity, was also found to effectively increase pCREB 
when administered chronically for 10 days. These increases were blocked by the
antagonist of the CB1 cannabinoid receptor. Present findings demonstrate: (1) the
hippocampus is vulnerable to the direct chemical effect of anandamide and
R(+)-methanandamide in isolation of synaptic influences from the midbrain reward 
neurons, and (2) the effect of R(+)-methanandamide is cumulative as evidenced by 
the sustained elevation of CREB activities in response to a chronic dosage that
is too low and thus fails to exert any acute effect. The ability of hippocampal
neurons to integrate a time-dependent effect on the endogenous cannabinoid
signaling may be a key function of plasticity as related to the induction and
maintenance of maladaptive learning and memory that underlies both cue-induced
cravings as well as relapses in drug-seeking.

PMCID: PMC2682341
PMID: 19429161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Cytokine. 2009 Jul;47(1):43-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2009.04.005. Epub 2009 May 8.

IL-4 stimulates mouse macrophages to express APRIL through p38MAPK and two
different downstream molecules, CREB and Stat6.

Jang YS(1), Kim HA, Park SR, Lee MR, Park JB, Kim PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Bioscience, School of Bioscience and Biotechnology,
Kangwon National University, Chuncheon 200-701, South Korea.

APRIL (a proliferation-inducing ligand) is primarily expressed by macrophages and
dendritic cells, and has profound effects on B cell physiology. In this study, we
investigated the role of IL-4 in APRIL expression by mouse macrophages and the
signaling mechanism involved. IL-4 markedly enhanced APRIL expression in mouse
macrophages at the transcriptional and protein level. The p38MAPK inhibitor
SB203580 completely abolished the IL-4 effect, whereas overexpression of CREB
with IL-4 augmented APRIL expression. This increase was abolished by SB203580
treatment, indicating that p38MAPK may activate CREB. Overexpression of Stat6
also augmented IL-4-induced APRIL expression; this effect was partially abolished
by SB203580 but not by the Jak inhibitor AG490, indicating that Stat6 mediates
IL-4-induced APRIL expression in a Jak-independent manner and that p38MAPK acts
as the intermediate. Our results demonstrate that IL-4 up-regulates APRIL
expression through two divergent pathways in mouse macrophages, p38MAPK-CREB and 
p38MAPK-Stat6.

PMID: 19427796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Cell Immunol. 2009;258(2):115-22. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2009.03.020. Epub 2009
May 7.

The anti-inflammatory target A(3) adenosine receptor is over-expressed in
rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis and Crohn's disease.

Ochaion A(1), Bar-Yehuda S, Cohen S, Barer F, Patoka R, Amital H, Reitblat T,
Reitblat A, Ophir J, Konfino I, Chowers Y, Ben-Horin S, Fishman P.

Author information: 
(1)Can-Fite BioPharma Ltd., Kiryat-Matalon, Petah-Tikva, Israel.

The Gi protein associated A(3) adenosine receptor (A(3)AR) was recently defined
as a novel anti-inflammatory target. The aim of this study was to look at A(3)AR 
expression levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of patients with 
autoimmune inflammatory diseases and to explore transcription factors involved
receptor expression. Over-expression of A(3)AR was found in PBMCs derived from
patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), psoriasis and Crohn's disease compared
with PBMCs from healthy subjects. Bioinformatics analysis demonstrated the
presence of DNA binding sites for nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) and cyclic
AMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) in the A(3)AR gene promoter.
Up-regulation of NF-kappaB and CREB was found in the PBMCs from patients with RA,
psoriasis and Crohn's disease. The PI3K-PKB/Akt signaling pathway, known to
regulate both the NF-kappaB and CREB, was also up-regulated in the patients'
PBMCs. Taken together, NF-kappaB and CREB are involved with the over-expression
of A(3)AR in patients with autoimmune inflammatory diseases. The receptor may be 
considered as a specific target to combat inflammation.

PMID: 19426966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2009 May;25(5):385-8.

[Human cytomegalovirus-encoded US28 stimulates the CREB related transcriptional
activity].

[Article in Chinese]

Wen DQ(1), Zhang YY, Lu LP, Zhou XP, Yan F, Ma P, Xu JB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Transfusion Medicine, Academy of Military Medical Sciences,
Beijing, China. wendongqing2003@163.com

AIM: To observe the effect of the human cytomegalovirus(HCMV)-encoded chemokine
receptor homolog US28 on the human transcription factor CREB related
transcriptional activity.
METHODS: The US28 gene was cloned from DNA of HCMV-infected fibroblast at 72 h
post infection. The amplified gene fragment was subsequently cloned into pcDNA3.1
eukaryotic expression vector. The recombinant plasmid was selected and identified
by sequence analysis. US28-pcDNA3.1 was added to the Dual-Luciferase Reporter
Assay System. The immunoreactive bands of phospho-CREB(p-CREB)and luminescence
values were observed.
RESULTS: The constructed recombinant vector was verified by PCR analysis and DNA 
sequencing. US28 enhanced the transcriptional efficiency of CRE driving gene via 
p-CREB.
CONCLUSION: HCMV could enhance the transcriptional activity of CRE driving gene
via p-CREB. CREB might be involved in the very early reprogramming of the host
cell during virus activation.

PMID: 19426590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2009 Jul;297(1):F63-70. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00039.2009. Epub 2009 May 6.

Sp1 trans-activates the murine H(+)-K(+)-ATPase alpha(2)-subunit gene.

Yu Z(1), Li M, Zhang D, Xu W, Kone BC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University 
of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

The H(+)-K(+)-ATPase alpha(2) (HKalpha2) gene of the renal collecting duct and
distal colon plays a central role in potassium and acid-base homeostasis, yet its
transcriptional control remains poorly characterized. We previously demonstrated 
that the proximal 177 bp of its 5'-flanking region confers basal transcriptional 
activity in murine inner medullary collecting duct (mIMCD3) cells and that
NF-kappaB and CREB-1 bind this region to alter transcription. In the present
study, we sought to determine whether the -144/-135 Sp element influences basal
HKalpha2 gene transcription in these cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift and
supershift assays using probes for -154/-127 revealed Sp1-containing DNA-protein 
complexes in nuclear extracts of mIMCD3 cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assays demonstrated that Sp1, but not Sp3, binds to this promoter region
of the HKalpha2 gene in mIMCD3 cells in vivo. HKalpha2 minimal
promoter-luciferase constructs with point mutations in the -144/-135 Sp element
exhibited much lower activity than the wild-type promoter in transient
transfection assays. Overexpression of Sp1, but not Sp3, trans-activated an
HKalpha2 proximal promoter-luciferase construct in mIMCD3 cells as well as in SL2
insect cells, which lack Sp factors. Conversely, small interfering RNA knockdown 
of Sp1 inhibited endogenous HKalpha2 mRNA expression, and binding of Sp1 to
chromatin associated with the proximal HKalpha2 promoter without altering the
binding or regulatory influence of NF-kappaB p65 or CREB-1 on the proximal
HKalpha2 promoter. We conclude that Sp1 plays an important and positive role in
controlling basal HKalpha2 gene expression in mIMCD3 cells in vivo and in vitro.

PMCID: PMC2711706
PMID: 19420113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 3;284(27):18270-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.012492. Epub 2009
May 5.

Regulation of the hyaluronan synthase 2 gene by convergence in cyclic AMP
response element-binding protein and retinoid acid receptor signaling.

Makkonen KM(1), Pasonen-Seppänen S, Törrönen K, Tammi MI, Carlberg C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, of Kuopio, FIN-70211 Kuopio, Finland.

The human hyaluronan synthase 2 (HAS2) gene encodes for an enzyme making
hyaluronan, altered concentrations of which are associated with many pathological
situations including wounding, several inflammatory conditions, and malignant
tumors. In this study we showed that HAS2 is a primary target of the cAMP
activator forskolin and the nuclear hormone all-trans-retinoic acid (RA). The
first 2250 bp of the promoter contain three response elements (REs) for the
transcription factor CREB1 as well as two REs for the nuclear receptor RAR.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation and re-chromatin immunoprecipitation assays using
selected fragments of the promoter containing the putative REs showed that
forskolin and all-trans-RA modulate the formation of complexes between CREB1 and 
RAR with various co-regulators at the predicted sites. Interestingly, CREB1
complexes are regulated by all-trans-RA as are RAR complexes by forskolin.
Reporter gene assays using nested promoter fragments supported these findings.
Forskolin and all-trans-RA co-stimulation reduced the binding of CREB1, RAR, and 
the co-repressor nuclear receptor co-repressor 1 (NCoR1), but enhanced the
association of co-activators MED1 and CREB-binding protein (CBP). RNA
interference experiments suggested that MED1 and NCoR1 are central for the
all-trans-RA induction of the HAS2 gene and CBP dominates its forskolin response.
In general, our findings suggest a convergence of CREB1 and RAR signaling, and
demonstrate the individual character of each RE in terms of co-regulator use.

PMCID: PMC2709342
PMID: 19416972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Biochem Pharmacol. 2009 Aug 15;78(4):390-5. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2009.04.021. Epub 
2009 May 3.

Reduced skin inflammatory response in mice lacking inducible nitric oxide
synthase.

Medeiros R(1), Figueiredo CP, Passos GF, Calixto JB.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Farmacologia, Centro de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade
Federal de Santa Catarina, Santa Catarina, Brazil.

The skin is the largest organ in the body and one of its main functions is to
protect the body from environmental and endogenous noxious conditions, such as
injury, infection and inflammation. The inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS)
has been implicated as a key component in the inflammatory response. In the
present study, we assessed the role of iNOS in the skin inflammation induced by
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). Mice deficient in iNOS had reduced
edema and cellular infiltration in the skin following topical TPA application.
Moreover, the genetic blockage of iNOS signaling inhibited the TPA-induced ERK
and p38 activation resulting in reduced COX-2 upregulation. Finally,
immunohistochemical studies revealed that iNOS knockout mice exhibited marked
inhibition of AP-1, CREB and NF-kappaB transcriptional factors activation.
Together, these results indicate that TPA induces the activation of several
iNOS-dependent intracellular signaling pathways that have a key role in the
control of inflammatory response in the skin. Therefore, selective iNOS
inhibitors may be potentially relevant tools for cutaneous skin disease drug
development.

PMID: 19409374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Neuroscience. 2009 Apr 10;159(4):1208-15. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.02.008. Epub 2009 Feb 11.

Long-term administration of green tea catechins prevents age-related spatial
learning and memory decline in C57BL/6 J mice by regulating hippocampal cyclic
amp-response element binding protein signaling cascade.

Li Q(1), Zhao HF, Zhang ZF, Liu ZG, Pei XR, Wang JB, Cai MY, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Peking
University, Beijing, PR China.

Flavonoid-rich foods have been shown to be effective at reversing age-related
deficits in learning and memory in both animals and humans. However, little
investigation of the preventative effects of flavonoids on the naturally aged
animals was reported. In our study, 14-month-old female C57BL/6 J mice were
orally administered 0.025%, 0.05% and 0.1% green tea catechins (GTC, w/v) in
drinking water for 6 months; we found that a supplementation with 0.05% or 0.1%
GTC prevented age-related spatial learning and memory decline of mice in the
Morris water maze. Better performance of GTC-treated mice was associated with
increased levels of cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation 
in the hippocampus. The expressions of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)
and Bcl-2, two target genes of CREB which can exhibit long-term regulatory roles 
in synaptic plasticity and synaptic structure, were also increased. We also found
that long-term 0.05% or 0.1% GTC administration prevented age-related reductions 
of two representative post-synaptic density proteins PSD95 and
Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II, suggesting that synaptic
structural changes may be involved. These results demonstrated that long-term
0.05% or 0.1% green tea catechin administration may prevent age-related spatial
learning and memory decline of female C57BL/6 J mice by regulating hippocampal
CREB signaling cascade.

PMID: 19409206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Yao Xue Xue Bao. 2009 Feb;44(2):121-5.

[Effects of fluvastatin on the activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
in glomerular mesangial cells under high concentration of glucose].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang LH(1), Wu GL, Zhang LX, Huang XD, Li S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Bethune International Peace Hospital of PLA,
Shijiazhuang 050082, China. wanglh68@163.com

This study is to investigate the effects of fluvastatin on the activation of p38 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK) and cAMP response element-binding
protein (CREB1) in glomerular mesangial cells under high concentration of
glucose. High concentration glucose and fluvastatin were used to stimulate the
cultured rat glomerular mesangial cells (GMCs) in vitro. The protein expressions 
of p38 MAPK, CREB1, p-p38 MAPK and p-CREB1 were observed with Western blotting.
TGF-beta1 and fibronectin (FN) mRNA were measured with reverse transcription and 
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The protein synthesis of laminine (LN) and
type IV collagen in the supernatants of the GMCs were detected with
radioimmunoassay. Compared with low glucose control group, the expressions of
p-p38 MAPK, p-CREB1 were increased obviously in high glucose group, TGF-beta1
mRNA and FN mRNA, LN and type IV collagen in the supernatants were increased
significantly in GMCs under high concentration glucose medium. The expression
levels of p-p38 MAPK, p-CREB1, TGF-beta1 mRNA, and FN mRNA, LN and type IV
collagen in the supernatants were significantly lower in the fluvastatin group
than those in the high concentration glucose group. It is concluded that
fluvastatin can inhibit over production of TGF-beta1 and ECM proteins in GMCs
under high concentration of glucose, partly by regulating the phosphorylation of 
p38 MAPK and CREB1.

PMID: 19408679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Gene. 2009 Apr 15;435(1-2):80-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2008.12.020. Epub 2009 Jan
23.

Regulation of human bone sialoprotein gene transcription by platelet-derived
growth factor-BB.

Mezawa M(1), Araki S, Takai H, Sasaki Y, Wang S, Li X, Kim DS, Nakayama Y, Ogata 
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Chiba, Japan.

Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) is produced by mesenchymal cells and
released by platelets following aggregation and is synthesized by osteoblasts. In
bone, PDGF stimulates proliferation and differentiation of osteoblasts. PDGF also
increases bone resorption, most likely by increasing the number of osteoclasts.
Bone sialoprotein (BSP) is thought to function in the initial mineralization of
bone, selectively expressed by differentiated osteoblast. To determine the
molecular mechanisms PDGF regulation of human BSP gene transcription, we have
analyzed the effects of PDGF-BB on osteoblast-like Saos2 and ROS17/2.8 cells.
PDGF-BB (5 ng/ml) increased BSP mRNA and protein levels at 12 h in Saos2 cells,
and induced BSP mRNA expression at 3 h, reached maximal at 12 h in ROS17/2.8
cells. Transient transfection analyses were performed using chimeric constructs
of the human BSP gene promoter linked to a luciferase reporter gene. Treatment of
Saos2 cells with PDGF-BB (5 ng/ml, 12 h) increased luciferase activities of all
constructs between -184LUC to -2672LUC including the human BSP gene promoter.
Effects of PDGF-BB abrogated in constructs included 2 bp mutations in the two
cAMP response elements (CRE1 and CRE2), activator protein 1(3) (AP1(3)) and shear
stress response element 1 (SSRE1). Luciferase activities induced by PDGF-BB were 
blocked by protein kinase A inhibitor H89 and tyrosine kinase inhibitor
herbimycin A. Gel mobility shift analyses showed that PDGF-BB increased binding
of CRE1, CRE2, AP1(3) and SSRE1 elements. CRE1- and CRE2-protein complexes were
supershifted by CREB1 and phospho-CREB1 antibodies. Notably, AP1(3)-protein
complexes were supershifted by c-Fos and JunD, and disrupted by CREB1,
phospho-CREB1, c-Jun and Fra2 antibodies. These studies, therefore, demonstrate
that PDGF-BB stimulates human BSP transcription by targeting the CRE1, CRE2,
AP1(3) and SSRE1 elements in the human BSP gene promoter.

PMID: 19393184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Exp Mol Med. 2009 Aug 31;41(8):592-600. doi: 10.3858/emm.2009.41.8.065.

Stimulatory heterotrimeric G protein augments gamma ray-induced apoptosis by
up-regulation of Bak expression via CREB and AP-1 in H1299 human lung cancer
cells.

Choi YJ(1), Kim SY, Oh JM, Juhnn YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Laboratory of Cellular
Signaling, Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea.

Stimulatory heterotrimeric GTP-binding proteins (Gs protein) stimulate cAMP
generation in response to various signals, and modulate various cellular
phenomena such as proliferation and apoptosis. This study aimed to investigate
the effect of Gs proteins on gamma ray-induced apoptosis of lung cancer cells and
its molecular mechanism, as an attempt to develop a new strategy to improve the
therapeutic efficacy of gamma radiation. Expression of constitutively active
mutant of the alpha subunit of Gs (GalphasQL) augmented gamma ray-induced
apoptosis via mitochondrial dependent pathway when assessed by clonogenic assay, 
FACS analysis of PI stained cells, and western blot analysis of the cytoplasmic
translocation of cytochrome C and the cleavage of caspase-3 and ploy(ADP-ribose) 
polymerase (PARP) in H1299 human lung cancer cells. GalphasQL up-regulated the
Bak expression at the levels of protein and mRNA. Treatment with inhibitors of
PKA (H89), SP600125 (JNK inhibitor), and a CRE-decoy blocked GalphasQL-stimulated
Bak reporter luciferase activity. Expression of GalphasQL increased basal and
gamma ray-induced luciferase activity of cAMP response element binding protein
(CREB) and AP-1, and the binding of CREB and AP-1 to Bak promoter. Furthermore,
prostaglandin E2, a Galphas activating signal, was found to augment gamma
ray-induced apoptosis, which was abolished by treatment with a prostanoid
receptor antagonist. These results indicate that Galphas augments gamma
ray-induced apoptosis by up-regulation of Bak expression via CREB and AP-1 in
H1299 lung cancer cells, suggesting that the efficacy of radiotherapy of lung
cancer may be improved by modulating Gs signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC2739899
PMID: 19381065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. J Virol. 2009 Jul;83(13):6391-403. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00061-09. Epub 2009 Apr 15.

Breaking human cytomegalovirus major immediate-early gene silence by vasoactive
intestinal peptide stimulation of the protein kinase A-CREB-TORC2 signaling
cascade in human pluripotent embryonal NTera2 cells.

Yuan J(1), Liu X, Wu AW, McGonagill PW, Keller MJ, Galle CS, Meier JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa Carver College of
Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

The triggering mechanisms underlying reactivation of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)
in latently infected persons are unclear. During latency, HCMV major
immediate-early (MIE) gene expression breaks silence to initiate viral
reactivation. Using quiescently HCMV-infected human pluripotent embryonal NTera2 
cells (NT2) to model HCMV reactivation, we show that vasoactive intestinal
peptide (VIP), an immunomodulatory neuropeptide, immediately and dose-dependently
(1 to 500 nM) activates HCMV MIE gene expression. This response requires the MIE 
enhancer cyclic AMP response elements (CRE). VIP quickly elevates CREB Ser133 and
ATF-1 Ser63 phosphorylation levels, although the CREB Ser133 phosphorylation
level is substantial at baseline. VIP does not change the level of HCMV genomes
in nuclei, Oct4 (pluripotent cell marker), or hDaxx (cellular repressor of HCMV
gene expression). VIP-activated MIE gene expression is mediated by cellular
protein kinase A (PKA), CREB, and TORC2. VIP induces PKA-dependent TORC2 Ser171
dephosphorylation and nuclear entry, which likely enables MIE gene activation, as
TORC2 S171A (devoid of Ser171 phosphorylation) exhibits enhanced nuclear entry
and desilences the MIE genes in the absence of VIP stimulation. In conclusion,
VIP stimulation of the PKA-CREB-TORC2 signaling cascade activates HCMV
CRE-dependent MIE gene expression in quiescently infected NT2 cells. We speculate
that neurohormonal stimulation via this signaling cascade is a possible means for
reversing HCMV silence in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2698552
PMID: 19369332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Mol Vis. 2009;15:713-21. Epub 2009 Apr 10.

NMDA receptor mediates proliferation and CREB phosphorylation in postnatal Müller
glia-derived retinal progenitors.

Ramírez M(1), Lamas M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Farmacobiología, Cinvestav Sede Sur, México DF, México.

PURPOSE: Postnatal retinal Müller glia are considered to be retinal progenitors
as they retain the ability to dedifferentiate, proliferate, and differentiate to 
new retinal glia and neurons after injury. The proliferation and differentiation 
processes are coordinated by several extrinsic factors and neurotransmitters,
including glutamate. Thus, the appropriate numbers and proportions of the
different cell types are generated to form a functional retina during development
and during injury repair. Here we analyze the changes in the proliferation of
postnatal Müller glia-derived progenitors after activation of the
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptors.
METHODS: Müller glia-derived progenitor cell cultures were characterized by
immunocytochemistry with antibodies against the NR1 subunit of the NMDA receptor 
and the progenitor cell marker nestin. The effect of glutamate receptor agonists 
and antagonists on cell proliferation was analyzed by BrdU incorporation or Ki67 
immunostaining, cell counting, and by immunolabeling of phosphorylated cAMP
response element binding protein (P-CREB) transcription factor. The effect of
NMDA receptor activation was analyzed in vivo by P-CREB immunohistochemistry in
retinal sections of Long-Evans NMDA injected rats.
RESULTS: We show that NMDA receptor activation significantly increases the
proliferation rate of Müller-glia derived progenitor cells and that this increase
can be blocked by NMDA receptor antagonists. Furthermore, we show that CREB
phosphorylation is induced in NMDA-treated Müller-glia derived progenitor cells
in culture and that specific pharmacological inhibition of CREB phosphorylation
results in a decreased number of proliferating cells. We confirmed the relevance 
of these observations by the analysis of retinal sections after NMDA injection in
vivo where immunoreactivity to phosphorylated CREB is also increased after
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: In the present study we show that NMDA receptor activation induces
postnatal Müller glia-derived retinal cell progenitor proliferation and
transcription factor CREB phosphorylation both in culture and in vivo. The
identification of the molecular determinants of mature retinal progenitors such
as transcription factor CREB and NMDA receptor-induced players should facilitate 
the control of growth and manipulation of progenitor cell cultures and the
possible identification of the molecular mechanisms involved in progenitor
self-renewal.

PMCID: PMC2666774
PMID: 19365572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Apr 15;15(8):2583-7. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1137.
Epub 2009 Apr 7.

CREB in the pathophysiology of cancer: implications for targeting transcription
factors for cancer therapy.

Sakamoto KM(1), Frank DA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Gwynne Hazen Cherry Memorial Laboratories,
Mattel Children's Hospital UCLA, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
CA, USA.

Erratum in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2009 May 15;15(10):3643.

Transcription factors are key regulators of the pattern of gene expression in a
cell and directly control central processes such as proliferation, survival,
self-renewal, and invasion. Given this critical role, the function of
transcription factors is normally regulated closely, often through transient
phosphorylation. Although transcription factors are not often directly modified
by mutations in cancer cells, they frequently become activated constitutively
through mutations affecting "upstream" pathways. By continually driving the
expression of key target genes, these oncogenic transcription factors play a
central role in tumor pathogenesis. One such transcription factor is the
cAMP-regulatory element-binding protein (CREB), which can be activated through
phosphorylation by a number of kinases, including Akt, p90Rsk, protein kinase A, 
and calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinases and regulates genes whose deregulated
expression promotes oncogenesis, including cyclins, Bcl-2 family members, and
Egr-1. CREB is overexpressed and constitutively phosphorylated in a number of
forms of human cancer, including acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and non-small cell 
lung cancer, and appears to play a direct role in disease pathogenesis and
prognosis. Although transcription factors have not been a central focus of drug
development, recent advances suggest that CREB and other such proteins may be
worthwhile targets for cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC2883446
PMID: 19351775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 29;284(22):15325-38. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.002329. Epub
2009 Apr 3.

Lot1 is a key element of the pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide
(PACAP)/cyclic AMP pathway that negatively regulates neuronal precursor
proliferation.

Fila T(1), Trazzi S, Crochemore C, Bartesaghi R, Ciani E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and General Physiology, University of Bologna, Piazza di
Porta San Donato 2, Bologna, Italy.

The tumor suppressor gene Lot1 is highly expressed during brain development.
During cerebellar development, Lot1 is expressed by proliferating granule cells
with a time course matching the expression of the pituitary adenylate
cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) receptor, a neuropeptide receptor that
plays an important role in the regulation of granule cell proliferation/survival.
Although it has become clear that Lot1 is a negative regulator of cell division
in tumor cells, its role in neuronal proliferation is not understood. We
previously demonstrated that in cerebellar granule cells Lot1 expression is
regulated by the PACAP/cAMP system. The aim of this study was to investigate the 
role played by Lot1 in neuron proliferation/survival and to identify the
molecular mechanisms underlying its actions. Using a Lot1-inducible expression
system, we found that in PC12 cells Lot1 negatively regulates proliferation and
favors differentiation by up-regulating the expression of the PACAP receptor. In 
cerebellar granule cells in culture, an increase in Lot1 expression was
paralleled by inhibition of proliferation and up-regulation of the PACAP
receptor, which in turn positively regulated Lot1 expression. Silencing of Lot1
leads to an increase in granule cell proliferation and a reduction in survival.
Confirming the in vitro results, in vivo experiments showed that PACAP induced an
increase in Lot1 expression that was paralleled by inhibition of cerebellar
granule cell proliferation. These data show that Lot1 is a key element of the
PACAP/cAMP pathway that negatively regulates neuronal precursor proliferation.
The existence of a PACAP receptor/Lot1-positive feedback loop may powerfully
regulate neural proliferation during critical phases of cerebellar development.

PMCID: PMC2685713
PMID: 19346254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Jul 1;18(13):2328-43. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp165. Epub 2009 Apr 
3.

Systems biology of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD):
computational identification of gene expression pathways and integrated
regulatory networks.

Song X(1), Di Giovanni V, He N, Wang K, Ingram A, Rosenblum ND, Pei Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, University Health Network, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

To elucidate the molecular pathways that modulate renal cyst growth in ADPKD, we 
performed global gene profiling on cysts of different size (<1 ml, n = 5; 10-20
ml, n = 5; >50 ml, n = 3) and minimally cystic tissue (MCT, n = 5) from five PKD1
human polycystic kidneys using Affymetrix HG-U133 Plus 2.0 arrays. We used gene
set enrichment analysis to identify overrepresented signaling pathways and key
transcription factors (TFs) between cysts and MCT. We found down-regulation of
kidney epithelial restricted genes (e.g. nephron segment-specific markers and
cilia-associated cystic genes such as HNF1B, PKHD1, IFT88 and CYS1) in the renal 
cysts. On the other hand, PKD1 cysts displayed a rich profile of gene sets
associated with renal development, mitogen-mediated proliferation, cell cycle
progression, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, hypoxia, aging and
immune/inflammatory responses. Notably, our data suggest that up-regulation of
Wnt/beta-catenin, pleiotropic growth factor/receptor tyrosine kinase (e.g.
IGF/IGF1R, FGF/FGFR, EGF/EGFR, VEGF/VEGFR), G-protein-coupled receptor (e.g.
PTGER2) signaling was associated with renal cystic growth. By integrating these
pathways with a number of dysregulated networks of TFs (e.g. SRF, MYC, E2F1,
CREB1, LEF1, TCF7, HNF1B/ HNF1A and HNF4A), our data suggest that epithelial
dedifferentiation accompanied by aberrant activation and cross-talk of specific
signaling pathways may be required for PKD1 cyst growth and disease progression. 
Pharmacological modulation of some of these signaling pathways may provide a
potential therapeutic strategy for ADPKD.

PMID: 19346236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2009 Jun;29(6):809-15. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.109.185777. Epub 2009 Apr 2.

CREB-mediated IL-6 expression is required for 15(S)-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic
acid-induced vascular smooth muscle cell migration.

Chava KR(1), Karpurapu M, Wang D, Bhanoori M, Kundumani-Sridharan V, Zhang Q,
Ichiki T, Glasgow WC, Rao GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 894
Union Avenue, Memphis, TN 38163, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Migration of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) from media to intima
is a key event in the pathophysiology of atherosclerosis and restenosis. The
lipoxygenase products of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) were shown to play a 
role in these diseases. cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) has been
implicated in the regulation of VSMC growth and motility in response to thrombin 
and angiotensin II. The aim of the present study was to test the role of CREB in 
an oxidized lipid molecule, 15(S)-HETE-induced VSMC migration and neointima
formation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: 15(S)-HETE stimulated VSMC migration in CREB-dependent
manner, as measured by the modified Boyden chamber method. Blockade of MEK1,
JNK1, or p38MAPK inhibited 15(S)-HETE-induced CREB phosphorylation and VSMC
migration. 15(S)-HETE induced expression and secretion of interleukin-6 (IL-6),
as analyzed by RT-PCR and ELISA, respectively. Neutralizing anti-IL-6 antibodies 
blocked 15(S)-HETE-induced VSMC migration. Dominant-negative mutant-mediated
blockade of ERK1/2, JNK1, p38MAPK, or CREB suppressed 15(S)-HETE-induced IL-6
expression in VSMCs. Serial 5' deletions and site-directed mutagenesis of IL-6
promoter along with chromatin immunoprecipitation using anti-CREB antibodies
showed that cAMP response element is essential for 15(S)-HETE-induced IL-6
expression. Dominant-negative CREB also suppressed balloon injury-induced IL-6
expression, SMC migration from media to intimal region, and neointima formation. 
Adenovirus-mediated transduction of 15-lipoxygenase 2 (15-LOX2) caused increased 
production of 15-HETE in VSMCs and enhanced IL-6 expression, SMC migration from
media to intimal region, and neointima formation in response to arterial injury.
CONCLUSIONS: The above results suggest a role for 15-LOX2-15-HETE in the
regulation of VSMC migration and neointima formation involving CREB-mediated IL-6
expression.

PMCID: PMC2724759
PMID: 19342597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Neuroscience. 2009 Jul 7;161(3):734-42. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.03.064. 
Epub 2009 Mar 31.

Protein receptor for activated C kinase 1 is involved in morphine reward in mice.

Wan L(1), Su L, Xie Y, Liu Y, Wang Y, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Chronobiology, Ministry of Health (Sichuan University),
Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, PR China. bigeyes812@163.com

Opiate addiction is associated with upregulation of cAMP signaling in the brain. 
cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB), a nuclear transcription factor,
is a downstream component of the extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase
(ERK) pathway, which has been shown to regulate different physiological and
psychological responses of drug addiction. RACK1, the protein receptor for
activated C kinase 1, is a multifunctional scaffolding protein known to be a key 
regulator of various signaling cascades in the CNS. RACK1 functions specifically 
in integrin mediated activation of ERK cascade and targets active ERK. We
examined if RACK1 is involved in the mechanism of drug addiction by regulating
CREB in mouse hippocampus and prefrontal cortex. Several expressions were
observed. Chronic administration of morphine made the expression of RACK1 and
CREB mRNA increase in hippocampus and prefrontal cortex. The expression of RACK1 
and CREB protein was strongly positive in CA1, CA3 and dentate gyrus (DG) of the 
hippocampus of morphine-treated mice brain, especially the pyramidal neurons in
the DG of the hippocampus. Using the small interfering RNA technology, we
determined that the expression of CREB mRNA was decreased in hippocampus and
prefrontal cortex of morphine-treated mice. The expression of RACK1 and CREB
protein was negative in CA1, CA3 and DG of hippocampus. These findings suggest
that morphine reward can influence the expression of RACK1 in mouse hippocampus
and prefrontal cortex through regulating CREB transcription.

PMID: 19341783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Apr;60(4):1076-84. doi: 10.1002/art.24360.

Variants within MECP2, a key transcription regulator, are associated with
increased susceptibility to lupus and differential gene expression in patients
with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Webb R(1), Wren JD, Jeffries M, Kelly JA, Kaufman KM, Tang Y, Frank MB, Merrill
J, Kimberly RP, Edberg JC, Ramsey-Goldman R, Petri M, Reveille JD, Alarcón GS,
Vilá LM, Alarcón-Riquelme ME, James JA, Vyse TJ, Moser KL, Gaffney PM, Gilkeson
GS, Harley JB, Sawalha AH.

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, and University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Both genetic and epigenetic factors play an important role in the
pathogenesis of lupus. The aim of this study was to examine methyl-CpG-binding
protein 2 gene (MECP2) polymorphisms in a large cohort of patients with lupus and
control subjects, and to determine the functional consequences of the
lupus-associated MECP2 haplotype.
METHODS: We genotyped 18 single-nucleotide polymorphisms within MECP2, located on
chromosome Xq28, in a large cohort of patients with lupus and control subjects of
European descent. We studied the functional effects of the lupus-associated MECP2
haplotype by determining gene expression profiles in B cell lines in female lupus
patients with and those without the lupus-associated MECP2 risk haplotype.
RESULTS: We confirmed, replicated, and extended the genetic association between
lupus and genetic markers within MECP2 in a large independent cohort of lupus
patients and control subjects of European descent (odds ratio 1.35, P = 6.65 x
10(-11)). MECP2 is a dichotomous transcription regulator that either activates or
represses gene expression. We identified 128 genes that are differentially
expressed in lupus patients with the disease-associated MECP2 haplotype; most (
approximately 81%) were up-regulated. Genes that were up-regulated had
significantly more CpG islands in their promoter regions compared with genes that
were down-regulated. Gene ontology analysis using the differentially expressed
genes revealed significant association with epigenetic regulatory mechanisms,
suggesting that these genes are targets for MECP2 regulation in B cells.
Furthermore, at least 13 of the 104 up-regulated genes are regulated by
interferon. The disease-risk MECP2 haplotype was associated with increased
expression of the MECP2 transcription coactivator CREB1 and decreased expression 
of the corepressor histone deacetylase 1.
CONCLUSION: Polymorphism in the MECP2 locus is associated with lupus and, at
least in part, contributes to the interferon signature observed in lupus
patients.

PMCID: PMC2734382
PMID: 19333917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jun 5;284(23):15390-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808331200. Epub 2009
Mar 26.

Tissue transglutaminase regulates matrix metalloproteinase-2 in ovarian cancer by
modulating cAMP-response element-binding protein activity.

Satpathy M(1), Shao M, Emerson R, Donner DB, Matei D.

Author information: 
(1)Indiana University Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Tissue transglutaminase 2 (TG2) is overexpressed in epithelial ovarian cancer
(EOC) and promotes intraperitoneal metastasis. How TG2 facilitates the spread of 
EOC is unknown. Here, we show that TG2 regulates the expression and function of
matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2), a critical mediator of tissue invasiveness.
TG2 knockdown down-regulates MMP-2 protein and mRNA expression in SKOV3, IGROV-1,
MDA-MB-436, and PC-3 cancer cells. TG2 knockdown or inhibition of TG2 activity
using KCC009 decreases MMP-2 gelatinase activity in cancer cells. MMP-2
expression and function are regulated by TG2 at transcriptional level, as
demonstrated by quantitative PCR and reporter assays. We used bioinformatics and 
chromatin immunoprecipitation to identify a CREB binding site in the MMP-2
promoter. Binding of CREB to the MMP-2 promoter was diminished in cells that
expressed decreased TG2 levels. TG2 knockdown decreased CREB phosphorylation, and
CREB knockdown decreased MMP-2 expression. The effect of TG2 on CREB activity and
MMP-2 transcription is mediated by TG2-dependent degradation of protein
phosphatase 2 (PP2A-alpha). We show that PP2A-alpha complexes with and is
targeted for degradation by TG2. In addition to their related in vitro expression
levels, TG2 and MMP-2 expression were significantly correlated in vivo, as shown 
by concordant immunostaining in peritoneal xenografts and in human ovarian
tumors. The capacity of TG2 to regulate MMP-2 expression in vitro and in vivo
identifies a mechanism that may facilitate tissue invasion and the spread of EOC.
The demonstration that TG2 induced degradation of PP2A-alpha activates CREB, and 
thereby increases MMP-2 transcription, provides novel mechanistic insight into
the pro- metastatic function of TG2.

PMCID: PMC2708835
PMID: 19324884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Cancer Sci. 2009 Jun;100(6):1069-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2009.01136.x. Epub 
2009 Mar 23.

Stimulatory heterotrimeric GTP-binding protein augments cisplatin-induced
apoptosis by upregulating Bak expression in human lung cancer cells.

Choi YJ(1), Oh JM, Kim SY, Seo M, Juhnn YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Laboratory of Cellular
Signaling, Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

The present study aimed to investigate the effect of the stimulatory
heterotrimeric GTP-binding (Gs) protein signaling system on cisplatin-induced
apoptosis of lung cancer cells and its underlying mechanism as an attempt to
develop a novel strategy to improve the therapeutic efficacy of cisplatin.
Overexpression of the constitutively active alpha subunit of Gs (GalphasQL) in
A549 human lung cancer cells increased cisplatin-induced apoptosis, and knockdown
of Galphas with small hairpin RNA decreased the percentage of apoptotic cells.
GalphasQL increased the expression of the proapoptotic proteins B-cell
leukemia/lymphoma-2 genes (Bcl-2) homologous antagonist killer protein (Bak) and 
Bcl-2 associated X protein (Bax), and decreased the expression of the
antiapoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-Xlong protein. Knockdown of Bak blocked the 
augmentative effects of GalphasQL. GalphasQL decreased the degradation rate of
the Bak protein, and increased Bak mRNA transcript levels. GalphasQL increased
Bak-luciferase activity in a protein kinase A and cyclic AMP response
element-dependent manner. GalphasQL also augmented cisplatin-induced apoptosis of
H1299 human lung cancer cells that lack functional p53. From this study, it is
concluded that Galphas augments cisplatin-induced apoptosis of lung cancer cells 
partially through upregulating Bak expression by increasing transcription and by 
decreasing the rate of protein degradation.

PMID: 19320642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Br J Pharmacol. 2009 Mar;156(6):933-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2009.00022.x.

Inhibition of inducible NO synthase, cyclooxygenase-2 and interleukin-1beta by
torilin is mediated by mitogen-activated protein kinases in microglial BV2 cells.

Choi Y(1), Lee MK, Lim SY, Sung SH, Kim YC.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Traditionally, the stem and root bark of Ulmus davidiana 
var. japonica (Ulmaceae) have been known to be anti-inflammatory in Korea.
Anti-inflammatory effects of torilin, isolated from this plant and the underlying
mechanisms were examined by using lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated microglial 
BV2 cells.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: The cells were treated with torilin prior to LPS exposure 
and the effects on pro-inflammatory enzymes, inducible nitric oxide synthase
(iNOS) and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), and a pro-inflammatory cytokine,
interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) were analysed by RT-PCR, Western blot or elisa. To
reveal the mechanism of action of torilin we investigated the involvement of
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades and their downstream
transcription factors, nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) and cyclic
AMP-responsive element (CRE)-binding protein (CREB).
KEY RESULTS: Torilin significantly reduced the LPS-induced expression of iNOS,
COX-2 and IL-1beta, and the subsequent release of NO, prostaglandin E(2) and
IL-1beta into culture medium. LPS stimulation of extracellular signal-regulated
kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) and p38 MAPK was inhibited by torilin. In addition, the
inhibitory effect of torilin on NF-kappaB and CREB was shown by torilin-mediated 
recovery of LPS-induced degradation of inhibitor kappaB-alpha and suppression of 
LPS-induced phosphorylation of CREB respectively.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: This study indicates that torilin inhibited
LPS-induced iNOS, COX-2 and IL-1beta via down-regulation of ERK1/2, p38 MAPK,
NF-kappaB and CREB and suggests that torilin has a potential as an
anti-inflammatory drug candidate.

PMCID: PMC2697713
PMID: 19298258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Hippocampus. 2009 Oct;19(10):962-72. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20579.

Running exercise-induced up-regulation of hippocampal brain-derived neurotrophic 
factor is CREB-dependent.

Chen MJ(1), Russo-Neustadt AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, California State University, 5151 State
University Dr., Los Angeles, CA 90032, USA. mchen@calstatela.edu

The past decade has witnessed burgeoning evidence that antidepressant medications
and physical exercise increase the expression of hippocampal brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF). This phenomenon has gained widespread appeal, because
BDNF is one of the first macromolecules observed to play a central role not only 
in the treatment of mood disorders, but also in neuronal survival-, growth-, and 
plasticity-related signaling cascades. Thus, it has become critical to understand
how BDNF synthesis is regulated. Much evidence exists that changes in BDNF
expression result from the activation/phosphorylation of the transcription
factor, cAMP-response-element binding protein (CREB) following the administration
of antidepressant medications. Utilizing a mouse model genetically engineered
with an inducible CREB repressor, our current study provides evidence that
increases in BDNF expression and cellular survival signaling resulting from
physical exercise are also dependent upon activation of this central
transcription factor. The transcription and expression of hippocampal BDNF, as
well as the activation of Akt, a key survival signaling molecule, were measured
following acute exercise, and also following short-term treatment with the
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, reboxetine. We found that both interventions
led to a marked increase in hippocampal BDNF mRNA, BDNF protein, and Akt
phosphorylation (as well as CREB phosphorylation) in wild-type mice. As expected,
activation of the CREB repressor in mutant mice sharply decreased CREB
phosphorylation. In addition, all measures noted above remained at baseline
levels when mutant mice exercised or received reboxetine. Increases in BDNF and
phospho-Akt were also prevented when mutant mice received a combination of
exercise and antidepressant treatment. The results are discussed in the context
of what is currently known about BDNF signaling.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2756465
PMID: 19294650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Apr 7;106(14):5779-83. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0813410106. Epub 2009 Mar 17.

Activation of critical, host-induced, metabolic and stress pathways marks
neutrophil entry into cystic fibrosis lungs.

Makam M(1), Diaz D, Laval J, Gernez Y, Conrad CK, Dunn CE, Davies ZA, Moss RB,
Herzenberg LA, Herzenberg LA, Tirouvanziam R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305, USA.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) patients undergo progressive airway destruction caused in
part by chronic neutrophilic inflammation. While opportunistic pathogens
infecting CF airways can cause inflammation, we hypothesized that host-derived
metabolic and stress signals would also play a role in this process. We show that
neutrophils that have entered CF airways have increased phosphorylation of the
eukaryotic initiation factor 4E and its partner the 4E-binding protein 1; 2 key
effectors in the growth factor- and amino acid-regulated mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) pathway. Furthermore CF airway neutrophils display increased
phosphorylation of the cAMP response element binding protein (CREB), a major
transcriptional coactivator in stress signaling cascades. These active
intracellular pathways are associated with increased surface expression of
critical adaptor molecules, including the growth factor receptor CD114 and the
receptor for advanced glycation end-products (RAGE), a CREB inducer and sensor
for host-derived damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs). Most CF airway
fluids lack any detectable soluble RAGE, an inhibitory decoy receptor for DAMPs. 
Concomitantly, CF airway fluids displayed high and consequently unopposed levels 
of S100A12; a potent mucosa- and neutrophil-derived DAMP. CF airway neutrophils
also show increased surface levels of 2 critical CREB targets, the
purine-recycling enzyme CD39 and the multifunctional, mTOR-inducing CXCR4
receptor. This coordinated set of events occurs in all patients, even in the
context of minimal airway inflammation and well-preserved lung function. Taken
together, our data demonstrate an early and sustained activation of
host-responsive metabolic and stress pathways upon neutrophil entry into CF
airways, suggesting potential targets for therapeutic modulation.

PMCID: PMC2667067
PMID: 19293384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Science. 2009 Mar 13;323(5920):1492-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1164139.

Selective erasure of a fear memory.

Han JH(1), Kushner SA, Yiu AP, Hsiang HL, Buch T, Waisman A, Bontempi B, Neve RL,
Frankland PW, Josselyn SA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neurosciences and Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children, 555
University Avenue, Toronto, ON, M5G 1X8, Canada.

Memories are thought to be encoded by sparsely distributed groups of neurons.
However, identifying the precise neurons supporting a given memory (the memory
trace) has been a long-standing challenge. We have shown previously that lateral 
amygdala (LA) neurons with increased cyclic adenosine monophosphate response
element-binding protein (CREB) are preferentially activated by fear memory
expression, which suggests that they are selectively recruited into the memory
trace. We used an inducible diphtheria-toxin strategy to specifically ablate
these neurons. Selectively deleting neurons overexpressing CREB (but not a
similar portion of random LA neurons) after learning blocked expression of that
fear memory. The resulting memory loss was robust and persistent, which suggests 
that the memory was permanently erased. These results establish a causal link
between a specific neuronal subpopulation and memory expression, thereby
identifying critical neurons within the memory trace.

PMID: 19286560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Mar 13;380(3):655-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.01.159. Epub 2009 Jan 29.

Phosphorylation of CREB, a cyclic AMP responsive element binding protein,
contributes partially to lysophosphatidic acid-induced fibroblast cell
proliferation.

Kwon YJ(1), Sun Y, Kim NH, Huh SO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Institute of Natural
Medicine, Hallym University, Chunchon, Gangwon-do 200-702, South Korea.

Lysophospholipids regulate a wide array of biological processes including cell
survival and proliferation. In our previous studies, we found that in addition to
SRE, CRE is required for maximal c-fos promoter activation triggered by
lysophosphatidic acid (LPA). c-fos is an early indicator of various cells into
the cell cycle after mitogenic stimulation. However, role of CREB activation in
LPA-stimulated proliferation has not been elucidated yet. Here, we investigate
how LPA induces proliferation in Rat-2 fibroblast cell via CREB activation. We
found that total cell number and BrdU-positive cells were increased by LPA.
Moreover, levels of c-fos mRNA and cyclin D1 protein were increased via
LPA-induced CREB phosphorylation. Furthermore, LPA-induced Rat-2 cell
proliferation was decreased markedly by ERK inhibitor (U0126) and partially by
MSK inhibitor (H89). Taken together, these results suggest that CREB activation
could partially up-regulate accumulation of cyclin D1 protein level and
proliferation of LPA-stimulated Rat-2 fibroblast cells.

PMID: 19285017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Endocrinology. 2009 Jul;150(7):3308-17. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1668. Epub 2009 Mar 
12.

Mechanisms of protein kinase C signaling in the modulation of 3',5'-cyclic
adenosine monophosphate-mediated steroidogenesis in mouse gonadal cells.

Manna PR(1), Huhtaniemi IT, Stocco DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, Texas 79430, USA.

The protein kinase C (PKC) signaling pathway plays integral roles in the
expression of the steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR) protein that regulates
steroid biosynthesis in steroidogenic cells. PKC can modulate the activity of
cAMP/protein kinase A signaling involved in steroidogenesis; however, its
mechanism remains obscure. In the present study, we demonstrate that activation
of the PKC pathway, by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), was capable of
potentiating dibutyryl cAMP [(Bu)(2)cAMP]-stimulated StAR expression, StAR
phosphorylation, and progesterone synthesis in both mouse Leydig (MA-10) and
granulosa (KK-1) tumor cells. The steroidogenic potential of PMA and (Bu)(2)cAMP 
was linked with phosphorylation of ERK 1/2; however, inhibition of the latter
demonstrated varying effects on steroidogenesis. Transcriptional activation of
the StAR gene by PMA and (Bu)(2)cAMP was influenced by several factors, its
up-regulation being dependent on phosphorylation of the cAMP response element
binding protein (CREB). An oligonucleotide probe containing a CREB/activating
transcription factor binding region in the StAR promoter was found to bind
nuclear proteins in PMA and (Bu)(2)cAMP-treated MA-10 and KK-1 cells. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies revealed that the induction of phosphorylated CREB
was tightly correlated with in vivo protein-DNA interactions and recruitment of
CREB binding protein to the StAR promoter. Ectopic expression of CREB binding
protein enhanced CREB-mediated transcription of the StAR gene, an event that was 
markedly repressed by the adenovirus E1A oncoprotein. Further studies
demonstrated that the activation of StAR expression and steroid synthesis by PMA 
and (Bu)(2)cAMP was associated with expression of the nuclear receptor Nur77,
indicating its essential role in hormone-regulated steroidogenesis. Collectively,
these findings provide insight into the mechanisms by which PKC modulates
cAMP/protein kinase A responsiveness involved in regulating the steroidogenic
response in mouse gonadal cells.

PMCID: PMC2703526
PMID: 19282384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Autoimmun Rev. 2009 Sep;9(1):34-9. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2009.02.035. Epub 2009
Mar 6.

Interleukin 2 and systemic lupus erythematosus: beyond the transcriptional
regulatory net abnormalities.

Gómez-Martín D(1), Díaz-Zamudio M, Crispín JC, Alcocer-Varela J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Rheumatology, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias
Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Vasco de Quiroga 15, Tlalpan 14000, Mexico 
City, Mexico.

IL-2 plays a key role in setting the balance between immunity and tolerance. This
cytokine has a dual role as the regulator of the two main phases of the immune
response (proliferative and suppressive). Likewise, activation induced cell death
and the induction and maintenance of regulatory T cells are the tolerance
mechanisms regulated by IL-2, which convey the link between IL-2 abnormalities
and the development of autoimmune disorders, such as systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE). Particularly, in SLE murine models and in humans, deficiency in IL-2
synthesis and activity has been proven. Diverse signaling pathways abnormalities 
(TCR, NF-kappaBeta, NF-AT) have been involved in the IL-2 transcriptional
dysregulation displayed by T cells from SLE patients, and its functional
relevance as part of the physiopathogenic scheme has been shown. Aberrant
expression and activity of multiple IL-2 transcriptional factors, such as c-fos, 
and predominantly, CREM and CREB have been involved in this immune dysregulation.
Diverse alterations in signaling kinases and phosphatases (PKA, PP2A, CAMKIV) and
the modulation by epigenetic mechanisms have been related to the altered
CREM/pCREB index. The synergic effect of multiple abnormalities in the
transcriptional factors previously mentioned has been shown to be of functional
relevance in lupus.

PMID: 19269352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Cancer Res. 2009 Mar 15;69(6):2471-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3404. Epub
2009 Mar 3.

miR-34b targets cyclic AMP-responsive element binding protein in acute myeloid
leukemia.

Pigazzi M(1), Manara E, Baron E, Basso G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Padova, Padova, Italy. martina.pigazzi@unipd.it

The cyclic AMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) is documented to be
overexpressed in leukemia, but the underlying mechanism remains unknown. Here,
microRNAs (miRNA), which act as negative regulators of gene expression
principally through translational repression, are investigated for the mediation 
of high CREB protein levels. A series of miRNAs that target CREB were identified.
Real-time quantitative PCR revealed that miR-34b was expressed significantly less
in myeloid cell lines, previously known for high CREB protein levels. Exogenous
miR-34b expression was induced, and results revealed a direct interaction with
the CREB 3'-untranslated region, with the consequent reduction of the CREB
protein levels in vitro. miR-34b restored expression caused cell cycle
abnormalities, reduced anchorage-independent growth, and altered CREB target gene
expression, suggesting its suppressor potential. Using reverse-phase protein
array, CREB target proteins (BCL-2, cyclin A1, cyclin B1, cyclin D, nuclear
factor-kappaB, Janus-activated kinase 1, and signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3), as well as many downstream protein kinases and cell survival
signaling pathways (AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin and extracellular
signal-regulated kinase) usually elicited by CREB, were observed to have
decreased. The miR-34b/miR-34c promoter was shown to be methylated in the
leukemia cell lines used. This epigenetic regulation should control the observed 
miR-34b expression levels to maintain the CREB protein overexpressed. In
addition, the inverse correlation between miR-34b and CREB expression was found
in a cohort of 78 pediatric patients at diagnosis of acute myeloid leukemia,
supporting this relationship in vivo. Our results identify a direct miR-34b
target gene, provide a possible mechanism for CREB overexpression, and provide
new information about myeloid transformation and therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 19258499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Cancer Res. 2009 Mar 1;69(5):2108-16. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3495. Epub
2009 Feb 24.

RGS17, an overexpressed gene in human lung and prostate cancer, induces tumor
cell proliferation through the cyclic AMP-PKA-CREB pathway.

James MA(1), Lu Y, Liu Y, Vikis HG, You M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

We have identified RGS17 as a commonly induced gene in lung and prostate tumors. 
Through microarray and gene expression analysis, we show that expression of RGS17
is up-regulated in 80% of lung tumors, and also up-regulated in prostate tumors. 
Through knockdown and overexpression of RGS17 in tumor cells, we show that RGS17 
confers a proliferative phenotype and is required for the maintenance of the
proliferative potential of tumor cells. We show through exon microarray,
transcript analysis, and functional assays that RGS17 promotes cyclic AMP
(cAMP)-responsive element binding protein (CREB)-responsive gene expression,
increases cAMP levels, and enhances forskolin-mediated cAMP production.
Furthermore, inhibition of cAMP-dependent kinase prevents tumor cell
proliferation, and proliferation is partially rescued by RGS17 overexpression. In
the present study, we show a role for RGS17 in the maintenance of tumor cell
proliferation through induction of cAMP signaling and CREB phosphorylation. The
prevalence of the induction of RGS17 in tumor tissues of various types further
implicates its importance in the maintenance of tumor growth.

PMCID: PMC2746047
PMID: 19244110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Apr 17;381(4):537-43. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.02.077. Epub 2009 Feb 20.

Identification and characterization of an alternative promoter of the human
PGC-1alpha gene.

Yoshioka T(1), Inagaki K, Noguchi T, Sakai M, Ogawa W, Hosooka T, Iguchi H,
Watanabe E, Matsuki Y, Hiramatsu R, Kasuga M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Chuo-ku, Japan.

The transcriptional regulator peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma
coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha) controls mitochondrial biogenesis and energy
homeostasis. Although physical exercise induces PGC-1alpha expression in muscle, 
the underlying mechanism of this effect has remained incompletely understood. We 
recently identified a novel muscle-enriched isoform of PGC-1alpha transcript
(designated PGC-1alpha-b) that is derived from a previously unidentified first
exon. We have now cloned and characterized the human PGC-1alpha-b promoter. The
muscle-specific transcription factors MyoD and MRF4 transactivated this promoter 
through interaction with a proximal E-box motif. Furthermore, either forced
expression of Ca(2+)- and calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV (CaMKIV),
calcineurin A, or the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK) kinase MKK6
or the intracellular accumulation of cAMP activated the PGC-1alpha-b promoter in 
cultured myoblasts through recruitment of cAMP response element (CRE)-binding
protein (CREB) to a putative CRE located downstream of the E-box. Our results
thus reveal a potential molecular basis for isoform-specific regulation of
PGC-1alpha expression in contracting muscle.

PMID: 19233136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Cancer Res. 2009 Mar 1;69(5):1867-76. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1982. Epub
2009 Feb 17.

The beta-catenin axis integrates multiple signals downstream from RET/papillary
thyroid carcinoma leading to cell proliferation.

Castellone MD(1), De Falco V, Rao DM, Bellelli R, Muthu M, Basolo F, Fusco A,
Gutkind JS, Santoro M.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale G. Salvatore, Consiglio
Nazionale delle Ricerche, c/o Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e
Molecolare L. Califano, Universita Federico II, Naples, Italy.

RET/papillary thyroid carcinoma (RET/PTC) oncoproteins result from the in-frame
fusion of the RET receptor tyrosine kinase domain with protein dimerization
motifs encoded by heterologous genes. Here, we show that RET/PTC stimulates the
beta-catenin pathway. By stimulating PI3K/AKT and Ras/extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK), RET/PTC promotes glycogen synthase kinase 3beta
(GSK3beta) phosphorylation, thereby reducing GSK3beta-mediated NH(2)-terminal
beta-catenin (Ser33/Ser37/Thr41) phosphorylation. In addition, RET/PTC physically
interacts with beta-catenin and increases its phosphotyrosine content. The
increased free pool of S/T(nonphospho)/Y(phospho)beta-catenin is stabilized as a 
result of the reduced binding affinity for the Axin/GSK3beta complex and
activates the transcription factor T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor.
Moreover, through the ERK pathway, RET/PTC stimulates cyclic AMP-responsive
element binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation and promotes the formation of a
beta-catenin-CREB-CREB-binding protein/p300 transcriptional complex.
Transcriptional complexes containing beta-catenin are recruited to the cyclin D1 
promoter and a cyclin D1 gene promoter reporter is active in RET/PTC-expressing
cells. Silencing of beta-catenin by small interfering RNA inhibits proliferation 
of RET/PTC-transformed PC Cl3 thyrocytes, whereas a constitutively active form of
beta-catenin stimulates autonomous proliferation of thyroid cells. Thus, multiple
signaling events downstream from RET/PTC converge on beta-catenin to stimulate
cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2746012
PMID: 19223551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2009 Jul;34(8):1993-2001. doi: 10.1038/npp.2009.11. Epub
2009 Feb 11.

Nucleus accumbens CREB activity is necessary for nicotine conditioned place
preference.

Brunzell DH(1), Mineur YS, Neve RL, Picciotto MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
USA.

The ability of nicotine to alter firing of dopamine neurons is the first step
leading to nicotine reward, but activation of intracellular signaling pathways
downstream of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors is likely to be critical for
longer-term consequences of nicotine exposure, including conditioned reward. The 
transcription factor cyclic AMP-response element binding protein (CREB) is
important for new gene transcription and in its phosphorylated form (pCREB)
promotes long-term changes in synaptic strength. Previous studies have implicated
nucleus accumbens (NAc) CREB activity in the modulation of cocaine and morphine
reward, and have shown that nicotine conditioned place preference (CPP) is
associated with NAc CREB activation. It is not clear whether CPP elicits
phosphorylation of CREB or if elevations in pCREB support nicotine CPP. In the
current study, we investigated levels of CREB and pCREB during Pavlovian
conditioning with nicotine in a novel context in the absence of chamber choice.
Nicotine context conditioning resulted in elevated pCREB levels in the NAc shell 
but not the NAc core of mice following placement in the nicotine-paired chamber
in the absence of nicotine. To test if CREB activity in the NAc shell contributes
to cue-induced responses that may precipitate nicotine-seeking, we used
viral-mediated gene transfer of a dominant-negative CREB construct in the NAc
shell of C57BL/6J mice and found that disruption of CREB activation before
training blocked nicotine place preference across a range of doses. Taken
together, these studies identify the NAc shell as a brain region where CREB
activity is essential for nicotine CPP.

PMCID: PMC2709692
PMID: 19212318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Immunol. 2009 Feb 15;182(4):2349-56. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0713637.

CREB mediates prostaglandin F2alpha-induced MUC5AC overexpression.

Chung WC(1), Ryu SH, Sun H, Zeldin DC, Koo JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas
M D Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Mucus secretion is an important protective mechanism for the luminal lining of
open tubular organs, but mucin overproduction in the respiratory tract can
exacerbate the inflammatory process and cause airway obstruction. Production of
MUC5AC, a predominant gel-forming mucin secreted by airway epithelia, can be
induced by various inflammatory mediators such as prostaglandins. The two major
prostaglandins involved in inflammation are PGE(2) and PGF(2alpha).
PGE(2)-induced mucin production has been well studied, but the effect of
PGF(2alpha) on mucin production remains poorly understood. To elucidate the
effect and underlying mechanism of PGF(2alpha) on MUC5AC production, we
investigated the signal transduction of PGF(2alpha) associated with this effect
using normal human tracheobronchial epithelial cells. Our results demonstrated
that PGF(2alpha) induces MUC5AC overproduction via a signaling cascade involving 
protein kinase C, ERK, p90 ribosomal S6 protein kinase, and CREB. The regulation 
of PGF(2alpha)-induced MUC5AC expression by CREB was further confirmed by cAMP
response element-dependent MUC5AC promoter activity and by interaction between
CREB and MUC5AC promoter. The abrogation of all downstream signaling activities
via suppression of each signaling molecule along the pathway indicates that a
single pathway from PGF(2alpha) receptor to CREB is responsible for inducing
MUC5AC overproduction. As CREB also mediates mucin overproduction induced by
PGE(2) and other inflammatory mediators, our findings have important clinical
implications for the management of airway mucus hypersecretion.

PMCID: PMC2756474
PMID: 19201889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Infect Dis. 2009 Mar 1;199(5):661-5. doi: 10.1086/596742.

IFN-gamma production during active tuberculosis is regulated by mechanisms that
involve IL-17, SLAM, and CREB.

Pasquinelli V(1), Townsend JC, Jurado JO, Alvarez IB, Quiroga MF, Barnes PF,
Samten B, García VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Sciences, University of Buenos
Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) is crucial for protection against Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, and the transcription factor cAMP response element binding protein 
(CREB) increases IFN-gamma transcription. We determined whether the transmembrane
receptor signaling lymphocyte activation molecule (SLAM) and interleukin-17
(IL-17) affect CREB phosphorylation and IFN-gamma production in persons with
tuberculosis. When T cells from patients with tuberculosis were activated with M.
tuberculosis, 80% of SLAM(+) T cells expressed phosphorylated CREB, and SLAM
activation increased CREB phosphorylation and IFN-gamma production. In contrast, 
IL-17 down-regulated SLAM expression, CREB phosphorylation, and IFN-gamma
production. Therefore, IL-17 and SLAM have opposing effects on IFN-gamma
production through CREB activation in persons with tuberculosis.

PMID: 19199539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2009 Dec 5;150B(8):1128-32. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.30935.

Association study of CREB1 with Major Depressive Disorder and related phenotypes.

Hettema JM(1), An SS, van den Oord EJ, Neale MC, Kendler KS, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Virginia Institute for Psychiatric and Behavioral
Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, 23298-0126, USA.
jhettema@vcu.edu

Cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CREB) has been implicated in
behavioral models of anxiety and depression, antidepressant response in humans,
and suicide. One group reported a female-specific association of the CREB1 gene
in early-onset Major Depressive Disorder (MDD), while another found no evidence
of association with this phenotype. In this study, we sought to examine the
evidence for association of the CREB1 gene to MDD and related phenotypes. We used
multivariate structural equation modeling to identify and select twin pairs that 
scored at the extremes of a latent genetic risk factor shared by MDD,
neuroticism, and several anxiety disorders from the Virginia Twin Registry. Using
one member from each of these pairs, the resulting sample of 589 cases (including
473 subjects with lifetime MDD) and 539 controls were entered into a 2-stage
association study in which genetic markers were screened in stage 1, the positive
results of which were tested for replication in stage 2. Eight SNP markers
selected to capture the major allelic variation across the haplotype block
containing CREB1 were analyzed for differences between cases and controls.
Several markers showed criterion differences between cases and controls in the
stage 1 sample with some evidence of sex specific effects. However, none of these
markers were significant in stage 2 in either sex individually or combined. Our
data suggests that common variations in the CREB1 gene do not appear to increase 
susceptibility for MDD or related phenotypes.

2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2844886
PMID: 19194961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Genes Brain Behav. 2009 Apr;8(3):320-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2009.00474.x.
Epub 2008 Jan 12.

RNA interference in hippocampus demonstrates opposing roles for CREB and PP1alpha
in contextual and temporal long-term memory.

Peters M(1), Bletsch M, Catapano R, Zhang X, Tully T, Bourtchouladze R.

Author information: 
(1)Helicon Therapeutics Inc., San Diego, CA, USA.

We injected small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) directly into the hippocampus of
wild-type mice, knocking down expression of cyclic AMP responsive element-binding
protein (CREB) and disrupting long-term, but not short-term, memory after both
contextual and trace fear conditioning. In contrast, similar knockdown of siRNA
for protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) was sufficient to enhance contextual and temporal
memory formation, thereby demonstrating with such a gain-of-function effect a
lack of any general deleterious effect for this method of RNAi-mediated gene
knockdown. Our findings clearly confirm that contextual memory formation involves
CREB and PP1 as positive and negative regulators, respectively, and show for the 
first time that temporal memory formation shares this mechanism. More generally, 
we establish that direct injection of siRNA into identified adult brain regions
yields specific gene knockdowns, which can be used to validate in vivo candidate 
genes involved in behavioral plasticity.

PMID: 19191880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar 20;284(12):8033-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808466200. Epub 2009 
Jan 21.

TORC2, a coactivator of cAMP-response element-binding protein, promotes
Epstein-Barr virus reactivation from latency through interaction with viral BZLF1
protein.

Murata T(1), Sato Y, Nakayama S, Kudoh A, Iwahori S, Isomura H, Tajima M, Hishiki
T, Ohshima T, Hijikata M, Shimotohno K, Tsurumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1, Kanokoden, 
Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8681, Japan.

Reactivation of the Epstein-Barr virus from latency is dependent on expression of
the viral BZLF1 protein. The BZLF1 promoter (Zp) normally exhibits only low basal
activity but is activated in response to chemical inducers such as
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate and calcium ionophore. We found here that
Transducer of Regulated cAMP-response Element-binding Protein (CREB) (TORC) 2
enhances Zp activity 10-fold and more than 100-fold with co-expression of the
BZLF1 protein. Mutational analysis of Zp revealed that the activation by TORC is 
dependent on ZII and ZIII cis elements, binding sites for CREB family
transcriptional factors and the BZLF1 protein, respectively. Immunoprecipitation,
chromatin immunoprecipitation, and reporter assay using Gal4-luc and Gal4BD-BZLF1
fusion protein indicate that TORC2 interacts with BZLF1, and that the complex is 
efficiently recruited onto Zp. These observations clearly indicate that TORC2
activates the promoter through interaction with the BZLF1 protein as well as CREB
family transcriptional factors. Induction of the lytic replication resulted in
the translocation of TORC2 from cytoplasm to viral replication compartments in
nuclei, and furthermore, activation of Zp by TORC2 was augmented by
calcium-regulated phosphatase, calcineurin. Silencing of endogenous TORC2 gene
expression by RNA interference decreased the levels of the BZLF1 protein in
response to 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate/ionophore. Based on these
results, we conclude that Epstein-Barr virus exploits the calcineurin-TORC
signaling pathway through interactions between TORC and the BZLF1 protein in
reactivation from latency.

PMCID: PMC2658097
PMID: 19164291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Brain Res. 2009 May 7;1269:68-89. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.11.105. Epub 2008 
Dec 29.

Neuromodulatory property of standardized extract Ginkgo biloba L. (EGb 761) on
memory: behavioral and molecular evidence.

Oliveira DR(1), Sanada PF, Saragossa Filho AC, Innocenti LR, Oler G, Cerutti JM, 
Cerutti SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Federal University of Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.

Although it has been suggested that the standardized Ginkgo biloba leaf extract
(Egb 761) may have a beneficial effect on memory, the cellular and molecular
changes that underlie this process are not yet well defined. The present study
evaluated the effects of acute (one dose) or subacute treatments (one daily
dose/seven days) with EGb 761 (0.5 g kg(-1) and 1.0 g kg(-1)) on rats submitted
to a conditioned emotional response (CER) in comparison with positive (4 mg
kg(-1) Diazepam) and negative (12%Tween 80) control groups. To this end, eighty
(n=10/group) adult, male, Wistar rats (+/-250-300 g) were used in an off-baseline
CER procedure. We here observed that the rats submitted to an acute and subacute 
EGb 761 treatments had acquisition of fear conditioning. Additionally, we
investigate if the expression of genes previously associated with classical
conditioning (CREB-1 and GAP-43) and new candidate genes (GFAP) are modulated
following EGb 761 acute treatment. CREB-1, GAP-43 and GFAP mRNA and protein
expressions were evaluated using both quantitative PCR (qPCR) and
immunohistochemical analysis, respectively. We here show, for the first time,
that EGb 761 modulated GAP-43, CREB-1 and GFAP expression in the prefrontal
cortex, amygdala and hippocampus. We observed an underexpression of GAP-43 in all
structures evaluated and over-expression of GFAP in the amygdala and hippocampus 
following acute G. biloba treatment when compared to control group (Tween;
p<0.01). GAP-43 expression was decreased in prefrontal cortex and hippocampus in 
the subacute treatment with EGb 761. Subacute treatment with EGb 761 lead to a
decreased CREB-1 in mPFC (p<0.001) and increased in the hippocampus to 1.0 g
kg(-1)G. biloba group (p<0.001). The results obtained from immunohistochemical
analysis support our aforementioned findings and revealed that the changes in
expression occurred within specific regions in the areas evaluated. All together,
our findings not only provide new evidence for a role of EGb 761 on memory but
also identify molecular changes that underlie the fear memory consolidation.

PMID: 19146837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Neurosci. 2009 Jan 14;29(2):328-33. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5252-08.2009.

The CREB/CREM transcription factors negatively regulate early synaptogenesis and 
spontaneous network activity.

Aguado F(1), Díaz-Ruiz C, Parlato R, Martínez A, Carmona MA, Bleckmann S, Ureña
JM, Burgaya F, del Río JA, Schütz G, Soriano E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red para
Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas, Institute for Research in Biomedicine,
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    J Neurosci. 2009 May 20;29(20):6389-91.

The family of CREB (cAMP response element-binding protein) transcription factors 
are involved in a variety of biological processes including the development and
plasticity of the nervous system. In the maturing and adult brain, CREB genes are
required for activity-dependent processes, including synaptogenesis, refinement
of connections and long-term potentiation. Here, we use CREB1(Nescre)CREM(-/-)
(cAMP-responsive element modulator) mutants to investigate the role of these
genes in stimulus-independent patterns of neural activity at early stages. We
show that lack of CREB/CREM genes specifically in neural tissue leads to
increased synaptogenesis and to a dramatic increase in the levels of spontaneous 
network activity at embryonic stages. Thus, the functions of CREB/CREM genes in
neural activity differ in distinct periods of neural development.

PMID: 19144833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Mar 1;106(4):618-25. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22039.

Parathyroid hormone regulation of the human bone sialoprotein gene transcription 
is mediated through two cAMP response elements.

Araki S(1), Mezawa M, Sasaki Y, Yang L, Li Z, Takai H, Nakayama Y, Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Chiba, Japan.

Parathyroid hormone (PTH) regulates serum calcium and inorganic phosphate levels 
through its actions on kidney and bone. Bone sialoprotein (BSP) is an early
marker of osteoblast differentiation and bone metabolism. We here report that two
cAMP response elements (CRE) in the human BSP gene promoter are target of PTH. In
human osteoblast-like Saos2 cells, PTH (human 1-34 PTH, 10 nM) increased BSP mRNA
and protein levels at 3 h. From transient transfection assays, 2- to 2.5-fold
increase in transcription by PTH was observed at 3 and 6 h in -184, -211, -428,
-868, and -927 luciferase constructs that included the human BSP gene promoter.
Effect of PTH was abrogated by 2 bp mutations in either the CRE1 (-79 to -72) or 
CRE2 (-674 to -667). Luciferase activities induced by PTH were blocked by protein
kinase A inhibitor H89 and tyrosine kinase inhibitor herbimycin A. Gel shift
analyses showed that PTH increased binding of nuclear proteins to the CRE1 and
CRE2 elements. The CRE1-protein and CRE2-protein complexes were disrupted by CRE 
binding protein 1 (CREB1) antibodies and supershifted by phospho-CREB1 antibody. 
ChIP assays detected binding of CREB1 and phospho-CREB1 to a chromatin fragment
containing CRE1 and CRE2, and increased binding of phospho-CREB1 to the both
sites. These studies demonstrate that PTH stimulates human BSP gene transcription
by targeting the two CREs in the promoter of the human BSP gene.

PMID: 19127545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Arch Dermatol Res. 2009 Mar;301(3):253-8. doi: 10.1007/s00403-008-0924-4. Epub
2009 Jan 3.

6-Benzylaminopurine stimulates melanogenesis via cAMP-independent activation of
protein kinase A.

Kim S(1), Lee J, Jung E, Lee J, Huh S, Hwang H, Kim Y, Park D.

Author information: 
(1)Biospectrum Life Science Institute, 101-701 SK Ventium, 522 Dangjung Dong,
Gunpo City, Gyunggi Do, Republic of Korea.

Melanogenesis is a physiological process that results in the synthesis of melanin
pigments, which play a crucial protective role against skin photocarcinogenesis. 
The present study was designed to determine the effects of 6-benzylaminopurine
(6-BAP) on melanogenesis and elucidate the molecular events of melanogenesis
induced by 6-BAP. To elucidate the pigmenting effect of 6-BAP and its mechanism, 
several experiments were performed in B16 melanoma cells. Melanin content,
tyrosinase activity, cAMP production, and Western blots for proteins which are
involved in melanogenesis were introduced in this study. Melanin content and
tyrosinase activity increased in response to treatment with 6-BAP in a
concentration-dependent manner. The tyrosinase, TRP-1, TRP-2 and MITF protein
levels were found to increase significantly in response to 6-BAP in a
time-dependent manner. In addition, Western blot analysis revealed that 6-BAP
increased the phosphorylated level of CRE-binding protein. The increased melanin 
synthesis that was induced by treatment with 6-BAP treatment was reduced
significantly in response to co-treatment with H-89 [a protein kinase A (PKA)
inhibitor], whereas co-treatment with SB203580 (a p38 MAPK inhibitor) and
Ro-32-0432 (a PKC inhibitor) did not attenuate the increase in melanin content
levels that was induced by 6-BAP. In a cAMP production assay, 6-BAP did not
increase the intracellular cAMP level. These findings suggest that 6-BAP
activates PKA via a cAMP-independent pathway and subsequently stimulates
melanogenesis by up-regulating MITF and tyrosinase expression.

PMID: 19123006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Seishin Shinkeigaku Zasshi. 2009;111(12):1540-5.

[Molecular biological approach to understanding mental disorders].

[Article in Japanese]

Ueno S.

PMID: 20344866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Microbes Infect. 2009 Feb;11(2):302-10. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2008.12.005. Epub
2008 Dec 16.

Salmonella enterica Typhimurium SipA induces CXC-chemokine expression through
p38MAPK and JUN pathways.

Figueiredo JF(1), Lawhon SD, Gokulan K, Khare S, Raffatellu M, Tsolis RM, Bäumler
AJ, McCormick BA, Adams LG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-4467, USA.

The role of Salmonella typhimurium type III secretion system
(T3SS-1)-translocated proteins in chemokines' expression and protein
phosphorylation was investigated in HeLa cells. Infection of HeLa cells with S.
typhimurium activated IL-8 and GRO-alpha expression at higher levels than
infection with a S. typhimurium sipAsopABDE2 mutant, confirming that
T3SS-1-secreted proteins are required to fully induce chemokine expression in
HeLa cells. A S. typhimurium sipAsopABDE2 mutant complemented with sipA or a
strain carrying a chromosomal copy of sipA (sopABDE2 mutant) activated chemokines
at significantly higher levels than a S. typhimurium sipAsopABDE2 mutant.
However, extracellular addition of recombinant SipA failed to induce IL-8
expression. Phosphorylation analyses revealed that S. typhimurium induced a
twofold increase in the phosphorylation of B23, CREB1, ERK1, JUN, p38MAPK, and
NR1. JUN and p38MAPK were phosphorylated by S. typhimurium carrying a chromosomal
copy of sipA (sopABDE2 mutant) while none was more than twofold phosphorylated in
cells infected with the S. typhimurium sipAsopABDE2 mutant. Treating cells with
JUN and p38MAPK inhibitors significantly decreased IL-8 expression in sopABDE2
mutant infected cells. These data indicate that S. typhimurium SipA induces
expression of CXC chemokines through phosphorylation of IL-8-transcription
regulatory proteins, JUN and p38MAK.

PMID: 19114119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Bone Miner Res. 2009 May;24(5):826-36. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.081236.

SOX9 directly binds CREB as a novel synergism with the PKA pathway in
BMP-2-induced osteochondrogenic differentiation.

Zhao L(1), Li G, Zhou GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Center for Cancer Research and Cell
Biology, School of Biomedical Sciences, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast,
United Kingdom.

SOX9 acts as a master transcription factor in osteochondrogenesis, and the
phosphorylation by protein kinase A (PKA) has been shown to increase its DNA
binding and transactivation activity. The PKA pathway is involved in the complex 
downstream signaling underlying the BMP-2-mediated osteochondrogenesis. This
study therefore aimed at further analyzing the possible cross-talk between the
SOX9 and the PKA regulation on the background of BMP-2 stimulation. It was first 
shown that the removal of the residues serine 64 and 211 of SOX9 diminished, but 
did not completely deplete, its stimulatory effect on the expression of both
osteo- and chondrogenic markers. PKA activators and inhibitors increased and
decreased the action of wildtype and mutated SOX9, respectively. Interestingly,
the interplay of the SOX9 action with the PKA pathway was further shown to occur 
through direct physical association between SOX9 and CREB, a prototypical PKA
downstream transcription factor. Moreover, the binding was shown to be an active 
biological event happening on BMP-2 stimulation. The C-terminal domain of SOX9
and amino acid residue serine at position 133 of CREB were identified to be
involved in the interaction. The action of SOX9 was enhanced by overexpressing
CREB. These results suggest that PKA signaling synergizes with SOX9 at the
nuclear and cytoplasmic levels to promote BMP-2-induced osteochondrogenic
differentiation.

PMID: 19113914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Curr Biol. 2009 Jan 13;19(1):54-60. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2008.11.056. Epub 2008 Dec
24.

Lack of DREAM protein enhances learning and memory and slows brain aging.

Fontán-Lozano A(1), Romero-Granados R, del-Pozo-Martín Y, Suárez-Pereira I,
Delgado-García JM, Penninger JM, Carrión AM.

Author information: 
(1)División de Neurociencias, Universidad Pablo de Olavide de Sevilla, Carretera 
de Utrera Km. 1, 41013-Sevilla, Spain.

Erratum in
    Curr Biol. 2009 Aug 11;19(15):1332.

Memory deficits in aging affect millions of people and are often disturbing to
those concerned. Dissection of the molecular control of learning and memory is
paramount to understand and possibly enhance cognitive functions. Old-age memory 
loss also has been recently linked to altered Ca(2+) homeostasis. We have
previously identified DREAM (downstream regulatory element antagonistic
modulator), a member of the neuronal Ca(2+) sensor superfamily of EF-hand
proteins, with specific roles in different cell compartments. In the nucleus,
DREAM is a Ca(2+)-dependent transcriptional repressor, binding to specific DNA
signatures, or interacting with nucleoproteins regulating their transcriptional
properties. Also, we and others have shown that dream mutant (dream(-/-)) mice
exhibit marked analgesia. Here we report that dream(-/-) mice exhibit markedly
enhanced learning and synaptic plasticity related to improved cognition.
Mechanistically, DREAM functions as a negative regulator of the key memory factor
CREB in a Ca(2+)-dependent manner, and loss of DREAM facilitates CREB-dependent
transcription during learning. Intriguingly, 18-month-old dream(-/-) mice display
learning and memory capacities similar to young mice. Moreover, loss of DREAM
protects from brain degeneration in aging. These data identify the
Ca(2+)-regulated "pain gene" DREAM as a novel key regulator of memory and brain
aging.

PMID: 19110430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar 20;284(12):8054-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805384200. Epub 2008 
Dec 23.

Platelet-derived growth factor selectively inhibits NR2B-containing
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors in CA1 hippocampal neurons.

Beazely MA(1), Lim A, Li H, Trepanier C, Chen X, Sidhu B, Macdonald JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8,
Canada.

Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) beta receptor activation inhibits
N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)-evoked currents in hippocampal and cortical neurons
via the activation of phospholipase Cgamma, PKC, the release of intracellular
calcium, and a rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton. In the hippocampus, the
majority of NMDA receptors are heteromeric; most are composed of 2 NR1 subunits
and 2 NR2A or 2 NR2B subunits. Using NR2B- and NR2A-specific antagonists, we
demonstrate that PDGF-BB treatment preferentially inhibits NR2B-containing NMDA
receptor currents in CA1 hippocampal neurons and enhances long-term depression in
an NR2B subunit-dependent manner. Furthermore, treatment of hippocampal slices or
cultures with PDGF-BB decreases the surface localization of NR2B but not of NR2A 
subunits. PDGFbeta receptors colocalize to a higher degree with NR2B subunits
than with NR2A subunits. After neuronal injury, PDGFbeta receptors and PDGF-BB
are up-regulated and PDGFbeta receptor activation is neuroprotective against
glutamate-induced neuronal damage in cultured neurons. We demonstrate that the
neuroprotective effects of PDGF-BB are occluded by the NR2B antagonist,
Ro25-6981, and that PDGF-BB promotes NMDA signaling to CREB and ERK1/2. We
conclude that PDGFbetaR signaling, by preferentially targeting NR2B receptors,
provides an important mechanism for neuroprotection by growth factors in the
central nervous system.

PMCID: PMC2658099
PMID: 19106110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Genes Brain Behav. 2009 Apr;8(3):257-66. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2008.00468.x.
Epub 2008 Dec 11.

Localized low-level re-expression of high-affinity mesolimbic nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors restores nicotine-induced locomotion but not place
conditioning.

Mineur YS(1), Brunzell DH, Grady SR, Lindstrom JM, McIntosh JM, Marks MJ, King
SL, Picciotto MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06515, USA.

High-affinity, beta2-subunit-containing (beta2*) nicotinic acetylcholine
receptors (nAChRs) are essential for nicotine reinforcement; however, these
nAChRs are found on both gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and dopaminergic (DA)
neurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and also on terminals of
glutamatergic and cholinergic neurons projecting from the pedunculopontine
tegmental area and the laterodorsal tegmental nucleus. Thus, systemic nicotine
administration stimulates many different neuronal subtypes in various brain
nuclei. To identify neurons in which nAChRs must be expressed to mediate effects 
of systemic nicotine, we investigated responses in mice with low-level, localized
expression of beta2* nAChRs in the midbrain/VTA. Nicotine-induced GABA and DA
release were partially rescued in striatal synaptosomes from transgenic mice
compared with tissue from beta2 knockout mice. Nicotine-induced locomotor
activation, but not place preference, was rescued in mice with low-level VTA
expression, suggesting that low-level expression of beta2* nAChRs in DA neurons
is not sufficient to support nicotine reward. In contrast to control mice,
transgenic mice with low-level beta2* nAChR expression in the VTA showed no
increase in overall levels of cyclic AMP response element-binding protein (CREB) 
but did show an increase in CREB phosphorylation in response to exposure to a
nicotine-paired chamber. Thus, CREB activation in the absence of regulation of
total CREB levels during place preference testing was not sufficient to support
nicotine place preference in beta2 trangenic mice. This suggests that partial
activation of high-affinity nAChRs in VTA might block the rewarding effects of
nicotine, providing a potential mechanism for the ability of nicotinic partial
agonists to aid in smoking cessation.

PMCID: PMC2672109
PMID: 19077117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Biol Chem. 2009 Feb 13;284(7):4332-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807595200. Epub 2008
Dec 11.

beta-Arrestin 1 is required for PAC1 receptor-mediated potentiation of
long-lasting ERK1/2 activation by glucose in pancreatic beta-cells.

Broca C(1), Quoyer J, Costes S, Linck N, Varrault A, Deffayet PM, Bockaert J,
Dalle S, Bertrand G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle, CNRS, Unité Mixte de Recherche 5203,
INSERM, U661, Université Montpellier I, and Université Montpellier II, 34094
Montpellier Cedex 5, France.

In pancreatic beta-cells, the pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide 
(PACAP) exerts a potent insulin secretory effect via PAC(1) and VPAC receptors
(Rs) through the Galpha(s)/cAMP/protein kinase A pathway. Here, we investigated
the mechanisms linking PAC(1)R to ERK1/2 activation in INS-1E beta-cells and
pancreatic islets. PACAP caused a transient (5 min) increase in ERK1/2
phosphorylation via PAC(1)Rs and promoted nuclear translocation of a fraction of 
cytosolic p-ERK1/2. Both protein kinase A- and Src-dependent pathways mediated
this transient ERK1/2 activation. Moreover, PACAP potentiated glucose-induced
long-lasting ERK1/2 activation. Blocking Ca(2+) influx abolished glucose-induced 
ERK1/2 activation and PACAP potentiating effect. Glucose stimulation during KCl
depolarization showed that, in addition to the triggering signal (rise in
cytosolic [Ca(2+)]), the amplifying pathway was also involved in glucose-induced 
sustained ERK1/2 activation and was required for PACAP potentiation. The finding 
that at 30 min glucose-induced p-ERK1/2 was detected in both cytosol and nucleus 
while the potentiating effect of PACAP was only observed in the cytosol,
suggested the involvement of the scaffold protein beta-arrestin. Indeed,
beta-arrestin 1 (beta-arr1) depletion (in beta-arr1 knockout mouse islets or in
INS-1E cells by siRNA) completely abolished PACAP potentiation of long-lasting
ERK1/2 activation by glucose. Finally, PACAP potentiated glucose-induced CREB
transcriptional activity and IRS-2 mRNA expression mainly via the ERK1/2
signaling pathway, and likewise, beta-arr1 depletion reduced the PACAP
potentiating effect on IRS-2 expression. These results establish for the first
time that PACAP potentiates glucose-induced long-lasting ERK1/2 activation via a 
beta-arr1-dependent pathway and thus provide new insights concerning the
mechanisms of PACAP and glucose actions in pancreatic beta-cells.

PMID: 19074139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Jan 30;379(1):1-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.11.135. Epub 2008 Dec 12.

Inactivation of CREB mediated gene transcription by HDAC8 bound protein
phosphatase.

Gao J(1), Siddoway B, Huang Q, Xia H.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Center, LSU Health Science Center, 2020 Gravier Street, Suite D, 
New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

CREB activation via phosphorylation at serine 133 and resulting CREB mediated
gene expression is a critical event which can have a significant effect on many
cellular processes, including cell survival and plasticity. CREB can be activated
by many kinases, for example, it can be phosphorylated by PKA, MAPK, and CaMKIV. 
The various signaling pathways leading to CREB activation have been extensively
studied. On the other hand, CREB is inactivated by PP1 through dephosphorylation 
at S133 and not much attention has been paid to this aspect of the signaling
pathway. It was shown recently that PP1 can be targeted to CREB, for efficient
dephosphorylation, through PP1 binding protein HDAC1. In this study, we found
that another class-I HDAC family protein, HDAC8, localized in the nucleus of
HEK293 cells and also bound to both CREB and PP1. Expression of recombinant HDAC8
results in decreased CREB activation and CREB mediated gene transcription in
response to forskolin application. Our study thus elucidated that more than one
class-I HDAC family members can regulate the duration of CREB mediated gene
transcription.

PMID: 19070599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2008 Dec;21(6):653-64. doi:
10.1111/j.1755-148X.2008.00503.x.

NDRG2 gene expression in B16F10 melanoma cells restrains melanogenesis via
inhibition of Mitf expression.

Kim A(1), Yang Y, Lee MS, Yoo YD, Lee HG, Lim JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and the Research Center for Women's Diseases,
Sookmyung Women's University, Seoul, Korea.

NDRG2 (N-myc downstream-regulated gene 2) is a candidate tumor suppressor
implicated in control of glioblastoma proliferation and dendritic cell
differentiation. The microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (Mitf) plays 
a crucial role in the melanocyte lineage and in melanoma by controlling survival,
differentiation, cell cycle entry and exit, and melanoma metastasis. Identifying 
upstream regulators of Mitf expression, therefore, remains a key issue. In this
study, we aimed to assess whether the candidate tumor suppressor NDRG2 can
modulate Mitf expression. Here, we show that NDRG2 acts to prevent cAMP and
beta-catenin-mediated activation of the Mitf promoter, thereby blocking
melanogenesis via the downstream Mitf target genes Tyrosinase, Tyrp1 and Dct. The
data suggest that NDRG2 impairs melanogenesis by interfering with both the
TCF/beta-catenin and cAMP/CREB pathways that are known to stimulate Mitf
expression in melanocytes and have major implications for the role of NDRG2 in
pigmentation and melanoma progression. Taken together, the results not only
identify NDRG2 as a novel regulator of pigmentation, but also potentially a key
factor in regulating melanoma progression via Mitf.

PMID: 19067970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. J Cell Biol. 2008 Dec 1;183(5):849-63. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200805048.

CaMKII locally encodes L-type channel activity to signal to nuclear CREB in
excitation-transcription coupling.

Wheeler DG(1), Barrett CF, Groth RD, Safa P, Tsien RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Republished in
    J Gen Physiol. 2009 Jan;133(1):i2.

Communication between cell surface proteins and the nucleus is integral to many
cellular adaptations. In the case of ion channels in excitable cells, the
dynamics of signaling to the nucleus are particularly important because the
natural stimulus, surface membrane depolarization, is rapidly pulsatile. To
better understand excitation-transcription coupling we characterized the
dependence of cAMP response element-binding protein phosphorylation, a critical
step in neuronal plasticity, on the level and duration of membrane
depolarization. We find that signaling strength is steeply dependent on
depolarization, with sensitivity far greater than hitherto recognized. In
contrast, graded blockade of the Ca(2+) channel pore has a remarkably mild
effect, although some Ca(2+) entry is absolutely required. Our data indicate that
Ca(2+)/CaM-dependent protein kinase II acting near the channel couples local
Ca(2+) rises to signal transduction, encoding the frequency of Ca(2+) channel
openings rather than integrated Ca(2+) flux-a form of digital logic.

PMCID: PMC2592819
PMID: 19047462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Feb;29(3):675-86. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01466-08. Epub 2008 Dec 1.

Hematopoietic protein tyrosine phosphatase mediates beta2-adrenergic
receptor-induced regulation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase in B
lymphocytes.

McAlees JW(1), Sanders VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio
43210, USA.

Stimulation of the beta(2)-adrenergic receptor (beta(2)AR) on a
CD40L/interleukin-4-activated B lymphocyte increases the level of immunoglobulin 
E (IgE) in a protein kinase A (PKA)- and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK)-dependent manner. However, the mechanism by which beta(2)AR stimulation
mediates the increase in the level of p38 MAPK activation has remained unclear.
Here we show that the beta(2)AR-induced increase in p38 MAPK activation occurred 
via a hematopoietic protein tyrosine phosphatase (HePTP)-mediated cross talk
between PKA and p38 MAPK. beta(2)AR agonists, cAMP-elevating agents, and PKA
inhibitors were used to show that beta(2)AR stimulation resulted in a
PKA-dependent increase in p38 MAPK phosphorylation. Pharmacological agents and
gene-deficient mice revealed that p38 MAPK phosphorylation was regulated by the
G-stimulatory (Gs)/cAMP/PKA pathway independently of the G-inhibitory or
beta-arrestin-2 pathways. Coimmunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis showed 
that HePTP was phosphorylated in a PKA-dependent manner, which inactivated HePTP 
and allowed for increased free p38 MAPK to be phosphorylated by the MAPK cascade 
that was activated by CD40L. HePTP short hairpin RNA confirmed that HePTP played 
a role in regulating the level of p38 MAPK phosphorylation in a B cell. Thus,
beta(2)AR stimulation on a B cell phosphorylates and inactivates HePTP in a
Gs/cAMP/PKA-dependent manner to release bound p38 MAPK, making more available for
phosphorylation and subsequent IgE regulation.

PMCID: PMC2630696
PMID: 19047375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Cancer Res. 2008 Dec 1;68(23):9663-70. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2229.

Ionizing radiation induces prostate cancer neuroendocrine differentiation through
interplay of CREB and ATF2: implications for disease progression.

Deng X(1), Liu H, Huang J, Cheng L, Keller ET, Parsons SJ, Hu CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology and the Purdue
Cancer Center, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA.

Radiation therapy is a first-line treatment for prostate cancer patients with
localized tumors. Although some patients respond well to the treatment,
approximately 10% of low-risk and up to 60% of high-risk prostate cancer patients
experience recurrent tumors. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying tumor
recurrence remain largely unknown. Here we show that fractionated ionizing
radiation (IR) induces differentiation of LNCaP prostate cancer cells into
neuroendocrine (NE)-like cells, which are known to be implicated in prostate
cancer progression, androgen-independent growth, and poor prognosis. Further
analyses revealed that two cyclic AMP-responsive element binding transcription
factors, cyclic AMP-response element binding protein (CREB) and activating
transcription factor 2 (ATF2), function as a transcriptional activator and a
repressor, respectively, of NE-like differentiation and that IR induces NE-like
differentiation by increasing the nuclear content of phospho-CREB and cytoplasmic
accumulation of ATF2. Consistent with this notion, stable expression of a
nonphosphorylatable CREB or a constitutively nuclear-localized ATF2 in LNCaP
cells inhibits IR-induced NE-like differentiation. IR-induced NE-like
morphologies are reversible, and three IR-resistant clones isolated from
dedifferentiated cells have acquired the ability to proliferate and lost the
NE-like cell properties. In addition, these three IR-resistant clones exhibit
differential responses to IR- and androgen depletion-induced NE-like
differentiation. However, they are all resistant to cell death induced by IR and 
the chemotherapeutic agent docetaxel and to androgen depletion-induced growth
inhibition. These results suggest that radiation therapy-induced NE-like
differentiation may represent a novel pathway by which prostate cancer cells
survive the treatment and contribute to tumor recurrence.

PMCID: PMC3100895
PMID: 19047143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Neuron. 2008 Nov 26;60(4):610-24. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.09.024.

A biological function for the neuronal activity-dependent component of Bdnf
transcription in the development of cortical inhibition.

Hong EJ(1), McCord AE, Greenberg ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, 220 Longwood Avenue,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2008 Nov 26;60(4):523-5.

Neuronal activity-regulated gene expression has been suggested to be an important
mediator of long-lasting, experience-dependent changes in the nervous system, but
the activity-dependent component of gene transcription has never been selectively
isolated and tested for its functional significance. Here, we demonstrate that
introduction of a subtle knockin mutation into the mouse Bdnf gene that blocks
the ability of the activity-regulated factor CREB to bind Bdnf promoter IV
results in an animal in which the sensory experience-dependent induction of Bdnf 
expression is disrupted in the cortex. Neurons from these animals form fewer
inhibitory synapses, have fewer spontaneous inhibitory quantal events, and
exhibit reduced expression of inhibitory presynaptic markers in the cortex. These
results indicate a specific requirement for activity-dependent Bdnf expression in
the development of inhibition in the cortex and demonstrate that the activation
of gene expression in response to experience-driven neuronal activity has
important biological consequences in the nervous system.

PMCID: PMC2873221
PMID: 19038219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Gene. 2009 Feb 15;431(1-2):39-46. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2008.10.015. Epub 2008 Nov 
5.

Transcriptional regulation of the major zinc uptake protein hZip1 in prostate
cancer cells.

Makhov P(1), Golovine K, Uzzo RG, Wuestefeld T, Scoll BJ, Kolenko VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA
19111, USA. petr.makhov@fccc.edu

hZip1 has been characterized as the major zinc uptake transporter regulating the 
accumulation of zinc in prostate cells. The mechanisms regulating expression of
hZip1 have not been described. To explore the mechanisms of transcriptional
regulation of the hZip1 gene, we determined the putative promoter sequence for
hZip1 and identified the potential transcription start site within the predicted 
hZip1 promoter region. To further characterize the promoter region for basal
hZip1 transcription, 3' and 5' deletion constructs and constructs with mutated
binding sites for putative transcription factors were generated by PCR
amplification and assessed for transcriptional activity with a luciferase
reporter assay in PC-3 prostate cancer cells. The ability of the specific
transcription factors to bind the hZip1 core promoter was confirmed by EMSA,
GelSupershift and ChIP assays. Our experiments identified the core promoter
region responsible for constitutive expression of hZip1 and demonstrated critical
roles for SP1 and CREB1 in transcriptional regulation of the hZip1 gene in
prostate cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2741159
PMID: 19026724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Nov 11;105(45):17549-54. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0803959105. Epub 2008 Nov 10.

Loss of the Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase type IV in dopaminoceptive
neurons enhances behavioral effects of cocaine.

Bilbao A(1), Parkitna JR, Engblom D, Perreau-Lenz S, Sanchis-Segura C, Schneider 
M, Konopka W, Westphal M, Breen G, Desrivieres S, Klugmann M, Guindalini C,
Vallada H, Laranjeira R, de Fonseca FR, Schumann G, Schütz G, Spanagel R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychopharmacology, Central Institute of Mental Health, J5,
68159 Mannheim, Germany.

The persistent nature of addiction has been associated with activity-induced
plasticity of neurons within the striatum and nucleus accumbens (NAc). To
identify the molecular processes leading to these adaptations, we performed
Cre/loxP-mediated genetic ablations of two key regulators of gene expression in
response to activity, the Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV (CaMKIV) 
and its postulated main target, the cAMP-responsive element binding protein
(CREB). We found that acute cocaine-induced gene expression in the striatum was
largely unaffected by the loss of CaMKIV. On the behavioral level, mice lacking
CaMKIV in dopaminoceptive neurons displayed increased sensitivity to cocaine as
evidenced by augmented expression of locomotor sensitization and enhanced
conditioned place preference and reinstatement after extinction. However, the
loss of CREB in the forebrain had no effect on either of these behaviors, even
though it robustly blunted acute cocaine-induced transcription. To test the
relevance of these observations for addiction in humans, we performed an
association study of CAMK4 and CREB promoter polymorphisms with cocaine addiction
in a large sample of addicts. We found that a single nucleotide polymorphism in
the CAMK4 promoter was significantly associated with cocaine addiction, whereas
variations in the CREB promoter regions did not correlate with drug abuse. These 
findings reveal a critical role for CaMKIV in the development and persistence of 
cocaine-induced behaviors, through mechanisms dissociated from acute effects on
gene expression and CREB-dependent transcription.

PMCID: PMC2582267
PMID: 19001277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Cell Physiol. 2009 Mar;218(3):490-500. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21622.

Evidence that leptin through STAT and CREB signaling enhances cyclin D1
expression and promotes human endometrial cancer proliferation.

Catalano S(1), Giordano C, Rizza P, Gu G, Barone I, Bonofiglio D, Giordano F,
Malivindi R, Gaccione D, Lanzino M, De Amicis F, Andò S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaco-Biology, University of Calabria, Arcavacata di Rende
(CS), Italy.

Obesity is a risk factor for endometrial cancer in pre- and post-menopausal
women. Leptin, an adipocyte-derived hormone, in addition to the control weight
homeostasis, is implicated in multiple biological actions. A recent study
demonstrated that leptin promotes endometrial cancer growth and invasiveness
through STAT/MAPK and Akt pathways, but the molecular mechanism involved in such 
processes still needs to be elucidated. In an attempt to understand the role of
leptin in regulating endometrial cancer cells proliferation, we have demonstrated
that leptin treatment reduced the numbers of cells in G0/G1-phase while increased
cell population in S-phase. This effect is associated with an up-regulation of
cyclin D1 together with a down-regulation of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
p21(WAF1/Cip1). Mutagenesis studies, eletrophoretic mobility shift, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that signal transducers and activators of
transcription 3 (STAT3) and cyclic AMP-responsive element (CRE) binding protein
motifs, within cyclin D1 promoter, were required for leptin-induced cyclin D1
expression in Ishikawa endometrial cancer cells. Silencing of STAT3 and CREB gene
expression by RNA interference reversed the up-regulatory effect of leptin on
cyclin D1 expression and cells proliferation. These results support the
hypothesis that STAT3 and CREB play an important role in leptin signaling pathway
that leads to the proliferation of Ishikawa cells, thus establishing a direct
association between obesity and endometrial tumorogenesis.

PMID: 18988190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Eur J Neurosci. 2008 Oct;28(8):1618-28. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06471.x.

Depression-like behaviour in neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM)-deficient mice 
and its reversal by an NCAM-derived peptide, FGL.

Aonurm-Helm A(1), Jurgenson M, Zharkovsky T, Sonn K, Berezin V, Bock E,
Zharkovsky A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Centre of Excellence for Translational Medicine,
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.

Comment in
    Eur J Neurosci. 2008 Oct;28(8):1617.

The neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) plays a pivotal role in brain
plasticity. Brain plasticity itself has a crucial role in the development of
depression. The aim of this study was to analyze whether NCAM-deficient
(NCAM(-/-)) mice exhibit depression-like behaviour and whether a peptide termed
FGL, derived from the NCAM binding site for the fibroblast growth factor (FGF)
receptor, is able to reverse the depression-like signs in NCAM(-/-) mice. Our
study showed that NCAM(-/-) mice demonstrated increased freezing time in the
tail-suspension test and reduced preference for sucrose consumption in the
sucrose preference test, reduced adult neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus and
reduced levels of the phosphorylated cAMP response element-binding protein
(pCREB) in the hippocampus. FGL administered acutely or repeatedly reduced
depression-like behaviour in NCAM(-/-) mice without having an effect on their
wild-type littermates. Repeated administration of FGL enhanced survival of the
newly born neurons in NCAM(-/-) mice and increased the levels of pCREB in both
NCAM(+/+) and NCAM(-/-) mice. In conclusion, our data demonstrate that NCAM
deficiency in mice results in a depression-like phenotype which can be reversed
by the acute or repeated administration of FGL. The results also suggest a role
of the deficit in NCAM signalling through the FGF receptor in depression.

PMID: 18973581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. PLoS One. 2008;3(10):e3564. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003564. Epub 2008 Oct 29.

Anthrax edema toxin modulates PKA- and CREB-dependent signaling in two phases.

Puhar A(1), Dal Molin F, Horvath S, Ladant D, Montecucco C.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche Sperimentali, Università di Padova, Padova,
Italy. andrea.puhar@pasteur.fr

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2008;3(11). doi:
10.1371/annotation/b72b80a6-ee81-49e6-a086-0292f6255d4f. Ladants, Daniel
[corrected to Ladant, Daniel].

BACKGROUND: Anthrax edema toxin (EdTx) is an adenylate cyclase which operates in 
the perinuclear region of host cells. However, the action of EdTx is poorly
understood, especially at molecular level. The ability of EdTx to modulate
cAMP-dependent signaling was studied in Jurkat T cells and was compared with that
of other cAMP-rising agents: Bordetella pertussis adenylate cyclase toxin,
cholera toxin and forskolin.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: EdTx caused a prolonged increase of the
intracellular cAMP concentration. This led to nuclear translocation of the
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) catalytic subunit, phosphorylation of cAMP
response element binding protein (CREB) and expression of a reporter gene under
control of the cAMP response element. Neither p90 ribosomal S6 kinase nor
mitogen- and stress-activated kinase, which mediate CREB phosphorylation during T
cell activation, were involved. The duration of phospho-CREB binding to chromatin
correlated with the spatio-temporal rise of cAMP levels. Strikingly, EdTx
pre-treated T cells were unresponsive to other stimuli involving CREB
phosphorylation such as addition of forskolin or T cell receptor cross-linking.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We concluded that, in a first intoxication phase, EdTx 
induces PKA-dependent signaling, which culminates in CREB phosphorylation and
activation of gene transcription. Subsequently CREB phosphorylation is impaired
and therefore T cells are not able to respond to cues involving CREB. The present
data functionally link the perinuclear localization of EdTx to its intoxication
mechanism, indicating that this is a specific feature of its intoxication
mechanism.

PMCID: PMC2569206
PMID: 18958164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Dec;36(21):6795-805. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn752. Epub 2008
Oct 25.

Positional distribution of human transcription factor binding sites.

Koudritsky M(1), Domany E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics of Complex Systems, Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot, Israel.

We developed a method for estimating the positional distribution of transcription
factor (TF) binding sites using ChIP-chip data, and applied it to recently
published experiments on binding sites of nine TFs: OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, HNF1A,
HNF4A, HNF6, FOXA2, USF1 and CREB1. The data were obtained from a genome-wide
coverage of promoter regions from 8-kb upstream of the transcription start site
(TSS) to 2-kb downstream. The number of target genes of each TF ranges from few
hundred to several thousand. We found that for each of the nine TFs the estimated
binding site distribution is closely approximated by a mixture of two components:
a narrow peak, localized within 300-bp upstream of the TSS, and a distribution of
almost uniform density within the tested region. Using Gene Ontology (GO) and
Enrichment analysis, we were able to associate (for each of the TFs studied) the 
target genes of both types of binding with known biological processes. Most GO
terms were enriched either among the proximal targets or among those with a
uniform distribution of binding sites. For example, the three stemness-related
TFs have several hundred target genes that belong to 'development' and
'morphogenesis' whose binding sites belong to the uniform distribution.

PMCID: PMC2588498
PMID: 18953043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Leukoc Biol. 2009 Jan;85(1):165-74. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0608383. Epub 2008 Nov 12.

Mechanisms of SHP-1 P2 promoter regulation in hematopoietic cells and its
silencing in HTLV-1-transformed T cells.

Nakase K(1), Cheng J, Zhu Q, Marasco WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Harvard Medical School, 44 Binney St., Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The Src homology-2-containing protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1 (SHP-1), is a
negative regulator of cell signaling. It is also considered a tumor suppressor
gene because of its ability to antagonize the action of tyrosine kinases.
Although SHP-1 is expressed strongly in hematopoietic cells, decreased expression
has been observed in various hematological malignancies, which suggests a central
involvement of SHP-1 in leukemogenesis. We have shown previously that human T
cell lymphotropic virus type-1 (HTLV-1) Tax-induced promoter silencing (TIPS) is 
an early event causing down-regulation of SHP-1 expression, which is dependent on
NF-kappaB. In this study, DNase I footprinting and EMSA also revealed binding of 
transcription factors, specificity protein 1 (Sp1) and octamer-binding
transcription factor 1 (Oct-1) to the P2 promoter, and site-directed mutagenesis 
confirmed that these factors contribute to the basal P2 promoter activity.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (CHIP) assays showed that Sp1, Oct-1, NF-kappaB,
CREB-1, and RNA polymerase II interacted with the core SHP-1 P2 promoter in CD4+ 
T cells and Jurkat cells but not in HTLV-1-transformed MT-2 and HUT102 cells when
HTLV-1 Tax is present. Furthermore, bisulfite sequencing of the SHP-1 P2 core
region revealed heavy CpG methylation in HTLV-1-transformed cells compared with
freshly isolated CD4+ T cells and HTLV-1-noninfected T cell lines. A significant 
inverse correlation between degree of CpG methylation and expression of SHP-1
mRNA or protein was observed. Taken together, our data support the notion that in
HTLV-1-transformed CD4+ T cells, TIPS causes dissociation of transcription
factors from the core SHP-1 P2 promoter, which in turn leads to subsequent DNA
methylation, an important early step for leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2626764
PMID: 18948549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Jan;23(1):86-99. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0257. Epub 2008 Oct
22.

A novel mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase-1 and glucocorticoid
receptor (GR) interacting protein-1-dependent combinatorial mechanism of gene
transrepression by GR.

Cho IJ(1), Kim SG.

Author information: 
(1)Innovative Drug Research Center for Metabolic and Inflammatory Disease,
College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Sillim-dong, Kwanak-gu, Seoul
151-742, Korea.

Glucocorticoids have major antiinflammatory effects. Because COX-2 is the
rate-limiting enzyme for proinflammatory prostaglandins, this study investigated 
the combinatorial inhibitory role of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in COX-2 gene
induction in macrophages and sought to identify the molecular mechanisms for that
inhibition. Glucocorticoid-activated GR repressed COX-2 gene induction by
lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Activated GR inhibited LPS-induced activator protein 1 
activity, which in turn decreased activating transcription factor 2/c-Jun
phosphorylation. The inhibition of MAPK-dependent activating transcription factor
2/c-Jun phosphorylation by GR in COX-2 repression was a result of MAPK
phosphatase-1 (MKP-1) induction. Although GR did not inhibit LPS-induced p65
phosphorylation or nuclear factor-kappaB DNA binding activity, deletion of the
nuclear factor-kappaB binding site in the COX-2 gene suppressed the ability of
glucocorticoid to attenuate COX-2 induction. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and
transfection assays revealed that a p65 DNA complex involving GR-bound
GR-interacting protein 1 (GRIP1) also contributed to COX-2 repression. Additional
knockdown and transfection assays identified other inflammatory genes
coordinately regulated by MKP-1 and GRIP1. In summary, activated GR was found to 
antagonize the LPS-dependent induction of the COX-2 gene via a novel
combinatorial mechanism involving MKP-1-mediated activator protein 1 inhibition
and GR/GRIP1 recruitment to the p65 DNA complex; moreover, this work facilitated 
the identification of other GR-responding MKP-1/GRIP1-regulated genes.

PMID: 18945810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. J Androl. 2009 Mar-Apr;30(2):157-67. doi: 10.2164/jandrol.108.005785. Epub 2008
Oct 16.

Homo sapiens lactate dehydrogenase c (Ldhc) gene expression in cancer cells is
regulated by transcription factor Sp1, CREB, and CpG island methylation.

Tang H(1), Goldberg E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA. h-tang2@northwestern.edu

The human testis-specific lactate dehydrogenase c gene (hLdhc) is transcribed
only in cells of the germinal epithelium. Recently hLdhc was reported to express 
in a broad spectrum of tumors with relatively high frequency in lung cancer,
melanoma, and breast cancer, and in some prostate cancers. Two melanoma cell
lines that express the hLdhc gene, A375M and C81-61, were identified and were
used to characterize the hLdhc promoter and explore transcriptional regulation of
this gene. A 110-bp core promoter, including a conserved GC box and cyclic
adenosine monophosphate-responsive element (CRE), were identified as essential
for basal promoter activity. The methylation status of the CpG island (CGI) in
the hLdhc core promoter sequence was analyzed in hLdhc-expressing and
nonexpressing cells and human prostate tumor tissues. The CGI in 2 cell lines
expressing the gene was hypomethylated whereas the DNA from cells that did not
express hLdhc was hypermethylated. The role of methylation in regulating this
promoter was confirmed by experimental induction of hLdhc transcription with the 
methylation inhibitor 5'aza-deoxycytidine. Quantitative analyses of the
methylation level in the CGI were performed in prostate tumor tissues by
pyrosequencing. Overall, these experiments demonstrated that hLdhc expression in 
cancer cells was regulated by transcription factor Sp1 and CREB and promoter CGI 
methylation. In addition, these findings suggest the possibility of developing a 
biomarker for cancer diagnosis/prognosis based on DNA methylation of the Ldhc
gene.

PMID: 18930904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Mol Immunol. 2009 Feb;46(4):677-87. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.08.281. Epub 2008 
Oct 17.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK3beta) inhibition suppresses the inflammatory 
response to Francisella infection and protects against tularemia in mice.

Zhang P(1), Katz J, Michalek SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, AL 35294, United States.

Francisella tularensis, the causative agent of tularemia, is currently considered
a category A bioterrorism agent due to its high virulence. Infection with F.
tularensis results in an inflammatory response that plays an important role in
the pathogenesis of the disease; however, the cellular mechanisms regulating this
response are poorly understood. Glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK3beta) is a
serine/threonine protein kinase that has recently emerged as a key regulatory
switch in the modulation of the inflammatory response. In this study, we
investigated the effect of GSK3beta inhibition in regulating F. tularensis
LVS-induced inflammatory responses. F. tularensis LVS infection of murine
peritoneal macrophages induced a TLR2 dependent phosphorylation of GSK3beta.
Inhibition of GSK3beta resulted in a significant decrease in the production of
pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-6, IL-12p40 and TNF-alpha, as well as a significant 
increase in the production of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. GSK3beta
regulated the F. tularensis LVS-induced cytokine response by differentially
affecting the activation of transcription factors NF-kappaB and CREB. Inhibition 
of GSK3beta by lithium in vivo suppressed the inflammatory response in mice
infected with F. tularensis LVS and conferred a survival advantage. In addition, 
we show that the production of IFN-gamma contributed to the development of
tularemia and to the fatal outcome of the infected animals, depending on the
timing and the relative level of the IFN-gamma produced. IFN-gamma potentiated F.
tularensis LVS-induced cytokine production by increasing GSK3beta activity and
the nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB. Taken together, these results demonstrate
a regulatory function of GSK3beta in modulating inflammatory responses that can
be detrimental to the host during an F. tularensis LVS infection, and suggest
that inhibition of GSK3beta may represent a novel therapeutic approach in the
treatment of tularemia.

PMCID: PMC3033759
PMID: 18929413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2009 Apr;34(5):1263-76. doi: 10.1038/npp.2008.185. Epub 
2008 Oct 15.

Requirement of AQP4 for antidepressive efficiency of fluoxetine: implication in
adult hippocampal neurogenesis.

Kong H(1), Sha LL, Fan Y, Xiao M, Ding JH, Wu J, Hu G.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Neurodegeneration, Department of Pharmacology,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, PR China.

Erratum in
    Neuropsychopharmacology. 2009 Jul;34(8):2055.

Aquaporin-4 (AQP4), a key molecule for maintaining water homeostasis in the
central nervous system, is expressed in adult neural stem cells (ANSCs) as well
as astrocytes. Neural stem cells give rise to new hippocampal neurons throughout 
adulthood, and defects in neurogenesis may predispose an individual to
depression. Nevertheless, the role of AQP4 in adult hippocampal neurogenesis and 
chronic mild stress (CMS)-induced depression remains unknown. We herein report
that AQP4 knockout disrupted 4-week fluoxetine (10 mg/kg per day i.p)
treatment-induced enhancement of adult mouse hippocampal neurogenesis as well as 
behavioral improvement under both basal condition and CMS-evoked depressive
state. Meanwhile, AQP4 knockout abolished fluoxetine-induced enhancement of
hippocampal cyclic AMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation.
The CMS procedure inhibited hippocampal protein kinase A (PKA) activity,
extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK1/2), and calcium/calmodulin-dependent
protein kinase IV (CaMKIV) phosphorylation in AQP4(+/+) and AQP4(-/-) mice.
Fluoxetine treatment could reverse CMS-induced inhibition of PKA activity and
ERK1/2 phosphorylation in both genotypes. However, fluoxetine restored
CMS-induced inhibition of hippocampal CaMKIV phosphorylation in AQP4(+/+) mice
but failed in AQP4(-/-) mice. Notably, CMS procedure significantly increased the 
hippocampal AQP4 expression, which was reversed by 4-week fluoxetine treatment.
Further investigation showed AQP4 knockout inhibited the proliferation of
cultured ANSCs and eliminated the pro-proliferative effect of fluoxetine in
vitro. Collectively, these findings suggest that AQP4 is required for the
antidepressive action of fluoxetine via regulating adult hippocampal
neurogenesis.

PMID: 18923397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Nature. 2008 Nov 13;456(7219):269-73. doi: 10.1038/nature07349. Epub 2008 Oct 5.

A fasting inducible switch modulates gluconeogenesis via activator/coactivator
exchange.

Liu Y(1), Dentin R, Chen D, Hedrick S, Ravnskjaer K, Schenk S, Milne J, Meyers
DJ, Cole P, Yates J 3rd, Olefsky J, Guarente L, Montminy M.

Author information: 
(1)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 North Torrey Pines Rd, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

During early fasting, increases in skeletal muscle proteolysis liberate free
amino acids for hepatic gluconeogenesis in response to pancreatic glucagon.
Hepatic glucose output diminishes during the late protein-sparing phase of
fasting, when ketone body production by the liver supplies compensatory fuel for 
glucose-dependent tissues. Glucagon stimulates the gluconeogenic program by
triggering the dephosphorylation and nuclear translocation of the CREB regulated 
transcription coactivator 2 (CRTC2; also known as TORC2), while parallel
decreases in insulin signalling augment gluconeogenic gene expression through the
dephosphorylation and nuclear shuttling of forkhead box O1 (FOXO1). Here we show 
that a fasting-inducible switch, consisting of the histone acetyltransferase p300
and the nutrient-sensing deacetylase sirtuin 1 (SIRT1), maintains energy balance 
in mice through the sequential induction of CRTC2 and FOXO1. After glucagon
induction, CRTC2 stimulated gluconeogenic gene expression by an association with 
p300, which we show here is also activated by dephosphorylation at Ser 89 during 
fasting. In turn, p300 increased hepatic CRTC2 activity by acetylating it at Lys 
628, a site that also targets CRTC2 for degradation after its ubiquitination by
the E3 ligase constitutive photomorphogenic protein (COP1). Glucagon effects were
attenuated during late fasting, when CRTC2 was downregulated owing to
SIRT1-mediated deacetylation and when FOXO1 supported expression of the
gluconeogenic program. Disrupting SIRT1 activity, by liver-specific knockout of
the Sirt1 gene or by administration of a SIRT1 antagonist, increased CRTC2
activity and glucose output, whereas exposure to SIRT1 agonists reduced them. In 
view of the reciprocal activation of FOXO1 and its coactivator peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha, encoded by 
Ppargc1a) by SIRT1 activators, our results illustrate how the exchange of two
gluconeogenic regulators during fasting maintains energy balance.

PMCID: PMC2597669
PMID: 18849969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2008 Dec 1;233(2):333-42. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2008.09.003. Epub 2008 Sep 18.

o,p'-DDT induces cyclooxygenase-2 gene expression in murine macrophages: Role of 
AP-1 and CRE promoter elements and PI3-kinase/Akt/MAPK signaling pathways.

Han EH(1), Kim JY, Kim HK, Hwang YP, Jeong HG.

Author information: 
(1)BK 21 Project Team, Department of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Chosun
University, 375 Seosuk-dong, Gwangju 501-759, South Korea.

Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) has been used as an insecticide to prevent 
the devastation of malaria in tropical zones. However, many reports suggest that 
DDT may act as an endocrine disruptor and may have possible carcinogenic effects.
Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) acts as a link between inflammation and carcinogenesis
through its involvement in tumor promotion. In the present study, we examined the
effect of o,p'-DDT on COX-2 gene expression and analyzed the molecular mechanism 
of its activity in murine RAW 264.7 macrophages. Exposure to o,p'-DDT markedly
enhanced the production of prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)), a major COX-2 metabolite,
in murine macrophages. Furthermore, o,p'-DDT dose-dependently increased the
levels of COX-2 protein and mRNA. Transfection with human COX-2 promoter
construct, electrophoretic mobility shift assays and DNA-affinity protein-binding
assay experiments revealed that o,p'-DDT activated the activator protein 1 (AP-1)
and cyclic AMP response element (CRE) sites, but not the NF-kappaB site.
Phosphatidylinositol 3 (PI3)-kinase, its downstream signaling molecule, Akt, and 
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) were also significantly activated by the
o,p'-DDT-induced AP-1 and CRE activation. These results demonstrate that o,p'-DDT
induced COX-2 expression via AP-1 and CRE activation through the PI3-K/Akt/ERK,
JNK, and p38 MAP kinase pathways. These findings provide further insight into the
signal transduction pathways involved in the carcinogenic effects of o,p'-DDT.

PMID: 18840457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2009 Jul;64(2):223-32. doi:
10.1007/s00280-008-0833-4. Epub 2008 Oct 2.

Zebularine suppresses the apoptotic potential of 5-fluorouracil via cAMP/PKA/CREB
pathway against human oral squamous cell carcinoma cells.

Suzuki M(1), Shinohara F, Endo M, Sugazaki M, Echigo S, Rikiishi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Dentistry, 4-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8575, Japan.

PURPOSE: During tumorigenesis, tumor suppressor and tumor-related genes are
commonly silenced by aberrant DNA methylation in their promoter regions, which is
one of the important determinants of susceptibility to 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) in
oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cells. Here, we examine the chemotherapeutic 
efficacy of epigenetic agents on 5-FU cytotoxicity.
METHOD: We investigated the effect of a DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitor,
zebularine (Zeb), on the chemosensitivity of 5-FU and cisplatin (CDDP) by MTT and
TUNEL methods, and compared the molecular mechanism of action with those of a
GSK3beta inhibitor, LiCl, and an Hsp90 inhibitor, 17-AAG.
RESULTS: A significant apoptotic effect by a combination of Zeb or 17-AAG was
found in CDDP treatment; however, considerable suppression of 5-FU-induced
apoptosis was observed after incubation with Zeb, 17-AAG, or LiCl. Zeb's
suppressive effects were associated with activation of the cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway,
differing from mechanisms of 17-AAG and LiCl. Suppression of 5-FU-induced
apoptosis by Zeb was not associated with increased Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL expressions
dependent on transcription factor CREB, and with the expression level of
thymidylate synthase.
CONCLUSIONS: In the present study, we identified a more detailed mechanism of
action by which Zeb suppresses 5-FU-induced apoptosis. These results indicate
that combination therapies have to be carefully investigated due to potential
harmful effects in the clinical application of DNMT inhibitors.

PMID: 18830594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Sep;6(9):1397-409. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-07-2086.

A Key role for cyclic AMP-responsive element binding protein in hypoxia-mediated 
activation of the angiogenesis factor CCN1 (CYR61) in Tumor cells.

Meyuhas R(1), Pikarsky E, Tavor E, Klar A, Abramovitch R, Hochman J, Lago TG,
Honigman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School,
Jerusalem, Israel.

Hypoxia is a prominent feature of solid tumors known to contribute to malignant
progression and therapeutic resistance. Cancer cells adapt to hypoxia using
various pathways, allowing tumors to thrive in a low oxygen state. Induction of
new blood vessel formation via the secretion of proangiogenic factors is one of
the main adaptive responses engaged by tumor cells under hypoxic conditions.
Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a transcription factor that plays a pivotal
role in mediating such responses. In addition, several other transcription
factors have also been implicated in hypoxic gene regulation, either
independently or in cooperation with HIF-1. In this work, we show that the
expression of the angiogenesis-related, immediate early gene CCN1 (formerly known
as CYR61), considered to be involved in tumor growth and invasiveness, is
enhanced upon hypoxia stress primarily in a protein kinase A and cyclic
AMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) and CRE-dependent manner in various
cell lines. The hypoxia-mediated activation of the CCN1 promoter is independent
of HIF-1 and HIF-2, as shown by small interfering RNA knockdown. We identify the 
cis element in the mouse CCN1 promoter responsible for CREB binding to be one of 
two partial CRE sites present in the promoter. Moreover, we report for the first 
time that CREB-mediated CCN1 transcription is enhanced in hypoxic regions of
tumors in vivo. Identifying and characterizing the molecular mechanisms that
govern the response of tumors to hypoxia may be instrumental to identify the
tumors that will respond favorably to inhibition of angiogenesis and thus lead to
the development of treatments that could complement hypoxia-inducing treatment
modalities.

PMID: 18819928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Auton Neurosci. 2008 Dec 15;144(1-2):22-9. doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2008.08.004.
Epub 2008 Sep 25.

Nerve sprouting suppresses myocardial I(to) and I(K1) channels and increases
severity to ventricular fibrillation in rat.

Ren C(1), Wang F, Li G, Jiao Q, Bai J, Yu D, Hao W, Wang R, Cao JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine Peking
Union Medical College, Beijing, PR China.

Nerve sprouting in healed myocardial infarction has been associated with
increased incidences of ventricular tachyarrhythmia and sudden cardiac death.
However, the underlying electrophysiological mechanisms are unclear. To
investigate the linkage between nerve sprouting and potassium channel function,
we developed a rat model of cardiac sympathetic nerve sprouting by chronic
subcutaneous injection of 4-methylcatechol, a potent stimulator of nerve growth
factor (NGF) synthesis. Cardiac sympathetic nerves were visualized by
immunohistochemical staining. Myocardial necrotic injury was created by focal
cold shock across intact diaphragm to mimic infarction. Transient outward current
(I(to)) and inward rectifier current (I(K1)) of cardiomyocytes were recorded with
the whole-cell patch clamp technique. We found that chronic 4-MC administration
1) increased cardiac NGF level and the density of cardiac sympathetic
innervation; 2) decreased the expressions of Kv4.2, Kv channel-interacting
protein 2 (KChIP2), Kir2.1, and the current densities of I(to) and I(K1); 3)
reduced the phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2
(pERK1/2); and 4) decreased heart rate variability and increased the
susceptibility to ventricular fibrillation. Myocardial necrotic injury exerted
similar effects as 4-methylcatechol, and 4-methylcatechol plus myocardial
necrotic injury intensified the cardiac effects of 4-methylcatechol alone and
decreased the phosphoralation of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB). We
conclude that nerve sprouting suppressed the expressions and functions of
myocardial I(to) and I(K1) channels and increased the susceptibility to
ventricular fibrillation. These effects are associated with decreased
phosphorylation of ERK and CREB and reduced expression of KChIP2.

PMID: 18818126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Brain Res. 2008 Dec 3;1243:104-12. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.08.091. Epub 2008
Sep 12.

Dysregulated CREB signaling pathway in the brain of neural cell adhesion molecule
(NCAM)-deficient mice.

Aonurm-Helm A(1), Zharkovsky T, Jürgenson M, Kalda A, Zharkovsky A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Centre of Excellence for Translational Medicine,
University of Tartu, 19 Ravila Street, 51014, Estonia.

The neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) mediates cell-cell interactions and
plays an important role in processes associated with neural plasticity, including
learning and memory formation. It has been shown that mice deficient in all
isoforms of NCAM (NCAM-/- mice) demonstrate impairment in long-term plasticity at
multiple hippocampal synapses, disrupted spatial learning, and impaired
contextual and auditory-cued fear conditioning. The formation of long-term memory
is associated with activation of transcription factor CREB (cAMP response element
binding protein). The aims of this study were to investigate NCAM-mediated
signaling transduction pathways and the levels of the phosphorylated (Ser133)
active form of the CREB in the brain structures (the pre- and frontal cortex,
basolateral amygdala, and hippocampus) involved in the memory formation in
NCAM-deficient mice. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed reduced levels of
pCREB in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), frontal cortex (FC), CA3 subregion of the
hippocampus (CA3) and basolateral nucleus of amygdala (BLA) in NCAM-/- mice.
NCAM-/- mice had also reduced levels of the phosphorylated CaMKII and CaMKIV in
PFC/FC and the hippocampus, which are the downstream signaling molecules of NCAM.
The levels of non-phosphorylated kinases did not differ from those seen in the
wild-type mice. These results provide evidence that NCAM deficiency results in
the dysregulation of CREB-mediated signaling pathways in the brain regions, which
is related to the formation of memory.

PMID: 18817764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Virol. 2008 Dec;82(23):11939-47. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01356-08. Epub 2008 Sep 24.

The proto-oncogene Bcl3, induced by Tax, represses Tax-mediated transcription via
p300 displacement from the human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 promoter.

Kim YM(1), Sharma N, Nyborg JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Campus Box 1870, Colorado
State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1870, USA.

The etiology of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1)-induced adult T-cell 
leukemia is linked to the expression of the viral oncoprotein Tax. Although the
mechanism of retroviral transformation is unknown, Tax interferes with
fundamental cellular processes, including proliferation and apoptosis, and these 
events may directly link Tax to early steps in malignant progression. In this
study, we examined the interplay between Tax and the potent proto-oncogene B-cell
chronic leukemia protein 3 (Bcl3). Bcl3 is a critical regulator of cell survival 
and proliferation and is overexpressed in HTLV-1-infected cells. We found that
Tax induced Bcl3 expression through stimulation of the NF-kappaB pathway. An
intronic NF-kappaB binding site within the Bcl3 gene served as the primary target
of Tax-induced NF-kappaB activation. We next considered the consequence of Bcl3
overexpression on Tax function. Interestingly, we found that Bcl3 formed a stable
complex with Tax and that this complex potently inhibited Tax-dependent HTLV-1
transcription. Importantly, Bcl3 associated with the HTLV-1 promoter in a
Tax-dependent manner and inhibited the binding of the critical cellular
coactivator p300. The conserved ankyrin repeat domain of Bcl3 mediated both Tax
binding and inhibition of p300 recruitment to the HTLV-1 promoter. Together,
these data suggest that Tax-induced Bcl3 overexpression benefits the virus in two
important ways. First, Bcl3 may promote cell division and thus clonal
proliferation of the virus. Second, Bcl3 may attenuate virion production,
facilitating immune evasion. One consequence of this regulatory loop may be
Bcl3-induced malignant transformation of the host cell.

PMCID: PMC2583681
PMID: 18815299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Genetica. 2009 May;136(1):109-17. doi: 10.1007/s10709-008-9318-y. Epub 2008 Sep
16.

Search for informative polymorphisms in candidate genes: clock genes and
circadian behaviour in blue tits.

Steinmeyer C(1), Mueller JC, Kempenaers B.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Ornithology (Seewiesen), Postfach 1564, 82305
Starnberg, Seewiesen, Germany.

Erratum in
    Genetica. 2010 Apr;138(4):469.

The identification of functional polymorphisms in genes that underlie behavioural
trait variation is a challenging but intriguing task in evolutionary biology.
Given the wealth of genomic data and the increasing number of genotype-phenotype 
association studies in model organisms, one can ask whether and how this
information can be used for non-model organisms. Here we describe two strategies 
to search for likely functional polymorphisms in candidate genes in a bird
species that has been intensively studied by behavioural and population
ecologists, the blue tit Cyanistes caeruleus. In the first approach we searched
for repeating elements in coding regions of the genome using information about
repeats in Gallus gallus genes. The rationale is that tandem-repeat elements have
a high potential to be polymorphic and functional. The second strategy aimed to
replicate reported genotype-phenotype association studies by extrapolating
results from model organisms to our study species. Both strategies showed high
success rates with respect to finding homologous gene regions and potentially
informative genetic variants in the genes AANAT, ADCYAP1, CKIepsilon, CLOCK,
CREB1, NPAS2 and PERIOD2.

PMCID: PMC2832883
PMID: 18792794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008 Oct 30;76(9):1121-33. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2008.08.023.
Epub 2008 Aug 27.

Helioxanthin inhibits interleukin-1 beta-induced MIP-1 beta production by
reduction of c-jun expression and binding of the c-jun/CREB1 complex to the
AP-1/CRE site of the MIP-1 beta promoter in Huh7 cells.

Tseng PC(1), Hsu HC, Janmanchi D, Lin CH, Kuo YH, Chou CK, Yeh SF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei City 112, Taiwan, ROC.

An elevated level of macrophage inflammatory protein-1beta (MIP-1beta) induced by
IL-1beta has been correlated with chronic hepatic inflammatory disease. However, 
molecular mechanism of IL-1beta-induced MIP-1beta expression in hepatic cells is 
obscure. Previously, we reported the mechanism of the anti-hepatitis B virus
(HBV) activity of helioxanthin (HE-145). Here, we demonstrated that HE-145
inhibited IL-1beta-induced MIP-1beta expression in a dose-dependent manner in
Huh7 cells. To understand the mode of action of HE-145, we first examined how
IL-1beta induced MIP-1beta expression at the molecular level. Using selective
inhibitors, we found that JNK and p38 pathways participated in IL-1beta-induced
MIP-1beta expression. HE-145 specifically suppressed IL-1beta-induced c-jun mRNA 
and protein expression and prevented c-jun-mediated AP-1 DNA-binding activity,
whereas it had no effect on IL-1beta-induced activation of JNK, p38 and ATF2.
Further studies indicated that HE-145 may downregulate c-jun mRNA expression
directly at transcriptional level without requirement of de novo protein
synthesis. Mutational analysis and supershift assays indicated that IL-1beta
stimulated c-jun and CREB1 binding to the essential AP-1/CRE site of the
MIP-1beta promoter. The inhibitory effect of HE-145 on IL-1beta-induced MIP-1beta
promoter activity was completely reversed by overexpressing c-jun.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assay consistently revealed that HE-145 reduced c-jun binding to the
AP-1/CRE site in vitro and in vivo. Our results established a major role for
c-jun in IL-1beta-induced MIP-1beta expression in hepatic cells. The reduction in
IL-1beta-induced c-jun expression and subsequent binding of the c-jun/CREB1
complex to AP-1/CRE site mainly contributed to the inhibitory action of HE-145 on
IL-1beta-induced MIP-1beta production.

PMID: 18789903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2008 Dec;39(4):519-28. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2008.07.019. Epub
2008 Aug 5.

Regulation of neural migration by the CREB/CREM transcription factors and altered
Dab1 levels in CREB/CREM mutants.

Díaz-Ruiz C(1), Parlato R, Aguado F, Ureña JM, Burgaya F, Martínez A, Carmona MA,
Kreiner G, Bleckmann S, Del Río JA, Schütz G, Soriano E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine-Barcelona (IRB), Department of Cell
Biology and CIBERNED (ISCIII), University of Barcelona, Barcelona Science Park,
Lab A1-S1, Josep Samitier 1-5, Barcelona 08028, Spain.

The family of CREB transcription factors is involved in a variety of biological
processes including the development and plasticity of the nervous system. To gain
further insight into the roles of CREB family members in the development of the
embryonic brain, we examined the migratory phenotype of CREB1(Nescre)CREM(-/-)
mutants. We found that the lack of CREB/CREM genes is accompanied by anatomical
defects in specific layers of the olfactory bulb, hippocampus and cerebral
cortex. These changes are associated with decreased Dab1 expression in
CREB1(Nescre)CREM(-/-) mutants. Our results indicate that the lack of CREB/CREM
genes, specifically in neural and glial progenitors, leads to migration
abnormalities during brain development, suggesting that unidentified
age-dependent factors modulate the role of CREB/CREM genes in neural development.

PMID: 18786638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Leukemia. 2008 Dec;22(12):2217-25. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.244. Epub 2008 Sep 11.

ICER expression inhibits leukemia phenotype and controls tumor progression.

Pigazzi M(1), Manara E, Baron E, Basso G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Laboratory of Oncohematology, University of Padova, 
Padova, Italy. martina.pigazzi@unipd.it

The inducible cyclic AMP (cAMP) early repressor (ICER) and cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB) are transcriptional regulators of the
cAMP-mediated signaling pathway. CREB has been demonstrated to be upregulated in 
the majority of childhood leukemias contributing to disease progression, whereas 
ICER, its endogenous repressor, was found to be downregulated. Our research focus
has been the function of restored ICER expression. ICER exogenously expressed in 
cell lines decreases CREB protein level and induces a lowered clonogenic
potential in vitro. It decreases the ability of HL60 to invade the extramedullary
sites and to promote bone marrow angiogenesis in nonobese diabetic-severe
combined immunodeficient mice, demonstrating its potential effects on tumor
progression. ICER represses the majority of 96 target genes upregulated by CREB. 
It binds CRE promoters and controls gene expression restoring the normal
regulation of major cellular pathways. ICER is subjected to degradation through a
constitutively active form of the extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase, 
which drives it to the proteasome. We propose that ICER is downregulated in HL60 
to preserve CREB overexpression, which disrupts normal myelopoiesis and promotes 
blast proliferation. These findings define the function of ICER as a tumor
suppressor in leukemia. Unbalanced CREB/ICER expression needs to be considered a 
pathogenetic feature in leukemogenesis. The molecular characterization of this
pathway could be useful for novel therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 18784739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. FASEB J. 2009 Jan;23(1):90-8. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-114462. Epub 2008 Sep 4.

EphB receptor signaling in mouse spinal cord contributes to physical dependence
on morphine.

Liu WT(1), Li HC, Song XS, Huang ZJ, Song XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Parker University Research Institute, 2500 Walnut 
Hill Lane, Dallas, TX 75229, USA.

Cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying opioid tolerance and dependence
remain elusive. We investigated roles of EphB receptor tyrosine kinases--which
play important roles in synaptic connection and plasticity during development and
in the matured nervous system--in development and maintenance of physical
dependence on morphine in the mouse spinal cord (SC). Spinal administration of an
EphB receptor blocking reagent EphB2-Fc prevents and/or suppresses behavioral
responses to morphine withdrawal and associated induction of c-Fos and depletion 
of calcitonin gene-related peptide. Western blotting and immunohistochemical
fluorescence staining demonstrates that EphB1 receptor protein is significantly
up-regulated in the spinal dorsal horn following escalating morphine treatment.
Chronic morphine exposure and withdrawal significantly increased phosphorylation 
of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunit NR2B as well as the activated forms of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase and the cAMP response element binding
protein in SC. The increased levels of phosphorylation of these molecules,
however, are significantly inhibited by the EphB receptor blocker. These findings
indicate that EphB receptor signaling, probably by interacting with NR2B in SC,
contributes to the development of opioid physical dependence and withdrawal
effects. This novel role for EphB receptor signaling suggests that these
molecules may be useful therapeutic targets for preventing, minimizing, or
reversing the development of opiate dependence.

PMID: 18772347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Eur J Pharmacol. 2008 Oct 31;596(1-3):14-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2008.08.006.
Epub 2008 Aug 20.

Norepinephrine-glucocorticoids interaction does not annul the opposite effects of
the individual treatments on cellular plasticity in neuroblastoma cells.

Yaniv SP(1), Ben-Shachar D, Klein E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Psychobiology, Department of Psychiatry, Rambam Medical Center
and B. Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel.

The plasticity hypothesis of major depression states that glucocorticoids may be 
detrimental to neuronal plasticity while monoamines and antidepressants may
reconstitute cellular plasticity. The aim of the present study was to investigate
how dexamethasone, a synthetic glucocorticoid, and norepinephrine, both of which 
are involved in depression, interact to affect aspects of neuronal plasticity.
Dexamethasone and norepinephrine administered separately oppositely affected
differentiation of human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells, observed by both
morphological alterations and gene expression, at the level of mRNA and protein
of the differentiation markers Gap-43, L1 and laminin. Norepinephrine increased
differentiation, manifested as an increase in neurite length, neurite number, and
gene expression, while dexamethasone reduced these parameters. Opposite effects
were also observed in the expression of the transcription factor CREB with
norepinephrine upregulating phosphorylated CREB (pCREB) levels, while
dexamethasone downregulated CREB mRNA and protein levels, as well as pCREB
levels. Interestingly, co-administration of dexamethasone and norepinephrine
resulted in morphology more differentiated than control and similar to that
induced by norepinephrine, albeit to a lesser degree. The alterations in the
expression of the differentiation markers induced by norepinephrine or
dexamethasone treatments were mostly annulled by the co-treatment. However, pCREB
levels were robustly enhanced by co-treatment, as compared to both control and
norepinephrine treated cells, providing a possible explanation for the
morphological increase in differentiation. These results suggest that in order
for cells to combat the deleterious effects of glucocorticoids, a hyperactivation
of pCREB may be necessary to restore differentiation and plasticity.

PMID: 18762182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Nat Med. 2008 Oct;14(10):1112-7. doi: 10.1038/nm.1866. Epub 2008 Aug 31.

The Creb1 coactivator Crtc1 is required for energy balance and fertility.

Altarejos JY(1), Goebel N, Conkright MD, Inoue H, Xie J, Arias CM, Sawchenko PE, 
Montminy M.

Author information: 
(1)Peptide Biology Laboratories, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2009 Sep;15(9):989-90; author reply 991.

The adipocyte-derived hormone leptin maintains energy balance by acting on
hypothalamic leptin receptors (Leprs) that act on the signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 (Stat3). Although disruption of Lepr-Stat3 signaling
promotes obesity in mice, other features of Lepr function, such as fertility,
seem normal, pointing to the involvement of additional regulators. Here we show
that the cyclic AMP responsive element-binding protein-1 (Creb1)-regulated
transcription coactivator-1 (Crtc1) is required for energy balance and
reproduction-Crtc1(-/-) mice are hyperphagic, obese and infertile. Hypothalamic
Crtc1 was phosphorylated and inactive in leptin-deficient ob/ob mice, while
leptin administration increased amounts of dephosphorylated nuclear Crtc1.
Dephosphorylated Crtc1 stimulated expression of the Cartpt and Kiss1 genes, which
encode hypothalamic neuropeptides that mediate leptin's effects on satiety and
fertility. Crtc1 overexpression in hypothalamic cells increased Cartpt and Kiss1 
gene expression, whereas Crtc1 depletion decreased it. Indeed, leptin enhanced
Crtc1 activity over the Cartpt and Kiss1 promoters in cells overexpressing Lepr, 
and these effects were disrupted by expression of a dominant-negative Creb1
polypeptide. As leptin administration increased recruitment of hypothalamic Crtc1
to Cartpt and Kiss1 promoters, our results indicate that the Creb1-Crtc1 pathway 
mediates the central effects of hormones and nutrients on energy balance and
fertility.

PMCID: PMC2667698
PMID: 18758446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Nat Immunol. 2008 Oct;9(10):1140-7. doi: 10.1038/ni.1649. Epub 2008 Aug 24.

Notch2 integrates signaling by the transcription factors RBP-J and CREB1 to
promote T cell cytotoxicity.

Maekawa Y(1), Minato Y, Ishifune C, Kurihara T, Kitamura A, Kojima H, Yagita H,
Sakata-Yanagimoto M, Saito T, Taniuchi I, Chiba S, Sone S, Yasutomo K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology & Parasitology, Tokushima, Japan.

The acquisition of cytotoxic effector function by CD8(+) T cells is crucial for
the control of intracellular infection and tumor invasion. However, it remains
unclear which signaling pathways are required for the differentiation of CD8(+)
cytotoxic T lymphocytes. We show here that Notch2-deficient T cells had impaired 
differentiation into cytotoxic T lymphocytes. In addition, dendritic cells with
lower expression of the Notch ligand Delta-like 1 induced the differentiation of 
cytotoxic T lymphocytes less efficiently. We found that the intracellular domain 
of Notch2 interacted with a phosphorylated form of the transcription factor
CREB1, and together these proteins bound the transcriptional coactivator p300 to 
form a complex on the promoter of the gene encoding granzyme B. Our results
suggest that the highly regulated, dynamic control of T cell cytotoxicity depends
on the integration of Notch2 and CREB1 signals.

PMID: 18724371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Cell Sci. 2008 Sep 15;121(Pt 18):3035-41. doi: 10.1242/jcs.026757. Epub 2008
Aug 19.

VRK1 phosphorylates CREB and mediates CCND1 expression.

Kang TH(1), Park DY, Kim W, Kim KT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Pohang University of Science and Technology ,
Pohang 790-784, Republic of Korea.

Vaccinia virus B1 kinase plays a key role in viral DNA replication. The
homologous mammalian vaccinia-related kinases (VRKs) are also implicated in the
regulation of DNA replication, although direct evidence remains elusive. Here we 
show that VRK1 regulates cell cycle progression in the DNA replication period by 
inducing cyclin D1 (CCND1) expression. Furthermore, depletion of VRK1 in human
cancer cells reduces the fraction of cells in S phase at a given time. VRK1
specifically enhances activity of the cAMP-response element (CRE) in the CCND1
promoter by facilitating the recruitment of phospho-CREB to this locus. VRK1
phosphorylates CREB at Ser133 in vitro and the expression of a kinase-dead mutant
of VRK1 or knockdown of VRK1 using siRNA fails to activate CREB and subsequently 
activate CRE. Finally, we show that VRK1 is a critical link in the CCND1 gene
expression pathway stimulated by Myc overexpression. Our results indicate that
VRK1 is a novel regulator of CCND1 expression.

PMID: 18713830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Cancer Biol Ther. 2008 Jul;7(7):997-1003. Epub 2008 Jun 30.

Transcriptional control of the melanoma malignant phenotype.

Melnikova VO(1), Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Malignant progression and tumor metastasis is a complex process enabled by the
intrinsic genomic instability of the tumor cells and supported by a plethora of
recruited cell types within the tumor microenvironment. Propelled by a selective 
pressure to overcome tissue homeostatic mechanisms, a metastatic "super-cell"
emerges whose phenotype is associated with the cellular capacity for uncontrolled
growth, resistance to apoptosis, high invasive potential, and effective
neoangiogenesis. While genetic alterations arise early in the course of melanoma 
development, the progression toward metastatic disease is accompanied by
deregulated expression of a number of transcription factors. In melanoma,
acquisition of the metastatic phenotype involves the loss of Activator
Protein-2alpha (AP-2alpha) and gain in expression of cAMP-responsive element
(CRE)-binding protein/Activating Transcription Factor-1 (CREB/ATF-1) family
transcription factors. Together with the upregulation of ATF-2, SNAIL/SLUG,
Nuclear Factor kappaB, STAT3 and 5, and other transcription factors, these
changes result in the aberrant expression of cellular adhesion molecules,
matrix-degrading enzymes as well as other factors that enable a complex
interaction of metastatic cells with the extracellular milieu. Similar to the
case of oncogene addiction, the tumorigenicity and metastatic potential of
melanoma can be greatly inhibited by altering the activity of the above-named
transcription factors, therefore indicating new treatment prospects.

PMID: 18698165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2009 Feb;40(2):168-78. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2007-0377OC. 
Epub 2008 Aug 7.

Signal pathway of 17beta-estradiol-induced MUC5B expression in human airway
epithelial cells.

Choi HJ(1), Chung YS, Kim HJ, Moon UY, Choi YH, Van Seuningen I, Baek SJ, Yoon
HG, Yoon JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 134 
Shinchon-dong, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, Korea.

MUC5B is a major mucin of the human respiratory tract, and it is not clear how
MUC5B expression is regulated in various airway diseases. The goal of this study 
was to determine the mechanisms by which 17beta-estradiol induces MUC5B gene
expression in airway epithelial cells. It was found that E2, a sex hormone,
stimulates MUC5B gene overexpression by interaction with estrogen receptor alpha 
(ERalpha) and by acting through extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2
(ERK1/2)-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK). Pretreatment with ER antagonist
ICI 182,780 blocked both E2-induced ERK1/2-MAPK activation and MUC5B gene
expression. It was also found that the activation of p90 ribosomal S 6 protein
kinase 1 (RSK1), cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB), and cAMP-response 
element (CRE) (-956 region of the MUC5B promoter)-responsive signaling cascades
via ERK1/2 MAPK are crucial aspects of the intracellular mechanisms that mediate 
MUC5B gene expression. Taken together, these studies give additional insights
into the molecular mechanism of hormone-induced MUC5B gene expression and enhance
our understanding of abnormal mucin secretion in response to hormonal imbalances.

PMID: 18688042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Endocrinology. 2008 Dec;149(12):6213-25. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0459. Epub 2008 Aug
7.

Regulation of bovine tumor necrosis factor-alpha-induced protein 6 in ovarian
follicles during the ovulatory process and promoter activation in granulosa
cells.

Sayasith K(1), Bouchard N, Doré M, Sirois J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Reproduction Animale and the Département de Biomédecine
Vétérinaire, Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire, Université de Montréal,
Saint-Hyacinthe, Québec, Canada J2S 7C6. k.sayasith@umontreal.ca

To study the regulation of bovine TNFalpha-induced protein 6 (TNFAIP6) prior to
ovulation, preovulatory follicles obtained after the treatment with human
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) were used. RT-PCR analyses showed that levels of
TNFAIP6 mRNA were low before hCG but significantly increased after hCG treatment 
in follicles. Further analyses and immunohistochemistry indicated that this
increase in transcript and protein levels occurred in theca and granulosa cells. 
To investigate molecular mechanisms involved in TNFAIP6 transactivation, the
activity of bovine TNFAIP6 promoter was studied in granulosa cell cultures.
Mutant studies identified the minimal region conferring full-length promoter
activity, in which activator protein-1 (AP1) and cAMP response element (CRE)
elements were required for promoter activity. Overexpression of dominant-negative
AP1 and activating transcription factor/cAMP response element-binding protein
(CREB) inhibited forskolin-inducible promoter activity. DNA binding assays
demonstrated the importance of AP1 and CRE for activity and identified JunD,
FosB, Fra2, CREB1, and CREB2 as being part of the AP1 complex, and FosB, Fra2,
and CREB1 for the CRE complex. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays confirmed
binding of these proteins with endogenous TNFAIP6 promoter. Treatment with
forskolin, prostaglandin E2, and catalytic subunit protein kinase (cPKA)
stimulated, but H89, PKA inhibitor peptide, and indomethacin inhibited, TNFAIP6
promoter activity and gene expression in granulosa cells. Collectively, this
study is the first to describe that the ovulatory process in cows is associated
with a gonadotropin-dependent induction of TNFAIP6 in ovarian follicles and
provide the molecular basis through which AP1 and CRE sites and PKA activation
played important roles in the regulation of TNFAIP6 in granulosa cells.

PMID: 18687781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Hippocampus. 2009 Jan;19(1):66-78. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20476.

Levothyroxin restores hypothyroidism-induced impairment of hippocampus-dependent 
learning and memory: Behavioral, electrophysiological, and molecular studies.

Alzoubi KH(1), Gerges NZ, Aleisa AM, Alkadhi KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Jordan University of
Science and Technology, Irbid, Jordan.

Hypothyroidism induces cognitive impairment in experimental animals and patients.
Clinical reports are conflicting about the ability of thyroid hormone replacement
therapy to fully restore the hypothyroidism-induced learning and memory
impairment. In this study, we investigated the effects of L-thyroxin (thyroxin)
treatment on hippocampus-dependent learning and memory in thyroidectomized adult 
rats. In the radial arm water maze (RAWM) task, thyroxin treated thyroidectomized
animals made significantly fewer errors than the untreated hypothyroid animals in
Trial 3 of the acquisition phase, short-term memory and long-term memory tests.
In addition, the number of errors made by the thyroxin treated thyroidectomized
animals was not different from that of the control group. Furthermore, the
days-to-criterion (DTC) values for thyroxin treated thyroidectomized animals were
not different from those of the control group but significantly lower than those 
of the untreated hypothyroid animals. In anesthetized rats, extracellular
recording from hippocampal area CA1 of hypothyroid rats shows that thyroxin
treatment restores impaired Late-phase long-term potentiation (L-LTP). Immunoblot
analysis of signaling molecules, including cyclic-AMP response element binding
protein (CREB), mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKp44/42; ERK1/2), in area
CA1 revealed that thyroxin treatment reversed hypothyroidism-induced reduction of
signaling molecules essential for learning and memory, and L-LTP. This study
shows that thyroxin treatment reverses hypothyroidism-induced impairment of
hippocampus-dependent cognition, and L-LTP, probably by restoring the levels of
signaling molecule important for these processes.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18680156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2008 Aug;65(8):882-92. doi:
10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2008.3.

Association of a polymorphism near CREB1 with differential aversion processing in
the insula of healthy participants.

Perlis RH(1), Holt DJ, Smoller JW, Blood AJ, Lee S, Kim BW, Lee MJ, Sun M, Makris
N, Kennedy DK, Rooney K, Dougherty DD, Hoge R, Rosenbaum JF, Fava M, Gusella J,
Gasic GP, Breiter HC; Phenotype Genotype Project on Addiction and Mood Disorders.

Collaborators: Breiter H, Blood A, Smoller J, Perlis R, Rosenbaum J, Hyman S,
Rosen B, Salat D, Fischl B, Dougherty D, Holt D, Hoge R, Evins AE, Gusella J,
Smoller J, Perlis R, Makris N, Kennedy D, Caviness V, Fava M, Iosifesus D, Perlis
R, Rooney K, Breiter H, Blood A, Kim BW, Kim MJ, Lee S, Loehr VG, Blood A,
Gusella J, Hyman S, Rosenbaum J, Thrall J, Breiter H, Gasic G, Rosenbaum JF, Fava
M, Smoller JW, Dougherty D, Holt D, Thrall J, Kennedy D, Makris N, Caviness V Jr,
Blood A, Evins E, Rosen B, Salat D, Fischl B, Hoge R, Gusella J, Smoller JW,
Perlis R, Sun M, Myers R, Clark T, Kennedy D, Makris N, Fava M, Iosifescu DV,
Perlis RH, Rooney K, Kim BW, Lissot T, Lee S, Calhoun J, Kim MJ, Baxter C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.

CONTEXT: Previous functional neuroimaging studies have identified a network of
brain regions that process aversive stimuli, including anger. A polymorphism near
the cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element binding protein gene (CREB1) 
has recently been associated with greater self-reported effort at anger control
as well as risk for antidepressant treatment-emergent suicidality in men with
major depressive disorder, but its functional effects have not been studied.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether this genetic variant is associated with altered
brain processing of and behavioral avoidance responses to angry facial
expressions.
DESIGN AND PARTICIPANTS: A total of 28 white participants (mean age, 29.2 years; 
13 women) were screened using the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV to
exclude any lifetime Axis I psychiatric disorder and were genotyped for
rs4675690, a single-nucleotide polymorphism near CREB1.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Blood oxygenation level-dependent signal by functional
magnetic resonance imaging in the amygdala, insula, anterior cingulate, and
orbitofrontal cortex during passive viewing of photographs of faces with
emotional expressions. To measure approach and avoidance responses to anger, an
off-line key-press task that traded effort for viewing time assessed valuation of
angry faces compared with other expressions.
RESULTS: The CREB1-linked single-nucleotide polymorphism was associated with
significant differential activation in an extended neural network responding to
angry and other facial expressions. The CREB1-associated insular activation was
coincident with activation associated with behavioral avoidance of angry faces.
CONCLUSIONS: A polymorphism near CREB1 is associated with responsiveness to angry
faces in a brain network implicated in processing aversion. Coincident activation
in the left insula is further associated with behavioral avoidance of these
stimuli.

PMCID: PMC3782742
PMID: 18678793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Neuroendocrinol. 2008 Oct;20(10):1147-54. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2826.2008.01775.x. Epub 2008 Jul 30.

Expression and activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunit-1 receptor
subunits in gonadotrophin-releasing hormone neurones of young and middle-aged
mice during the luteinising hormone surge.

Adjan V(1), Centers A, Jennes L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Kentucky College of
Medicine, Lexington, KY 40536-0298, USA.

Glutamate is an important excitatory neurotransmitter that stimulates the release
of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) and participates in the generation of
the luteinising hormone (LH) surge. To determine the mechanisms of action of
glutamate and possible changes in the glutamatergic input to GnRH neurones during
reproductive ageing, we measured the expression and activation of the mandatory
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunit-1 (NMDAR1) in GnRH neurones of young and
middle-aged mice prior to and during a steroid-induced LH surge. The results show
that, in young animals, approximately 55% of all GnRH neurones contain
immunoreactive NMDAR1 protein and this percentage does not change during the day 
of the LH surge. In approximately 10% of the GnRH neurones, NMDA receptor protein
is phosphorylated at Ser 890 prior to the surge, whereas, in approximately 55% of
the GnRH neurones, NMDAR1 subunits are phosphorylated during the LH surge.
Activation of NMDAR1 receptor subunits stimulates the calcium-calmodulin-kinase
IV (CaMK IV). pathway, which leads to the translocation of CaMK IV into the
nucleus where this enzyme can phosphorylate the cAMP response element-binding
protein (CREB) and CREB-binding protein. We show that, in young animals,
approximately 20% of the GnRH neurones contain CaMK IV in their nuclei 7 h prior 
to the LH surge; this percentage increases to 60% at the beginning of the surge
and decreases to approximately 40% some 2 h into the LH surge. In middle-aged
animals, approximately 25% of the GnRH neurones contain NMDAR1 protein and only
10% of the GnRH neurones contain phosphorylated NMDAR1 protein prior to and
during the surge; however 2 h after the peak of the surge, 20% of the GnRH
neurones contain phosphorylated NMDAR1 subunits. Similarly, 20% of GnRH neurones 
contain nuclear CaMK IV and this percentage does not change during the day of the
LH surge. The results suggest that, in the young animal, glutamatergic
innervation of GnRH neurones during the LH surge causes the activation and
phosphorylation of NMDAR1 receptor subunits which results in the translocation of
CaMK IV into the nucleus. However, both, the expression and activation of NMDAR1 
receptor subunits are greatly reduced in the middle-aged animals, which could
result in the absence of LH surges.

PMID: 18673408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2008 Oct;105(4):1218-27. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.00997.2007. Epub 2008 Jul 31.

Thyroid hormone effects on LKB1, MO25, phospho-AMPK, phospho-CREB, and PGC-1alpha
in rat muscle.

Branvold DJ(1), Allred DR, Beckstead DJ, Kim HJ, Fillmore N, Condon BM, Brown JD,
Sudweeks SN, Thomson DM, Winder WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Developmental Biology, Brigham Young University, 
Provo, UT 84602, USA.

Expression of all of the isoforms of the subunits of AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK) and AMPK activity is increased in skeletal muscle of hyperthyroid rats.
Activity of AMPK in skeletal muscle is regulated principally by the upstream
kinase, LKB1. This experiment was designed to determine whether the increase in
AMPK activity is accompanied by increased expression of the LKB1, along with
binding partner proteins. LKB1, MO25, and downstream targets were determined in
muscle extracts in control rats, in rats given 3 mg of thyroxine and 1 mg of
triiodothyronine per kilogram chow for 4 wk, and in rats given 0.01%
propylthiouracil (PTU; an inhibitor of thyroid hormone synthesis) in drinking
water for 4 wk (hypothyroid group). LKB1 and MO25 increased in the soleus of
thyroid hormone-treated rats vs. the controls. In other muscle types, LKB1
responses were variable, but MO25 increased in all. In soleus, MO25 mRNA
increased with thyroid hormone treatment, and STRAD mRNA increased with PTU
treatment. Phospho-AMPK and phospho-ACC were elevated in soleus and gastrocnemius
of hyperthyroid rats. Thyroid hormone treatment also increased the amount of
phospho-cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) in the soleus, heart, and
red quadriceps. Four proteins having CREB response elements (CRE) in promoter
regions of their genes (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma
coactivator-1alpha, uncoupling protein 3, cytochrome c, and hexokinase II) were
all increased in soleus in response to thyroid hormones. These data provide
evidence that thyroid hormones increase soleus muscle LKB1 and MO25 content with 
subsequent activation of AMPK, phosphorylation of CREB, and expression of
mitochondrial protein genes having CRE in their promoters.

PMID: 18669938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2009 Mar-Apr;12(2):143-6. doi: 10.2350/08-04-0460.1. Epub
2008 Jul 30.

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma with t(2;22)(q33;q12.2) and EWSR1 gene
rearrangement.

Shao L(1), Singh V, Cooley L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Children's Mercy Hospitals and Clinics, School of
Medicine, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, MO, USA. lshao@cmh.edu

Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is a rare soft tissue tumor of low
malignant potential. The tumor is mostly seen in the deep dermis and subcutis of 
the lower extremities in children and young adults. Histologically, the tumor
forms lobulated sheets of plump round to spindle cells surrounded by a fibrous
pseudocapsule and lymphoid cuff. The cytogenetic and molecular hallmarks of AFH
are not well defined. Only 4 of 30 reported cases of AFH have had karyotypic
information. We present a case of AFH in the inguinal region of a 12-year-old
girl. The tumor showed characteristic histological features, t(2;22)(q33;q12.2), 
and EWSR gene rearrangement by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

PMID: 18666823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Oncol Rep. 2008 Aug;20(2):391-6.

Key promoter elements involved in transcriptional activation of the
cancer-related gene coding for S100P calcium-binding protein.

Gibadulinova A(1), Oveckova I, Parkkila S, Pastorekova S, Pastorek J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Virology, Slovak Academy of
Sciences, 845 05 Bratislava, Slovakia.

S100P gene encodes a calcium-binding protein expressed in different tumor tissues
and is functionally implicated in malignant phenotype. Despite consistent
relationship to cancer, regulation of S100P gene expression has remained
unexplored. Here we determined the transcription start and defined the S100P core
promoter. Using a series of the promoter constructs analyzed by dual luciferase
reporter assay, we identified SMAD, STAT/CREB and SP/KLF binding sites as
critical cis-elements required for S100P expression in cancer cells. We also
demonstrated in EMSA that these elements bind nuclear factors, and showed their
functional significance by promoter deletion analysis. This study represents the 
first coherent contribution to understanding of factors and pathways responsible 
for S100P gene activation in cancer.

PMID: 18636203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jul 22;105(29):10161-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0800796105. Epub 2008 Jul 14.

Glucose controls CREB activity in islet cells via regulated phosphorylation of
TORC2.

Jansson D(1), Ng AC, Fu A, Depatie C, Al Azzabi M, Screaton RA.

Author information: 
(1)Apoptosis Research Centre, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research
Institute, 401 Smyth Road, Ottawa, ON, Canada.

CREB is a cAMP- and calcium-responsive transcriptional activator that is required
for islet beta cell proliferation and survival. Glucose and incretin hormones
elicit beta cell insulin secretion and promote synergistic CREB activity by
inducing the nuclear relocalization of TORC2 (also known as Crtc2), a coactivator
for CREB. In islet cells under basal conditions when CREB activity is low, TORC2 
is phosphorylated and sequestered in the cytoplasm by 14-3-3 proteins. In
response to feeding stimuli, TORC2 is dephosphorylated, enters the nucleus, and
binds to CREB located at target gene promoters. The dephosphorylation of TORC2 at
Ser-171 in response to cAMP is insufficient to account for the dynamics of TORC2 
localization and CREB activity in islet cells. Here, we identify Ser-275 of TORC2
as a 14-3-3 binding site that is phosphorylated under low glucose conditions and 
which becomes dephosphorylated by calcineurin in response to glucose influx.
Dephosphorylation of Ser-275 is essential for both glucose and cAMP-mediated
activation of CREB in beta cells and islets. Using a cell-based screen of 180
human protein kinases, we identified MARK2, a member of the AMPK family of
Ser/Thr kinases, as a Ser-275 kinase that blocks TORC2:CREB activity. Taken
together, these data provide the mechanistic underpinning for how cAMP and
glucose cooperatively promote a transcriptional program critical for islet cell
survival, and identifies MARK2 as a potential target for diabetes treatment.

PMCID: PMC2481316
PMID: 18626018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Endocrinology. 2008 Nov;149(11):5415-22. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0549. Epub 2008 Jul
10.

Insulin stimulates interleukin-6 expression and release in LS14 human adipocytes 
through multiple signaling pathways.

LaPensee CR(1), Hugo ER, Ben-Jonathan N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of cancer and Cell Biology, University of Cincinnati School of
Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0521, USA.

IL-6 is an important cytokine that regulates both immune and metabolic functions.
Within adipose tissue, preadipocytes produce significant amounts of IL-6, but
little is known about the factors or mechanisms that regulate IL-6 production in 
these cells. Using LS14, a newly developed human adipocyte cell line, our
objective was to determine the mechanisms by which insulin stimulates IL-6
production and release in preadipocytes. Insulin increased IL-6 gene expression
and secretion in a time- and dose-dependent manner. Insulin decreased cyclic AMP 
(cAMP) but increased cyclic GMP (cGMP) levels, and IL-6 expression/release was
stimulated by a cGMP analog. The stimulatory effect of insulin and cGMP was
abrogated by a specific inhibitor of protein kinase G (cyclic GMP-dependent
protein kinase). Both insulin and cGMP rapidly induced phosphorylation of cAMP
response element binding protein. Insulin also activated the MAPK signaling
pathway, and its blockade prevented the insulin-stimulated increases in IL-6 cell
content and release, but not IL-6 gene expression. Although inhibition of the
proteosome increased IL-6 cell content and release, proteosome activity was
unaffected by insulin. These data suggest that the stimulatory effects of insulin
on IL-6 release involve several interrelated components: transcription,
intracellular releasable pool, and secretion, which are differentially regulated 
and, thus, determine the size of the releasable pool of IL-6. Insulin-induced
IL-6 gene expression is mediated by cGMP/cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase/cAMP
response element binding protein, whereas MAPK is involved in the
insulin-stimulated IL-6 synthesis/release.

PMCID: PMC2584585
PMID: 18617614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Thromb Haemost. 2008 Jul;100(1):119-26. doi: 10.1160/TH07-11-0675.

Prostacyclin induction by high-density lipoprotein (HDL) in vascular smooth
muscle cells depends on sphingosine 1-phosphate receptors: effect of simvastatin.

González-Díez M(1), Rodríguez C, Badimon L, Martínez-González J.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación Cardiovascular, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, 
Sant Antoni Maria Claret # 167, 08025 Barcelona, Spain.

Prostacyclin (PGI2) is an important regulator of vascular homeostasis. Our goal
was to analyze the role of sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) and its receptors in the
up-regulation of cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2) induced by HDL in human vascular smooth
muscle cells (VSMC). S1P induces Cox-2 expression in a time-and dose-dependent
manner at concentrations (0.02-1 microM) compatible with those present in
physiological HDL levels. The effect was mimicked by dihydro-S1P (DhS1P), a S1P
derivative that only acts through cell surface S1P receptors. Desensitization of 
S1P receptors with S1P (or DhS1P) abolished HDL-induced Cox-2 up-regulation and
PGI2 release. Inhibition of S1P receptors by suramin (inhibitor of S1P3), JTE013 
(inhibitor of S1P2) or VPC23019 (inhibitor of S1P1 and S1P3) reduced the
up-regulation of Cox-2 induced by HDL and S1P. The combination of suramin and
JTE013 increased the inhibitory effect compared to that observed in cells treated
with each inhibitor alone. siRNA against S1P2 or S1P3 significantly reduced the
ability of HDL and S1P to up-regulate Cox-2. Simvastatin induced over-expression 
of S1P3 and potentiated the induction of Cox-2 expression produced by HDL (or
S1P). Finally, suramin, JTE013 and VPC23019 inhibited p38 MAPK and ERK1/2
signaling pathways activated by HDL (or S1P) and the downstream activation of
CREB, a key transcription factor involved in Cox-2 transcriptional up-regulation.
These results indicate that S1P receptors, in particular S1P2 and S1P3, are
involved in the Cox-2-dependent effects of HDL on vascular cells. Strategies
aimed to therapeutically modulate S1P or S1P receptors could be useful to improve
cardiovascular protection.

PMID: 18612546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Neuroscience. 2008 Aug 13;155(2):476-84. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2008.05.043.
Epub 2008 Jun 7.

Bacopa monniera ameliorates amnesic effects of diazepam qualifying
behavioral-molecular partitioning.

Saraf MK(1), Prabhakar S, Pandhi P, Anand A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Neuroscience Research Laboratory, Post Graduate
Institute of Medical Education and Research, Sector-12, Chandigarh, 160012,
India. msaraf@scientist.com

Benzodiazepines are known to produce amnesia by involvement of GABAergic system
and by interference of long term potentiation (LTP). In this study, we examined
effect of Bacopa monniera on downstream molecules of LTP after diazepam-induced
amnesia in mice. We used a Morris water maze scale for evaluating the effect of
Bacopa monniera after screening for muscle coordination by rota rod. The index of
acquisition and retrieval was recorded as escape latency time (ELT). Behavioral
results showed that Bacopa monniera (120 mg kg(-1) oral) significantly reversed
diazepam- (1.75 mg kg(-1) i.p.) induced amnesia in Morris water maze task. The
molecular studies revealed that diazepam upregulated mitogen activated protein
kinase (MAP kinase), phosphorylated CREB (pCREB) and inducible nitric oxide
synthase (iNOS), while it downregulated nitrite, nitrate, total nitrite, cAMP
response element binding protein (CREB) expression, phosphodiesterase, cyclic
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) without affecting calmodulin levels. Bacopa
monniera suppressed the diazepam induced upregulation of MAP kinase, pCREB and
iNOS and attenuated the downregulation of nitrite. It did not affect the cAMP,
PDE, nitrate, total nitrite, total CREB level. These behavioral findings
displayed the reversal of diazepam-induced amnesia by Bacopa monniera without
qualifying the molecular details although some downstream molecules of LTP may be
involved.

PMID: 18585439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Biol Chem. 2008 Aug 29;283(35):23884-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800754200. Epub 2008
Jun 24.

Rap1 activation plays a regulatory role in pancreatic amylase secretion.

Sabbatini ME(1), Chen X, Ernst SA, Williams JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0622, USA. mesabba@umich.edu

Rap1 is a member of the Ras superfamily of small GTP-binding proteins and is
localized on pancreatic zymogen granules. The current study was designed to
determine whether GTP-Rap1 is involved in the regulation of amylase secretion.
Rap1A/B and the two Rap1 guanine nucleotide exchange factors, Epac1 and
CalDAG-GEF III, were identified in mouse pancreatic acini. A fraction of both
Rap1 and Epac1 colocalized with amylase in zymogen granules, but only Rap1 was
integral to the zymogen granule membranes. Stimulation with cholecystokinin
(CCK), carbachol, and vasoactive intestinal peptide all induced Rap1 activation, 
as did calcium ionophore A23187, phorbol ester, forskolin, 8-bromo-cyclic AMP,
and the Epac-specific cAMP analog 8-pCPT-2'-O-Me-cAMP. The phospholipase C
inhibitor U-73122 abolished carbachol- but not forskolin-induced Rap1 activation.
Co-stimulation with carbachol and 8-pCPT-2'-O-Me-cAMP led to an additive effect
on Rap1 activation, whereas a synergistic effect was seen on amylase release.
Although the protein kinase A inhibitor H-89 abolished forskolin-stimulated CREB 
phosphorylation, it did not modify forskolin-induced GTP-Rap1 levels, excluding
PKA participation. Overexpression of Rap1 GTPase-activating protein, which
blocked Rap1 activation, reduced the effect of 8-bromo-cyclic AMP,
8-pCPT-2'-O-Me-cAMP, and vasoactive intestinal peptide on amylase release by 60% 
and reduced CCK- as well as carbachol-stimulated pancreatic amylase release by
40%. These findings indicate that GTP-Rap1 is required for pancreatic amylase
release. Rap1 activation not only mediates the cAMP-evoked response via Epac1 but
is also involved in CCK- and carbachol-induced amylase release, with their action
most likely mediated by CalDAG-GEF III.

PMCID: PMC2527106
PMID: 18577515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Science. 2008 Jul 11;321(5886):259-63. doi: 10.1126/science.1156499. Epub 2008
Jun 19.

Modulation of gene expression via disruption of NF-kappaB signaling by a
bacterial small molecule.

Kravchenko VV(1), Kaufmann GF, Mathison JC, Scott DA, Katz AZ, Grauer DC, Lehmann
M, Meijler MM, Janda KD, Ulevitch RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbial Sciences, Scripps Research Institute,
10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The control of innate immune responses through activation of the nuclear
transcription factor NF-kappaB is essential for the elimination of invading
microbial pathogens. We showed that the bacterial N-(3-oxo-dodecanoyl) homoserine
lactone (C12) selectively impairs the regulation of NF-kappaB functions in
activated mammalian cells. The consequence is specific repression of
stimulus-mediated induction of NF-kappaB-responsive genes encoding inflammatory
cytokines and other immune regulators. These findings uncover a strategy by which
C12-producing opportunistic pathogens, such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, attenuate 
the innate immune system to establish and maintain local persistent infection in 
humans, for example, in cystic fibrosis patients.

PMID: 18566250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2008 Aug;32(8):1439-50. doi:
10.1111/j.1530-0277.2008.00720.x. Epub 2008 Jun 28.

Maturation-dependent alcohol resistance in the developing mouse: cerebellar
neuronal loss and gene expression during alcohol-vulnerable and -resistant
periods.

Karaçay B(1), Li S, Bonthius DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Child Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, 200 Hawkins Dr.,
University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
bahri-karacay@uiowa.edu

BACKGROUND: Alcohol abuse during pregnancy injures the fetal brain. One of
alcohol's most important neuroteratogenic effects is neuronal loss. Rat models
have shown that the cerebellum becomes less vulnerable to alcohol-induced
neuronal death as it matures. We determined if maturation-dependent alcohol
resistance occurs in mice and compared patterns of gene expression during the
alcohol resistant and sensitive periods.
METHODS: Neonatal mice received alcohol daily over postnatal day (PD) 2 to 4 or
PD8 to 10. Purkinje cells and granule cells were quantified on PD25. The temporal
expression patterns of 4 neuro-developmental genes and 3 neuro-protective genes
in the cerebellum were determined daily over PD0 to 15 to determine how gene
expression changes as the cerebellum transitions from alcohol-vulnerable to
alcohol-resistant. The effect of alcohol on expression of these genes was
determined when the cerebellum is alcohol sensitive (PD4) and resistant (PD10).
RESULTS: Purkinje and granule cells were vulnerable to alcohol-induced death at
PD2 to 4, but not at PD8 to 10. Acquisition of maturation-dependent alcohol
resistance coincided with changes in the expression of neurodevelopmental genes. 
The vulnerability of cerebellar neurons to alcohol toxicity declined in parallel 
with decreasing levels of Math1 and Cyclin D2, markers of immature granule cells.
Likewise, the rising resistance to alcohol toxicity paralleled increasing levels 
of GABA alpha-6 and Wnt-7a, markers of mature granule neurons. Expression of
growth factors and genes with survival promoting function (IGF-1, BDNF, and
cyclic AMP response element binding protein) did not rise as the cerebellum
transitioned from alcohol-vulnerable to alcohol-resistant. All 3 were expressed
at substantial levels during the vulnerable period and were not expressed at
higher levels later. Acute alcohol exposure altered the expression of
neurodevelopmental genes and growth factor genes when administered either during 
the alcohol vulnerable period or resistant period. However, the patterns in which
gene expression changed varied among the genes and depended on timing of alcohol 
administration.
CONCLUSIONS: Mice have a temporal window of vulnerability in the first week of
life, during which cerebellar neurons are more sensitive to alcohol toxicity than
during the second week. Expression of genes governing neuronal maturation changes
in synchrony with the acquisition of alcohol resistance. Growth factors do not
rise as the cerebellum transitions from alcohol-vulnerable to alcohol-resistant. 
Thus, a process intrinsic to neuronal maturation, rather than rising levels of
growth factors, likely underlies maturation-dependent alcohol resistance.

PMID: 18565154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Dermatol Sci. 2008 Oct;52(1):39-46. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2008.03.013. Epub
2008 Jun 2.

Expressional changes in the intracellular melanogenesis pathways and their
possible role in the pathogenesis of vitiligo.

Kingo K(1), Aunin E, Karelson M, Rätsep R, Silm H, Vasar E, Kõks S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venerology, Centre of Molecular and Clinical
Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.

BACKGROUND: Main pathway in human melanocytes through which signal from the
melanocortin system reaches the melanogenesis enzymes is cAMP/PKA pathway and it 
is modulated by Wnt and MAPK pathways. In our previous study we established
significant increase of melanocortin receptor expression in unaffected skin of
vitiligo patients compared to healthy subjects.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to assess the gene expression profile of the
intracellular signalling pathways linking melanocortin system with enzymes
involved in melanogenesis.
METHODS: Using QRT-PCR method, mRNA expression levels of eight genes related to
signal transduction from the melanocortin system to melanogenesis enzymes was
measured in lesional and non-lesional skin of vitiligo patients and in the skin
of healthy control subjects. Following genes were analyzed in the study: MITF,
CREB1, p38, USF1, PIK3CB (PI3K), RPS6KB1, LEF1 and BCL2.
RESULTS: The mRNA levels of MITF, LEF1, p38, PIK3CB and RPS6KB1 were decreased in
lesional skin of vitiligo patients compared to skin of healthy control subjects. 
We also found increased expression of USF1 and BCL2 in non-lesional skin of
vitiligo patients compared to skin of healthy control subjects. mRNA levels of
MITF and BCL2 were decreased in lesional skin of vitiligo patients compared to
non-lesional skin of vitiligo patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Present study indicates increased expression of the genes of the
intracellular melanogenesis pathway in the non-lesional skin of vitiligo
patients. This finding suggests activation of melanogenesis pathway in the
non-lesional skin of vitiligo.

PMID: 18514490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Blood. 2008 Sep 1;112(5):1610-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-01-135111. Epub 2008 May
29.

CC chemokine receptor 5 gene promoter activation by the cyclic AMP response
element binding transcription factor.

Kuipers HF(1), Biesta PJ, Montagne LJ, van Haastert ES, van der Valk P, van den
Elsen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University
Medical Center, The Netherlands.

The chemokine receptor CCR5 is implicated in the pathogenesis of various
inflammatory diseases, such as multiple sclerosis (MS), atherosclerosis,
transplant rejection, and autoimmunity. In previous studies, we have shown that
MS lesions are characterized by enhanced expression of transcription factors
associated with stress responses, ie, IRF-1, NF-kappaB, and CREB-1, which
modulate expression of both classes of major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
molecules. The expression of MHC-I and MHC-II molecules greatly overlaps with the
expression of CCR5 in MS lesions. Therefore, we investigated whether these
factors are also involved in the transcriptional regulation of CCR5. Using in
vitro assays, we determined that neither IRF-1 nor NF-kappaB is involved in the
activation of the CCR5 promoter. This is corroborated by the finding that these
factors are not involved in the induction of endogenous CCR5 transcription in
various cell types. In contrast, we show that CCR5 expression is regulated by the
cAMP/CREB pathway and that interference in this pathway affects endogenous CCR5
transcription. From this, we conclude that the cAMP/CREB pathway is involved in
the regulation of CCR5 transcription and that, given the ubiquitous nature of
CREB-1 protein expression, additional regulatory mechanisms must contribute to
cell type-specific expression of CCR5.

PMID: 18511806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Learn Mem. 2008 May 29;15(6):426-33. doi: 10.1101/lm.888808. Print 2008 Jun.

Activation of LVGCCs and CB1 receptors required for destabilization of
reactivated contextual fear memories.

Suzuki A(1), Mukawa T, Tsukagoshi A, Frankland PW, Kida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, Faculty of Applied Bioscience, Tokyo University of
Agriculture, 1-1-1 Sakuragaoka, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 156-8502, Japan.

Previous studies have shown that inhibiting protein synthesis shortly after
reactivation impairs the subsequent expression of a previously consolidated fear 
memory. This has suggested that reactivation returns a memory to a labile state
and that protein synthesis is required for the subsequent restabilization of
memory. While the molecular mechanisms underlying the restabilization of
reactivated memories are being uncovered, those underlying the initial
destabilization are not known at all. Using a contextual fear conditioning
paradigm in mice, here we show that LVGCCs or CB1 receptors in hippocampus are
required for the initial destabilization of reactivated memory. Either
pharmacological blockade of hippocampal protein synthesis or genetic disruption
of CREB-dependent transcription disrupts memory restabilization following
reactivation. However, these effects were completely blocked when mice were
treated with inhibitors of either LVGCCs or CB1 receptors, indicating that LVGCCs
or CB1 receptors are required for the initial destabilization of reactivated
memory. In control experiments, we show that blockade of LVGCCs or CB1 receptors 
does not interfere with the ability of ANI to block protein synthesis, or with
the ability of ANI to impair initial consolidation. These experiments begin to
reveal mechanisms underlying the destabilization of previously consolidated
memories following reactivation and indicate the importance of activation of
LVGCCs and CB1 in this process.

PMCID: PMC2414253
PMID: 18511694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Science. 2008 May 30;320(5880):1224-9. doi: 10.1126/science.1153252.

MeCP2, a key contributor to neurological disease, activates and represses
transcription.

Chahrour M(1), Jung SY, Shaw C, Zhou X, Wong ST, Qin J, Zoghbi HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2008 May 30;320(5880):1172-3.

Mutations in the gene encoding the transcriptional repressor methyl-CpG binding
protein 2 (MeCP2) cause the neurodevelopmental disorder Rett syndrome. Loss of
function as well as increased dosage of the MECP2 gene cause a host of
neuropsychiatric disorders. To explore the molecular mechanism(s) underlying
these disorders, we examined gene expression patterns in the hypothalamus of mice
that either lack or overexpress MeCP2. In both models, MeCP2 dysfunction induced 
changes in the expression levels of thousands of genes, but unexpectedly the
majority of genes (approximately 85%) appeared to be activated by MeCP2. We
selected six genes and confirmed that MeCP2 binds to their promoters.
Furthermore, we showed that MeCP2 associates with the transcriptional activator
CREB1 at the promoter of an activated target but not a repressed target. These
studies suggest that MeCP2 regulates the expression of a wide range of genes in
the hypothalamus and that it can function as both an activator and a repressor of
transcription.

PMCID: PMC2443785
PMID: 18511691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2008 Aug;295(2):C499-513. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00369.2007. Epub 2008 May 28.

Small mouse cholangiocytes proliferate in response to H1 histamine receptor
stimulation by activation of the IP3/CaMK I/CREB pathway.

Francis H(1), Glaser S, Demorrow S, Gaudio E, Ueno Y, Venter J, Dostal D, Onori
P, Franchitto A, Marzioni M, Vaculin S, Vaculin B, Katki K, Stutes M, Savage J,
Alpini G.

Author information: 
(1)Central Texas Veterans Health Care System, Scott & White and Texas A&M Health 
Science Center College of Medicine, Medical Research Bldg., 702 SW H.K. Dodgen
Loop, Temple, TX, 76504, USA.

Cholangiopathies are characterized by the heterogeneous proliferation of
different-sized cholangiocytes. Large cholangiocytes proliferate by a
cAMP-dependent mechanism. The function of small cholangiocytes may depend on the 
activation of inositol trisphosphate (IP(3))/Ca(2+)-dependent signaling pathways;
however, data supporting this speculation are lacking. Four histamine receptors
exist (HRH1, HRH2, HRH3, and HRH4). In several cells: 1) activation of HRH1
increases intracellular Ca(2+) concentration levels; and 2) increased [Ca(2+)](i)
levels are coupled with calmodulin-dependent stimulation of calmodulin-dependent 
protein kinase (CaMK) and activation of cAMP-response element binding protein
(CREB). HRH1 agonists modulate small cholangiocyte proliferation by activation of
IP(3)/Ca(2+)-dependent CaMK/CREB. We evaluated HRH1 expression in cholangiocytes.
Small and large cholangiocytes were stimulated with histamine trifluoromethyl
toluidide (HTMT dimaleate; HRH1 agonist) for 24-48 h with/without terfenadine,
BAPTA/AM, or W7 before measuring proliferation. Expression of CaMK I, II, and IV 
was evaluated in small and large cholangiocytes. We measured IP(3), Ca(2+) and
cAMP levels, phosphorylation of CaMK I, and activation of CREB (in the
absence/presence of W7) in small cholangiocytes treated with HTMT dimaleate. CaMK
I knockdown was performed in small cholangiocytes stimulated with HTMT dimaleate 
before measurement of proliferation and CREB activity. Small and large
cholangiocytes express HRH1, CaMK I, and CaMK II. Small (but not large)
cholangiocytes proliferate in response to HTMT dimaleate and are blocked by
terfenadine (HRH1 antagonist), BAPTA/AM, and W7. In small cholangiocytes, HTMT
dimaleate increased IP(3)/Ca(2+) levels, CaMK I phosphorylation, and CREB
activity. Gene knockdown of CaMK I ablated the effects of HTMT dimaleate on small
cholangiocyte proliferation and CREB activation. The IP(3)/Ca(2+)/CaMK I/CREB
pathway is important in the regulation of small cholangiocyte function.

PMCID: PMC2518416
PMID: 18508907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Mol Biol. 2008 Jun 27;380(1):1-16. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.04.056. Epub 2008
Apr 30.

Recruitment of CREB1 and histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) to the mouse Ltbp-1
promoter regulates its constitutive expression in a dioxin receptor-dependent
manner.

Gomez-Duran A(1), Ballestar E, Carvajal-Gonzalez JM, Marlowe JL, Puga A, Esteller
M, Fernandez-Salguero PM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias,
Universidad de Extremadura, Avenida de Elvas s/n, 06071-Badajoz, Spain.

Latent TGFbeta-binding protein 1 (LTBP-1) is a key regulator of TGFbeta targeting
and activation in the extracellular matrix. LTBP-1 is recognized as a major
docking molecule to localize, and possibly to activate, TGFbeta in the
extracellular matrix. Despite this relevant function, the molecular mechanisms
regulating Ltbp-1 transcription remain largely unknown. Previous results from our
laboratory revealed that mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) lacking dioxin
receptor (AhR) had increased Ltbp-1 mRNA expression and elevated TGFbeta
activity, suggesting that AhR repressed Ltbp-1 transcription. Here, we have
cloned the mouse Ltbp-1 gene promoter and analysed its mechanism of
transcriptional repression by AhR. Reporter gene assays, AhR over-expression and 
site-directed mutagenesis showed that basal Ltbp-1 transcription is
AhR-dependent. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and RNA interference (RNAi)
revealed that AhR regulates Ltbp-1 transcription by a mechanism involving
recruitment of co-activators such as CREB1 and co-repressors such as HDAC2 to the
Ltbp-1 promoter. In AhR-expressing (AhR+/+) MEF cells, the recruitment of HDAC1, 
2 and 4 correlated with decreased K8H4 acetylation and impaired binding of
pCREB(Ser133) to the Ltbp-1 promoter, likely maintaining a constitutive repressed
state. AhR-/- MEF cells had the opposite pattern of HDACs and pCREB1(Ser133)
binding to Ltbp-1 promoter, and therefore, over-expressed Ltbp-1 mRNA. In
agreement, siRNA for HDAC2 increased Ltbp-1 expression and K8H4 acetylation in
AhR+/+ but not in AhR-/- MEF cells. We suggest that HDAC2 binding keeps Ltbp-1
promoter repressed in AhR+/+ MEF cells, whereas in AhR-null MEF cells the absence
of HDAC2 and the binding of pCREB(Ser133) allow Ltbp-1 transcription. Thus,
epigenetics can contribute to constitutive Ltbp-1 repression by a mechanism
requiring AhR activity.

PMCID: PMC2824431
PMID: 18508077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Pineal Res. 2009 Jan;46(1):36-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2008.00605.x. Epub
2008 May 27.

Protection against cell death and sustained tyrosine hydroxylase phosphorylation 
in hydrogen peroxide- and MPP-treated human neuroblastoma cells with melatonin.

Chetsawang B(1), Chetsawang J, Govitrapong P.

Author information: 
(1)Neuro-Behavioural Biology Center, Institute of Science and Technology for
Research and Development, Mahidol University, Salaya, Nakhonpathom, Thailand.
grbcs@mahidol.ac.th

Neuroprotective effects of melatonin against oxidative stress-induced neuronal
cell degeneration in human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells were investigated in this 
report. The results demonstrate that exogenous administration of H(2)O(2) and
1-methyl, 4-phenyl, pyridinium ion (MPP(+)) significantly decreased cell
viability in SH-SY5Y cultured cells. Desipramine, a monoamine uptake blocker was 
able to abolish the toxic effects of MPP(+) but not H(2)O(2) in reduction of cell
viability. Conversely, melatonin reversed the toxic effects of H(2)O(2) and
MPP(+) on cell viability. In addition, the reduction of phosphorylation of
tyrosine hydroxylase, the rate limiting enzyme in dopamine synthesis, and
phosphorylation of cyclic AMP responsive element-binding protein by H(2)O(2) and 
MPP(+) was also diminished by melatonin. These results demonstrate some effective
roles of melatonin on neuroprotection and its action on the modulation of
tyrosine hydroxylase phosphorylation.

PMID: 18507712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Nutr. 2008 Jun;138(6):996-1003.

Diallyl disulfide and diallyl trisulfide suppress oxidized LDL-induced vascular
cell adhesion molecule and E-selectin expression through protein kinase A- and
B-dependent signaling pathways.

Lei YP(1), Chen HW, Sheen LY, Lii CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung 402, Taiwan.

Uptake of oxidized LDL (ox-LDL) by vascular endothelial cells is a critical step 
in the initiation and development of atherosclerosis. Adhesion molecules are
upregulated by ox-LDL and numerous inflammatory cytokines and play a pivotal role
in atherogenesis. In this study, we examined whether diallyl sulfide (DAS),
diallyl disulfide (DADS), and diallyl trisulfide (DATS), 3 major organosulfur
compounds of garlic oil, reduce adhesion molecule expression induced by ox-LDL
and, if so, through what mechanism. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells were
preincubated with 1 mmol/L DAS, 200 mumol/L DADS, or 100 mumol/L DATS for 16 h
and then with 40 mg/L ox-LDL for an additional 24 h. ox-LDL induction of cellular
and cell surface expression of E-selectin and vascular cell adhesion molecule
(VCAM)-1 was suppressed by garlic allyl sulfides in the order DATS > DADS > DAS. 
The adhesion of HL-60 cells to endothelial cells was inhibited 27 and 33% and the
production of cellular peroxides was inhibited 43 and 50% by DADS and DATS,
respectively (P < 0.05). ox-LDL alone dephosphorylated protein kinase B (PKB) and
cAMP responsive element binding protein (CREB); such deactivation was reversed by
DADS and DATS. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that the activation of
CREB binding to DNA was consistent with changes in CREB phosphorylation. The
protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor H89 reversed the suppression of VCAM-1 by DADS
and DATS, but the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor wortmannin had no
effect. In contrast, wortmannin abolished DADS- and DATS-induced suppression of
ox-LDL-induced E-selectin expression. These results suggest that the suppression 
of ox-LDL-induced E-selectin and VCAM-1 expression by DADS and DATS and, thus,
monocyte adhesion to endothelial cells is likely dependent on the PI3K/PKB or
PKA/CREB signaling pathway in an adhesion molecule-specific manner. To our
knowledge, this is the first report that garlic modulates ox-LDL-mediated
leukocyte adhesion to human endothelial cells through the PKB and PKA pathways.

PMID: 18492825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Horm Metab Res. 2008 May;40(5):347-53. doi: 10.1055/s-2008-1076694.

Phosphodiesterase 11A expression in the adrenal cortex, primary pigmented nodular
adrenocortical disease, and other corticotropin-independent lesions.

Boikos SA(1), Horvath A, Heyerdahl S, Stein E, Robinson-White A, Bossis I,
Bertherat J, Carney JA, Stratakis CA.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Endocrinology & Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

A variety of adrenal tumors and bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasias (BAH)
leading to Cushing syndrome (CS) may be caused by aberrant cAMP signaling. We
recently identified patients with a micronodular form of BAH that we have called 
"isolated micronodular adrenocortical disease" (iMAD) in whom CS was associated
with inactivating mutations in phosphodiesterase (PDE) 11A ( PDE11A). In the
present study, we examined PDE11A expression in normal adrenocortical tissue,
sporadic tumors, and hyperplasias without PDE11A mutations, and primary pigmented
nodular adrenocortical disease (PPNAD) and adenomas from patients with PRKAR1A
and a single tumor with a GNAS mutation. The total number of the tumor samples
that we studied was 22. Normal human tissues showed consistent PDE11A expression.
There was variable expression of PDE11A in sporadic adrenocortical hyperplasia or
adenomas; PPNAD tissues from patients with PRKAR1A mutations expressed
consistently high levels of PDE11A in contrast to adenomas caused by GNAS
mutations. Phosphorylated CREB was the highest in tissues from patients with iMAD
compared to all other forms of BAH and normal adrenal tissue. We conclude that
PDE11A is expressed widely in adrenal cortex. Its expression appears to be
increased in PPNAD but varies widely among other adrenocortical tumors. PRKAR1A
expression appears to be higher in tissues with PDE11A defects. Finally,
sequencing defects in PDE11A are associated with a high state of CREB
phosphorylation, just like PRKAR1A mutations. These preliminary data suggest that
these two molecules are perhaps regulated in a reverse manner in their control of
cAMP signaling in adrenocortical tissues.

PMCID: PMC2713062
PMID: 18491255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. FEBS Lett. 2008 Jun 11;582(13):1889-93. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.04.059. Epub 
2008 May 15.

CREB activates proteasomal degradation of DSCR1/RCAN1.

Seo SR(1), Chung KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Bioscience, School of Bioscience and Biotechnology,
Kangwon National University, Chuncheon 200-701, Republic of Korea.
suryeonseo@kangwon.ac.kr <suryeonseo@kangwon.ac.kr>

The cyclic AMP response element-binding protein (CREB) is involved in the
development and function of the nervous system. Here, we find that CREB decreases
the protein level of Regulator of Calcineurin Activity 1 (RCAN1/DSCR1/MCIP1),
which is overexpressed in the brain of Down Syndrome (DS) patients. Decrease of
RCAN1 by CREB was blocked by proteasome inhibitors, indicating that this decrease
is mediated by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Furthermore, we found that the
ability of CREB to activate the degradation of RCAN1 depends on its
transcriptional activation. Consistently, CREB-enhanced the ubiquitination and
turnover rate of RCAN1. Our results reveal a new regulatory role for CREB in DS
pathology through the proteasomal degradation of RCAN1.

PMID: 18485898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2008 Jul;295(1):G153-G162. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00036.2008. Epub 2008 May 15.

Human gastrin-releasing peptide receptor gene regulation requires transcription
factor binding at two distinct CRE sites.

Chinnappan D(1), Qu X, Xiao D, Ratnasari A, Weber HC.

Author information: 
(1)Boston University School of Medicine, Section of Gastroenterology, 650 Albany 
St., EBRC Rm. 515, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Ectopic expression of the gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP) receptor (GRP-R) occurs
frequently in human malignancies of the gastrointestinal tract. Owing to
paracrine and autocrine interaction with its specific high-affinity ligand GRP,
tumor cell proliferation, migration, and invasion might ensue. Here we provide
the first insights regarding molecular mechanisms of GRP-R regulation in
gastrointestinal cancer cells. We identified by EMSA and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays two cAMP response element (CRE) binding sites that
recruited transcription factor CRE binding protein (CREB) to the human GRP-R
promoter. Transfection studies with a wild-type human GRP-R promoter reporter and
corresponding CRE mutants showed that both CRE sites are critical for basal
transcriptional activation in gastrointestinal cancer cells. Forced expression of
cAMP-dependent effectors CREB and PKA resulted in robust upregulation of human
GRP-R transcriptional activity, and this overexpression strictly required intact 
wild-type CRE sites. Direct cAMP stimulation with forskolin resulted in enhanced 
human GRP-R promoter activity only in HuTu-80 cells, but not in Caco-2 cells,
coinciding with forskolin-induced CREB phosphorylation occurring only in HuTu-80 
but not Caco-2 cells. In summary, CREB is a critical regulator of human GRP-R
expression in gastrointestinal cancer and might be activated through different
upstream intracellular pathways.

PMCID: PMC2494719
PMID: 18483184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2008 Jul;295(1):G170-G178. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00492.2007. Epub 2008 May 8.

Regulation of transforming growth factor beta-induced responses by protein kinase
A in pancreatic acinar cells.

Yang H(1), Lee CJ, Zhang L, Sans MD, Simeone DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Molecular, University of Michigan Medical School,
Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

TGF-beta is an important regulator of growth and differentiation in the pancreas 
and has been implicated in pancreatic tumorigenesis. We have recently
demonstrated that TGF-beta can activate protein kinase A (PKA) in mink lung
epithelial cells (Zhang L, Duan C, Binkley C, Li G, Uhler M, Logsdon C, Simeone
D. Mol Cell Biol 24: 2169-2180, 2004). In this study, we sought to determine
whether TGF-beta activates PKA in pancreatic acinar cells, the mechanism by which
PKA is activated, and PKA's role in TGF-beta-mediated growth regulatory
responses. TGF-beta rapidly activated PKA in pancreatic acini while having no
effect on intracellular cAMP levels. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments
demonstrated a physical interaction between a Smad3/Smad4 complex and the
regulatory subunits of PKA. TGF-beta also induced activation of the PKA-dependent
transcription factor CREB. Both the specific PKA inhibitor H89 and PKI peptide
significantly blocked TGF-beta's ability to activate PKA and CREB.
TGF-beta-mediated growth inhibition and TGF-beta-induced p21 and SnoN expression 
in pancreatic acinar cells were blocked by H89 and PKI peptide. This study
demonstrates that this novel cross talk between TGF-beta and PKA signaling
pathways may play an important role in regulating TGF-beta signaling in the
pancreas.

PMCID: PMC2494718
PMID: 18467503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Neurosci Lett. 2008 Jun 13;438(1):29-33. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.04.056. Epub 
2008 Apr 20.

Neuroprotective effects of hesperetin in mouse primary neurones are independent
of CREB activation.

Rainey-Smith S(1), Schroetke LW, Bahia P, Fahmi A, Skilton R, Spencer JP,
Rice-Evans C, Rattray M, Williams RJ.

Author information: 
(1)King's College London, The Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, Guy's
Hospital Campus, London SE1 1UL, UK.

Dietary flavonoids, including the citrus flavanone hesperetin, may have
stimulatory effects on cytoprotective intracellular signalling pathways. In
primary mouse cortical neurone cultures, but not SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma
cells or human primary dermal fibroblasts (Promocells), hesperetin (100-300nM,
15min) caused significant increases in the level of ERK1/2 phosphorylation, but
did not increase CREB phosphorylation. Administration of hesperetin for 18h did
not alter gene expression driven by the cyclic AMP response element (CRE),
assessed using a luciferase reporter system, but 300nM hesperetin partially
reversed staurosporine-induced cell death in primary neurones. Our data show that
hesperetin is a neuroprotective compound at concentrations where antioxidant
effects are unlikely to predominate. The effects of hesperetin are cell-type
dependent and, unlike the flavanol (-)epicatechin, neuroprotection in vitro is
not associated with enhanced CREB phosphorylation or CRE-mediated gene
expression.

PMID: 18467030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2008;13(4):493-501. doi: 10.2478/s11658-008-0019-4. Epub 2008
May 6.

The mitochondrial localization of RelB and NFATx in immature T cells.

Stasik I(1), Rapak A, Ziolo E, Strzadala L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Molecular Immunobiology, Ludwik Hirszfeld Institute of
Immunology and Experimental Therapy, Polish Academy of Sciences, ul. Weigla 12,
53-114, Wroclaw, Poland.

In order to exert their activity, transcription factors must be transported to
the nucleus. Certain transcription factors have also been found on mitochondria. 
Here, the localization of RelB and NFATx in the mitochondrial fractions of normal
thymocytes and thymic lymphoma cells is shown for the first time. CREB was only
found in the nucleus, while p50 (NFkappaB) was found in both the nucleus and the 
cytoplasm, but outside the mitochondria. The translocation of transcription
factors to the mitochondria is differentially regulated. Unlike RelB, which is
always present in the mitochondrial fraction, NFATx appeared on the mitochondria 
in cells treated with ionomycin together with an immunosuppressant and inhibitor 
of calcineurin (FK506). This data reveals that the mitochondrial localization of 
some transcription factors is precisely controlled by a calcium signal sensitive 
to FK506 in T cells.

PMID: 18463795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jul 4;283(27):18743-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800296200. Epub 2008 
May 6.

Mechanisms mediating the enhanced gene transcription of P2X3 receptor by
calcitonin gene-related peptide in trigeminal sensory neurons.

Simonetti M(1), Giniatullin R, Fabbretti E.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology Sector and Italian Institute of Technology Unit, International
School for Advanced Studies (SISSA), 34014 Trieste, Italy .

The molecular mechanisms underlying migraine pain remain unclear and probably
require sustained facilitation in pain-sensing P2X(3) receptors gated by
extracellular ATP in nociceptive sensory neurons. The major migraine mediator
calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) is known to sensitize P2X(3) receptors to 
increase impulse flow to brainstem trigeminal nuclei. This process is mediated
via changes in the expression and function of P2X(3) receptors initially through 
enhanced trafficking and, later, perhaps through augmented synthesis of P2X(3)
receptors. To clarify the mechanisms responsible for CGRP-evoked long lasting
alterations in P2X(3) receptors, we used as a model mouse trigeminal ganglion
neurons in culture. CGRP activated Ca(2+)-calmodulin-dependent kinase II, which
became localized to the perimembrane region and neuronal processes, a phenomenon 
already apparent after 30 min and accompanied by a parallel increase in
cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation and nuclear
translocation. These effects triggered increased P2X(3) receptor transcription
and were prevented by expressing a dominant negative form of CREB. Increased
P2X(3) receptor synthesis was partly mediated by endogenous brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) because of its block by anti-BDNF antibodies and
mimicry by exogenous BDNF. Immunocytochemistry experiments indicated distinct
subpopulations of BDNF- or CGRP-sensitive trigeminal neurons with only partial
overlap. The present data indicate a novel mechanism for enhancing P2X(3)
receptor expression and function in trigeminal sensory neurons by CGRP via CREB
phosphorylation. BDNF was an intermediate to extend the sensitizing effect of
CGRP also to CGRP-insensitive neurons. This combinatorial action could serve as a
powerful process to amplify and prolong pain mediated by P2X(3) receptors.

PMID: 18460469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Conscious Cogn. 2008 Jun;17(2):468-74. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2008.03.015. Epub
2008 Apr 29.

The molecules of social recognition memory: implications for social cognition,
extended mind, and neuroethics.

Bickle J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Philosophy and Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0374, USA. bicklejw@email.uc.edu

Social cognition, cognitive neuroscience, and neuroethics have reached a
synthesis of late, but some troubling features are present. The neuroscience that
currently dominates the study of social cognition is exclusively cognitive
neuroscience, as contrasted with the cellular and increasingly molecular emphasis
that has gripped mainstream neuroscience over the past three decades.
Furthermore, the recent field of molecular and cellular cognition has begun to
unravel some molecular mechanisms involved in social cognition, especially
pertaining to the consolidation of memories of particular conspecific organisms. 
Some new experimental techniques for positive interventions into these
hypothesized mechanisms offer opportunities for establishing direct causal
linkages between intra-neuronal molecular events and the behaviors used to
measure social cognitive phenomena. Predicted results from an experiment
described below also cast doubt on the application of the "extended mind"
approach from recent cognitive science to ground the neuroscience of social
cognition. Since neuroethics relies heavily on our best neuroscience of social
cognition, that field may soon need to extend its attention beyond cognitive
neuroscience, and into neuroscience's cellular and molecular mainstream.

PMID: 18448362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cardiovasc Res. 2008 Aug 1;79(3):458-63. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvn106. Epub 2008 Apr
25.

Overexpression of human truncated peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
alpha induces apoptosis in HL-1 cardiomyocytes.

Beaumont J(1), Arias T, Ravassa S, Díez J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, Centre for Applied Medical Research,
University of Navarra, CIMA, Avda. Pío XII 55, 31008 Pamplona, Spain.

AIMS: Our goal was to analyse whether truncated peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor alpha (PPARalpha) overexpression induces apoptosis of cardiomyocytes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We constructed a recombinant vector of human truncated
PPARalpha and a mammalian expression vector to transfect PPARalpha into a line of
murine cardiomyocytes designated HL-1. Four hallmarks of apoptosis were measured 
in these transfected cells: depolarization of mitochondrial membrane, activation 
of caspase-3, phosphatidylserine (PS) externalization, and DNA fragmentation.
Co-transfection with human cyclic adenosine monophosphate response
element-binding protein (CREB) and human CREB binding protein (CBP) and analysis 
of apoptosis regulatory proteins, Bcl-2 and Bax, were also performed in truncated
PPARalpha-transfected cells to determine the potential mechanisms by which
truncated PPARalpha may influence apoptosis. Progressive depolarization of
mitochondrial membrane, activation of caspase-3, PS externalization, DNA
fragmentation, and cell death were observed in HL-1 cells upon increasing levels 
of transfected truncated PPARalpha. The expression of the antiapoptotic protein
Bcl-2 decreased in transfected HL-1 cardiomyocytes, whereas no changes in the
proapoptotic protein Bax were observed in these cells. Overexpression of CREB
plus CBP abolished the inhibitory effect of truncated PPARalpha on Bcl-2 protein.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate that human truncated PPARalpha
overexpression induces apoptosis in HL-1 cardiomyocytes. In addition, our
findings suggest that truncated PPARalpha may induce cardiomyocyte apoptosis
through the inhibition of the antiapoptotic protein, Bcl-2. It is proposed that
competition with CREB for coactivators like CBP could be involved in this
inhibitory effect.

PMID: 18440986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Apr 22;105(16):6150-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0800105105. Epub 2008 Apr 21.

Antiinflammatory cAMP signaling and cell migration genes co-opted by the anthrax 
bacillus.

Kim C(1), Wilcox-Adelman S, Sano Y, Tang WJ, Collier RJ, Park JM.

Author information: 
(1)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Bacillus anthracis, the etiologic agent of anthrax, avoids immune surveillance
and commandeers host macrophages as a vehicle for lymphatic spreading. Here, we
show that B. anthracis edema toxin (ET), via its adenylyl cyclase activity,
dramatically increases the motility of infected macrophages and the expression of
vascular endothelial growth factor. The transcription factor CREB and the
syndecan-1 gene, a CREB target, play crucial roles in ET-induced macrophage
migration. These molecular and cellular responses occur in macrophages engaged in
antiinflammatory G protein-coupled receptor activation, thus illustrating a
common signaling circuitry controlling resolution of inflammation and host cell
hijacking by B. anthracis.

PMCID: PMC2329691
PMID: 18427110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. FASEB J. 2008 Aug;22(8):2872-9. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-107888. Epub 2008 Apr 18.

CREB has a context-dependent role in activity-regulated transcription and
maintains neuronal cholesterol homeostasis.

Lemberger T(1), Parkitna JR, Chai M, Schütz G, Engblom D.

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Induction of specific gene expression patterns in response to activity confers
functional plasticity to neurons. A principal role in the regulation of these
processes has been ascribed to the cAMP responsive element binding protein
(CREB). Using genome-wide expression profiling in mice lacking CREB in the
forebrain, accompanied by deletion of the cAMP responsive element modulator gene 
(CREM), we here show that the role of these proteins in activity-induced gene
expression is surprisingly selective and highly context dependent. Thus, only a
very restricted subset of activity-induced genes (i.e., Gadd45b or Nr4a2)
requires these proteins for their induction in the hippocampus after kainic acid 
administration, while they are required for most of the cocaine-induced
expression changes in the striatum. Interestingly, in the absence of CREB, CREM
is able to rescue activity-regulated transcription, which strengthens the notion 
of overlapping functions of the two proteins. In addition, we show that
cholesterol metabolism is dysregulated in the brains of mutant mice, as reflected
coordinated expression changes in genes involved in cholesterol synthesis and
neuronal accumulation of cholesterol. These findings provide novel insights into 
the role of CREB and CREM in stimulus-dependent transcription and neuronal
homeostasis.

PMID: 18424767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Apr 22;105(16):6081-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0708257105. Epub 2008 Apr 18.

Deletion of G protein-coupled receptor 48 leads to ocular anterior segment
dysgenesis (ASD) through down-regulation of Pitx2.

Weng J(1), Luo J, Cheng X, Jin C, Zhou X, Qu J, Tu L, Ai D, Li D, Wang J, Martin 
JF, Amendt BA, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology and Department of Molecular and
Cellular Medicine, Texas A&M University System Health Science Center, 2121 West
Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The development of the anterior segment of the mammalian eye is critical for
normal ocular function, whereas abnormal development can cause glaucoma, a
leading cause of blindness in the world. We report that orphan G protein-coupled 
receptor 48 (Gpr48/LGR4) plays an important role in the development of the
anterior segment structure. Disruption of Gpr48 causes a wide spectrum of
anterior segment dysgenesis (ASD), including microphthalmia, iris hypoplasia,
irdiocorneal angle malformation, cornea dysgenesis, and cataract. Detailed
analyses reveal that defective iris myogenesis and ocular extracellular matrix
homeostasis are detected at early postnatal stages of eye development, whereas
ganglion cell loss, inner nuclear layer thinness, and early onset of glaucoma
were detected in 6-month-old Gpr48(-/-) mice. To determine the molecular
mechanism of ASD caused by the deletion of Gpr48, we performed gene expression
analyses and revealed dramatic down-regulation of Pitx2 in homozygous knockout
mice. In vitro studies with the constitutively active Gpr48 mutant receptor
demonstrate that Pitx2 is a direct target of the Gpr48-mediated cAMP-CREB
signaling pathway in regulating anterior segment development, suggesting a role
of Gpr48 as a potential therapeutic target of ASD.

PMCID: PMC2329706
PMID: 18424556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Neurobiol Dis. 2008 Jun;30(3):375-87. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2008.02.010. Epub 2008
Mar 7.

Beneficial effects of rolipram in the R6/2 mouse model of Huntington's disease.

DeMarch Z(1), Giampà C, Patassini S, Bernardi G, Fusco FR.

Author information: 
(1)Santa Lucia Foundation IRCCS Hospital at the European Center for Brain
Research, Laboratory of Neuroanatomy, Rome, Italy.

We have previously showed that rolipram, a phosphodiesterase type IV inhibitor,
displays a neuroprotective effect in a rat quinolinic acid model of HD [DeMarch
Z., Giampa C., Patassini S., Martorana A., Bernardi G. and Fusco F.R., (2007)
Beneficial effects of rolipram in a quinolinic acid model of striatal
excitotoxicity. Neurobiol. Dis. 25:266-273.]. In this study, we sought to
determine if rolipram exerts a neuroprotective effect in R6/2 mutant mice, which 
recapitulates, in many aspects, human HD [Mangiarini L., Sathasivam K., Seller
M., Cozens B., Harper A., Hetherington C., Lawton M., Trottier Y., Lehrach H.,
Davies S.W. and Bates G.P. (1996) Exon 1 of the HD gene with an expanded CAG
repeat is sufficient to cause a progressive neurological phenotype in transgenic 
mice. Cell. 87:493-506]. Transgenic mice were treated with rolipram 1.5 mg/kg
daily starting from 4 weeks of age. After transcardial perfusion, histological
and immunohistochemical studies were performed. We found that rolipram-treated
R6/2 mice survived longer and displayed less severe signs of neurological
dysfunction than the vehicle treated ones. Primary outcome measures such as brain
volume, striatal atrophy, size and morphology of striatal neurons, neuronal
intranuclear inclusions and microglial reaction confirmed a neuroprotective
effect of the compound. Rolipram was effective in increasing significantly the
levels of activated CREB and of BDNF the striatal spiny neurons, which might
account for the beneficial effects observed in this model. Our findings show that
rolipram could be considered as a valid therapeutic approach for HD.

PMID: 18424161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Apoptosis. 2008 May;13(5):681-92. doi: 10.1007/s10495-008-0203-z.

Protein kinase A-mediated CREB phosphorylation is an oxidant-induced survival
pathway in alveolar type II cells.

Barlow CA(1), Kitiphongspattana K, Siddiqui N, Roe MW, Mossman BT, Lounsbury KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Vermont, 89 Beaumont Avenue,
Burlington, VT 05405, USA.

Oxidant stress plays a role in the pathogenesis of pulmonary diseases, including 
fibrotic lung disease and cancer. We previously found that hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2) initiates an increase in Ca2+/cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB)
phosphorylation in C10 alveolar type II cells that requires activation of
extracellular regulated kinases 1/2 (ERK1/2). Here, we investigated the role of
crosstalk between protein kinase A (PKA) and epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) in oxidant-induced signaling to ERK1/2 and CREB in C10 cells. Application 
of H2O2 increased nuclear accumulation of PKA, and inhibition of PKA with H89
reduced oxidant-mediated phosphorylation of both CREB and ERK1/2. Single cell
measurements of cAMP and redox status, using a FRET-based biosensor and a
redox-sensitive GFP, respectively, indicated that H2O2 increases production of
cAMP that correlates with redox state. Inhibition of EGFR activity decreased both
H2O2-induced CREB phosphorylation and translocation of PKA to the nucleus,
suggesting that crosstalk between PKA and EGFR underlies the oxidant-induced CREB
response. Furthermore, knockdown of CREB expression using siRNA led to a decrease
in bcl-2 and an increase in oxidant-induced apoptosis. Together these data reveal
a novel role for crosstalk between PKA, ERK1/2 and CREB that mediates cell
survival during oxidant stress.

PMCID: PMC2311383
PMID: 18392938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 13;283(24):16299-308. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M706426200. Epub
2008 Mar 28.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 oncoprotein tax represses ZNF268 expression
through the cAMP-responsive element-binding protein/activating transcription
factor pathway.

Wang D(1), Guo MX, Hu HM, Zhao ZZ, Qiu HL, Shao HJ, Zhu CG, Xue L, Shi YB, Li WX.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan 430072, China.

Expression of the human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) oncoprotein Tax is 
correlated with cellular transformation, contributing to the development of adult
T-cell leukemia. In this study, we investigated the role of Tax in the regulation
of the ZNF268 gene, which plays a role in the differentiation of blood cells and 
the pathogenesis of leukemia. We demonstrated that ZNF268 mRNA was repressed in
HTLV-1-infected cells. We also showed that stable and transient expression of
HTLV-1 Tax led to repression of ZNF268. In addition, by using reporter constructs
that bear the human ZNF268 promoter and its mutants, we showed that Tax repressed
ZNF268 promoter in a process dependent on a functional cAMP-responsive element.
By using Tax, cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB)-1, CREB-2, and their
mutants, we further showed that Tax repressed ZNF268 through the CREB/activating 
transcription factor pathway. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and chromatin
immunoprecipitation demonstrated the formation of the complex of Tax.CREB-1
directly at the cAMP-responsive element both in vitro and in vivo. These findings
suggest a role for ZNF268 in aberrant T-cell proliferation observed in
HTLV-1-associated diseases.

PMCID: PMC2423250
PMID: 18375384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Reprod Dev. 2008 Nov;75(11):1637-52. doi: 10.1002/mrd.20902.

Integration of CREB and bHLH transcriptional signaling pathways through direct
heterodimerization of the proteins: role in muscle and testis development.

Muir T(1), Wilson-Rawls J, Stevens JD, Rawls A, Schweitzer R, Kang C, Skinner MK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Biology, Washington State University, Pullman,
Washington 99164-4231, USA.

The cAMP response element binding protein/activating transcription factor
(CREB/ATF) family of transcription factors is hormone responsive and critical for
nearly all mammalian cell types. The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of
transcription factors is important during the development and differentiation of 
a wide variety of cell types. Independent studies of the role of the bHLH protein
scleraxis in testicular Sertoli cells and paraxis in muscle development using
yeast-2-hybrid screens provided the novel observation that bHLH proteins can
directly interact with ATF/CREB family members. Analysis of the interactions
demonstrated the helix-loop-helix domain of bHLH proteins directly interacts with
the leucine zipper (ZIP) region of CREB2/ATF4 to form heterodimers. The direct
bHLH-CREB2 binding interactions were supported using co-immunoprecipitation of
recombinant proteins. Structural analysis of bHLH and ATF4 heterodimer using
previous crystal structures demonstrated the heterodimer likely involves the HLH 
and Zip domains and has the potential capacity to bind DNA. Transfection assays
demonstrated CREB2/ATF4 over-expression blocked stimulatory actions of scleraxis 
or paraxis. CREB1 inhibited MyoD induced myogenic conversion of C3H10T1/2 cells. 
CREB2/ATF4 and scleraxis are expressed throughout embryonic and postnatal testis 
development, with scleraxis specifically expressed in Sertoli cells. ATF4 and
scleraxis null mutant mice both had similar adult testis phenotypes of reduced
spermatogenic capacity. In summary, bHLH and CREB family members were found to
directly heterodimerize and inhibit the actions of bHLH dimers on Sertoli cells
and myogenic precursor cells. The observations suggest a mechanism for direct
cross-talk between cAMP induced and bHLH controlled cellular differentiation.

PMID: 18361414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 23;370(1):174-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.03.052. Epub 2008 Mar 18.

DPPC regulates COX-2 expression in monocytes via phosphorylation of CREB.

Morris RH(1), Tonks AJ, Jones KP, Ahluwalia MK, Thomas AW, Tonks A, Jackson SK.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Health Sciences, University of Wales Institute Cardiff,
Western Avenue, Llandaff, Cardiff, Wales CF5 2YB, UK. kmorris@uwic.ac.uk

The major phospholipid in pulmonary surfactant dipalmitoyl phosphatidylcholine
(DPPC) has been shown to modulate inflammatory responses. Using human monocytes, 
this study demonstrates that DPPC significantly increased PGE(2) (P<0.05)
production by 2.5-fold when compared to untreated monocyte controls.
Mechanistically, this effect was concomitant with an increase in COX-2 expression
which was abrogated in the presence of a COX-2 inhibitor. The regulation of COX-2
expression was independent of NF-kappaB activity. Further, DPPC increased the
phosphorylation of the cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CREB; an
important nuclear transcription factor important in regulating COX-2 expression).
In addition, we also show that changing the fatty acid groups of PC (e.g. using
l-alpha-phosphatidylcholine beta-arachidonoyl-gamma-palmitoyl (PAPC)) has a
profound effect on the regulation of COX-2 expression and CREB activation. This
study provides new evidence for the anti-inflammatory activity of DPPC and that
this activity is at least in part mediated via CREB activation of COX-2.

PMID: 18355441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Learn Mem. 2008 Mar 19;15(4):183-8. doi: 10.1101/lm.783108. Print 2008 Apr.

Learning strategy selection in the water maze and hippocampal CREB
phosphorylation differ in two inbred strains of mice.

Sung JY(1), Goo JS, Lee DE, Jin DQ, Bizon JL, Gallagher M, Han JS.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Neuroscience & Institute for Brain Science and Technology 
(IBST), Inje University, Daejeon 305-804, South Korea.

Learning strategy selection was assessed in two different inbred strains of mice,
C57BL/6 and DBA/2, which are used for developing genetically modified mouse
models. Male mice received a training protocol in a water maze using alternating 
blocks of visible and hidden platform trials, during which mice escaped to a
single location. After training, mice were required to choose between the spatial
location where the platform had been during training (a place strategy) and a
visible platform presented in a new location (a cued/response strategy). Both
strains of mice had similar escape performance on the visible and hidden platform
trials during training. However, in the strategy preference test, C57BL/6 mice
selected a place strategy significantly more often than DBA/2 mice. Because much 
evidence implicates the hippocampus and striatum as important neural substrates
for spatial/place and cued/response learning, respectively, the engagement of the
hippocampus was then assessed after either place or cue training by determining
levels of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) and phosphorylated CREB
(pCREB) in these two mouse strains. Results revealed that hippocampal CREB levels
in both strains of mice were significantly increased after place in comparison to
cued training. However, the relation of hippocampal pCREB levels to training was 
strain dependent; pCREB was significantly higher in C57BL/6 mice than in DBA/2
mice after place training, while hippocampal pCREB levels did not differ between 
strains after cued training. These findings indicate that pCREB, specifically
associated with place/spatial training, is closely tied to differences in
spatial/place strategy preference between C57BL/6 and DBA/2 mice.

PMCID: PMC2327260
PMID: 18353993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Psychiatry. 2009 Apr;14(4):390-7. doi: 10.1038/mp.2008.23. Epub 2008 Mar 4.

Effects of the G(-656)A variant on CREB1 promoter activity in a neuronal cell
line: interactions with gonadal steroids and stress.

Zubenko GS(1), Hughes HB 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. zubenkog@pitt.edu

Major depressive disorder (MDD) constitutes a major public health problem
worldwide and affects women twice as frequently as men. Previous genetic studies 
have revealed significant evidence of linkage of the cAMP-responsive
element-binding protein 1 (CREB1) gene region (2q33-35) to mood disorders among
women from families with recurrent, early-onset MDD (RE-MDD), a severe and
familial subtype of MDD. A rare G-to-A transition at position -656 in the CREB1
promoter co-segregates with mood disorders in women from these families,
implicating CREB1 as a sex-related susceptibility gene for unipolar mood
disorders. In the current study, the functional significance of the CREB1
promoter variant was determined using transfection experiments that employed
plasmid constructs containing the wild-type or variant CREB1 promoters coupled to
a reporter gene. The results support the hypothesis that the A(-656) allele
contributes to the development of MDD in women through selective alteration of
CREB1 promoter activity by female gonadal steroids in noradrenergic neuronal
cells. Furthermore, exaggeration of these effects during a simulated stress
condition may be relevant to reported gene-environment interactions that
contribute to the emergence of MDD in clinical populations.

PMCID: PMC2830064
PMID: 18317463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Mar;40(3):113-23. doi: 10.1677/JME-07-0111.

Stromal-derived factor-1alpha induces a non-canonical pathway to activate the
endocrine-linked Tac1 gene in non-tumorigenic breast cells.

Corcoran KE(1), Malhotra A, Molina CA, Rameshwar P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine-Hematology-Oncology, New Jersey Medical School,
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey 07103,
USA.

The chemokine Stromal-derived factor-1alpha (SDF-1alpha) interacts with seven
transmembrane (TM) G-protein-coupled receptor (GPR), CXCR4. SDF-1alpha is linked 
to inflammation, chemoattraction, cancer metastasis, and hematopoiesis.
Tachykinin (Tac1) peptides bind seven transmembrane (TM), GPR and are involved in
tumor promotion. SDF-1alpha regulates Tac1 expression in non-tumorigenic breast
cells through a bimodal pattern with repression at high levels through nuclear
factor-kappa B (NFkappaB) activation. This study focuses on the mechanism of
activation at low SDF-1alpha in MCF12A non-tumorigenic breast cells. Reporter
gene assays with the 5' flanking region of Tac1 (exon 1 omitted) and
co-transfection with the repressor of cAMP response element (CREB) (ICER), and
transfection with the CRE sites mutated, verified critical roles for CRE sites in
SDF-1alpha-mediated Tac1 activation. Western blots and functional assays with
specific inhibitors indicated that SDF-1alpha phosphorylated CREB (P-CREB) via
Galpha(i)2-PI3K-protein kinase C (PKC)zeta-p38-extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK) and no evidence of cAMP-PKA pathway. This observation is different
from previous studies that reported CREB-phosphorylated PKA pathway in the
activation of Tac1 in bone marrow stromal cells. This suggests cell specificity
in Tac1 expression. In conclusion, this study reports on a non-canonical pathway 
in Tac1 activation by SDF-1alpha. This finding is significant, since Tac1 is
relevant to breast cancer metastasis, to bone marrow where stromal cells have a
significant facilitating function.

PMID: 18316470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. BMC Genomics. 2008 Mar 3;9:114. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-114.

Comprehensive transcriptional profiling of prion infection in mouse models
reveals networks of responsive genes.

Sorensen G(1), Medina S, Parchaliuk D, Phillipson C, Robertson C, Booth SA.

Author information: 
(1)Prion Diseases Program, National Microbiology Laboratory, Public Health Agency
of Canada, Winnipeg, MB, R3E 3R2, Canada. Garrett_Sorensen@phac-aspc.gc.ca

BACKGROUND: Prion infection results in progressive neurodegeneration of the
central nervous system invariably resulting in death. The pathological effects of
prion diseases in the brain are morphologically well defined, such as gliosis,
vacuolation, and the accumulation of disease-specific protease-resistant prion
protein (PrPSc). However, the underlying molecular events that lead to the death 
of neurons are poorly characterised.
RESULTS: In this study cDNA microarrays were used to profile gene expression
changes in the brains of two different strains of mice infected with three
strains of mouse-adapted scrapie. Extensive data was collected and analyzed, from
which we identified a core group of 349 prion-related genes (PRGs) that
consistently showed altered expression in mouse models. Gene ontology analysis
assigned many of the up-regulated genes to functional groups associated with one 
of the primary neuropathological features of prion diseases, astrocytosis and
gliosis; protein synthesis, inflammation, cell proliferation and lipid
metabolism. Using a computational tool, Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA), we were
able to build networks of interacting genes from the PRG list. The regulatory
cytokine TGFB1, involved in modulating the inflammatory response, was identified 
as the outstanding interaction partner for many of the PRGs. The majority of
genes expressed in neurons were down-regulated; a number of these were involved
in regulatory pathways including synapse function, calcium signalling, long-term 
potentiation and ERK/MAPK signalling. Two down-regulated genes coding for the
transcription regulators, EGR1 and CREB1, were also identified as central to
interacting networks of genes; these factors are often used as markers of
neuronal activity and their deregulation could be key to loss of neuronal
function.
CONCLUSION: These data provides a comprehensive list of genes that are
consistently differentially expressed in multiple scrapie infected mouse models. 
Building networks of interactions between these genes provides a means to
understand the complex interplay in the brain during neurodegeneration. Resolving
the key regulatory and signaling events that underlie prion pathogenesis will
provide targets for the design of novel therapies and the elucidation of
biomarkers.

PMCID: PMC2294129
PMID: 18315872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Endocrinol. 2008 Mar;196(3):497-507. doi: 10.1677/JOE-07-0542.

Bone morphogenetic protein-4 interacts with activin and GnRH to modulate
gonadotrophin secretion in LbetaT2 gonadotrophs.

Nicol L(1), Faure MO, McNeilly JR, Fontaine J, Taragnat C, McNeilly AS.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Reproductive Sciences Unit, The Queen's Medical Research Institute, 
Centre for Reproductive Biology, 47 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh, EH16 4TJ
UK. l.nicol@hrsu.mrc.ac.uk

We have shown previously that, in sheep primary pituitary cells, bone
morphogenetic proteins (BMP)-4 inhibits FSHbeta mRNA expression and FSH release. 
In contrast, in mouse LbetaT2 gonadotrophs, others have shown a stimulatory
effect of BMPs on basal or activin-stimulated FSHbeta promoter-driven
transcription. As a species comparison with our previous results, we used LbetaT2
cells to investigate the effects of BMP-4 on gonadotrophin mRNA and secretion
modulated by activin and GnRH. BMP-4 alone had no effect on FSH production, but
enhanced the activin+GnRH-induced stimulation of FSHbeta mRNA and FSH secretion, 
without any effect on follistatin mRNA. BMP-4 reduced LHbeta mRNA up-regulation
in response to GnRH (+/-activin) and decreased GnRH receptor expression, which
would favour FSH, rather than LH, synthesis and secretion. In contrast to sheep
pituitary gonadotrophs, which express only BMP receptor types IA (BMPRIA) and II 
(BMPRII), LbetaT2 cells also express BMPRIB. Smad1/5 phosphorylation induced by
BMP-4, indicating activation of BMP signalling, was the same whether BMP-4 was
used alone or combined with activin+/-GnRH. We hypothesized that activin and/or
GnRH pathways may be modulated by BMP-4, but neither the activin-stimulated
phosphorylation of Smad2/3 nor the GnRH-induced ERK1/2 or cAMP response
element-binding phosphorylation were modified. However, the GnRH-induced
activation of p38 MAPK was decreased by BMP-4. This was associated with increased
FSHbeta mRNA levels and FSH secretion, but decreased LHbeta mRNA levels. These
results confirm 1. BMPs as important modulators of activin and/or GnRH-stimulated
gonadotrophin synthesis and release and 2. important species differences in these
effects, which could relate to differences in BMP receptor expression in
gonadotrophs.

PMCID: PMC2262182
PMID: 18310445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2008 Mar;15(1):139-47. doi: 10.1677/ERC-07-0192.

Enhanced expression of aromatase in p53-inactivated mammary epithelial cells.

Choi HK(1), Roh SH, Kim HG, Han EH, Jeong HG, Kang KW.

Author information: 
(1)BK21 Project Team, College of Pharmacy, Chosun University, Gwangju, South
Korea.

Both the functional loss of p53 and the overexpression of aromatase are important
for the progression of breast cancer in postmenopausal women. Here, we found that
aromatase expression was up-regulated in primary cultures of mammary epithelial
cells (p53(Delta)(5,6) MEC) isolated from mice with a defect in exons 5 and 6 of 
the p53 gene. Aromatase basal activity and expression levels were significantly
increased in p53(Delta)(5,6) MEC when compared with wild-type MEC. Reporter gene 
activity in p53(Delta)(5,6) MEC transfected with the aromatase promoter or the
cAMP-responsive element (CRE) minimal promoter was higher than wild-type MEC. p53
inactivation increased both Ser133-phosphorylated CRE-binding protein (CREB) and 
the nuclear accumulation of CREB. Inhibition of extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK) or Src tyrosine kinase blocked aromatase gene transactivation and
CREB activation in the p53(Delta)(5,6) MEC. These results support the hypothesis 
that a genetic defect in the function of p53 enhances the expression of aromatase
via ERK or Src activation in MEC, which suggests that aromatase expression is
closely related to the p53 status in MEC.

PMID: 18310282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Carcinogenesis. 2008 Oct;29(10):1979-85. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgn041. Epub 2008
Feb 28.

Gamma-aminobutyric acid, a potential tumor suppressor for small airway-derived
lung adenocarcinoma.

Schuller HM(1), Al-Wadei HA, Majidi M.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Oncology Laboratory, Department of Pathobiology, College of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Tennessee, 2407 River Drive, Knoxville, TN
37996, USA. hmsch@utk.edu

Pulmonary adenocarcinoma (PAC) is the leading type of lung cancer in smokers and 
non-smokers that arises in most cases from small airway epithelial cells. PAC has
a high mortality due to its aggressive behavior and resistance to cancer
therapeutics. We have shown previously that the proliferation of human PAC cells 
NCI-H322 and immortalized human small airway epithelial cells HPL1D is stimulated
by cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)/protein kinase A-dependent
phosphorylation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element-binding (CREB)
protein and transactivation of the epidermal growth factor receptor and that this
pathway is activated by beta-1-adrenoreceptors (beta(1)-ARs) and the non-genomic 
estrogen receptor beta. Our current in vitro studies with HPL1D and NCI-H322
cells showed that signaling via the gamma-amino butyric acid receptor (GABA(B)R) 
strongly inhibited base level and isoproterenol-induced cAMP, p-CREB, cyclic
adenosine monophosphate response element-luciferase activity and p-extracellular 
regulated kinase-1 (ERK1)/2 and effectively blocked DNA synthesis and cell
migration. The inhibitory effects of gamma-amino butyric acid (GABA) were
disinhibited by the GABA(B)R antagonist CGP-35348 or GABA(B)R knockdown.
Immunohistochemical investigation of hamster lungs showed significant
underexpression of GABA in animals with small airway-derived PACs induced by the 
nicotine-derived carcinogen 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK).
These findings suggest that GABA may have tumor suppressor function in small
airway epithelia and the PACs derived from them and that downregulation of GABA
by NNK may contribute to the development of this cancer in smokers. Our findings 
suggest that marker-guided treatment with GABA or a GABA(B)R agonist of
individuals with downregulated pulmonary GABA may provide a novel targeted
approach for the prevention of PAC in smokers.

PMCID: PMC2556972
PMID: 18310090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008 Mar;32(3):452-60. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31814b18fb.

Clear cell sarcoma of soft tissue: a clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical, and 
molecular analysis of 33 cases.

Hisaoka M(1), Ishida T, Kuo TT, Matsuyama A, Imamura T, Nishida K, Kuroda H,
Inayama Y, Oshiro H, Kobayashi H, Nakajima T, Fukuda T, Ae K, Hashimoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Oncology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Japan.
hisaoka@med.uoeh-u.ac.jp

Clear cell sarcoma (CCS) of soft tissue is a rare sarcoma with morphologic
similarities to malignant melanoma but a distinct genetic background including a 
chromosomal translocation, t(12;22)(q13;q12), or a resultant EWSR1-ATF1 fusion
gene. In addition, the tumors occurring in the gastrointestinal tract may have a 
variant fusion gene EWSR1-CREB1. This study analyzed the clinicopathologic and
molecular genetic features of 33 CCSs of soft tissue. The patients' ages ranged
from 13 to 73 years (median, 30 y), and there was a male predominance (20 males, 
13 females). The tumors were located in the deep soft tissues of the extremities 
(N=25) or in the trunk or limb girdles (N=8). The median tumor size was 4 cm
(range, 1 to 15 cm). The tumor cells were either spindle or epithelioid, and they
were arranged predominantly in a short fascicular (N=19) or a solid sheetlike
growth pattern (N=14). Minor histologic variations included the existence of
rhabdoid cells (N=8), bizarre pleomorphic cells (N=6), alveolar structures due to
loss of cellular cohesion (N=3), and a seminomalike pattern (N=2). Tumor necrosis
was evident in 14 tumors, and the mitotic activity ranged from 0 to 43 mitotic
figures (MF)/10 high-power fields (HPF) (mean: 4 MF/10 HPF).
Immunohistochemically, the tumors were consistently positive for S-100 protein
(33/33) and variably or focally for HMB45 (32/33), microphthalmia transcription
factor (26/32), Melan A (23/32), CD57 (25/33), bcl-2 (30/32), synaptophysin
(14/32), CD56 (7/32), epithelial membrane antigen (12/33), cytokeratin (AE1/AE3) 
(1/32), CD34 (3/32), c-erbB-2 (10/32), c-kit (5/32), and c-met (5/32).
alpha-Smooth muscle actin, desmin, and cytokeratin (CAM5.2) were negative.
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction using RNA extracted from
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues demonstrated transcripts of the
EWSR1-ATF1 (31/33) or EWSR1-CREB1 fusion gene (2/33). In 26 cases with available 
clinical information, local recurrences and metastases developed in 2 and 15
patients, respectively. Ten patients were dead of the disease, and the overall
survival rate was 63% at 5 years. However, no clinicopathologic or molecular
variables associated with the patients' prognosis were identified. This study
confirms that CCS is an aggressive soft tissue tumor with a melanocytic phenotype
and wider morphologic variations than had been generally considered. In cases
with unusual histologic findings, molecular detection of the EWSR1-ATF1/CREB1
fusion genes provides critical information regarding the diagnosis of the tumor.

PMID: 18300804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Neurosci. 2008 Feb 20;28(8):1970-6. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3848-07.2008.

cAMP response element-binding protein 1 feedback loop is necessary for
consolidation of long-term synaptic facilitation in Aplysia.

Liu RY(1), Fioravante D, Shah S, Byrne JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, W. M. Keck Center for the Neurobiology
of Learning and Memory, The University of Texas Medical School at Houston,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The transcription factor cAMP response element (CRE)-binding protein (CREB) plays
an essential role in the induction of many forms of long-term synaptic
plasticity. Levels of CREB1, the Aplysia homolog of CREB, show sustained
elevations for several hours after the induction of long-term synaptic
facilitation (LTF). Furthermore, CREB1 binds to the promoter of its own gene.
These results suggest the existence of a CREB1-positive feedback loop that
contributes to the consolidation of LTF. In the present study, we provide a
detailed, quantitative characterization of the dynamics of CREB1 mRNA and protein
as well as CREB1 phosphorylation after LTF induction. Injections of CRE
oligonucleotides prevented the increase in CREB1 in response to 5-HT,
corroborating the existence of the CREB1 feedback loop. This loop probably
sustains CRE-dependent gene transcription, which remains elevated for at least 12
h after LTF induction. LTF is blocked by injection of CREB1 antibody after the
induction phase, suggesting that the CREB1-positive feedback is required for
consolidation of LTF.

PMID: 18287513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Virol. 2008 May;82(9):4250-6. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02156-07. Epub 2008 Feb 20.

NF-kappaB-mediated activation of the chemokine CCL22 by the product of the human 
cytomegalovirus gene UL144 escapes regulation by viral IE86.

Poole E(1), Atkins E, Nakayama T, Yoshie O, Groves I, Alcami A, Sinclair J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Box 157, University of Cambridge, Level 5
Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, United Kingdom.

The product of the human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) gene UL144, expressed at early
times postinfection, is located in the UL/b' region of the viral genome and is
related to members of the tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily, but it does
not bind tumor necrosis factor superfamily ligands. However, UL144 does activate 
NF-kappaB, resulting in NF-kappaB-mediated activation of the cellular chemokine
CCL22. Consistent with this finding, isolates of HCMV lacking the UL/b' region
show no such activation of CCL22. Recently, it has been suggested that activation
of NF-kappaB is repressed by the product of the viral gene IE86: IE86 appears to 
block NF-kappaB binding to DNA but not nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB.
Intriguingly, IE86 is detectable throughout an infection with the virus, so how
UL144 is able to activate NF-kappaB in the presence of continued IE86 expression 
is unclear. Here we show that although IE86 does repress the UL144-mediated
activation of a synthetic NF-kappaB promoter, it is unable to block
UL144-mediated activation of the CCL22 promoter, and this lack of responsiveness 
to IE86 appears to be regulated by binding of the CREB transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC2293074
PMID: 18287226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Eur J Neurosci. 2008 Feb;27(3):691-701. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06047.x.

Reduction in memory in passive avoidance learning, exploratory behaviour and
synaptic plasticity in mice with a spontaneous deletion in the ubiquitin
C-terminal hydrolase L1 gene.

Sakurai M(1), Sekiguchi M, Zushida K, Yamada K, Nagamine S, Kabuta T, Wada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Degenerative Neurological Diseases, National Institute of
Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, 4-1-1 Ogawahigashi,
Kodaira, Tokyo 187-8502, Japan.

Overexpression of ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase L1 (UCH-L1) in mice rescues
amyloid beta-protein-induced decreases in synaptic plasticity and memory.
However, the physiological role of UCH-L1 in the brain is not fully understood.
In the present study, we investigated the role of UCH-L1 in the brain by
utilizing gracile axonal dystrophy (gad) mice with a spontaneous deletion in the 
gene Uch-l1 as a loss-of-function model. Although gad mice exhibit motor paresis 
beginning at approximately 12 weeks of age, it is possible to analyse their brain
phenotypes at a younger age when no motor paresis is evident. Maintenance of
memory in a passive avoidance test and exploratory behaviour in an open field
test were reduced in 6-week-old gad mice. The maintenance of theta-burst
stimulation-induced long-term potentiation (LTP) of field synaptic responses from
Schaffer collaterals to CA1 pyramidal cells in hippocampal slices was also
impaired in gad mice. The LTP in gad mice was insensitive to actinomycin D,
suggesting that a transcription-dependent component of the LTP is impaired.
Phosphorylation of cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CREB) in the CA1 
region of hippocampal slices from gad mice occurred earlier than in the slices
from wild-type mice and was transient, suggesting that CREB phosphorylation is
altered in gad mice. These results suggest that memory in passive avoidance
learning, exploratory behaviour and hippocampal CA1 LTP are reduced in gad mice. 
We propose that UCH-L1-mediated maintenance of the temporal integrity and
persistence of CREB phosphorylation underlies these impairments.

PMID: 18279321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Neurosci Lett. 2008 Mar 21;434(1):18-22. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.01.021. Epub 
2008 Jan 16.

Voluntary oral nicotine intake in mice down-regulates GluR2 but does not modulate
depression-like behaviors.

Vieyra-Reyes P(1), Picciotto MR, Mineur YS.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University, Department of Psychiatry, 34 Park Street, New Haven, CT
06508, USA.

Repeated exposure to nicotine induces adaptive changes in the central nervous
system including the mesolimbic dopamine (DA) projections from the ventral
tegmental area (VTA) to the nucleus accumbens (NAc). These modifications can
modulate nicotine reward and reinforcement, but also anxiety and
depression-related behaviors. The development of addiction-related phenotypes is 
known to be modulated by regulation of glutamate receptors, as well as activation
of transcription factors including cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB), 
in the NAc. We investigated the effects of nicotine pre-exposure on nicotine
preference and levels of GluR1/2 and CREB in the mesolimbic system in male mice
C57BL/6J and BALB/c inbred mice. We also evaluated locomotor activity,
anxiety-like and depression-like behaviors known to be affected by nicotine.
There were few behavioral changes in mice subjected to chronic nicotine exposure,
but there was a marked regulation of GluR2 in the mesolimbic system. Both treated
and non-treated animals showed a significant preference for nicotine when facing 
a choice with a control solution. These results suggest that voluntary nicotine
drinking induces nicotine preference in mice, but does not alter a number of
affective behaviors. In addition, alterations in CREB and GluR1 levels are not
sufficient to explain preference for nicotine in a 2-bottle choice paradigm.

PMCID: PMC2757003
PMID: 18261852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Biol Chem. 2008 Mar 28;283(13):8070-4. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C700221200. Epub 2008
Feb 5.

Deregulated protein kinase A signaling and myospryn expression in muscular
dystrophy.

Reynolds JG(1), McCalmon SA, Donaghey JA, Naya FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Program in Cell and Molecular Biology, Boston
University, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Alterations in signaling pathway activity have been implicated in the
pathogenesis of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, a degenerative muscle disease caused
by a deficiency in the costameric protein dystrophin. Accordingly, the notion of 
the dystrophin-glycoprotein complex, and by extension the costamere, as harboring
signaling components has received increased attention in recent years. The
localization of most, if not all, signaling enzymes to this subcellular region
relies on interactions with scaffolding proteins directly or indirectly
associated with the dystrophin-glycoprotein complex. One of these scaffolds is
myospryn, a large, muscle-specific protein kinase A (PKA) anchoring protein or
AKAP. Previous studies have demonstrated a dysregulation of myospryn expression
in human Duchenne muscular dystrophy, suggesting a connection to the
pathophysiology of the disorder. Here we report that dystrophic muscle exhibits
reduced PKA activity resulting, in part, from severely mislocalized myospryn and 
the type II regulatory subunit (RIIalpha) of PKA. Furthermore, we show that
myospryn and dystrophin coimmunoprecipitate in native muscle extracts and
directly interact in vitro. Our findings reveal for the first time abnormalities 
in the PKA signal transduction pathway and myospryn regulation in dystrophin
deficiency.

PMCID: PMC2276392
PMID: 18252718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Cell Signal. 2008 Apr;20(4):771-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2007.12.012. Epub 2007 
Dec 27.

Endothelin-1 induces glut1 transcription through enhanced interaction between Sp1
and NF-kappaB transcription factors.

Kao YS(1), Fong JC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

We have shown previously that endothelin-1 (ET-1) induction of Glut1
transcription is mediated by ET-1 responsive elements on enhancer 2, via both
protein kinase Cepsilon (PKCepsilon)- and p42/p44 mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK)-dependent pathways. In the present study, we further explored the
molecular mechanism involved. By using mutation constructs of luciferase reporter
driven by Glut1 promoter/enhancers, chromatin immunoprecipitation and
co-immunoprecipitation experiments, we were able to demonstrate that cooperative 
interaction between NF-kappaB and Sp1 were required to enhance Glut1
transcription in response to ET-1. While ET-1 may induce Sp1 expression via both 
PKC-and MAPK-dependent pathways, activation of NF-kappaB by ET-1 is mediated by a
PKCepsilon/reactive oxygen species (ROS) cascade. Taken together, these results
suggest that by activating NF-kappaB via PKCepsilon/ROS cascade and increasing
Sp1 expression through both PKCepsilon- and MAPK-dependent pathways, ET-1 may
activate Glut1 transcription by enhancing interaction between nuclear NF-kappaB
and Sp1 as well as their binding to enhancer 2.

PMID: 18249093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Cell Signal. 2008 Apr;20(4):613-24. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2007.11.012. Epub 2007
Nov 29.

A novel collagen-binding peptide promotes osteogenic differentiation via
Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II/ERK/AP-1 signaling pathway in human
bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Shin MK(1), Kim MK, Bae YS, Jo I, Lee SJ, Chung CP, Park YJ, Min do S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Science, Pusan National
University, 30 Jangjeon dong, Geumjeong gu, Busan 609-735, Republic of Korea.

The intracellular signaling events controlling human mesenchymal stem cell (hMSC)
differentiation into osteoblasts are poorly understood. Collagen-binding domain
is considered an essential component of bone mineralization. In the present
study, we investigated the regulatory mechanism of osteoblastic differentiation
of hMSC by the peptide with a novel collagen-binding motif derived from
osteopontin. The peptide induced influx of extracellular Ca2+ via calcium
channels and increased intracellular Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+]i) independent of 
both pertussis toxin and phospholipase C, and activated ERK, which was inhibited 
by Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaMKII) antagonist, KN93. The
peptide-induced increase of [Ca2+]i is correlated with ERK activation in a
various cell types. The peptide stimulated the migration of hMSC but suppressed
cell proliferation. Furthermore, the peptide increased the phosphorylation of
cAMP-response element-binding protein, leading to a significant increase in the
transactivation of cAMP-response element and serum response element. Ultimately, 
the peptide increased AP-1 transactivation, c-jun expression, and bone
mineralization, which are suppressed by KN93. Taken together, these results
indicate that the novel collagen-binding peptide promotes osteogenic
differentiation via Ca2+/CaMKII/ERK/AP-1 signaling pathway in hMSC, suggesting
the potential application in cell therapy for bone regeneration.

PMID: 18248957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;28(7):2446-59. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00980-07. Epub 2008 Jan
28.

CREB-1alpha is recruited to and mediates upregulation of the cytochrome c
promoter during enhanced mitochondrial biogenesis accompanying skeletal muscle
differentiation.

Franko A(1), Mayer S, Thiel G, Mercy L, Arnould T, Hornig-Do HT, Wiesner RJ,
Goffart S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Vegetative Physiology, Medical Faculty, University of Köln,
Robert-Koch-Strasse 39, 50931 Köln, Germany.

To further understand pathways coordinating the expression of nuclear genes
encoding mitochondrial proteins, we studied mitochondrial biogenesis during
differentiation of myoblasts to myotubes. This energy-demanding process was
accompanied by a fivefold increase of ATP turnover, covered by an eightfold
increase of mitochondrial activity. While no change in mitochondrial DNA copy
number was observed, mRNAs as well as proteins for nucleus-encoded cytochrome c, 
cytochrome c oxidase subunit IV, and mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) 
increased, together with total cellular RNA and protein levels. Detailed analysis
of the cytochrome c promoter by luciferase reporter, binding affinity, and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays as well as mutagenesis studies revealed a
critical role for cyclic AMP responsive element binding protein 1 (CREB-1) for
promoter activation. Expression of two CREB-1 isoforms was observed by using
specific antibodies and quantitative reverse transcription-PCR, and a shift from 
phosphorylated CREB-1Delta in myoblasts to phosphorylated CREB-1alpha protein in 
myotubes was shown, while mRNA ratios remained unchanged. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays confirmed preferential binding of CREB-1alpha in situ 
to the cytochrome c promoter in myotubes. Overexpression of constitutively active
and dominant-negative forms supported the key role of CREB-1 in regulating the
expression of genes encoding mitochondrial proteins during myogenesis and
probably also in other situations of enhanced mitochondrial biogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2268439
PMID: 18227154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2007 Dec;9(6):480-5.

Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep: an endophenotype for depression.

Modell S(1), Lauer CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Bristol-Myers Squibb GmbH & Company KGaA, Sapporobogen 6-8, 80637, München,
Germany. sieglinde.modell@bms.com

Disturbed sleep is one of the hallmark signs of depression. After successful
treatment, many of these signs disappear; however, changes in rapid eye movement 
(REM) sleep may persist and even predict recurrence of depression. High-risk
studies have established these alterations to be not only biological scars but
true endophenotypes for depression. REM sleep changes are mediated by the
noradrenergic, serotonergic, and cholinergic systems and are under strong genetic
control. REM sleep has a crucial role for brain maturation and is inhibited
during ontogeny. Lack of this inhibition may predispose an individual to
depression. Findings regarding the CREB gene support REM sleep's role in
depression. The combination of psychopathology and neurobiological measures, such
as REM sleep parameters, will help to improve genetic studies and therefore
increase the knowledge of relevant pathways for depression. This could facilitate
development of preventive and therapeutic measures.

PMID: 18221628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008 Jul 5;147B(5):579-85. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.30708.

Effects of the G(-656)A variant on CREB1 promoter activity in a glial cell line: 
interactions with gonadal steroids and stress.

Zubenko GS(1), Hughes HB 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. zubenkog@pitt.edu

Major depressive disorder (MDD) constitutes a major public health problem
worldwide and affects women twice as frequently as men. Previous genetic studies 
have revealed significant evidence of linkage of the CREB1 region to mood
disorders among women from families with recurrent, early-onset MDD (RE-MDD), a
severe and familial subtype of MDD. A rare G to A transition at position -656 in 
the CREB1 promoter cosegregates with mood disorders in women from these families,
implicating CREB1 as a sex-related susceptibility gene for unipolar mood
disorders. In the current study, the functional significance of the CREB1
promoter variant was determined using transfection experiments that employed
constructs containing the wild-type or variant CREB1 promoters coupled to a
reporter gene. The results support the hypothesis that the A(-656) allele
contributes to the development of MDD in women by selectively altering the
activity of the CREB1 promoter in glial cells exposed to 17 beta-estradiol.
Furthermore, the exaggeration of this effect during a simulated stress condition 
may be relevant to reported gene-environment interactions that contribute to the 
emergence of MDD in clinical populations. The results of in silico analysis
revealed four putative binding sites for transcription factors that are affected 
by the G to A transition at position -656, of which CP2 best fit the experimental
observations.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18213625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Cancer Res. 2008 Jan 15;68(2):395-403. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1580.

t-Darpp promotes cancer cell survival by up-regulation of Bcl2 through
Akt-dependent mechanism.

Belkhiri A(1), Dar AA, Zaika A, Kelley M, El-Rifai W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232, USA.

t-Darpp is a cancer-related truncated isoform of Darpp-32 (dopamine and
cyclic-AMP-regulated phosphoprotein of M(r) 32,000). We detected overexpression
of t-Darpp mRNA in two thirds of gastric cancers compared with normal samples (P 
= 0.004). Using 20 micromol/L ceramide treatment as a model for induction of
apoptosis in AGS cancer cells, we found that expression of t-Darpp led to an
increase in Bcl2 protein levels and blocked the activation of caspase-3 and
caspase-9. The MitoCapture mitochondrial apoptosis and cytochrome c release
assays indicated that t-Darpp expression enforces the mitochondrial transmembrane
potential and protects against ceramide-induced apoptosis. Interestingly, the
expression of t-Darpp in AGS cells led to >or=2-fold increase in Akt kinase
activity with an increase in protein levels of p-Ser(473) Akt and p-Ser(9) GSK3
beta. These findings were further confirmed using tetracycline-inducible AGS
cells stably expressing t-Darpp. We also showed transcriptional up-regulation of 
Bcl2 using the luciferase assay with Bcl2 reporter containing P1 full promoter,
quantitative reverse transcription-PCR, and t-Darpp small interfering RNA. The
Bcl2 promoter contains binding sites for cyclic AMP-responsive element binding
protein CREB/ATF1 transcription factors and using the electrophoretic mobility
shift assay with a CREB response element, we detected a stronger binding in
t-Darpp-expressing cells. The t-Darpp expression led to an increase in expression
and phosphorylation of CREB and ATF-1 transcription factors that were required
for up-regulating Bcl2 levels. Indeed, knockdown of Akt, CREB, or ATF1 in
t-Darpp-expressing cells reduced Bcl2 protein levels. In conclusion, the
t-Darpp/Akt axis underscores a novel oncogenic potential of t-Darpp in gastric
carcinogenesis and resistance to drug-induced apoptosis.

PMID: 18199533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Feb;10(2):149-59. doi: 10.1038/ncb1677. Epub 2008 Jan 13.

Intra-axonal translation and retrograde trafficking of CREB promotes neuronal
survival.

Cox LJ(1), Hengst U, Gurskaya NG, Lukyanov KA, Jaffrey SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Medical College, Cornell University, New
York, NY 10021, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Mar;10(3):370.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Feb;10(2):115-8.

During development of the nervous system, axons and growth cones contain mRNAs
such as beta-actin, cofilin and RhoA, which are locally translated in response to
guidance cues. Intra-axonal translation of these mRNAs results in local
morphological responses; however, other functions of intra-axonal mRNA
translation remain unknown. Here, we show that axons of developing mammalian
neurons contain mRNA encoding the cAMP-responsive element (CRE)-binding protein
(CREB). CREB is translated within axons in response to nerve growth factor (NGF) 
and is retrogradely trafficked to the cell body. In neurons that are selectively 
deficient in axonal CREB transcripts, increases in nuclear pCREB, CRE-mediated
transcription and neuronal survival elicited by axonal application of NGF are
abolished, indicating a signalling function for axonally synthesized CREB. These 
studies identify a signalling role for axonally derived CREB, and indicate that
signal-dependent synthesis and retrograde trafficking of transcription factors
enables specific transcriptional responses to signalling events at distal axons.

PMCID: PMC3153364
PMID: 18193038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008 Jun 5;147B(4):500-4. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.30617.

Lithium response and genetic variation in the CREB family of genes.

Mamdani F(1), Alda M, Grof P, Young LT, Rouleau G, Turecki G.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Group for Suicide Studies-Depressive Disorders Group, Douglas Hospital,
Research Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Bipolar disorder (BD) is a severe psychiatric disorder that affects 1% of the
population. Recently, there have been many attempts to identify specific genes
that are involved in BD; however, the task of finding susceptibility genes is not
easy due to the complexity of the disorder. Since lithium (Li) has been used for 
over 40 years now as an effective prophylactic agent and response to Li treatment
seems to be, at least in part, genetically determined, classification according
to Li response is a manner through which more homogeneous populations can be
obtained for investigation. It has previously been suggested that Li exerts an
effect on signal transduction pathways, such as the cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) pathway. We carried out an association study of BD with
CREB1, CREB2 and CREB3 genes, located at ch 2q32.3-q34, 22q13.1 and 9pter-p22.1, 
respectively. A total of three promoter single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP), 14
SNPs in the UTR, 6 exonic and 15 intronic SNPs were investigated for their
frequency and haplotype distribution in a BD sample of 180 lithium responders and
69 nonresponders and 127 controls using a SNaPshot multiplex reaction from
Applied Biosystems, a modified fluorescent single base pair extension procedure. 
Following correction for multiple testing, our results suggest that the CREB1-1H 
SNP (G/A change, P < 0.002) and the CREB1-7H SNP (T/C change, P < 0.002) may be
associated with BD and/or lithium response.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3549998
PMID: 18189280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Mar;1783(3):503-17. Epub 2007 Dec 7.

Lyl1 interacts with CREB1 and alters expression of CREB1 target genes.

San-Marina S(1), Han Y, Suarez Saiz F, Trus MR, Minden MD.

Author information: 
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute/Princess Margaret Hospital, 610 University Avenue
9-111, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 2M9.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor family contains key
regulators of cellular proliferation and differentiation as well as the suspected
oncoproteins Tal1 and Lyl1. Tal1 and Lyl1 are aberrantly over-expressed in
leukemia as a result of chromosomal translocations, or other genetic or
epigenetic events. Protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions described so far 
are mediated by their highly homologous bHLH domains, while little is known about
the function of other protein domains. Hetero-dimers of Tal1 and Lyl1 with E2A or
HEB, decrease the rate of E2A or HEB homo-dimer formation and are poor activators
of transcription. In vitro, these hetero-dimers also recognize different binding 
sites from homo-dimer complexes, which may also lead to inappropriate activation 
or repression of promoters in vivo. Both mechanisms are thought to contribute to 
the oncogenic potential of Tal1 and Lyl1. Despite their bHLH structural
similarity, accumulating evidence suggests that Tal1 and Lyl1 target different
genes. This raises the possibility that domains flanking the bHLH region, which
are distinct in the two proteins, may participate in target recognition. Here we 
report that CREB1, a widely-expressed transcription factor and a suspected
oncogene in acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) was identified as a binding partner 
for Lyl1 but not for Tal1. The interaction between Lyl1 and CREB1 involves the N 
terminal domain of Lyl1 and the Q2 and KID domains of CREB1. The histone
acetyl-transferases p300 and CBP are recruited to these complexes in the absence 
of CREB1 Ser 133 phosphorylation. In the Id1 promoter, Lyl1 complexes direct
transcriptional activation. We also found that in addition to Id1, over-expressed
Lyl1 can activate other CREB1 target promoters such as Id3, cyclin D3, Brca1,
Btg2 and Egr1. Moreover, approximately 50% of all gene promoters identified by
ChIP-chip experiments were jointly occupied by CREB1 and Lyl1, further
strengthening the association of Lyl1 with Cre binding sites. Given the newly
recognized importance of CREB1 in AML, the ability of Lyl1 to modulate promoter
responses to CREB1 suggests that it plays a role in the malignant phenotype by
occupying different promoters than Tal1.

PMID: 18160048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 22;283(8):4652-7. Epub 2007 Dec 21.

Epidermal growth factor stimulates RSK2 activation through activation of the
MEK/ERK pathway and src-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of RSK2 at Tyr-529.

Kang S(1), Dong S, Guo A, Ruan H, Lonial S, Khoury HJ, Gu TL, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia 30322, USA.

The Ser/Thr kinase ribosomal S6 kinase 2 (RSK2) has been demonstrated to
phosphorylate transcription factor CREB (cyclic AMP-responsive-binding protein)
and histone H3 in response to mitogenic stimulation by epidermal growth factor
(EGF). EGF activates the MEK/ERK pathway to activate RSK2. We recently reported
that receptor tyrosine kinase fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3)
directly tyrosine phosphorylates RSK2 at Tyr-529, which consequently regulates
RSK2 activation by facilitating inactive ERK binding to RSK2 that is required for
ERK-dependent phosphorylation and activation of RSK2 (Kang, S., Dong, S., Gu, T. 
L., Guo, A., Cohen, M. S., Lonial, S., Khoury, H. J., Fabbro, D., Gilliland, D.
G., Bergsagel, P. L., Taunton, J., Polakiewicz, R. D., and Chen, J. (2007) Cancer
Cell 12, 201-214). Here we report that upon treatment of EGF, RSK2 was
tyrosine-phosphorylated at Tyr-529 and activated in 293T and COS7 cells that do
not express FGFR3. In contrast to FGFR3, the receptor tyrosine kinase EGF
receptor did not directly phosphorylate RSK2 at Tyr-529 in an in vitro kinase
assay using recombinant RSK2 and active EGF receptor or FGFR3. By mass
spectroscopy-based studies, we identified Src tyrosine kinase family members Src 
and Fyn as upstream kinases of RSK2 Tyr-529. Treatment of Src inhibitor PP2
effectively attenuated EGF-dependent activation and Tyr-529 phosphorylation of
RSK2, suggesting that Src family members are the kinases that phosphorylate RSK2 
at Tyr-529 in response to EGF. Src and Fyn were able to directly phosphorylate
RSK2 at Tyr-529 in the in vitro kinase assay. In vitro reconstitution of Tyr-529 
phosphorylation by Src in glutathione S-transferase-tagged RSK2 enhanced inactive
ERK binding to RSK2 wild type, but not the Y529F mutant. Together, our findings
suggest that Src-dependent phosphorylation at Tyr-529 facilitates inactive ERK
binding to RSK2, which might be a general requirement for RSK2 activation by EGF 
through the MEK/ERK pathway.

PMCID: PMC2367159
PMID: 18156174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Dec 15;13(24):7322-8.

EWSR1-CREB1 and EWSR1-ATF1 fusion genes in angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma.

Rossi S(1), Szuhai K, Ijszenga M, Tanke HJ, Zanatta L, Sciot R, Fletcher CD, Dei 
Tos AP, Hogendoorn PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Regional Hospital, Treviso, Italy.

PURPOSE: Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is a low-grade mesenchymal
neoplasm which usually occurs in children and adolescents. Either FUS-ATF1 or
EWSR1-ATF1 have been detected in the few cases published, pointing to the
interchangeable role of FUS and EWSR1 in this entity. EWSR1-ATF1 also represents 
the most frequent genetic alteration in clear cell sarcoma, suggesting the
existence of a molecular homology between these two histotypes. We investigated
the presence of EWSR1-CREB1, recently found in gastrointestinal clear cell
sarcoma, and FUS-CREB1, as well as the already reported FUS-ATF1 and EWSR1-ATF1
in a series of AFH.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Fourteen cases were analyzed by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) on paraffin-embedded tissue sections, using a commercial
EWSR1 probe and custom-designed probes for FUS, ATF1, and CREB1. In two cases,
four-color FISH was also done. Reverse transcription-PCR for the four
hypothetical fusion genes was done in one case, for which frozen material was
available.
RESULTS: Thirteen cases showed rearrangements of both EWSR1 and CREB1, whereas
one case showed the rearrangement of both EWSR1 and ATF1. Four-color FISH
confirmed the results in two selected cases. Reverse transcription-PCR showed
EWSR1-CREB1 transcript in the case analyzed.
CONCLUSION: We identified the presence of either EWSR1-CREB1 or EWSR1-ATF1 in all
the cases, strengthening the concept of chromosomal promiscuity between AFH and
clear cell sarcoma. Either the occurrence of a second unknown tumor-specific
molecular event or, perhaps more likely, divergent differentiation programs of
the putatively distinct precursor cells of AFH and clear cell sarcoma might be
invoked in order to explain the two different phenotypes.

PMID: 18094413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Neurochem. 2008 May;105(3):820-32. Epub 2007 Dec 13.

Serum- and glucocorticoid-inducible kinase 1 enhances zif268 expression through
the mediation of SRF and CREB1 associated with spatial memory formation.

Tyan SW(1), Tsai MC, Lin CL, Ma YL, Lee EH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

Serum- and glucocorticoid-inducible kinase 1 (SGK1) has been shown to play an
important role in spatial memory formation, but the molecular mechanism
underlying this effect of SGK1 was not known. zif268 is an immediate early gene
that is induced by water maze learning. To investigate the role of SGK1 in the
regulation of zif268 expression, the dominant negative mutant of SGK1, SGK1
S422A, was infused to the hippocampal CA1 area of rats, and was found to decrease
significantly the mRNA level of zif268 in both naïve animals and trained animals.
SGK1 was also found to phosphorylate serum response factor (SRF) at Ser73, Ser75,
and Ser99, and phosphorylate CREB1 at Ser133. Inhibition of SGK1 phosphorylation 
sites on SRF and CREB1 with alanine substitution significantly diminished
SGK1-enhanced zif268 expression in the promoter-luciferase assay. SGK1 also
phosphorylates Elk-1 and SGK1 phosphorylation of Elk-1 decreased the
transcriptional activity of Elk-1. But SGK1 phosphorylation of Elk-1 did not
affect SGK1-enhanced zif268 expression. Moreover, the phosphorylation of SGK1 was
increased in rat CA1 area after water maze learning, accompanied by increased
phosphorylation of SRF at Ser99 and increased phosphorylation of CREB1 at Ser133.
All these effects were antagonized by SGK1 S422A transfection. These results
together suggest that SGK1 enhances zif268 expression through the mediation of
SRF and CREB1, and these signaling pathways are associated with spatial memory
formation in rats.

PMID: 18088355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Eur J Neurosci. 2007 Dec;26(12):3509-17.

Involvement of AMPA receptor phosphorylation in antidepressant actions with
special reference to tianeptine.

Svenningsson P(1), Bateup H, Qi H, Takamiya K, Huganir RL, Spedding M, Roth BL,
McEwen BS, Greengard P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience, The Rockefeller University,
New York, New York 10021, USA. per.svenningsson@ki.se

Depression is associated with abnormal neuronal plasticity. AMPA receptors
mediate transmission and plasticity at excitatory synapses in a manner which is
positively regulated by phosphorylation at Ser831-GluR1, a CaMKII/PKC site, and
Ser845-GluR1, a PKA site. Treatment with the selective serotonin
(5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) reuptake inhibitor fluoxetine increases
P-Ser845-GluR1 but not P-Ser831-GluR1. Here, it was found that treatment with
another antidepressant, tianeptine, increased P-Ser831-GluR1 in the frontal
cortex and the CA3 region of hippocampus and P-Ser845-GluR1 in the CA3 region of 
hippocampus. A receptorome profile detected no affinity for tianeptine at any
monaminergic receptors or transporters, confirming an atypical profile for this
compound. Behavioural analyses showed that mice bearing point mutations at both
Ser831- and Ser845-GluR1, treated with saline, exhibited increased latency to
enter the centre of an open field and increased immobility in the tail-suspension
test compared to their wild-type counterparts. Chronic tianeptine treatment
increased open-field locomotion and reduced immobility in wild-type mice but not 
in phosphomutant GluR1 mice. P-Ser133-CREB was reduced in the CA3 region of
hippocampus in phosphomutant mice, and tianeptine decreased P-Ser133-CREB in this
region in wild-type, but not in phosphomutant, mice. Tianeptine increased
P-Ser133-CREB in the CA1 region in wild-type mice but not in phosphomutant GluR1 
mice. There were higher basal P-Ser133-CREB and c-fos levels in frontal and
cingulate cortex in phosphomutant GluR1 mice; these changes in level were
counteracted by tianeptine in a GluR1-independent manner. Using phosphorylation
assays and phosphomutant GluR1 mice, this study provides evidence that AMPA
receptor phosphorylation mediates certain explorative and antidepressant-like
actions under basal conditions and following tianeptine treatment.

PMID: 18088278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2007 Nov;15(11):2624-33.

Effects of subcutaneous leptin injections on hypothalamic gene profiles in lean
and ob/ob mice.

Duan J(1), Choi YH, Hartzell D, Della-Fera MA, Hamrick M, Baile CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Dairy Science, University of Georgia, Athens Georgia 
30602-2771, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Leptin-deficient ob/ob mice are more sensitive to exogenous leptin
than lean mice and leptin treatment normalizes many of the phenotypic
characteristics of ob/ob mice. The primary objective of this experiment was to
investigate whether this altered leptin sensitivity in ob/ob mice was reflected
in the hypothalamic mRNA profile.
RESEARCH METHODS AND PROCEDURES: Fifteen-week-old female ob/ob and lean mice were
treated with 14 days of subcutaneous (sc) infusion of phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS) or leptin (10 mug/d) using osmotic pumps. Real-time Taqman reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) (ABI Microfluidic cards) was
used to quantitatively compare the mRNA levels of selected hypothalamic genes in 
these groups.
RESULTS: Hypothalamic mRNA levels for ob/ob control mice were higher for
agouti-related protein (AGRP), neuropeptide Y (NPY), and arginine vasopressin
(AVP), and lower for cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART), cAMP
response element binding protein (CREB)-1, proopiomelanocortin (POMC)-1, and
urocortin (UCN)-3 compared with lean controls. In leptin-treated ob/ob mice,
hypothalamic mRNA levels were reduced for NPY, AGRP, AVP, and increased for
suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3) compared with ob/ob controls. Leptin
treatment dramatically up-regulated hypothalamic mRNA level of POMC1 in both lean
and ob/ob mice. Strong correlations were observed between hypothalamic Janus
kinase 2 (JAK2) and CREB1, STAT3 and CREB1, JAK2 and STAT3, NPY and AVP in all
samples.
DISCUSSION: ob/ob and lean mice have different hypothalamic mRNA expression
patterns (particularly those of feeding-related genes), and selected genes in
ob/ob mice are more sensitive to exogenous leptin stimulation compared with lean 
mice.

PMID: 18070753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2008 Feb;104(2):429-38. Epub 2007 Dec 6.

AMP-activated protein kinase phosphorylates transcription factors of the CREB
family.

Thomson DM(1), Herway ST, Fillmore N, Kim H, Brown JD, Barrow JR, Winder WW.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Physiology and Developmental Biology, 545 WIDB, Brigham Young Univ., 
Provo, UT 84602, USA.

AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) has been identified as a regulator of gene
transcription, increasing mitochondrial proteins of oxidative metabolism as well 
as hexokinase expression in skeletal muscle. In mice, muscle-specific knockout of
LKB1, a component of the upstream kinase of AMPK, prevents contraction- and
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-beta-D-ribofuranoside (AICAR)-induced activation
of AMPK in skeletal muscle, and the increase in hexokinase II protein that is
normally observed with chronic AICAR activation of AMPK. Since previous reports
show a cAMP response element in the promoter region of the hexokinase II gene, we
hypothesized that the cAMP-response element (CRE) binding protein (CREB) family
of transcription factors could be targets of AMPK. Using radioisotopic kinase
assays, we found that recombinant and rat liver and muscle AMPK phosphorylated
CREB1 at the same site as cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). AMPK was also
found to phosphorylate activating transcription factor 1 (ATF1), CRE modulator
(CREM), and CREB-like 2 (CREBL2), but not ATF2. Treatment of HEK-293 cells stably
transfected with a CREB-driven luciferase reporter with AICAR increased
luciferase activity approximately threefold over a 24-h time course. This
increase was blocked with compound C, an AMPK inhibitor. In addition,
AICAR-induced activation of AMPK in incubated rat epitrochlearis muscles resulted
in an increase in both phospho-acetyl-CoA carboxylase and phospho-CREB. We
conclude that CREB and related proteins are direct downstream targets for AMPK
and are therefore likely involved in mediating some effects of AMPK on expression
of genes having a CRE in their promoters.

PMID: 18063805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Br J Pharmacol. 2008 Feb;153(4):775-83. Epub 2007 Dec 3.

Interleukin-1-induced interleukin-6 synthesis is mediated by the neutral
sphingomyelinase/Src kinase pathway in neurones.

Tsakiri N(1), Kimber I, Rothwell NJ, Pinteaux E.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
nancy.rothwell@manchester.ac.uk

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Interleukin (IL)-1 is a key mediator of inflammatory and 
host defence responses and its effects in the brain are mediated primarily via
effects on glia. IL-1 induces release of inflammatory mediators such as IL-6 from
glia via the type-1 receptor (IL-1R1) and established signalling mechanisms
including mitogen-activated protein kinases and nuclear factor kappa-B. IL-1 also
modifies physiological functions via actions on neurones, through activation of
the neutral sphingomyelinase (nSMase)/Src kinase signalling pathway, although the
mechanism of IL-1-induced IL-6 synthesis in neurones remains unknown.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Primary mouse neuronal cell cultures, ELISA, Western blot 
and immunocytochemistry techniques were used.
KEY RESULTS: We show here that IL-1beta induces the synthesis of IL-6 in primary 
mouse neuronal cultures, and this is dependent on the activation of IL-1R1,
nSMase and Src kinase. We demonstrate that IL-1beta-induced Src kinase activation
triggers the phosphorylation of the NMDA receptor NR2B subunit, leading to
activation of Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CamKII) and the
nuclear transcription factor CREB. We also show that NR2B, CamKII and CREB are
essential signalling elements involved in IL-1beta-induced IL-6 synthesis in
neurones.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: These results demonstrate that IL-1 interacts with 
the same receptors on neurones and glia to elicit IL-6 release, but does so via
distinct signalling pathways. The mechanism by which IL-1beta induces IL-6
synthesis in neurones could be critical in both physiological and
pathophysiological actions of IL-1beta, and may provide a new therapeutic target 
for the treatment of acute CNS injury.

PMCID: PMC2259207
PMID: 18059318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 1;283(5):2751-60. Epub 2007 Nov 30.

CREB modulates the functional output of nucleus accumbens neurons: a critical
role of N-methyl-D-aspartate glutamate receptor (NMDAR) receptors.

Huang YH(1), Lin Y, Brown TE, Han MH, Saal DB, Neve RL, Zukin RS, Sorg BA,
Nestler EJ, Malenka RC, Dong Y.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neuroscience, Department of Veterinary and Comparative Anatomy,
Pharmacology, and Physiology, Washington State University, Wegner 205, Pullman,
WA 99164, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 25;283(17):11860.

Nucleus accumbens (NAc) medium spiny neurons cycle between two states, a
functionally inactive downstate and a functionally active upstate. Here, we show 
that activation of the transcription factor cAMP-response element-binding protein
(CREB), a common molecular response to several drugs of abuse, increases both
duration of the upstate and action potential firing during the upstate. This
effect of CREB is mediated by enhanced N-methyl-d-aspartate glutamate receptor
(NMDAR) function: increased CREB activity increases both NMDAR-mediated synaptic 
currents and surface level of NMDARs, while inhibition of NMDARs abolishes the
effect of CREB on upstate duration. Furthermore, mimicking the effect of CREB by 
pharmacological enhancement of NMDAR function in the NAc in vivo suppressed
novelty- and cocaine-elicited locomotor activity. These findings suggest that by 
enhancing NMDAR-mediated synaptic transmission, CREB activation promotes the
proportion of time NAc neurons spend in the upstate. This effect, along with the 
CREB enhancement of NAc membrane excitability (Dong, Y., Green, T., Saal, D.,
Marie, H., Neve, R., Nestler, E. J., and Malenka, R. C. (2006) Nat. Neurosci. 9, 
475-477), may counteract drug-induced maladaptations in the NAc and thus
ameliorate the addictive state.

PMCID: PMC2535571
PMID: 18055458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2008 Sep;33(10):2407-15. Epub 2007 Nov 28.

Chronic lithium salt treatment reduces CRE/CREB-directed gene transcription and
reverses its upregulation by chronic psychosocial stress in transgenic reporter
gene mice.

Böer U(1), Cierny I, Krause D, Heinrich A, Lin H, Mayr G, Hiemke C, Knepel W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, University of Göttingen, Göttingen,
Germany. uboeer1@gwdg.de

The molecular mechanism of action of the mood stabilizer lithium is assumed to
involve changes in gene expression leading to neuronal adaptation. The
transcription factor CREB (cAMP-responsive element binding protein) regulates the
expression of many genes and has been implicated in important brain functions and
the action of psychogenic agents. We here investigated the effect of lithium on
cAMP-responsive element (CRE)/CREB-mediated gene transcription in the brain,
using transgenic reporter mice that express the luciferase reporter gene under
the control of four copies of the rat somatostatin gene promoter CRE. Chronic (21
days) but not acute (24 h) treatment with lithium (7.5 mmol/kg) significantly
decreased CRE/CREB-directed gene expression in hippocampus, cortex, hypothalamus,
and striatum to 60-70%, and likewise reduced CREB phosphorylation. As bipolar
disorder is also considered as a stress-related disorder, the effect of lithium
was determined in mice submitted to a paradigm for chronic psychosocial stress.
As shown before, stress for 25 days significantly increased CRE/CREB-directed
gene expression in several brain regions by 100-150%. Treatment of stressed mice 
with lithium decreased stress-induced CRE/CREB-directed gene expression to
control levels in nearly all brain regions and likewise reduced CREB
phosphorylation. Chronic lithium treatment induced beta-catenin accumulation and 
decreased cAMP levels, indicating an inhibitory effect of lithium on glycogen
synthase kinase 3 and the adenylate cyclase/protein kinase A signalling cascade, 
which are known to modulate CREB activity. We here for the first time show that
lithium regulates CRE/CREB-directed gene transcription in vivo and suggest CREB
as a putative mediator of the neuronal adaptation after chronic lithium
treatment.

PMID: 18046304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Endocrinology. 2008 Feb;149(2):565-73. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

Estrogens promote human testicular germ cell cancer through a membrane-mediated
activation of extracellular regulated kinase and protein kinase A.

Bouskine A(1), Nebout M, Mograbi B, Brücker-Davis F, Roger C, Fenichel P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Mixte de Recherche Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale Unité 670 Faculty of Medicine of Nice, 06102, Nice Cedex 02, France.

Clinical and experimental studies have suggested that estrogens, the archetype of
female hormones, participate in the control of male germ cell proliferation and
that fetal exposure to environmental estrogens may contribute to hypofertility
and/or to testicular germ cell cancer. However, the underlying mechanisms remain 
to be elucidated. 17beta-Estradiol (E2) conjugated to BSA was able to stimulate
human testicular seminoma cell proliferation by triggering a rapid, nongenomic,
membrane-mediated activation of ERK1/2 and cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA).
Both ERK1/2 and PKA participated in this promoting effect. This activation was
associated with phosphorylation of the transcription factor cAMP response
element-binding protein and the nuclear factor retinoblastoma protein. Enhanced
proliferation together with ERK activation could be reversed by pertussis toxin, 
a G protein inhibitor. Estrogen receptors (ERs) in JKT-1 were characterized by
immunofluorescence, subcellular fractioning, and Western blot. JKT-1 cells did
not express ERalpha but ERbeta, which localized to the mitochondria and the
nucleus but not to the membrane. Moreover, neither ICI-182,780, a classical ER
antagonist, nor tamoxifen, a selective ER modulator, could reverse the
17beta-estradiol-BSA-induced promoting effect. Estrogens contribute to human
testicular germ cell cancer proliferation by rapid activation of ERK1/2 and PKA
through a membrane nonclassical ER. This nongenomic effect represents a new basis
for understanding the estrogenic control of spermatogenesis and evaluating the
role of fetal exposure to xenoestrogens during malignant transformation of
testicular germ stem cells.

PMID: 18039775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Dec;37(12):3509-21.

Regulation of constitutive and microbial pathogen-induced human macrophage
migration inhibitory factor (MIF) gene expression.

Roger T(1), Ding X, Chanson AL, Renner P, Calandra T.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Service, Department of Medicine, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire Vaudois and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

The cytokine macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is an important
regulator of innate immunity, inflammation and oncogenesis. However, four decades
after its identification, the molecular mechanism(s) regulating the expression of
the MIF gene remain largely unknown. Analyses of human monocytic (THP-1),
epithelial (HeLa and A549) and keratinocytic (HaCat) cells transfected with
wild-type, truncated and mutated MIF promoter reporter constructs, and
electrophoretic mobility shift assay, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and siRNA
inhibition indicated that the transcription factors specificity protein (Sp)1 and
cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) are critical positive regulators of 
constitutive human MIF gene expression. Albeit located in a cytosine guanine
dinucleotide island, the MIF gene was found to be hypomethylated, an observation 
consistent with high baseline transcriptional activity. Moreover, stimulation of 
THP-1 cells and of peripheral blood mononuclear cells with microbial products
up-regulated phosphorylated Sp1 nuclear content, Sp1 DNA-binding activity, MIF
promoter activity and MIF mRNA levels in a MEK1/2-, Sp1-dependent manner. Taken
together with previous observations of an important role for MIF in
pro-inflammatory macrophage responses, these present findings suggest a key role 
for Sp1 and CREB in transcriptional regulation of MIF gene expression and
MIF-dependent host antimicrobial innate immune defense.

PMID: 18034423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Neuroscience. 2007 Dec 5;150(2):260-72. Epub 2007 Sep 19.

Female CREBalphadelta- deficient mice show earlier age-related cognitive deficits
than males.

Hebda-Bauer EK(1), Luo J, Watson SJ, Akil H.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience Institute, University of Michigan, 205
Zina Pitcher Place, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. hebda@umich.edu

Age-related changes in the hippocampus increase vulnerability to impaired
learning and memory. Our goal is to understand how a genetic vulnerability to
cognitive impairment can be modified by aging and sex. Mice with a mutation in
the cAMP response element binding (CREB) protein gene (CREB(alphadelta-)
deficient mice) have a mild cognitive impairment and show test
condition-dependent learning and memory deficits. We tested three ages of
CREB(alphadelta-) deficient and wild-type (WT) mice in two Morris water maze
(MWM) protocols: four trials per day with a 3-5 min inter-trial interval (ITI)
(MWM4) and two trials per day with a 1 min ITI (MWM2). All CREB(alphadelta-)
deficient mice performed well in the easier MWM4, except for the aged females
that performed poorly. In the harder MWM2, young male and female and middle-aged 
male CREB(alphadelta-) deficient mice performed well, but aged male and all
middle-aged and aged female CREB(alphadelta-) deficient mice were impaired. These
results show that mice with a genetic vulnerability to impaired learning and
memory exhibit increased vulnerability with age that is most apparent among
females. Thus, a genetic predisposition to cognitive impairment may render
females more vulnerable than males to such deficits with age.

PMCID: PMC2278026
PMID: 18029102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Endocrinology. 2008 Feb;149(2):725-32. Epub 2007 Nov 15.

Nuclear receptor coregulators differentially modulate induction and
glucocorticoid receptor-mediated repression of the corticotropin-releasing
hormone gene.

van der Laan S(1), Lachize SB, Vreugdenhil E, de Kloet ER, Meijer OC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Pharmacology, Leiden/Amsterdam Centre for Drug Research
and Leiden University Medical Centre, 2300 RA, Leiden, The Netherlands.
s.van.der.laan@lacdr.leidenuniv.nl

Nuclear receptor coregulators are proteins that modulate the transcriptional
activity of steroid receptors and may explain cell-specific effects of
glucocorticoid receptor action. Based on the uneven distribution of a number of
coregulators in CRH-expressing cells in the hypothalamus of the rat brain, we
tested the hypothesis that these proteins are involved as mediators in the
glucocorticoid-induced repression of the CRH promoter. Therefore, we assessed the
role of coregulator proteins on both induction and repression of CRH in the
AtT-20 cell line, a model system for CRH repression by glucocorticoids. The
steroid receptor coactivator 1a (SRC1a), SRC-1e, nuclear corepressor (N-CoR), and
silencing mediator of the retinoid and thyroid hormone receptor (SMRT) were
studied in this system. We show that the concentration of glucocorticoid receptor
and the type of ligand, i.e. corticosterone or dexamethasone, determines the
repression. Furthermore, overexpression of SRC1a, but not SRC1e, increased both
efficacy and potency of the glucocorticoid receptor-mediated repression of the
forskolin-induced CRH promoter. Unexpectedly, cotransfection of the corepressors 
N-CoR and SMRT did not affect the corticosterone-dependent repression but
resulted in a marked decrease of the forskolin stimulation of the CRH gene.
Altogether, our data demonstrate that 1) the concentration of the receptor, 2)
the type of ligand, and 3) the coregulator recruited all determine the expression
and the repression of the CRH gene. We conclude that modulation of coregulator
activity may play a role in the control of the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal
axis.

PMID: 18006628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Neurosci. 2007 Nov 14;27(46):12732-42.

The nuclear kinase mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase 1 regulates
hippocampal chromatin remodeling in memory formation.

Chwang WB(1), Arthur JS, Schumacher A, Sweatt JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, 
USA.

The extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)/MAPK (mitogen-activated protein
kinase) cascade has been established as a potent regulator of gene transcription 
in long-term memory formation, but the precise mechanisms of this regulation are 
poorly understood. ERK does not directly affect many of its nuclear targets, but 
rather must act through intermediary kinases. In this study, we investigated the 
role of mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase 1 (MSK1), a nuclear kinase
downstream of ERK, in chromatin remodeling during hippocampus-dependent memory
formation. Mice lacking MSK1 show impaired Pavlovian fear conditioning and
spatial learning, as well as a deficiency in histone phosphorylation and
acetylation in the hippocampus after fear training. In addition, hippocampal
slices from MSK1 knock-out mice exhibit a deficiency in both histone
phosphorylation and acetylation after activation of the ERK pathway in vitro. In 
vivo injections of a histone deacetylase inhibitor, sodium butyrate, fail to
alleviate the fear conditioning deficit in MSK1 knock-out mice. Finally, MSK1
knock-out mice demonstrate a deficiency in cAMP response element-binding protein 
(CREB) phosphorylation after fear training, which persists after sodium butyrate 
injection. This suggests that CREB phosphorylation and histone acetylation
represent parallel targets of MSK1 function. Our study identifies MSK1 as an
important regulator of chromatin remodeling in long-term memory.

PMID: 18003853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Neurochem. 2008 Mar;104(6):1637-48. Epub 2007 Nov 7.

Steady-state increase of cAMP-response element binding protein, Rac, and PAK
signaling in presenilin-deficient neurons.

Barnes NY(1), Shi J, Yajima H, Thinakaran G, Parent AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA.

Mutations in the genes encoding presenilins (PS1 and PS2) account for the
majority of cases of early-onset Alzheimer's disease. PS1 and PS2 form the
catalytic center of gamma-secretase, an enzyme responsible for intramembraneous
proteolysis of several type I transmembrane proteins. Many gamma-secretase
substrates are coupled to intracellular signaling events such as cAMP-response
element binding protein and Rac1/p21-activated kinase pathways, which are
associated with synaptic function. Here, we have examined the activation of these
pathways in neurons lacking PS1 expression or gamma-secretase activity. We found 
evidence for heightened steady-state activation of cAMP-response element binding 
protein, Rac1, and p21-activated kinase signaling in PS-deficient neurons. Our
study highlights the importance of PS-dependent proteolytic cleavage of
gamma-secretase substrates in regulating neuronal signal transduction.

PMCID: PMC2598774
PMID: 17996025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Endocrinology. 2008 Feb;149(2):695-702. Epub 2007 Nov 8.

Activation of thyroid hormone is transcriptionally regulated by epidermal growth 
factor in human placenta-derived JEG3 cells.

Canettieri G(1), Franchi A, Guardia MD, Morantte I, Santaguida MG, Harney JW,
Larsen PR, Centanni M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale, Viale
Regina Elena, 324-00161, Rome, Italy. gianluca.canettieri@uniroma1.it

Human type II deiodinase is a master regulator of thyroid hormone activation in
several tissues. In placenta, type II deiodinase mRNA levels and enzymatic
activity are elevated only during the first trimester of pregnancy and then
progressively decline. During this early stage, mitogens such as epidermal growth
factor (EGF) have been shown to promote the proliferation of the trophoblast by
acting through multiple mechanisms. Here we show that EGF modulates transcription
of human type II deiodinase gene (Dio2) through distinct signaling pathways,
leading to the assembly of a heterogeneous transcription factor complex. Gene
expression and deiodination assays have shown that EGF promptly induces a
short-lived Dio2 mRNA and enzymatic activity. The induction is mediated by ERK
and p38 kinases, as demonstrated by selective inhibition or overexpression of
different mitogen-activated kinases. Reporter assays of mutant constructs
indicate that EGF-induced transcriptional activity on Dio2 promoter is mediated
by the cAMP response element (CRE) and does not involve the activating protein 1 
site. With functional and biochemical approaches, we have demonstrated that the
EGF stimulation culminates with the assembly and recruitment over the Dio2 CRE of
a composite complex, which consists of c-Jun, c-Fos, and CRE-binding protein.
These results further support the hypothesis that placental iodothyronine
metabolism is critical during early pregnancy.

PMCID: PMC2219305
PMID: 17991726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Int J Oncol. 2007 Dec;31(6):1509-18.

Ethanol-induced ligand-independent activation of ERalpha mediated by cyclic
AMP/PKA signaling pathway: an in vitro study on MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

Etique N(1), Flament S, Lecomte J, Grillier-Vuissoz I.

Author information: 
(1)EA 3442 Aspects Cellulaires et Moléculaires de la Reproduction et du
Développement, Nancy-Université, Université Henri Poincaré, Faculté des Sciences,
54506, Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, France.

Alcohol consumption is an increased risk factor for hormone-dependent breast
cancer but the underlying molecular bases are unknown. Several studies suggest
that ethanol could activate the estrogen signaling pathway. We have performed an 
in vitro study in order to investigate the molecular players involved in this
phenomenon. Exposure of MCF-7 breast cancer cells to ethanol induced an increase 
in the mRNA level of two well known estrogen target genes: progesterone receptor 
(PR) and pS2. This result was confirmed by an increase in luciferase activity in 
pEREtkLuc-transfected MCF-7 cells exposed to ethanol. These effects, whose
intensity was similar to those of E2, were observed also in steroid-free medium
and were inhibited by the antiestrogen ICI 182,780. This suggested a
ligand-independent activation of ERalpha that was confirmed by the absence of
ERalpha proteolysis in ethanol-treated cells. Using PKA inhibitor (H89), the
study of phospho-CREB by Western blot and transfection experiments with a
CRE-reporter construct demonstrated that PKA was involved in ethanol-induced
transcription of ERalpha target genes. Adenylyl cyclase inhibition impaired the
activation of estrogen signaling pathway induced by ethanol. The results obtained
in vitro, are discussed in regard to alcohol consumption and relevance to humans.

PMID: 17982678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Front Biosci. 2008 Jan 1;13:2909-15.

Vascular effects of thrombin: involvement of NOR-1 in thrombin-induced mitogenic 
stimulus in vascular cells.

Martorell L(1), Rodriguez C, Calvayrac O, Gentile M, Badimon L, Martinez-Gonzalez
J.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigacion Cardiovascular, CSIC-ICCC, Hospital de la Santa Creu i
Sant Pau, c/Antoni Ma Claret 167, 08025 Barcelona, Spain.

Neuron-derived orphan receptor-1 (NOR-1) is a nuclear receptor recently involved 
in the onset and development of atherosclerosis. NOR-1 is induced in a
cell-specific manner by extracellular stimuli. NOR-1 is over-expressed in human
atherosclerotic plaques and in porcine arteries subjected to angioplasty, is
induced by growth factors in vascular cells and it has been involved in cell
migration and proliferation. This article examines the mechanisms that regulate
NOR-1 in vascular cells and the effects of NOR-1 knockdown on cell growth induced
by mitogens, in particular thrombin. Mitogenic stimuli up-regulates NOR-1 in
endothelial cells (ECs) through multiple pathways, including increase of
cytosolic calcium, activation of protein kinase C, mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) (ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK) and downstream activation of cAMP response
element binding protein (CREB). Inhibition of protease-activated receptor-1
(PAR-1) abolished thrombin-induced NOR-1 up-regulation and DNA synthesis. NOR-1
knockdown reduces DNA synthesis and EC re-growth in an in vitro model of wound
repair. NOR-1 could be regarded as a new target to prevent endothelial effects
triggered by thrombin and other mitogens.

PMID: 17981763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Free Radic Biol Med. 2008 Feb 1;44(3):353-66. Epub 2007 Oct 4.

Differential p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase-controlled hypophosphorylation 
of the retinoblastoma protein induced by nitric oxide in neuroblastoma cells.

González-Fernández O(1), Jiménez A, Villalobo A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas, and Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

In this report we show that exogenous NO added to human neuroblastoma NB69 cells 
inhibits cell proliferation and downregulates the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) and its downstream signaling pathways. These comprise the
3-phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1/Akt/glycogen synthase kinase-3beta pathway,
the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/extracellular-regulated kinases 1 and
2 pathway, and the phospholipase Cgamma pathway. In contrast, NO enhances the
EGFR-controlled p38MAPK pathway. We also show that NO enhances the activation of 
the cAMP-responsive element binding protein, a transcription factor controlled by
p38MAPK, as demonstrated using
4-(4-fluorophenyl)-2-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-5-(4-pyridyl)1H-imidazole (SB202190), a
p38MAPK inhibitor. These processes are accompanied by the NO-mediated
hypophosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein (pRb), preferentially at Ser795
compared to Ser780 and Ser807/811, and the downregulation of p27(KIP1),
p21(CIP1/WAF1), and p16(INK4a), although NO downregulated p16(INK4a) only when
the p38MAPK activity was suppressed. The p38MAPK pathway controls the
phosphorylation status of pRb as SB202190 enhances the hypophosphorylation of
pRb. We reverted the inhibitory action of NO on EGFR and pRb phosphorylation in
living cells using cell-permeable reducing agents, which suggested that
reversible S-nitrosation controls these proteins. Our results support the notion 
that NO negatively modulates the p38MAPK-controlled phosphorylation of pRb,
inducing the subsequent arrest of the cell cycle at the G1/S transition.

PMID: 17976389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Reproduction. 2007 Nov;134(5):667-75.

cAMP-responsive element-binding protein expression and regulation in the mouse
preimplantation embryo.

Jin XL(1), O'Neill C.

Author information: 
(1)Human Reproduction Unit, Discipline of Physiology and Discipline of Medicine, 
Royal North Shore Hospital, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2065,
Australia.

Gene expression from the new embryonic genome is required for normal
preimplantation embryo development. Two members of the cAMP-responsive
element-binding protein (Creb) family of transcription factors, Creb1 and
activating transcription factor 1 (Atf1), are essential for normal
preimplantation development. These transcription factors are activated by
phosphorylation. Creb1 mRNA was expressed throughout the preimplantation phase.
Cytoplasmic immunolocalization of Creb1 was detected in all preimplantation
embryo stages. The antigen was largely excluded from the pronuclei/nuclei at
embryonic stages except in the mid-cycle two-cell and compacted eight-cell
embryo. Activation-state-specific antibodies showed serine 133 phosphorylated
Creb1 localization was similar to Creb1 staining, except that there was no
increase in staining at the eight-cell stage. Increased staining of
phosphorylated Creb1 was observed in the nucleus of mid-cycle two-cell embryos.
Increased expression of phosphorylated Creb1 in the two-cell embryo was induced
by brief exposure of embryos to ionomycin, but not by a dibutyryl cAMP. This was 
blocked by buffering intracellular calcium with
1,2-bis(2-aminophenoxy)ethane-N,N,N',N'-tetraacetic acid tetrakis (acetoxymethyl 
ester), but not by a cAMP antagonist, Rp-cyclic 3',5'-hydrogen phosphorothioate
adenosine. Calmodulin is an intracellular receptor for calcium. Calmodulin mRNA
was expressed throughout the preimplantation phase of development. The calmodulin
antagonist, W-7, inhibited the ionomycin-induced localization of phosphorylated
Creb1 in the nucleus. Treatment of embryos with W-7 caused a dose-dependent
inhibition of normal development of zygotes to the blastocysts stage. The study
shows Creb1 expression and nuclear localization was dynamically regulated in the 
early embryo. The marked nuclear accumulation and phosphorylation of Creb1 at the
two-cell stage occurred at the time of transcription from the embryonic genome
and was regulated in a calcium- and calmodulin-dependent manner.

PMID: 17965257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Endocrinology. 2008 Feb;149(2):672-80. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

Mechanisms of glucose-induced expression of pancreatic-derived factor in
pancreatic beta-cells.

Wang O(1), Cai K, Pang S, Wang T, Qi D, Zhu Q, Ni Z, Le Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, PR China.

Pancreatic-derived factor (PANDER) is a cytokine-like peptide highly expressed in
pancreatic beta-cells. PANDER was reported to promote apoptosis of pancreatic
beta-cells and secrete in response to glucose. Here we explored the effects of
glucose on PANDER expression, and the underlying mechanisms in murine pancreatic 
beta-cell line MIN6 and primary islets. Our results showed that glucose
up-regulated PANDER mRNA and protein levels in a time- and dose-dependent manner 
in MIN6 cells and pancreatic islets. In cells expressing cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB) dominant-negative construct, glucose failed to
induce PANDER gene expression and promoter activation. Treatment of the cells
with calcium chelator [EGTA, 1,2-bis(o-aminophenoxy)ethane-N,N,N',N'-tetraacetic 
acid tetra(acetoxymethyl)ester (BAPTA/AM)], the voltage-dependent Ca(2+) channel 
inhibitor (nifedipine), the protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor (H89), the protein
kinase C (PKC) inhibitor (Go6976), or the MAPK kinase 1/2 inhibitor (PD98059),
all significantly inhibited glucose-induced PANDER gene expression and promoter
activation. Further studies showed that glucose induced CREB phosphorylation
through Ca(2+)-PKA-ERK1/2 and Ca(2+)-PKC pathways. Thus, the
Ca(2+)-PKA-ERK1/2-CREB and Ca(2+)-PKC-CREB signaling pathways are involved in
glucose-induced PANDER gene expression. Wortmannin (phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
inhibitor), ammonium pyrrolidinedithiocarbamate (nuclear factor-kappaB inhibitor 
and nonspecific antioxidant), and N-acetylcysteine (antioxidant) were also found 
to inhibit glucose-induced PANDER promoter activation and gene expression.
Because there is no nuclear factor-kappaB binding site in the promoter region of 
PANDER gene, these results suggest that phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and
reactive oxygen species be involved in glucose-induced PANDER gene expression. In
conclusion, glucose induces PANDER gene expression in pancreatic beta-cells
through multiple signaling pathways. Because PANDER is expressed by pancreatic
beta-cells and in response to glucose in a similar way to those of insulin,
PANDER may be involved in glucose homeostasis.

PMID: 17962352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2008 Mar;89(3):285-92. Epub 2007 Oct 24.

Molecular and cellular mechanisms of memory allocation in neuronetworks.

Won J(1), Silva AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, and the Brain Research Institute, UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Determining how neuronal networks encode memories is a key goal of neuroscience. 
Although neuronal circuit processes involved in encoding, storing and retrieving 
memory have attracted a great deal of attention, the processes that allocate
individual memories to specific neurons within a network have remained elusive.
Recent findings unraveled the first insights into the processes that modulate
memory allocation in neuronetworks. They showed that neurons in the lateral
amygdala compete to take part in auditory fear conditioned memory traces and that
the levels of the transcription factor CREB (cAMP-response element binding
protein) can affect the probability of a neuron to be recruited into a given
memory representation. CREB-mediated transcriptional regulation involves several 
signaling pathways, known to mediate nuclear responses to diverse behavioral
stimuli, along with coordinated interactions with multiple other transcription
activators, coactivators and repressors. Moreover, activation of CREB triggers an
autoinhibitory feedback loop, a metaplastic process that could be used to
allocate memories away from cells that have been recently involved in memory.
Beyond CREB, there may be a host of other processes that dynamically modulate
memory allocation in neuronetworks by shaping cooperation and competition among
neurons.

PMCID: PMC2673809
PMID: 17962049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Neurosci Behav Physiol. 2007 Nov;37(9):853-6.

Immunohistochemical detection of the activation of CREB and c-Fos transcription
factors in the nervous system of the terrestrial snail induced by
pentylenetetrazole.

Efimova OI(1), Ierusalimskii VN, Anokhin KV, Balaban PM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for the Neurobiology of Memory, P. K. Anokhin Research Institute of
Normal Physiology, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow.
o_efimova@yahoo.com

Phosphorylation of CREB transcription factor and expression of the immediate
early gene c-fos in the brains of vertebrates play a key role in the molecular
genetic mechanisms of long-term neuronal plasticity. The present study identifies
the conditions for immunohistochemical detection of pCREB and c-Fos in the
nervous system of the mollusk Helix lucorum (Pulmonata: Stylommatophora);
activation of these transcription factors was demonstrated after administration
of the convulsive agent pentylenetetrazole. Basal pCREB and c-Fos levels in the
central nervous system of intact animals were low. Injection of
pentylenetetrazole at a dose of 600 mg/kg evoked characteristic stereotypical
motor responses, along with sharp reductions in the phosphorylation of CREB1 and 
expression of the immediate early gene c-fos, this also occurring in identified
neurons. Double immunofluorescent labeling of pCREB and c-Fos showed that
expression of c-Fos transcription factor was seen only in pCREB-immunoreactive
neurons. These data provide evidence that activation of pCREB and c-Fos
transcription factors can be used as molecular markers for mapping the processes 
of neuronal plasticity in the nervous systems of mollusks.

PMID: 17955377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. FEBS Lett. 2007 Nov 13;581(27):5207-12. Epub 2007 Oct 12.

IL-2 withdrawal induces HTLV-1 expression through p38 activation in ATL cell
lines.

Washiyama M(1), Nishigaki K, Ahmed N, Kinpara S, Ishii Y, Kanzawa N, Masuda T,
Kannagi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunotherapeutics, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Graduate School, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

Expression of human T-cell leukemia virus type-1 (HTLV-1) in adult T-cell
leukemia (ATL) cells is known to be marginal in vivo and inducible in short-term 
culture. In this study, we demonstrated that withdrawal of interleukin (IL)-2
from IL-2-dependent ATL cell lines resulted in induction of HTLV-1 mRNA and
protein expression, and that viral induction was associated with phosphorylation 
of the stress kinase p38 and its downstream CREB. Pharmacological inhibitors of
the p38 pathway suppressed viral expression induced by IL-2 depletion. These
results indicate that the stress-induced p38 pathway might up-regulate HTLV-1
gene expression through at least CREB activation.

PMID: 17950728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Blood. 2008 Jan 15;111(2):723-31. Epub 2007 Oct 1.

Calmodulin-dependent kinase IV links Toll-like receptor 4 signaling with survival
pathway of activated dendritic cells.

Illario M(1), Giardino-Torchia ML, Sankar U, Ribar TJ, Galgani M, Vitiello L,
Masci AM, Bertani FR, Ciaglia E, Astone D, Maulucci G, Cavallo A, Vitale M,
Cimini V, Pastore L, Means AR, Rossi G, Racioppi L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology and Pathology, Federico II
University of Naples, Italy.

Microbial products, including lipopolysaccharide (LPS), an agonist of Toll-like
receptor 4 (TLR4), regulate the lifespan of dendritic cells (DCs) by largely
undefined mechanisms. Here, we identify a role for calcium-calmodulin-dependent
kinase IV (CaMKIV) in this survival program. The pharmacologic inhibition of
CaMKs as well as ectopic expression of kinase-inactive CaMKIV decrease the
viability of monocyte-derived DCs exposed to bacterial LPS. The defect in TLR4
signaling includes a failure to accumulate the phosphorylated form of the cAMP
response element-binding protein (pCREB), Bcl-2, and Bcl-xL. CaMKIV null mice
have a decreased number of DCs in lymphoid tissues and fail to accumulate mature 
DCs in spleen on in vivo exposure to LPS. Although isolated Camk4-/- DCs are able
to acquire the phenotype typical of mature cells and release normal amounts of
cytokines in response to LPS, they fail to accumulate pCREB, Bcl-2, and Bcl-xL
and therefore do not survive. The transgenic expression of Bcl-2 in CaMKIV null
mice results in full recovery of DC survival in response to LPS. These results
reveal a novel link between TLR4 and a calcium-dependent signaling cascade
comprising CaMKIV-CREB-Bcl-2 that is essential for DC survival.

PMCID: PMC2200860
PMID: 17909078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Neurochem. 2007 Dec;103(6):2462-70. Epub 2007 Oct 1.

Down-regulation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase by over-activated calpain in
Alzheimer disease brain.

Liang Z(1), Liu F, Grundke-Iqbal I, Iqbal K, Gong CX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurochemistry, New York State Institute for Basic Research in
Developmental Disabilities, Staten Island, New York, USA.

Impaired cognition and memory may be associated with down-regulation of
cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) in the brain in patients with
Alzheimer disease, but the molecular mechanism leading to the down-regulation is 
not understood. In this study, we found a selective reduction in the levels of
the regulatory subunits (RIIalpha and RIIbeta) and the catalytic subunit (Cbeta) 
as well as the enzymatic activity of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), which
is the major positive regulator of CREB. We also observed that PKA subunits were 
proteolyzed by calpain and the levels of PKA subunits correlated negatively with 
calpain activation in the human brain. These findings led us to propose that in
the brain in patients with Alzheimer disease, over-activation of calpain because 
of calcium dysregulation causes increased degradation and thus decreased activity
of PKA, which, in turn, contributes to down-regulation of CREB and impaired
cognition and memory.

PMCID: PMC2262109
PMID: 17908236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Neurotoxicology. 2007 Sep;28(5):957-64. Epub 2007 Aug 10.

Athymic nude mice are insensitive to low-level toluene-induced up-regulation of
memory-related gene expressions in the hippocampus.

Win-Shwe TT(1), Tsukahara S, Ahmed S, Fukushima A, Yamamoto S, Kakeyama M,
Nakajima D, Goto S, Kobayashi T, Fujimaki H.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Environmental Studies, 16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8506, Japan.

The function of the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) subtype of glutamatergic
receptors is known to be antagonized by toluene, a well-characterized neurotoxic 
chemical known to impair memory functions. Recently, peripheral T cells have been
clearly shown to play an important role in cognitive and behavioral functions. In
the present study, we investigated the role of peripheral T cells in the
hippocampal mRNA expression of memory-related genes induced by low levels of
toluene exposure in mice. BALB/c wild-type (WT) and nude mice were exposed to
9ppm of toluene or filtered air (0ppm toluene; control groups) in a nose-only
exposure chamber for 30min on 3 consecutive days followed by weekly sessions for 
4 weeks. Twenty-four hours after the last exposure, the hippocampi were collected
and the inducibility of memory-related genes was examined using a real-time
quantitative PCR method. NMDA NR2A, calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase
IV (CaMKIV), cyclic AMP-responsive element binding protein 1 (CREB1), and BDNF
were significantly up-regulated in the hippocampi of WT mice exposed to 9ppm of
toluene, compared to the expressions observed in WT mice exposed to filtered air,
but similar results were not observed in nude mice. To investigate the possible
involvement of peripheral T cells in the toluene-induced up-regulation of
memory-related genes in WT mice, we examined the mRNA expression of Thy-1 (a pan 
T cell-specific marker) and quantified the number of cells that were
immunoreactive to a T cell antigen receptor, CD3 (CD3-ir). Both the expression of
Thy-1 mRNA and the number of CD3-ir cells were significantly higher in the
hippocampi of the WT mice exposed to 9ppm of toluene, compared with that in WT
mice exposed to filtered air; similar results were not observed in nude mice. We 
also examined the expression of chemokine genes like CCL2 and CCL3. The
expression of CCL3 mRNA was significantly up-regulated only in the
toluene-exposed WT mice. Although other differences unrelated to immune function 
may exist between WT and nude mice from the same background, the findings of the 
present study strongly suggest that the recruitment of peripheral T cells in the 
hippocampi of BALB/c WT mice exposed to low levels of toluene may be involved in 
the toluene-induced up-regulation of memory-related genes at the mRNA level.

PMID: 17870172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Blood. 2007 Dec 15;110(13):4455-63. Epub 2007 Sep 7.

Genetic variation in 1253 immune and inflammation genes and risk of non-Hodgkin
lymphoma.

Cerhan JR(1), Ansell SM, Fredericksen ZS, Kay NE, Liebow M, Call TG, Dogan A,
Cunningham JM, Wang AH, Liu-Mares W, Macon WR, Jelinek D, Witzig TE, Habermann
TM, Slager SL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic 
College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. cerhan.james@mayo.edu

Smaller-scale evaluations suggest that common genetic variation in candidate
genes related to immune function may predispose to the development of non-Hodgkin
lymphoma (NHL). We report an analysis of variants within genes associated with
immunity and inflammation and risk of NHL using a panel of 9412 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) from 1253 genes in a study of 458 patients with NHL and 484 
frequency-matched controls. We modeled haplotypes and risk of NHL, as well as the
main effects for all independent SNPs from a gene in multivariate logistic
regression models; we separately report results for nonsynonymous (ns) SNPs. In
gene-level analyses, the strongest findings (P < or = .001) were for CREB1, FGG, 
MAP3K5, RIPK3, LSP1, TRAF1, DUSP2, and ITGB3. In nsSNP analyses, the strongest
findings (P < or = .01) were for ITGB3 L59P (odds ratio [OR] = 0.66; 95%
confidence interval [CI] 0.52-0.85), TLR6 V427A (OR = 5.20; CI 1.77-15.3), SELPLG
M264V (OR = 3.20; CI 1.48-6.91), UNC84B G671S (OR = 1.50; CI 1.12-2.00), B3GNT3
H328R (OR = 0.74; CI 0.59-0.93), and BAT2 V1883L (OR = 0.64; CI 0.45-0.90). Our
results suggest that genetic variation in genes associated with immune response
(TRAF1, RIPK3, BAT2, and TLR6), mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling
(MAP3K5, DUSP2, and CREB1), lymphocyte trafficking and migration (B3GNT3, SELPLG,
and LSP1), and coagulation pathways (FGG and ITGB3) may be important in the
etiology of NHL, and should be prioritized in replication studies.

PMCID: PMC2234796
PMID: 17827388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 2;282(44):32222-32. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

Myelin basic protein-primed T cells induce neurotrophins in glial cells via
alphavbeta3 [corrected] integrin.

Roy A(1), Liu X, Pahan K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
Illinois 60612, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 8;283(6):3688.

Increasing the level of neurotrophins within the central nervous system may have 
therapeutic efficacy in patients with various neurological diseases. Earlier we
have demonstrated that myelin basic protein (MBP)-primed T cells induce the
expression of various proinflammatory molecules in glial cells via cell-to-cell
contact. Here we describe that after Th2 polarization by gemfibrozil or other
drugs, MBP-primed T cells induced the expression of neurotrophic molecules such
as brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and neurotrophin-3 (NT-3), but not
proinflammatory molecules in microglia and astroglia via cell-to-cell contact.
MBP-primed Th2 cells expressed alpha5 and beta3 integrins and functional blocking
antibodies against both alpha5 and beta3 integrins inhibited the ability of
MBP-primed Th2 cells to induce glial neurotrophins. On the other hand, glial
cells expressed PDGF-Rbeta and neutralization of this glial receptor abrogated
the ability of Th2 cells to induce neurotrophins in glia. Activation of glial
cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) by MBP-primed Th2 cell contact and
inhibition of contact-mediated expression of neurotrophins by antisense knockdown
of glial CREB suggest that MBP-primed Th2 cell-glia contact induces the
expression of neurotrophins through glial activation of CREB. Accordingly,
blocking of either alpha5beta3 integrins on T cells or PDGF-Rbeta on glial cells 
impaired the ability of MBP-primed Th2 cells to induce glial activation of CREB. 
Furthermore, we demonstrate that these MBP-primed Th2 cells entered into the
central nervous system and increased the expression of neurotrophins in vivo in
the brain. This study illuminates the importance of alpha5beta3 and PDGF-Rbeta in
guiding the novel neurotrophic property of neuroantigen-primed T cells via
activation of CREB that may be of therapeutic importance in various neurological 
disorders.

PMCID: PMC2637617
PMID: 17823123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Sep-Oct;1769(9-10):593-602. Epub 2007 Aug 9.

Functional characterization of the promoter of human kinetochore protein HEC1:
novel link between regulation of the cell cycle protein and CREB family
transcription factors.

Cheng L(1), Li L, Qiao X, Liu J, Yao X.

Author information: 
(1)Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, School of Life Science,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, 230027, China.
charlson@ustc.edu.cn

HEC1 (highly expressed in cancer), which localizes to kinetochore in cell
mitosis, plays an essential role in chromosome segregation for M phase
progression. To clarify the mechanism of its transcriptional regulation, we
searched out and isolated its 5'-flanking region. Mapping of this region
identified that it is a TATA-less promoter and contains several putative binding 
sites for different transcription factors. The results from HeLa cells
transfected with pGL3 luciferase reporter vectors containing progressive deletion
of the HEC1 5'-flanking region demonstrated that two elements containing binding 
sites for cAMP responsive element binding (CREB) protein and activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4 or CREB2) are critical for transcriptional activity.
Mutation of the two elements, not downstream E2F box, resulted in a significant
reduction of the promoter activity. Gel shift and supershift assays also
demonstrated specific binding of transcription factors to their putative binding 
sites. Furthermore, overexpression of either CREB or ATF4 enhanced the activation
of the HEC1 promoter and overexpression of both of them had an additive effect on
the activation of the HEC1 transcription. Conversely, overexpression of dominant 
negative mutants of either CREB or ATF4 resulted in downregulation of HEC1 mRNA
significantly. Our study provided a new insight into a potential mechanism of how
transcription factors of CREB family are involved in the regulation of
kinetochore protein HEC1 in cancer-related cells.

PMID: 17822787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Environ Health Perspect. 2007 Sep;115(9):1276-82.

Lead induces chondrogenesis and alters transforming growth factor-beta and bone
morphogenetic protein signaling in mesenchymal cell populations.

Zuscik MJ(1), Ma L, Buckley T, Puzas JE, Drissi H, Schwarz EM, O'Keefe RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Musculoskeletal Research, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York, USA.

BACKGROUND: It has been established that skeletal growth is stunted in
lead-exposed children. Because chondrogenesis is a seminal step during skeletal
development, elucidating the impact of Pb on this process is the first step
toward understanding the mechanism of Pb toxicity in the skeleton.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis that Pb alters
chondrogenic commitment of mesenchymal cells and to assess the effects of Pb on
various signaling pathways.
METHODS: We assessed the influence of Pb on chondrogenesis in murine limb bud
mesenchymal cells (MSCs) using nodule formation assays and gene analyses. The
effects of Pb on transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) and bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling was studied using luciferase-based
reporters and Western analyses, and luciferase-based assays were used to study
cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element binding protein (CREB),
beta-catenin, AP-1, and nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB) signaling. We also
used an ectopic bone formation assay to determine how Pb affects chondrogenesis
in vivo.
RESULTS: Pb-exposed MSCs showed enhanced basal and TGF-beta/BMP induction of
chondrogenesis, evidenced by enhanced nodule formation and up-regulation of
Sox-9, type 2 collagen, and aggrecan, all key markers of chondrogenesis. We
observed enhanced chondrogenesis during ectopic bone formation in mice preexposed
to Pb via drinking water. In MSCs, Pb enhanced TGF-beta but inhibited BMP-2
signaling, as measured by luciferase reporter assays and Western analyses of Smad
phosphorylation. Although Pb had no effect on basal CREB or Wnt/beta-catenin
pathway activity, it induced NFkappaB signaling and inhibited AP-1 signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: The in vitro and in vivo induction of chondrogenesis by Pb likely
involves modulation and integration of multiple signaling pathways including
TGF-beta, BMP, AP-1, and NFkappaB.

PMCID: PMC1964910
PMID: 17805416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Leukemia. 2008 Mar;22(3):665-7. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

CREB regulates Meis1 expression in normal and malignant hematopoietic cells.

Esparza SD, Chang J, Shankar DB, Zhang B, Nelson SF, Sakamoto KM.

PMID: 17805329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Oncol Rep. 2007 Oct;18(4):953-8.

Expression of transcription factor CREB1 in human breast cancer and its
correlation with prognosis.

Chhabra A(1), Fernando H, Watkins G, Mansel RE, Jiang WG.

Author information: 
(1)Metastasis and Angiogenesis Research Group, School of Medicine, Cardiff
University, Cardiff, CF14 4XN, UK. chhabraa1@cardiff.ac.uk

It has been suggested that the cAMP responsive element-binding protein (CREB) may
act as a transcription regulator of aromatase in breast cancer cells. However,
there is little knowledge on the expression of CREB1 in human breast cancer and
its clinical significance. The current study investigated the expression pattern 
of CREB1 in human breast cancer at the mRNA and protein level and correlated it
with the clinical outcome. CREB1 staining was primarily seen in the nucleus of
both normal and tumour cells. At the mRNA level, we found a significantly higher 
level of CREB1 in breast tumour tissues (n=120) as compared to non-neoplastic
mammary tissues (n=33, p=0.0092). When compared between different histological
types CREB1 expression was significantly higher in ductal carcinoma as compared
to lobular and other breast carcinoma. Patients with a poor prognosis and with
metastasis had a markedly raised level of CREB1 compared to patients who were
disease free. In addition, node-positive tumours had higher levels of CREB1 than 
node-negative tumours (p=0.0018). Finally, patients with high levels of CREB1 had
a significantly shorter disease-free survival [95.3 (68.4-122.3, 95% CI) months] 
compared with those with lower levels [133.9 (123.5-144.2) months, p=0.0193].
This study demonstrates that the level of CREB1 in breast cancer patients is
elevated and is significantly raised in patients with a poor prognosis,
metastatic disease and nodal involvement. We conclude that the level of CREB1
expression is aberrant in human breast cancer and is associated with disease
progression in breast cancer patients.

PMID: 17786359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Nat Genet. 2007 Oct;39(10):1225-34. Epub 2007 Sep 2.

Modulation of morphogenesis by noncanonical Wnt signaling requires ATF/CREB
family-mediated transcriptional activation of TGFbeta2.

Zhou W(1), Lin L, Majumdar A, Li X, Zhang X, Liu W, Etheridge L, Shi Y, Martin J,
Van de Ven W, Kaartinen V, Wynshaw-Boris A, McMahon AP, Rosenfeld MG, Evans SM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA.

Transcriptional readout downstream of canonical Wnt signaling is known to be
mediated by beta-catenin activation of well-described targets, but potential
transcriptional readout in response to noncanonical Wnt signaling remains poorly 
understood. Here, we define a transcriptional pathway important in noncanonical
Wnt signaling. We have found that Wnt11 is a direct target of a canonical
beta-catenin pathway in developing heart and that Wnt11 mutants show cardiac
outflow tract defects. We provide genetic and biochemical evidence thatWnt11
signaling affects extracellular matrix composition, cytoskeletal rearrangements
and polarized cell movement required for morphogenesis of the cardiac outflow
tract. Notably, transforming growth factor beta2 (TGFbeta2), a key effector of
organ morphogenesis, is regulated by Wnt11-mediated noncanonical signaling in
developing heart and somites via one or more activating transcription factor
(ATF)/cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CREB) family members. Thus, we
propose that transcriptional readout mediated at least in part by a Wnt11 -->
ATF/CREB --> TGFbeta2 pathway is critical in regulating morphogenesis in response
to noncanonical Wnt signaling.

PMID: 17767158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Learn Mem. 2007 Aug 29;14(9):564-72. Print 2007 Sep.

Transgenic mice expressing an inhibitory truncated form of p300 exhibit long-term
memory deficits.

Oliveira AM(1), Wood MA, McDonough CB, Abel T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
19104, USA.

The formation of many forms of long-term memory requires several molecular
mechanisms including regulation of gene expression. The mechanisms directing
transcription require not only activation of individual transcription factors but
also recruitment of transcriptional coactivators. CBP and p300 are
transcriptional coactivators that interact with a large number of transcription
factors and regulate transcription through multiple mechanisms, including an
intrinsic histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity. HAT activity mediates
acetylation of lysine residues on the amino-terminal tails of histone proteins,
thereby increasing DNA accessibility for transcription factors to activate gene
expression. CBP has been shown to play an important role in long-term memory
formation. We have investigated whether p300 is also required for certain forms
of memory. p300 shares a high degree of homology with CBP and has been shown to
interact with transcription factors known to be critical for long-term memory
formation. Here we demonstrate that conditional transgenic mice expressing an
inhibitory truncated form of p300 (p300Delta1), which lacks the carboxy-terminal 
HAT and activation domains, have impaired long-term recognition memory and
contextual fear memory. Thus, our study demonstrates that p300 is required for
certain forms of memory and that the HAT and carboxy-terminal domains play a
critical role.

PMCID: PMC1994075
PMID: 17761541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2007 Dec;46(12):1051-60.

EWSR1-CREB1 is the predominant gene fusion in angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma.

Antonescu CR(1), Dal Cin P, Nafa K, Teot LA, Surti U, Fletcher CD, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10021, USA. antonesc@mskcc.org

The molecular hallmark of angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is not well
defined, with only six cases with specific gene fusions reported to date,
consisting of either FUS-ATF1 or EWSR1-ATF1. To address this, we investigated the
presence of FUS-ATF1, EWSR1-ATF1, and the highly related EWSR1-CREB1 fusion in a 
group of nine AFHs. All cases were subjected to RT-PCR for EWSR1-ATF1 and
EWSR1-CREB1. FISH for EWSR1 and FUS rearrangements was performed in most cases.
Transcriptional profiling was performed in three tumors and their gene expression
was compared to five clear cell sarcomas expressing either the EWSR1-ATF1 or
EWSR1-CREB1 fusion. By RT-PCR, eight out of nine tumors showed the presence of
the EWSR1-CREB1 fusion, while one had an EWSR1-ATF1 transcript. FISH showed
evidence of EWSR1 rearrangement in seven out of eight cases. Karyotypic analysis 
performed in one tumor showed a t(2;22)(q33;q12). High transcript levels were
noted for TFE3 in AFH tumors, while overexpression of genes involved in
melanogenesis, such as MITF, GP100, and MET was noted in somatic clear cell
sarcomas. We report for the first time the presence of EWSR1-CREB1 in AFH, which 
now appears to be the most frequent gene fusion in this tumor. EWSR1-CREB1 is a
novel translocation recently described in clear cell sarcoma of the GI tract.
EWSR1-ATF1, identified in some AFH cases, is the most common genetic abnormality 
in soft tissue clear cell sarcoma. Thus, identical fusions involving ATF1 and
CREB1 are found in two distinct sarcomas, which may be able to transform two
different types of mesenchymal precursor cells, unlike most other sarcoma gene
fusions.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17724745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Neurochem. 2007 Nov;103(3):860-70. Epub 2007 Aug 20.

bFGF promotes photoreceptor cell survival in vitro by PKA-mediated inactivation
of glycogen synthase kinase 3beta and CREB-dependent Bcl-2 up-regulation.

O'Driscoll C(1), Wallace D, Cotter TG.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Development and Disease Laboratory, Biochemistry Department, Bioscience
Research Institute, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.

Although there is substantial evidence supporting the neuroprotective efficacy of
basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) in the rodent retina there is no consensus 
to date as to the protective mechanism involved. We hypothesise that bFGF can
assert its neuroprotective effects directly on mouse photoreceptors transduced
via the activation of specific intracellular signalling pathways. In mouse
photoreceptor-derived 661W cells, bFGF promoted a rapid inactivation of glycogen 
synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta) by phosphorylation at Ser9. The effects of bFGF 
on GSK3beta were dependent on protein kinase A (PKA) activation, as inhibition of
this pathway blocked inactivation. Furthermore, bFGF protection against oxidative
stress was dependent on PKA inactivation of GSK3beta as PKA inhibition attenuated
bFGF-induced protection. Furthermore, transfection of cells with mutant dominant 
negative GSK3betaS9A that cannot be phosphorylated on Ser9 also abrogated
neuroprotection. Activation of the transcription factor cAMP-response element
binding protein (CREB) and subsequent up-regulation of Bcl-2 in response to bFGF 
was also dependent on PKA as inhibition with H-89 attenuated increased pCREB
levels and Bcl-2 expression. These results indicate that the protective efficacy 
of bFGF in mouse photoreceptors involves PKA-dependent inactivation of GSK3beta
and subsequent up-regulation of Bcl-2 via CREB activation.

PMID: 17714451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Horm Metab Res. 2007 Aug;39(8):560-6.

Regulation of human MC2-R gene expression by CREB, CREM, and ICER in the
adrenocortical cell line Y1.

Zwermann O(1), Braun AC, Lalli E, Sassone-Corsi P, Beuschlein F, Reincke M.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik - Innenstadt, Ludwig-Maximilian-University, Munich,
Germany. oliver.zwermann@med.uni-muenchen.de

The MC2-Receptor (melanocortin 2 receptor, MC2-R) is a Gs-protein coupled
receptor that is upregulated by its own ligand ACTH and by forskolin. The
mechanisms regulating MC2-R expression are still unclear. We therefore
investigated the role of the stimulatory transcription factors CREB and CREM and 
the inhibitory factor ICER for regulation of human MC2-R expression. We
cotransfected mouse adrenocortical Y1 cells with luciferase reporter gene vectors
containing full length and deleted human MC2-R promoter constructs with
expression plasmids for CREB, CREBS133A, CREMtau, CREMtauS117A, or ICER. Direct
protein-DNA interaction was investigated by EMSA. Wild type CREB did not
significantly affect promoter activity due to high endogenous CREB activity.
However, CREBS133A decreased forskolin stimulated MC2-R promoter activity by
48+/-5% (mean+/-SEM) while unstimulated values remained unchanged. CREMtau
moderately increased basal and forskolin stimulated luciferase activity in a
dose-dependent manner (maximum effect 252+/-24% and 186+/-13% VS. control vector,
respectively). While this effect required the full length promoter, cAMP
stimulation was retained in shorter constructs. ICER reduced basal luciferase
activity in Y1 cells by 17+/-28%, but completely abolished forskolin stimulation.
Although 5'-deletion constructs mapped the minimum promoter region required for
ICER effect to the shortest -64/+40 construct, direct protein DNA interaction in 
this promoter region could not be identified by EMSA. Moreover, mutation of the
SF-1 binding sites, which retained ICER dependent inhibition, excluded SF-1 to be
required for this effect. We conclude from these data that transcription factors 
of the CREB/CREM/ATF family have a moderate effect on human MC2-R promoter
activity, but seem to play a minor role in transmitting stimulation of the cAMP
pathway to increased MC2-R expression.

PMID: 17712720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Inflamm Res. 2007 Aug;56(8):339-44.

Elevated CREB activity in embryonic fibroblasts of gene-targeted histamine
deficient mice.

Hegyi K(1), Falus A, Toth S.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group for Immunogenomics, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Semmelweis
University, 4 Nagyvarad ter Budapest, 1089 Budapest, Hungary.

OBJECTIVES: Histamine is a known inducer of cAMP-responsive element binding
protein (CREB), which plays a key role in initiation of adipogenesis. Our present
goal was to study how histamine deficiency impacts CREB signalling and
adipogenesis.
METHODS: We used a histidine-decarboxylase gene-targeted (HDC KO) mice model
lacking endogenous histamine. We measured CREB activity and expression by EMSA,
Western blot and real-time RT-PCR, as well as cAMP levels by ELISA in primary
embryonic fibroblasts derived from WT and HDC KO mice. The ability of these cells
to form adipocytes was also tested in preliminary experiments.
RESULTS: We found that in the absence of the histamine, cells show higher
constitutive CREB activity and greatly increased intracellular cAMP levels, as
well as that in contrast to WT cells, HDC KO fibroblasts are more prone to
differentiate into adipocytes.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest a newly recognised inhibitory role for histamine
in CREB activity and draws attention to the potential role of histamine in
adipocyte differentiation.

PMID: 17687518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Nephron Physiol. 2007;107(2):p35-44. Epub 2007 Aug 8.

Mechanistic analysis of VDR-mediated renin suppression.

Nakane M(1), Ma J, Ruan X, Kroeger PE, Wu-Wong R.

Author information: 
(1)Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL, USA. nakane475@earthlink.net

BACKGROUND: The vitamin D receptor (VDR) is involved in the regulation of renin
expression and vitamin D analogs down-regulated renin mRNA expression in As4.1
cells.
METHODS: Microarray analysis was used to assess the VDR-mediated gene expression 
profile in As4.1 cells treated with paricalcitol, followed by real-time RT-PCR.
Mechanistic analyses were done using siRNA, electrophoretic mobility shift assay 
(EMSA) and Western blotting.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis shows that 709 target genes were affected by
paricalcitol with 286 up- and 423 downregulated. A number of major pathways were 
impacted including transcription factors. Real-time RT-PCR confirmed the
microarray results. Treatment of the cells with siRNA against nuclear receptor
co-repressor (NCOR1) eliminated VDR-mediated renin suppression. Using EMSA,
paricalcitol treatment reduced the level of protein complex binding to the cyclic
AMP-responsive element (CRE)-like domain in the renin distal enhancer region.
VDR, CRE-binding protein (CREB1) and NCOR1 were identified in the complex binding
to the CRE-like domain by Western blot in the paricalcitol-treated cells.
Paricalcitol treatment resulted in an increase in the VDR level, but no
significant change in the CREB1 and NCOR1 levels.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that VDR-mediated renin suppression likely acts
through a transcriptional regulatory complex including CREB1, NCOR1 and VDR that 
binds to the CRE-like domain in the renin enhancer region.

(c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17687191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Learn Mem. 2007 Aug 1;14(8):512-9. Print 2007 Aug.

Long-term enrichment enhances the cognitive behavior of the aging neurogranin
null mice without affecting their hippocampal LTP.

Huang FL(1), Huang KP, Boucheron C.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neuroscience Program, National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4510, 
USA. fhuang@mail.nih.gov

Neurogranin (Ng), a PKC substrate, is abundantly expressed in brain regions
important for cognitive functions. Deletion of Ng caused severe deficits in
spatial learning and LTP in the hippocampal CA1 region of mice. These Ng-/- mice 
also exhibit deficits in the amplification of their hippocampal signaling
pathways critical for learning and memory. A short-term exposure to an enriched
environment failed to improve their behavioral performances. Here, we showed that
a long-term enrichment protocol for the aging mice was beneficial to the Ng-/- as
well as Ng+/+ and Ng+/- mice in preventing age-related cognitive decline.
Enrichment also caused an increase in the hippocampal CREB level of all three
genotypes and Ng level of Ng+/+ and Ng+/- mice, but not that of alphaCaMKII or
ERK. Interestingly, hippocampal slices of these enriched aging Ng-/- mice, unlike
those of Ng+/+ and Ng+/- mice, did not show enhancement in the high frequency
stimulation (HFS)-induced LTP in the CA1 region. It appears that the learning and
memory processes in these enriched aging Ng-/- mice do not correlate with the
HFS-induced LTP, which is facilitated by Ng. These results demonstrated that
long-term enrichment for the aging Ng-/- mice may improve their cognitive
function through an Ng-independent plasticity pathway.

PMCID: PMC1951789
PMID: 17671107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Biochem Mol Biol. 2007 Jul 31;40(4):525-31.

Clenbuterol inhibits SREBP-1c expression by activating CREB1.

Zhou L(1), Li Y, Nie T, Feng S, Yuan J, Chen H, Yang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of
Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, P. R. China.

As a beta(2)-adrenergic agonist, clenbuterol decreases body fat, but the
molecular mechanism underlying this process is unclear. In the present study, we 
treated 293T and L-02 cells with clenbuterol and found that clenbuterol
downregulates SREBP-1c expression and upregulates CREB1 expression. Considering
SREBP-1c has the function of regulating the transcription of several lipogenic
enzymes, we considered that the downregulation of SREBP-1c is responsible for
body fat reduction by clenbuterol. Many previous studies have found that
clenbuterol markedly increases intracellular cAMP levels, therefore, we also
investigated whether CREB1 is involved in this process. The data from our
experiments indicate that CREB1 overexpression inhibits SREBP-1c transcription,
and that this action is antagonized by CREB2, a competitive inhibitor of CREB1.
Furthermore, since PPARs are able to repress SREBP-1c transcription, we
investigated whether clenbuterol and CREB1 function via a pathway involving PPAR 
activation. However, our results showed that clenbuterol or CREB1 overexpression 
suppressed PPARs transcription in 293T and L-02 cells, which suggested that they 
impair SREBP-1c expression in other ways.

PMID: 17669268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Biol Chem. 2007 Sep 28;282(39):28335-43. Epub 2007 Jul 20.

BCL3 acts as a negative regulator of transcription from the human T-cell leukemia
virus type 1 long terminal repeat through interactions with TORC3.

Hishiki T(1), Ohshima T, Ego T, Shimotohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, 
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

By associating with cyclic AMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB), the
human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) Tax protein activates transcription
from the HTLV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR), which contains multiple cyclic
AMP-responsive elements. The transducers of regulated CREB activity (TORCs) were 
a recently identified family of CREB co-activators that bind to CREB to enhance
CRE-mediated transcription. TORC3, a TORC family protein, dramatically enhances
Tax-mediated transcription from the LTR. In this study, we performed a yeast
two-hybrid screen using the N-terminal region of TORC3 as bait and identified
B-cell chronic lymphatic leukemia protein 3 (BCL3) as a protein interacting with 
TORC3. This interaction was confirmed by glutathione S-transferase pulldown
assays and co-immunoprecipitation experiments with detection by Western blotting.
The ankyrin repeat domain of BCL3 interacted with TORC3. By using a luciferase
assay, we determined that BCL3 inhibited transcription from the HTLV-1 LTR in a
manner dependent on TORC3. Knockdown of endogenous BCL3 using RNA interference
enhanced transcriptional activation of CRE. Treatment with trichostatin A, a
potent inhibitor of the transcriptional co-repressor HDAC, partially reversed the
inhibitory effect of BCL3. These results suggest that BCL3 functions as a
repressor of HTLV-1 LTR-mediated transcription through interactions with TORC3.
In addition to stimulating transcription from the HTLV-1 LTR, Tax also enhances
BCL3 expression; thus, transcription from the LTR is regulated by both positive
and negative feedback mechanisms.

PMID: 17644518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Biochem J. 2007 Nov 1;407(3):373-81.

Human nuclear pregnane X receptor cross-talk with CREB to repress cAMP activation
of the glucose-6-phosphatase gene.

Kodama S(1), Moore R, Yamamoto Y, Negishi M.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacogenetics Section, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental
Toxicology, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National
Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

The nuclear PXR (pregnane X receptor) was originally characterized as a key
transcription factor that activated hepatic genes encoding drug-metabolizing
enzymes. We have now demonstrated that PXR also represses glucagon-activated
transcription of the G6Pase (glucose-6-phosphatase) gene by directly binding to
CREB [CRE (cAMP-response element)-binding protein]. Adenoviral-mediated
expression of human PXR (hPXR) and its activation by rifampicin strongly
repressed cAMP-dependent induction of the endogenous G6Pase gene in Huh7 cells.
Using the -259 bp G6Pase promoter construct in cell-based transcription assays,
repression by hPXR of PKA (cAMP-dependent protein kinase)-mediated promoter
activation was delineated to CRE sites. GST (glutathione transferase) pull-down
and immunoprecipitation assays were employed to show that PXR binds directly to
CREB, while gel-shift assays were used to demonstrate that this binding prevents 
CREB interaction with the CRE. These results are consistent with the hypothesis
that PXR represses the transcription of the G6Pase gene by inhibiting the
DNA-binding ability of CREB. In support of this hypothesis, treatment with the
mouse PXR activator PCN (pregnenolone 16alpha-carbonitrile) repressed
cAMP-dependent induction of the G6Pase gene in primary hepatocytes prepared from 
wild-type, but not from PXR-knockout, mice, and also in the liver of fasting
wild-type, but not PXR-knockout, mice. Moreover, ChIP (chromatin
immunoprecipitation) assays were performed to show a decreased CREB binding to
the G6Pase promoter in fasting wild-type mice after PCN treatment. Thus drug
activation of PXR can repress the transcriptional activity of CREB,
down-regulating gluconeogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2275060
PMID: 17635106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Neuroscience. 2007 Aug 10;148(1):238-49. Epub 2007 Jul 16.

Alteration of the somatostatinergic system in the striatum of rats with acute
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Aguado-Llera D(1), Puebla-Jiménez L, Yébenes-Gregorio L, Arilla-Ferreiro E.

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Neurobioquímica, Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular,
Facultad de Medicina, Ctra. Madrid-Barcelona km 33.6, Universidad de Alcalá,
E-28871 Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, Spain.

To date, the neurochemical basis underlying the motor and cognitive deficits
described in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) is unclear. Since the
neuropeptide somatostatin (SRIF) and the striatum have been implicated in
movement control and implicit memory, the aim of this study was to analyze the
striatal somatostatinergic system in an animal model of MS, experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). Female Lewis rats were immunized with an
emulsion containing myelin basic protein (MBP) in complete Freund's adjuvant to
induce the disease. The animals were decapitated when limp tail (grade 1) or
severe hind limb paralysis (grade 3) was observed. Acute EAE in grade 3 did not
modify striatal somatostatin-like immunoreactivity (SRIF-LI) content but
decreased the overall SRIF receptor density, without affecting the apparent
affinity, in the rat striatal membranes. A selective reduction in the protein
levels of the SRIF receptor subtype sst2, analyzed by Western blotting, was
detected in the EAE rats, which correlated with decreased sst2 mRNA levels. The
expression of the receptor subtypes sst1, sst3 or sst4 was unaltered by the
disease. The decrease in the SRIF receptor density was accompanied by an
attenuated capacity of SRIF to inhibit both basal and forskolin-stimulated
adenylyl cyclase activity. No significant changes, however, were found in the
protein levels of Gi proteins (G(ialpha1), G(ialpha2) or G(ialpha3)) nor in those
of the G-protein-coupled receptor kinase subtypes GRK2, GRK5 or GRK6. Acute EAE
in grade 1 did not modify any of the parameters studied. In conclusion, these
data demonstrate that acute EAE, in grade 3, disrupts the rat striatal SRIF
receptor-effector system. These findings provide new insight into the molecular
basis of EAE which might contribute to a better understanding of multiple
sclerosis in humans.

PMID: 17630220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Biol Chem. 2007 Aug 31;282(35):25177-81. Epub 2007 Jul 11.

Constitutive activation of TAK1 by HTLV-1 tax-dependent overexpression of TAB2
induces activation of JNK-ATF2 but not IKK-NF-kappaB.

Suzuki S(1), Singhirunnusorn P, Mori A, Yamaoka S, Kitajima I, Saiki I, Sakurai
H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathogenic Biochemistry, Institute of Natural Medicine, University
of Toyama, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.

HTLV-1 Tax oncoprotein induces persistent activation of the transcription factor 
NF-kappaB and CREB (cAMP-response element-binding protein)/ATF. Transforming
growth factor-beta-activated kinase 1 (TAK1) has been shown to play a critical
role in these transcription factors. Here, we found that TAK1 was constitutively 
activated in Tax-positive HTLV-1-transformed T cells. Tax induced persistent
overexpression of TAK1-binding protein 2 (TAB2), but not TAB3, which is essential
for TAK1 activation. Surprisingly, TAK1 was not involved in the activation of
NF-kappaB. On the other hand, JNK and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinases were 
activated by TAK1. In addition, ATF2, but not CREB, was a target for the TAK1-JNK
pathway, and p38 negatively regulated TAK1 activity through TAB1 phosphorylation.
These results indicate that Tax-mediated TAK1 activation is important for the
activation of ATF2 rather than NF-kappaB.

PMID: 17626013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2007 Sep;293(3):H1877-82. Epub 2007 Jul 6.

The CREB leucine zipper regulates CREB phosphorylation, cardiomyopathy, and
lethality in a transgenic model of heart failure.

Huggins GS(1), Lepore JJ, Greytak S, Patten R, McNamee R, Aronovitz M, Wang PJ,
Reed GL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Research Institute, Tufts-New England Medical Center,
Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA. ghuggins@tufts-nemc.org

Signaling through cAMP plays an important role in heart failure. Phosphorylation 
of cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) at serine-133 regulates gene
expression in the heart. We examined the functional significance of CREB-S133
phosphorylation by comparing transgenic models in which a phosphorylation
resistant CREB-S133A mutant containing either an intact or a mutated leucine
zipper domain (CREB-S133A-LZ) was expressed in the heart. In vitro, CREB-S133A
retained the ability to interact with wild-type CREB, whereas CREB-S133A-LZ did
not. In vivo, CREB-S133A and CREB-S133A-LZ were expressed at comparable levels in
the heart; however, CREB-S133A markedly suppressed the phosphorylation of
endogenous CREB, whereas CREB-S133A-LZ had no effect. The one-year survival of
mice from two CREB-S133A-LZ transgenic lines was equivalent to nontransgenic
littermate control mice (NTG), whereas transgenic CREB-S133A mice died with heart
failure at a median 30 wk of age (P < 0.0001). CREB-S133A mice had an altered
gene expression characteristic of the failing heart, whereas CREB-S133A-LZ mice
did not. Left ventricular contractile function was substantially reduced in
CREB-S133A mice versus NTG mice and only modestly reduced in CREB-S133A-LZ mice
(P < 0.02). When considered in light of other studies, these findings indicate
that overexpression of the CREB leucine zipper is required for both inhibition of
endogenous CREB phosphorylation and cardiomyopathy in this murine model of heart 
failure.

PMCID: PMC3911886
PMID: 17616745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Exp Mol Pathol. 2007 Dec;83(3):413-8. Epub 2007 May 25.

Expression and localization of the activated mitogen-activated protein kinase in 
lesional psoriatic skin.

Yu XJ(1), Li CY, Dai HY, Cai DX, Wang KY, Xu YH, Chen LM, Zhou CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Qilu Hospital, University of Shandong, Jinan
250012, China.

Abnormalities in several signaling pathways and in the expression and/or
activation of different transcription factors in psoriatic keratinocytes have
been hypothesized to play a role in the pathophysiology of psoriasis. The
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades are among the best characterized
of intracellular signaling pathways, and they play important roles in cell
proliferation, differentiation, gene expression, and inflammation. We
investigated the expression, activation and distribution of extracellular
signal-regulated kinases (ERKs), p38 mitogen-activated protein kinases (p38 MAPK)
and c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs), using immunohistochemistry and Western blot 
in lesional psoriatic skin and normal control skin, to clarify the possible roles
of these kinases involved in the pathogenesis of psoriasis. The immunoblot
analysis demonstrated that activation of ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK increased in the
lesional psoriatic skin. In addition, a significant increase in p-MEK (the
upstream activator of ERK), and p-CREB (a downstream transcription factor of
active ERK) was also found in our experiment. The immunohistochemical study
showed that the levels of phosphorylated ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK were enhanced in
lesional psoriatic skin compared with controls. Phosphorylated ERK1/2 and p38
exhibited clear nuclear localization throughout the epidermal part of lesional
psoriatic skin. These findings suggested that ERK1/2 and p38 pathways were
involved in the pathophysiology of psoriasis.

PMID: 17599830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Mol Psychiatry. 2007 Jul;12(7):615-7.

CREB1 haplotypes and the relative reinforcing value of nicotine.

Ray R, Jepson C, Wileyto P, Patterson F, Strasser AA, Rukstalis M, Perkins K,
Blendy J, Lerman C.

PMID: 17592483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Mol Carcinog. 2007 Dec;46(12):981-92.

The effect of cyclooxygenase-2 overexpression on skin carcinogenesis is context
dependent.

Rundhaug JE(1), Pavone A, Kim E, Fischer SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Science Park-Research Division, Smithville, Texas 78957, USA.

The up-regulation of the inducible form of cyclooxygenase (COX-2), a central
enzyme in the prostaglandin (PG) biosynthetic pathway, occurs in many epithelial 
tumors and has been associated with tumor cell proliferation and angiogenesis. To
better understand the role of COX-2 in skin tumor development, we generated
transgenic mice that overexpress COX-2 under the control of the keratin 14
promoter. We previously reported (Cancer Res. 62: 2516, 2002) that these mice,
referred to as keratin 14 (K14).COX2 mice, were unexpectedly very resistant to
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA) tumor promotion. The current studies
were undertaken to determine the mechanism of this resistance and determine if it
was restricted to TPA promotion. Transgenic and wild-type mice were subjected to 
a complete carcinogenesis protocol using 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA)
only, as well as a two-stage protocol using DMBA plus an unrelated tumor
promoter, anthralin. In addition, the responses of transgenic and wild-type mice 
to TPA in terms of induction of proliferation and various down-stream mediators
were examined. The TPA resistance phenotype correlated with a reduced ability to 
induce ornithine decarboxylase, interleukin-1alpha, and tumor necrosis
factor-alpha and a reduced proliferation response. This resistance phenotype
appears to be restricted to phorbol ester promotion because K14.COX2 mice
developed six times more tumors than wild-type mice when anthralin was used as
the tumor promoter. Additionally, K14.COX2 mice treated only with DMBA developed 
approximately 3.5 times more tumors than wild-type mice, suggesting that PGs have
intrinsic tumor promoting activity. We conclude that the role of PGs in skin
tumorigenesis is context dependent.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17583568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Cell Physiol. 2008 Jan;214(1):192-200.

PI3-K/Akt-dependent activation of cAMP-response element-binding (CREB) protein in
Jurkat T leukemia cells treated with TRAIL.

Caravatta L(1), Sancilio S, di Giacomo V, Rana R, Cataldi A, Di Pietro R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biomorfologia, Università G. d'Annunzio, Chieti-Pescara,
Italy.

We recently demonstrated the activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3-K/Akt) survival pathway in Jurkat T leukemia cells known for their
sensitivity to the tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand 
(TRAIL)/Apo2L cytotoxic action. The present investigation was done to elucidate
the role of cAMP-response element-binding (CREB) protein in this system. Jurkat T
cells were treated with 100-1,000 ng/ml TRAIL for time intervals up to 24 h in
the presence or absence of selective pharmacologic inhibitors of PI3-K/Akt
(LY294002) or p38 MAPK (SB253580) pathways. Upon TRAIL treatment, a
dose-dependent increase in the percentage of apoptotic cells as well as in
caspase-3 activity was observed. A further enhancement of apoptotic cell death
was obtained with the use of CREB1 siRNA technology, as demonstrated by flow
cytometry. Western blot analysis showed a high constitutive level of CREB
phosphorylation at Ser(133) in Jurkat T cells under normal serum culture
conditions. Under low serum culture conditions, an early (within 1 h) and
transient increase in CREB phosphorylation was detected in response to both TRAIL
doses and reduced upon pre-treatment with LY294002 or SB253580, demonstrating the
PI3-K/Akt- and p38 MAPK-dependency of this effect. The parallel analysis in
immune fluorescence demonstrated the nuclear translocation of the phosphorylated 
form upon treatment with 100 ng/ml TRAIL, whereas the immune labeling was mainly 
detectable in the cytoplasm compartment upon the higher more cytotoxic dose.
These results let us hypothesize that CREB activation can be an important player 
in the complex cross-talk among pro- and anti-apoptotic pathways in this peculiar
cell model.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17579344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Med Hypotheses. 2008;70(1):117-21. Epub 2007 Jun 18.

CREB-regulated diurnal activity patterns are not indicative for depression-like
symptoms in mice and men.

Chourbaji S(1), Brandwein C, Gau D, Depner M, Saam C, Johansson C, Schalling M,
Partonen T, Kasper S, Adolfsson R, Urani A, Lemberger T, Schütz G, Schumann G,
Gass P.

Author information: 
(1)Central Institute of Mental Health Mannheim (ZI), University of Heidelberg,
Germany. chourbaj@zi-mannheim.de

Activation of the transcription factor CREB by Ser142 phosphorylation is
implicated in synchronizing circadian rhythmicity, which is disturbed in many
depressive patients. Hence, one could assume that emotional behaviour and
neuroendocrinological markers would be altered in CREB(S142A) mice, in which
serine 142 is replaced by alanine, preventing phosphorylation at this residue.
Moreover, associations of CREB Ser142 and seasonal affective disorder (SAD) might
be detectable by the analysis of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the
CREB gene close to the Ser142 residue in SAD patients. However, neither
CREB(S142A) mice demonstrate features of depression, nor there is evidence for an
association of SAD with the CREB genotypes. Nevertheless, in humans there is an
association of a global seasonality score and circadian rhythmicity with the CREB
genotypes in healthy control probands, but not SAD patients. This parallels the
phenotype of CREB(S142A) mice, presenting alterations of circadian rhythm and
light-induced entrainment. Thus it is reasonable to assume that CREB Ser142
represents a molecular switch in mice and men, which is responsible for the
(dys)regulation of circadian rhythms.

PMID: 17574346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Allergy. 2007 Jul;62(7):787-94.

Variable p-CREB expression depicts different asthma phenotypes.

Chiappara G(1), Chanez P, Bruno A, Pace E, Pompeo F, Bousquet J, Bonsignore G,
Gjomarkaj M.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Biomedicina e Immunologia Molecolare, Commessa di Immunopatologia 
e Farmacologia Sperimentale dell'Appartato Respiratorio, Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche, Palermo, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Chromatin modification may play a role in inflammatory gene
regulation in asthma. Cyclic adenosine mono-phosphate response element-binding
protein (CREB), with the specific co-activator, the CREB-binding protein (CBP),
contributes to the acetylation of chromatin and to the transcription of
pro-inflammatory genes.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the expression of CBP and of phospho-CREB (p-CREB) in
bronchial biopsies and in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of controls
(C), untreated (UA), inhaled steroid treated (ICS) and steroid-dependent
asthmatic (SDA) patients.
METHODS: We used immunohistochemistry in bronchial biopsies and western blot
analysis and immunocytochemistry in PBMC.
RESULTS: Cyclic adenosine mono-phosphate response element-binding protein
expression, in the epithelium was similar in all groups, while p-CREB expression 
was increased in UA and in SDA in comparison with ICS and C subjects (C vs UA P =
0.002, C vs SDA P = 0.007), (ICS vs SDA P = 0.005), (ICS vs UA P = 0.001).
Interestingly, also in the submucosa, p-CREB was increased in UA and SDA in
comparison with ICS and C subjects (C vs UA P = 0.0004) (C vs SDA P < 0.0001)
(ICS vs UA P = 0.002) (ICS vs SDA P < 0.0001) and positively correlated with
leukocyte infiltration within the bronchi (CD45RB+ cells). Similar results were
obtained with PBMC isolated from the same patient groups. Incubation of PBMC in
vitro, with fluticasone propionate, decreased the p-CREB expression induced by
cytokine activation (interferon-gamma, tumor necrosis factor-alpha).
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that the expression of p-CREB is related, in
asthma, to the persistent inflammation according to the disease severity. p-CREB 
expression can be modulated by glucocorticoids in responsive patients.

PMID: 17573727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. FEBS J. 2007 Jul;274(13):3201. Epub 2007 Jun 12.

Transcription factor cAMP response element-binding protein CREB.

Takemori H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Signaling and Metabolism, National Institute of Biomedical 
Innovation, Osaka, Japan.

PMID: 17565600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Gen Virol. 2007 Jul;88(Pt 7):1887-94.

Activity of the LMP1 gene promoter in Epstein-Barr virus-transformed cell lines
is modulated by sequence variations in the promoter-proximal CRE site.

Jansson A(1), Johansson P, Li S, Rymo L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy
at Göteborg University, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, S-413 45 Gothenburg,
Sweden.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded tumour-associated latent membrane protein 1 
(LMP1) gene expression is transactivated by EBV nuclear antigen 2 (EBNA2) in
human B cells. We have previously identified a cyclic AMP-responsive element
(CRE) in the B95-8 LMP1 promoter that is essential for transcription activation. 
Sequencing of LMP1 promoter in the P3HR1-derived EREB2.5 cell line revealed 25
single base pair substitutions in comparison to the B95-8 virus, one of them
localized in the CRE element. Sequence variations in this element have been
identified in several EBV isolates of both African and Asian origins. The effect 
of the P3HR1 CRE site variation on binding of factors to the LMP1 promoter
sequence (LRS) and promoter activation was investigated with electrophoretic
mobility-shift assays and reporter gene transfection assays. ATF1 and CREB1
transcription factors bound with reduced efficiency to the P3HR1 variant and
below the detection level to the other tested variants. Accordingly, reporter
plasmids carrying the P3HR1 CRE sequence in a B95-8 LRS context displayed 50 %
lower activity in all tested cell lines. The impaired ability to activate
transcription caused by the C to A substitution in CRE was not apparent when the 
mutated site was placed in a P3HR1 LRS context and the reporter transfected into 
Jijoye cells, most likely as a consequence of the other base pair substitutions
in P3HR1 LRS. Overall, our results suggest that the mutations in the LRS CRE site
have been conserved to adjust LMP1 expression to levels that favour cell survival
in certain cellular and environmental contexts.

PMID: 17554019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Neuron. 2007 Jun 7;54(5):831-43.

Light entrainment of the mammalian circadian clock by a PRKCA-dependent
posttranslational mechanism.

Jakubcakova V(1), Oster H, Tamanini F, Cadenas C, Leitges M, van der Horst GT,
Eichele G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genes and Behavior, Max Planck Institute of Biophysical
Chemistry, 37077 Goettingen, Germany.

Light is the most potent stimulus for synchronizing endogenous circadian rhythms 
with external time. Photic clock resetting in mammals involves cAMP-responsive
element binding protein (CREB)-mediated transcriptional activation of Period
clock genes in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN). Here we provide evidence for an 
additional photic input pathway to the mammalian circadian clock based on Protein
Kinase C alpha (PRKCA). We found that Prkca-deficient mice show an impairment of 
light-mediated clock resetting. In the SCN of wild-type mice, light exposure
evokes a transient interaction between PRKCA and PERIOD 2 (PER2) proteins that
affects PER2 stability and nucleocytoplasmic distribution. These
posttranslational events, together with CREB-mediated transcriptional regulation,
are key factors in the molecular mechanism of photic clock resetting.

PMID: 17553429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2007 Jun;64(6):689-97.

Association between treatment-emergent suicidal ideation with citalopram and
polymorphisms near cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element binding
protein in the STAR*D study.

Perlis RH(1), Purcell S, Fava M, Fagerness J, Rush AJ, Trivedi MH, Smoller JW.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA. rperlis@partners.org

CONTEXT: A small subset of patients with depression exhibit new or worsening
suicidal thoughts or behavior during short-term treatment with antidepressants.
Because cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element binding (CREB) protein
has been implicated in both antidepressant mechanisms and suicide, the CREB1 gene
represents a gene that possibly influences the risk for treatment-emergent
suicidality.
OBJECTIVE: To examine polymorphisms that span CREB1, which was previously
associated with anger expression in men with major depressive disorder, for
association with new or worsening suicidality.
DESIGN: Nested case-control study derived from the Sequenced Treatment
Alternatives to Relieve Depression (STAR*D) study, a multicenter, prospective,
open, 12-week effectiveness trial from July 1, 2001, to September 30, 2006.
SETTING: Outpatient primary care and psychiatric clinics. Patients Individuals
with nonpsychotic major depressive disorder for whom DNA was available and who
did not report suicidal ideation at study entry were subsequently treated with
citalopram hydrobromide for up to 12 weeks.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Emergent suicidal ideation, defined as a score of 2 or
higher on any postbaseline visit for participants whose baseline score was 0 or 1
on the 16-item Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology-Clinician Rated
suicide item.
RESULTS: Of 1447 participants, 124 (8.6%) subsequently reported suicidality on at
least 1 visit; these individuals were compared with the remaining 1324
participants. Of 5 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) examined, none were
significantly associated with treatment-emergent suicidality overall. However, 2 
SNPs revealed a gene-by-sex interaction with suicidality. Among the 539 men,
these 2 SNPs and 2 of the 5 SNP haplotypes were significantly associated with
new-onset suicidality.
CONCLUSIONS: Polymorphisms that span CREB1 were associated with
treatment-emergent suicidality among men with depression, extending an
observation of association with male anger expression in a prior independent
cohort. If replicated, this finding would suggest that pharmacogenetic testing
could facilitate the identification of the small subset of individuals at greater
risk during short-term antidepressant treatment.

PMID: 17548750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Hepatology. 2007 Aug;46(2):558-65.

Activation of endoplasmic reticulum stress response by hepatitis viruses
up-regulates protein phosphatase 2A.

Christen V(1), Treves S, Duong FH, Heim MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

The up-regulation of protein phosphatase 2 A (PP2A) is an important factor
leading to an inhibition of IFNalpha signaling caused by viral protein
expression. Here, we describe the molecular mechanism involved in PP2Ac
up-regulation by HCV and HBV. HCV and HBV protein expression in cells induces an 
ER stress response leading to calcium release from the ER. HCV protein expression
induces CREB activation, probably through calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein
kinase. CREB binds to a CRE element in the promoter of PP2Ac and induces its
transcriptional up-regulation. Because PP2Ac is involved in many important
cellular processes including cell-cycle regulation, apoptosis, cell morphology,
development, signal transduction and translation, its up-regulation during ER
stress has potentially important implications.

PMID: 17526027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. EMBO J. 2007 Jun 20;26(12):2890-903. Epub 2007 May 24.

Individual CREB-target genes dictate usage of distinct cAMP-responsive
coactivation mechanisms.

Xu W(1), Kasper LH, Lerach S, Jeevan T, Brindle PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 332 N.
Lauderdale, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

CREB is a key mediator of cAMP- and calcium-inducible transcription, where
phosphorylation of serine 133 in its Kinase-Inducible Domain (KID) is often
equated with transactivation. Phospho-Ser133 is required for CREB to bind the KIX
domain of the coactivators CBP and p300 (CBP/p300) in vitro, although the
importance of this archetype coactivator interaction for endogenous gene
expression is unclear. Here, we show that the CREB interaction with KIX is
necessary for only a part of cAMP-inducible transcription and CBP/p300
recruitment. Surprisingly, individual cAMP-inducible genes with CREB bound at
their promoters differed in their reliance on KIX and none examined showed
complete dependence. Alternatively, we found that arginine 314 (Arg314) in the
CREB basic-leucine zipper (bZIP) domain contributed to CBP/p300 recruitment and
KIX-independent CREB transactivation function. This implicates Transducer Of
Regulated CREB (TORC), an unrelated cAMP-responsive coactivator that binds via
Arg314, and which can bind CBP/p300, in these functions. Interestingly, KIX was
also required for the full cAMP induction of a gene that did not require CREB.
Thus, individual CREB-target gene context dictates the relative contribution of
at least two different cAMP-responsive coactivation mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC1894772
PMID: 17525731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Cell. 2007 May 18;129(4):801-12.

Nuclear translocation of CAM-associated protein activates transcription for
long-term facilitation in Aplysia.

Lee SH(1), Lim CS, Park H, Lee JA, Han JH, Kim H, Cheang YH, Lee SH, Lee YS, Ko
HG, Jang DH, Kim H, Miniaci MC, Bartsch D, Kim E, Bailey CH, Kandel ER, Kaang BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Institute of Molecular Biology and
Genetics, RIO, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National University, San 56-1
Silim-dong Gwanak-gu, Seoul 151-747, Korea.

Repeated pulses of serotonin (5-HT) induce long-term facilitation (LTF) of the
synapses between sensory and motor neurons of the gill-withdrawal reflex in
Aplysia. To explore how apCAM downregulation at the plasma membrane and
CREB-mediated transcription in the nucleus, both of which are required for the
formation of LTF, might relate to each other, we cloned an apCAM-associated
protein (CAMAP) by yeast two-hybrid screening. We found that 5-HT signaling at
the synapse activates PKA which in turn phosphorylates CAMAP to induce the
dissociation of CAMAP from apCAM and the subsequent translocation of CAMAP into
the nucleus of sensory neurons. In the nucleus, CAMAP acts as a transcriptional
coactivator for CREB1 and is essential for the activation of ApC/EBP required for
the initiation of LTF. Combined, our data suggest that CAMAP is a retrograde
signaling component that translocates from activated synapses to the nucleus
during synapse-specific LTF.

PMID: 17512412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Cell Metab. 2007 May;5(5):345-56.

Genome-wide orchestration of cardiac functions by the orphan nuclear receptors
ERRalpha and gamma.

Dufour CR(1), Wilson BJ, Huss JM, Kelly DP, Alaynick WA, Downes M, Evans RM,
Blanchette M, Giguère V.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University Health Centre, Montréal, Québec
H3A 1A1, Canada.

Orphan nuclear receptor ERRalpha (NR3B1) is recognized as a key regulator of
mitochondrial biogenesis, but it is not known whether ERRalpha and other ERR
isoforms play a broader role in cardiac energetics and function. We used
genome-wide location analysis and expression profiling to appraise the role of
ERRalpha and gamma (NR3B3) in the adult heart. Our data indicate that the two
receptors, acting as nonobligatory heterodimers, target a common set of promoters
involved in the uptake of energy substrates, production and transport of ATP
across the mitochondrial membranes, and intracellular fuel sensing, as well as
Ca(2+) handling and contractile work. Motif-finding algorithms assisted by
functional studies indicated that ERR target promoters are enriched for NRF-1,
CREB, and STAT3 binding sites. Our study thus reveals that the ERRs orchestrate a
comprehensive cardiac transcriptional program and further suggests that
modulation of ERR activities could be used to manage cardiomyopathies.

PMID: 17488637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Neurobiol Aging. 2008 Oct;29(10):1533-46. Epub 2007 May 2.

Alteration of CREB phosphorylation and spatial memory deficits in aged 129T2/Sv
mice.

Porte Y(1), Buhot MC, Mons N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurosciences Cognitives, CNRS-UMR5228, Université de Bordeaux 
1, Avenue des Facultés, 33405 Talence Cedex, France.

Phosphorylation of cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB) is required for
hippocampus-dependent long-term memory formation. The present study was designed 
to determine whether spatial memory deficits in aged mice were associated with
alteration of hippocampal CREB phosphorylation. We examined the temporal pattern 
of CREB activation in 5-6 and 23-24-month-old 129T2/Sv mice trained on a spatial 
reference memory task in the water maze. Phosphorylated CREB (pCREB), total CREB 
(t-CREB) and c-Fos immunoreactivity (ir) were measured at four time points after 
the end of training. In young mice, pCREB-ir was significantly increased 15 and
60 min after training in the CA1 region and dentate gyrus. In aged mice
sacrificed 15 min after training, pCREB-ir in these structures was reduced
whereas t-CREB-ir remained unchanged compared to respective young-adults. An
age-related reduction of c-Fos-ir also occurred selectively in hippocampal CA1
region. Since reduced pCREB-ir in CA1 from the 15 min-aged group strongly
correlated with individual learning performance, we suggest that altered CREB
phosphorylation in CA1 may account for spatial memory impairments during normal
aging.

PMID: 17478013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Sep;212(3):787-95.

Calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase activity is required for efficient induction 
of osteoclast differentiation and bone resorption by receptor activator of
nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANKL).

Ang ES(1), Zhang P, Steer JH, Tan JW, Yip K, Zheng MH, Joyce DA, Xu J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Orthopedic Laboratory, School of Surgery and Pathology, University
of Western Australia, Nedlands, WA, Australia.

Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaMK) is a major down stream
mediator of Ca(2+) signaling in a wide range of cellular functions, including ion
channel and cell cycle regulation and neurotransmitter synthesis and release.
Here we have investigated the role of the CaMK signaling pathway in osteoclast
differentiation and bone resorption. We observed that the CaMKI, CaMKII gamma
isoforms were present in both bone-marrow derived macrophages and RAW264.7 murine
macrophage cell line, and that expression persisted during osteoclast
differentiation in the presence of receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B
(NF-kappaB) ligand (RANKL). RANKL-induced differentiation was accompanied by
increased cyclic AMP response element transcriptional activity, and ERK
phosphorylation, which are both downstream targets of CaMK. Two selective
inhibitors of CaMKs, KN-93 and KN-62, inhibited osteoclastogenesis in a time and 
concentration-dependent manner. This was accompanied by suppression of cathepsin 
K expression and osteoclastic bone resorption, which are markers for
differentiated osteoclast function. KN-93 and KN-62 both inhibited RANKL-induced 
ERK phosphorylation and CREB transcriptional activity. These findings imply a
role for CaMK in osteoclast differentiation and bone resorption.

PMID: 17477372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. EMBO J. 2007 Jun 20;26(12):2880-9. Epub 2007 May 3.

Cooperative interactions between CBP and TORC2 confer selectivity to CREB target 
gene expression.

Ravnskjaer K(1), Kester H, Liu Y, Zhang X, Lee D, Yates JR 3rd, Montminy M.

Author information: 
(1)Peptide Biology Laboratories, The Salk Institute For Biological Studies, 10010
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

A number of hormones and growth factors stimulate gene expression by promoting
the phosphorylation of CREB (P-CREB), thereby enhancing its association with the 
histone acetylase paralogs p300 and CBP (CBP/p300). Relative to cAMP, stress
signals trigger comparable amounts of CREB phosphorylation, but have minimal
effects on CRE-dependent transcription. Here, we show that the latent cytoplasmic
coactivator TORC2 mediates target gene activation in response to cAMP signaling
by associating with CBP/p300 and increasing its recruitment to a subset of CREB
target genes. TORC2 is not activated in response to stress signals, however; and 
in its absence, P-CREB is unable to stimulate CRE-dependent transcription, due to
a block in CBP recruitment. The effect of TORC2 on CBP/p300 promoter occupancy
appears pivotal because a gain of function mutant CREB polypeptide with increased
affinity for CBP restored CRE-mediated transcription in cells exposed to stress
signals. Taken together, these results indicate that TORC2 is one of the long
sought after cofactors that mediates the differential effects of cAMP and stress 
pathways on CREB target gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1894761
PMID: 17476304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 May 8;104(19):7933-8. Epub 2007 Apr 30.

A fundamental system of cellular energy homeostasis regulated by PGC-1alpha.

Rohas LM(1), St-Pierre J, Uldry M, Jäger S, Handschin C, Spiegelman BM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Maintenance of ATP levels is a critical feature of all cells. Mitochondria are
responsible for most ATP synthesis in eukaryotes. We show here that mammalian
cells respond to a partial chemical uncoupling of mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation with a decrease in ATP levels, which recovers over several hours 
to control levels. This recovery occurs through an increased expression of the
transcriptional coactivator peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-coactivator 1alpha (PGC-1alpha) and mitochondrial genes. Cells and
animals lacking PGC-1alpha lose this compensatory mechanism and cannot defend
their ATP levels or increase mitochondrial gene expression in response to reduced
oxidative phosphorylation. The induction of PGC-1alpha and its mitochondrial
target genes is triggered by a burst of intracellular calcium, which causes an
increase in cAMP-response-element-binding protein and transducer of regulated
cAMP-response-element-binding proteins actions on the PGC-1alpha promoter. These 
data illustrate a fundamental transcriptional cycle that provides homeostatic
control of cellular ATP. In light of this compensatory system that limits the
toxicity of mild uncoupling, the use of chemical uncoupling of mitochondria as a 
means of treating obesity should be re-evaluated.

PMCID: PMC1876550
PMID: 17470778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Nat Med. 2007 May;13(5):597-603. Epub 2007 Apr 29.

SIK1 is a class II HDAC kinase that promotes survival of skeletal myocytes.

Berdeaux R(1), Goebel N, Banaszynski L, Takemori H, Wandless T, Shelton GD,
Montminy M.

Author information: 
(1)Peptide Biology Laboratories, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

During physical exercise, increases in motor neuron activity stimulate the
expression of muscle-specific genes through the myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) 
family of transcription factors. Elevations in intracellular calcium increase
MEF2 activity via the phosphorylation-dependent inactivation of class II histone 
deacetylases (HDACs). In studies to determine the role of the cAMP responsive
element binding protein (CREB) in skeletal muscle, we found that mice expressing 
a dominant-negative CREB transgene (M-ACREB mice) exhibited a dystrophic
phenotype along with reduced MEF2 activity. Class II HDAC phosphorylation was
decreased in M-ACREB myofibers due to a reduction in amounts of Snf1lk (encoding 
salt inducible kinase, SIK1), a CREB target gene that functions as a class II
HDAC kinase. Inhibiting class II HDAC activity either by viral expression of
Snf1lk or by the administration of a small molecule antagonist improved the
dystrophic phenotype in M-ACREB mice, pointing to an important role for the
SIK1-HDAC pathway in regulating muscle function.

PMID: 17468767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Mol Cells. 2007 Apr 30;23(2):138-44.

Lactosylceramide alpha2,3-sialyltransferase is induced via a
PKC/ERK/CREB-dependent pathway in K562 human leukemia cells.

Choi HJ(1), Park YG, Kim CH.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Glycobiology Unit, Department of Biological Sciences,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Korea.

Previously we showed that the human GM3 synthase gene was expressed during the
induction of megakaryocytic differentiation in human leukemia K562 cells by
phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA). In this study we found that treatment of
PMA-induced K562 cells with Gö6976, a specific inhibitor of PKC, and U0126, an
inhibitor of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) reduced expression
of GM3 synthase, whereas wortmannin, an inhibitor of phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K) did not. Moreover, activation of ERK and cAMP response element binding
protein (CREB) was prevented by pretreatment with Gö6976 and U0126. PMA
stimulated the promoter activity of the 5'-flanking region from -177 to -83
region of the GM3 synthase gene, and mutation or deletion of a CREB site located 
around -143 of the promoter reduced PMA-stimulated promoter activity, as did the 
inhibitors Gö6976 and U0126. Our results demonstrate that induction of GM3
synthase during megakaryocytic differentiation in PMA-stimulated human leukemia
K562 cells depends upon the PKC/ERK/CREB pathway.

PMID: 17464189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2007 Mar;17(3):207-15.

A splice site polymorphism in the G-protein beta subunit influences
antidepressant efficacy in depression.

Wilkie MJ(1), Smith D, Reid IC, Day RK, Matthews K, Wolf CR, Blackwood D, Smith
G.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Centre, University of Dundee, Ninewells Hospital and
Medical School, Dundee, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Recent evidence suggests that signalling cascades located downstream
of monoamine receptors are altered following antidepressant treatment. Our
objective was to investigate whether genetic polymorphisms in genes involved in
these signalling cascades influenced antidepressant efficacy.
METHODS: Polymorphisms in the G-protein beta subunit GNB3, the cAMP response
element binding protein 1 gene (CREB1), the brain derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF) and CREB binding protein (CREBBP) were studied in well characterised
unipolar (n=166) and early onset (n=102) depressive populations and correlated
with treatment response.
RESULTS: The GNB3 C825T polymorphism, which results in a 41 amino acid deletion, 
was significantly associated with lack of remission (OR=0.18, P=0.02) and lack of
response (OR=0.26, P=0.03) following 2nd switch treatment. A cytosine deletion 16
base pairs from the start of exon 8 in CREB1 was found more frequently in
remitters and responders to 2nd switch antidepressant drug therapy, although
these differences failed to reach significance. Polymorphisms detected BDNF
(G196A) and CREBBP (T651 C) did not appear to influence antidepressant response.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that inheritance of the GNB3C825T allele may
significantly influence antidepressant response and emphasises the potential
importance of polymorphisms in genes in signalling cascades activated by commonly
prescribed antidepressants.

PMID: 17460549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Dec 1;102(5):1245-55.

Protein kinase Cdelta-mediated CREB activation regulates ghrelin-induced
cyclooxygenase-2 expression and prostaglandin E2 production in human colonic
epithelial cells.

Zhao D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA. dzhao@bidmc.harvard.edu

Ghrelin, a newly identified gastric peptide, is known for its potent activity in 
growth hormone release and appetite. Our recent study showed that ghrelin could
stimulate protein kinase C-mediated activation of nuclear factor-kappaB
(NF-kappaB) and interleukin-8 secretion in human colonic epithelial cells
transfected with a functional ghrelin receptor. In the present study, the effect 
of ghrelin stimulation on cyclooxygenese-2 expression and prostaglandin E2
production was examined. The data indicate that ghrelin significantly increased
the levels of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) protein as well as its promoter activity, 
which leaded to profound increase in prostaglandin E2 secretion. In order to
examine the involvement of NF-kappaB and cAMP responsive element-binding protein 
(CREB) in this response, the NF-kappaB inhibitory protein IkappaBalpha or a
dominant negative mutant of CREB was co-transfected into cells and the data show 
that transfection of either IkappaBalpha or DN-CREB significantly attenuated
ghrelin-induced COX-2 expression. Moreover ghrelin stimulated phosphorylation of 
CREB, which was mediated primarily via protein kinase Cdelta activation.
Furthermore, inhibition of PKCdelta function significantly attenuated
ghrelin-induced COX-2 expression. In addition, ghrelin stimulates phosphorylation
of PKCdelta. Together, these results indicate that in addition to NF-kappaB,
protein kinase Cdelta-mediated CREB activation plays an important role in the
cellular responses of ghrelin.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17455223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jun 29;282(26):18750-7. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

Molecular characterization of the Tax-containing HTLV-1 enhancer complex reveals 
a prominent role for CREB phosphorylation in Tax transactivation.

Kim YM(1), Ramírez JA, Mick JE, Giebler HA, Yan JP, Nyborg JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Colorado State University,
Fort Collins, Colorado 80523-1870, USA.

Transcriptional activation of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is
mediated by the viral oncoprotein Tax, which utilizes cellular transcriptional
machinery to perform this function. The viral promoter carries three cyclic
AMP-response elements (CREs), which are recognized by the cellular transcription 
factor cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB). Tax binds to GC-rich
sequences that immediately flank the CREs. The coactivator CREB-binding protein
(CBP)/p300 binds to this promoter-bound ternary complex, which promotes the
initiation of HTLV-1 transcription. Protein kinase A phosphorylation of CREB at
serine 133 facilitates transcription from cellular CREs by recruiting CBP/p300
via its KIX domain. However, it remains controversial whether CREB
phosphorylation plays a role in Tax transactivation. In this study, we
biochemically characterized the quaternary complex formed by Tax, CREB, KIX, and 
the viral CRE by examining the individual molecular interactions that contribute 
to Tax stabilization in the complex. Our data show KIX, Ser(133)-phosphorylated
CREB, and vCRE DNA are all required for stable Tax incorporation into the complex
in vitro. Consonant with a fundamental role for CREB phosphorylation in Tax
recruitment to the complex, we found that CREB is highly phosphorylated in a
panel of HTLV-1-infected human T-cell lines. Significantly, we show that Tax is
directly responsible for promoting elevated levels of CREB phosphorylation.
Together, these data support a model in which Tax promotes CREB phosphorylation
in vivo to ensure availability for Tax transactivation. Because pCREB has been
implicated in leukemogenesis, enhancement of CREB phosphorylation by the virus
may play a role in the etiology of adult T-cell leukemia.

PMID: 17449469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Neuroimmunol. 2007 May;186(1-2):104-11. Epub 2007 Apr 16.

Effects of low-level formaldehyde exposure on synaptic plasticity-related gene
expression in the hippocampus of immunized mice.

Ahmed S(1), Tsukahara S, Tin-Tin-Win-Shwe, Yamamoto S, Kunugita N, Arashidani K, 
Fujimaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Sciences Division, National Institute for Environmental
Studies, 16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba 305-8506, Ibaraki, Japan.

We examined the effects of inhalative exposure to formaldehyde (FA, 400 ppb) on
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor subunits (NR2A and NR2B), dopamine receptor 
subtypes (D1 and D2), cyclic AMP responsive element-binding protein (CREB)-1,
CREB-2, FosB/DeltaFosB, and transient receptor potential vanilloid receptor
(TRPV1) in the hippocampus of ovalbumin-immunized mice using quantitative
real-time PCR. Western blot analyses for pCREB were performed. The mRNA levels of
NR2A, D1 and D2 receptors, and CREB-1 were significantly increased by FA, but
NR2B, CREB-2, FosB/DeltaFosB, and TRPV1 mRNA levels remained unchanged. Treatment
with MK-801 normalized the mRNA levels induced by FA. There was no significant
effect of FA exposure and MK-801 treatment on the protein level of pCREB. These
results indicate that FA exposure selectively up-regulates hippocampal gene
expression in immunologically sensitized mice. The FA effects are presumably
mediated by glutamatergic neurotransmission through NMDA receptors.

PMID: 17434604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Brain Res. 2007 Jun 4;1152:10-6. Epub 2007 Mar 15.

Differential gene expression in the striatum of mice with very low expression of 
the vesicular monoamine transporter type 2 gene.

Colebrooke RE(1), Chan PM, Lynch PJ, Mooslehner K, Emson PC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, The Babraham Institute, Babraham,
Cambridge, UK.

The vesicular monoamine transporter type 2 (VMAT2) packages pre-synaptic
monoamines into vesicles. Previously, we generated mice hypomorphic for the VMAT2
gene (Slc18a2), which results in a approximately 95% reduction in VMAT2 protein, 
disrupted vesicular storage, severe depletion of striatal dopamine and mice with 
moderate motor behaviour deficits. Dopamine released from mid-brain dopamine
neurons acts on post-synaptic type 1 (D1) and 2 (D2) receptors located on
striatal medium spiny neurons to initiate a signalling cascade that leads to
altered transcription factor activity, gene expression and neuronal activity. We 
investigated striatal gene expression changes in VMAT2hypo mice by quantitative
real-time PCR and in situ hybridisation. Despite unaltered expression of D1 and
D2 dopamine receptors, there were dramatic alterations in striatal mRNAs encoding
the neuropeptides substance P, dynorphin, enkephalin and cholecystokinin. The
promoters of these genes are regulated by a combination of transcription factors 
that includes cAMP responsive element binding protein-1 (CREB) and c-Fos. Indeed,
the changes in peptide mRNAs were associated with elevated expression of Creb1
and c-Fos. These data indicate that striatal dopamine depletion, as a consequence
of deficient vesicular storage in this mouse, triggers a complex program of gene 
expression, consistent with this mouse being an excellent model of Parkinson's
disease.

PMID: 17433807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Invest Dermatol. 2007 Aug;127(8):2012-9. Epub 2007 Apr 12.

Mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase 2 and cyclic AMP response element
binding protein are activated in lesional psoriatic epidermis.

Funding AT(1), Johansen C, Kragballe K, Iversen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Aarhus Sygehus, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus 
C, Denmark.

The activity of the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) is increased in
lesional psoriatic skin, supporting a possible role of these kinases in the
pathogenesis of psoriasis. Recently, increased focal activation of the downstream
target mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase 1 (MSK1) was demonstrated in 
psoriatic epidermis. The purpose of this study is to investigate MSK2 and the
transcription factor cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element-binding
protein (CREB) in psoriatic skin and in cultured normal human keratinocytes. In
lesional psoriatic skin, significantly increased MSK2 (Ser196) and CREB (Ser133) 
activation was demonstrated by phospho blotting. Immunofluorescence staining of
phosphorylated MSK2 (Ser196) revealed colocalization with phosphorylated MSK1
(Thr 581) in the epidermis. Keratinocyte cultures stimulated with anisomycin and 
IL-1beta showed increased MSK2 (Ser196) and CREB (Ser133) phosphorylation. Such
activation was abolished during preincubation with a p38 inhibitor. Keratinocytes
transfected with small interfering RNA showed a stronger decrease in CREB
phosphorylation in MSK1/2 double-transfected cells than in MSK1 and MSK2
single-transfected cells. This study demonstrate for the first time the
expression of MSK2 in keratinocytes and increased MSK2 and CREB activation in
lesional psoriatic skin. Our results indicate that the p38-MAPK/MSK1/MSK2 and
CREB signalling pathway may play a role in the pathogenesis of psoriasis.

PMID: 17429437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jun 1;282(22):16577-84. Epub 2007 Apr 10.

Activation of the kinase activity of ATM by retinoic acid is required for
CREB-dependent differentiation of neuroblastoma cells.

Fernandes ND(1), Sun Y, Price BD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genomic Stability and DNA Repair, Department of Radiation
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The ATM protein kinase is mutated in ataxia telangiectasia, a genetic disease
characterized by defective DNA repair, neurodegeneration, and growth factor
signaling defects. The activity of ATM kinase is activated by DNA damage, and
this activation is required for cells to survive genotoxic events. In addition to
this well characterized role in DNA repair, we now demonstrate a novel role for
ATM in the retinoic acid (RA)-induced differentiation of SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma
cells into post-mitotic, neuronal-like cells. RA rapidly activates the activity
of ATM kinase, leading to the ATM-dependent phosphorylation of the CREB protein, 
extrusion of neuritic processes, and differentiation of SH-SY5Y cells into
neuronal-like cells. When ATM protein expression was suppressed by short hairpin 
RNA, the ATM-dependent phosphorylation of CREB was blocked. Furthermore,
ATM-negative cells failed to differentiate into neuronal-like cells when exposed 
to retinoic acid; instead, they underwent cell death. Expression of a
constitutively active CREBVP16 construct, or exposure to forskolin to induce CREB
phosphorylation, rescued ATM negative cells and restored differentiation.
Furthermore, when dominant negative CREB proteins with mutations in either the
CREB phosphorylation site (CREBS133A) or the DNA binding domain (KCREB) were
introduced into SH-SY5Y cells, retinoic acid-induced differentiation was blocked 
and the cells underwent cell death. The results demonstrate that ATM is required 
for the retinoic acid-induced differentiation of SH-SY5Y cells through the ATM
dependent-phosphorylation of serine 133 of CREB. These results therefore define a
novel mechanism for activation of the activity of ATM kinase by RA, and implicate
ATM in the regulation of CREB function during RA-induced differentiation.

PMID: 17426037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Cancer Res. 2007 Apr 1;67(7):3412-21.

Evidences that leptin up-regulates E-cadherin expression in breast cancer:
effects on tumor growth and progression.

Mauro L(1), Catalano S, Bossi G, Pellegrino M, Barone I, Morales S, Giordano C,
Bartella V, Casaburi I, Andò S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology and Pharmaco-Biology, University of Calabria,
Rende, Italy.

Leptin, a cytokine mainly produced by adipocytes, seems to play a crucial role in
mammary carcinogenesis. In the present study, we explored the mechanism of
leptin-mediated promotion of breast tumor growth using xenograft MCF-7 in
45-day-old female nude mice, and an in vitro model represented by MCF-7
three-dimensional cultures. Xenograft tumors, obtained only in animals with
estradiol (E(2)) pellet implants, doubled control value after 13 weeks of leptin 
exposure. In three-dimensional cultures, leptin and/or E(2) enhanced cell-cell
adhesion. This increased aggregation seems to be dependent on E-cadherin because 
it was completely abrogated in the presence of function-blocking E-cadherin
antibody or EGTA, a calcium-chelating agent. In three-dimensional cultures,
leptin and/or E(2) treatment significantly increased cell growth, which was
abrogated when E-cadherin function was blocked. These findings well correlated
with an increase of mRNA and protein content of E-cadherin in three-dimensional
cultures and in xenografts. In MCF-7 cells both hormones were able to activate
E-cadherin promoter. Mutagenesis studies, electrophoretic mobility shift assay,
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that cyclic AMP-responsive
element binding protein and Sp1 motifs, present on E-cadherin promoter, were
important for the up-regulatory effects induced by both hormones on E-cadherin
expression in breast cancer MCF-7 cells. In conclusion, the present study shows
how leptin is able to promote tumor cell proliferation and homotypic tumor cell
adhesion via an increase of E-cadherin expression. This combined effect may give 
reasonable emphasis to the important role of this cytokine in stimulating primary
breast tumor cell growth and progression, particularly in obese women.

PMID: 17409452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Jan;1095:504-12.

Epigallocatechin gallate inhibits phorbol ester-induced activation of NF-kappa B 
and CREB in mouse skin: role of p38 MAPK.

Kundu JK(1), Surh YJ.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Shillim-dong, Kwanak-ku, Seoul
151-742, Korea.

The modulation of intracellular signaling network involved in an inappropriate
expression of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is a pragmatic approach for
chemoprevention with a wide variety of dietary phytochemicals. Epigallocatechin
gallate (EGCG), a major green tea polyphenol, is one of the most extensively
investigated chemopreventive agents. Our previous study revealed that EGCG
inhibited expression of COX-2 and activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases
(MAPKs) in mouse skin stimulated with a prototype tumor promotor
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). This study was aimed at identifying
transcription factors as molecular targets of EGCG in downregulating COX-2
expression. We found that EGCG inhibited TPA-induced DNA binding of NF-kappaB and
CREB in mouse skin in vivo. EGCG also suppressed TPA-induced phosphorylation and 
subsequent degradation of IkappaBalpha, and prevented nuclear translocation of
p65. We also examined whether extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK)
and p38 MAPK, which are known to regulate activation of NF-kappaB, can also
modulate CREB DNA binding. Pretreatment with U0126 and SB203580, pharmacological 
inhibitors of ERK and p38 MAPK, respectively, showed that SB203580, but not
U0126, attenuated TPA-induced CREB DNA binding in mouse skin. Taken together,
EGCG inhibited TPA-induced DNA binding of NF-kappaB and CREB by blocking
activation of p38 MAPK, which may provide a molecular basis of COX-2 inhibition
by EGCG in mouse skin in vivo.

PMID: 17404063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 18;282(20):14777-87. Epub 2007 Mar 27.

Protein kinase D induces transcription through direct phosphorylation of the
cAMP-response element-binding protein.

Johannessen M(1), Delghandi MP, Rykx A, Dragset M, Vandenheede JR, Van Lint J,
Moens U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Virology, Institute of Medical Biology,
University of Tromsø, N-9037 Tromsø, Norway.

Protein kinase D (PKD), a family of serine/threonine kinases, can be activated by
a multitude of stimuli in a protein kinase C-dependent or -independent manner.
PKD is involved in signal transduction pathways controlling cell proliferation,
apoptosis, motility, and protein trafficking. Despite its versatile functions,
few genuine in vivo substrates for PKD have been identified. In this study we
demonstrate that the transcription factor cAMP-response element-binding protein
(CREB) is a direct substrate for PKD. PKD1 and CREB interact in cells, and
activated PKD1 provokes CREB phosphorylation at Ser-133 both in vitro and in
vivo. A constitutive active mutant of PKD1 stimulates GAL4-CREB-mediated
transcription in a Ser-133-dependent manner, activates CRE-responsive promoters, 
and increases the expression of CREB target genes. PKD1 also enhances
transcription mediated by two other members of the CREB family, ATF-1 and CREM.
Our results describe a novel mechanism for PKD-induced signaling through
activation of the transcription factor CREB and suggest that stimulus-induced
phosphorylation of CREB, reported to be mediated by protein kinase C, may involve
downstream activated PKD.

PMID: 17389598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Development. 2007 May;134(9):1663-70. Epub 2007 Mar 21.

Specific ablation of the transcription factor CREB in sympathetic neurons
surprisingly protects against developmentally regulated apoptosis.

Parlato R(1), Otto C, Begus Y, Stotz S, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology of the Cell I, German Cancer Research Center, 
Heidelberg, Germany.

The cyclic-AMP response element-binding (CREB) protein family of transcription
factors plays a crucial role in supporting the survival of neurons. However, a
cell-autonomous role has not been addressed in vivo. To investigate the
cell-specific role of CREB, we used as a model developing sympathetic neurons,
whose survival in vitro is dependent on CREB activity. We generated mice lacking 
CREB in noradrenergic (NA) and adrenergic neurons and compared them with the
phenotype of the germline CREB mutant. Whereas the germline CREB mutant revealed 
increased apoptosis of NA neurons and misplacement of sympathetic precursors, the
NA neuron-specific mutation unexpectedly led to reduced levels of
caspase-3-dependent apoptosis in sympathetic ganglia during the period of
naturally occurring neuronal death. A reduced level of p75 neurotrophin receptor 
expression in the absence of CREB was shown to be responsible. Thus, our analysis
indicates that the activity of cell-autonomous pro-survival signalling is
operative in developing sympathetic neurons in the absence of CREB.

PMID: 17376811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2007 Jun;27(6):1319-25. Epub 2007 Mar 15.

Acrolein induces cyclooxygenase-2 and prostaglandin production in human umbilical
vein endothelial cells: roles of p38 MAP kinase.

Park YS(1), Kim J, Misonou Y, Takamiya R, Takahashi M, Freeman MR, Taniguchi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka
University, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Acrolein, a known toxin in tobacco smoke, might be involved in
atherogenesis. This study examined the effect of acrolein on expression of
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and prostaglandin (PG) production in endothelial cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 induction by acrolein and signal
pathways were measured using Western blots, Northern blots, immunofluorescence,
ELISA, gene silencing, and promoter assay. Colocalization of COX2 and
acrolein-adduct was determined by immunohistochemistry. Here we report that the
levels of COX-2 mRNA and protein are increased in human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVECs) after acrolein exposure. COX-2 was found to colocalize
with acrolein-lysine adducts in human atherosclerotic lesions. Inhibition of p38 
MAPK activity abolished the induction of COX-2 protein and PGE2 accumulation by
acrolein, while suppression of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and
JNK activity had no effect on the induction of COX-2 expression in experiments
using inhibitors and siRNA. Furthermore, rottlerin, an inhibitor of protein
kinase Cdelta (PKCdelta), abrogated the upregulation of COX-2 at both protein and
mRNA levels.
CONCLUSION: These results provide that acrolein may play a role in progression of
atherosclerosis and new information on the signaling pathways involved in COX-2
upregulation in response to acrolein and provide evidence that PKCdelta and p38
MAPK are required for transcriptional activation of COX-2.

PMID: 17363696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007 Mar;6(3):1123-32.

Inhibition of heat shock protein 90 impairs epidermal growth factor-mediated
signaling in gastric cancer cells and reduces tumor growth and vascularization in
vivo.

Lang SA(1), Klein D, Moser C, Gaumann A, Glockzin G, Dahlke MH, Dietmaier W,
Bolder U, Schlitt HJ, Geissler EK, Stoeltzing O.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery and Surgical Oncology, University of Regensburg,
Franz-Josef-Strauss Allee 11, 93042 Regensburg, Germany.

Oncogenic signaling through activation of epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR), HER-2, and hypoxia inducible-factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) has been
implicated in gastric cancer growth and angiogenesis through up-regulation of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Recently, heat shock protein 90
(Hsp90) has been identified as a critical regulator of oncogenic protein
stability, including EGFR, HER-2, and HIF-1alpha. We hypothesized that inhibition
of Hsp90 impairs EGF- and hypoxia-mediated angiogenic signaling in gastric cancer
cells and consequently inhibits angiogenesis and tumor growth. In vitro, the
geldanamycin derivate 17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG) led to
marked reduction in constitutive and inducible activation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2, Akt, and signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 and decreased nuclear HIF-1alpha protein. In addition, EGFR and
HER-2 were down-regulated after Hsp90 inhibition. With respect to regulation of
angiogenic molecules, 17-AAG significantly reduced EGF-mediated VEGF secretion.
Phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase and paxillin were both abrogated by
17-AAG, which resulted in significant impairment of cancer cell motility.
Interestingly, cytotoxic effects of 17-AAG in vitro were higher on cancer cells
and gastric fibroblasts than on pericytes. In vivo, the water-soluble compound
17-dimethylaminoethylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-DMAG; 25 mg/kg, thrice
per week) significantly reduced s.c. xenografted tumor growth. By
immunohistochemistry, 17-DMAG significantly reduced vessel area and numbers of
proliferating tumor cells in sections. Furthermore, similar significant
growth-inhibitory effects of 17-DMAG were achieved when administered as low-dose 
therapy (5 mg/kg, thrice per week). In conclusion, blocking Hsp90 disrupts
multiple proangiogenic signaling pathways in gastric cancer cells and inhibits
xenografted tumor growth in vivo. Hence, gastric cancer harbors attractive
molecular targets for therapy with Hsp90 inhibitors, which could lead to improved
efficacy of antineoplastic therapy regimens.

PMID: 17363505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 May;27(10):3839-3854.

Differential regulation of Foxo3a target genes in erythropoiesis.

Bakker WJ(1), van Dijk TB, Parren-van Amelsvoort M, Kolbus A, Yamamoto K,
Steinlein P, Verhaak RG, Mak TW, Beug H, Löwenberg B, von Lindern M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Erasmus Medical Center, 3015 GE Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

The cooperation of stem cell factor (SCF) and erythropoietin (Epo) is required to
induce renewal divisions in erythroid progenitors, whereas differentiation to
mature erythrocytes requires the presence of Epo only. Epo and SCF activate
common signaling pathways such as the activation of protein kinase B (PKB) and
the subsequent phosphorylation and inactivation of Foxo3a. In contrast, only Epo 
activates Stat5. Both Foxo3a and Stat5 promote erythroid differentiation. To
understand the interplay of SCF and Epo in maintaining the balance between
renewal and differentiation during erythroid development, we investigated
differential Foxo3a target regulation by Epo and SCF. Expression profiling
revealed that a subset of Foxo3a targets was not inhibited but was activated by
Epo. One of these genes was Cited2. Transcriptional control of Epo/Foxo3a-induced
Cited2 was studied and compared with that of the Epo-repressed Foxo3a target
Btg1. We show that in response to Epo, the allegedly growth-inhibitory factor
Foxo3a associates with the allegedly growth-stimulatory factor Stat5 in the
nucleus, which is required for Epo-induced Cited2 expression. In contrast, Btg1
expression is controlled by the cooperation of Foxo3a with cyclic AMP- and Jun
kinase-dependent Creb family members. Thus, Foxo3a not only is an effector of PKB
but also integrates distinct signals to regulate gene expression in
erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC1900006
PMID: 17353275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2007 Apr;18(4):1140-9. Epub 2007 Mar 7.

The Bradykinin B2 receptor gene is a target of angiotensin II type 1 receptor
signaling.

Shen B(1), Harrison-Bernard LM, Fuller AJ, Vanderpool V, Saifudeen Z, El-Dahr SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, SL-37, Tulane University Health Sciences Center,
1430 Tulane Avenue, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

Cross-talk between G protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) is known to occur at
multiple levels, including receptor heterodimerization and intracellular
signaling. This study tested the hypothesis that GPCR cross-talk occurs at the
transcriptional level. It was demonstrated that the bradykinin B2 receptor gene
(BdkrB2) is a direct transcriptional target of the angiotensin II (AngII) type 1 
receptor (AT(1)R) in collecting duct cells. AngII induced BdkrB2 mRNA expression 
in mouse inner medullary collecting duct cells, and this effect was abrogated by 
AT(1)R blockade; in contrast, AT(2)R blockade was ineffective. Actinomycin D, an 
inhibitor of gene transcription, abrogated AngII-stimulated BdkrB2 expression. In
addition, AngII produced dosage- and time-dependent increases in B2 receptor
protein levels (2.9 +/- 0.4 fold; P < 0.05). AngII stimulated phosphorylation of 
cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) on Ser-133 and assembly of p-CREB on
the BdkrB2 promoter in vivo. Moreover, AngII induced hyperacetylation of BdkrB2
promoter-associated H4 histones, a chromatin modification that is associated with
gene activation. Mutations of the CRE abrogated AngII-induced activation of the
BdkrB2 promoter. AngII-treated inner medullary collecting duct cells exhibited
augmented intracellular calcium signaling in response to bradykinin, confirming
the functional relevance of AT(1)-B2 receptor signaling. Finally, studies that
were conducted in angiotensin type 1 receptor (Agtr1)-null mice revealed that
BdkrB2 mRNA levels were significantly lower in the renal medulla of Agtr1(A)(-/-)
and Agtr1(A/B)(-/-) than in Agtr1(+/+) and Agtr1(B)(-/-) mice. It is concluded
that BdkrB2 is a downstream target of the AT(1)R-CREB signaling pathway.
Transcriptional regulation represents a novel form of cross-talk between GPCR
that link the renin-angiotensin and kallikrein-kinin systems.

PMID: 17344422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Feb;1769(2):79-91. Epub 2007 Jan 28.

ATF-2 stimulates the human insulin promoter through the conserved CRE2 sequence.

Hay CW(1), Ferguson LA, Docherty K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Institute of Medical
Sciences, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, UK.

The insulin promoter contains a number of dissimilar cis-acting regulatory
elements that bind a range of tissue specific and ubiquitous transcription
factors. Of the regulatory elements within the insulin promoter, the cyclic AMP
responsive element (CRE) binds by far the most diverse array of transcription
factors. Rodent insulin promoters have a single CRE site, whereas there are four 
CREs within the human insulin gene, of which CRE2 is the only one conserved
between species. The aim of this study was to characterise the human CRE2 site
and to investigate the effects of the two principal CRE-associated transcription 
factors; CREB-1 and ATF-2. Co-transfection of INS-1 pancreatic beta-cells with
promoter constructs containing the human insulin gene promoter placed upstream of
the firefly luciferase reporter gene and expression plasmids for ATF-2 or CREB-1 
showed that ATF-2 stimulated transcriptional activity while CREB-1 elicited an
inhibitory effect. Mutagenesis of CRE2 diminished the effect of ATF-2 but not
that of CREB-1. ATF-2 was shown to bind to the CRE2 site by electrophoretic
mobility shift assay and by chromatin immunoprecipitation, while siRNA mediated
knockdown of ATF-2 diminished the stimulatory effects of cAMP related signalling 
on promoter activity. These results suggest that ATF-2 may be a key regulator of 
the human insulin promoter possibly stimulating activity in response to
extracellular signals.

PMID: 17337306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Neuron. 2007 Mar 1;53(5):747-59.

Developmental downregulation of histone posttranslational modifications regulates
visual cortical plasticity.

Putignano E(1), Lonetti G, Cancedda L, Ratto G, Costa M, Maffei L, Pizzorusso T.

Author information: 
(1)Scuola Normale Superiore, Neurobiology Laboratory, Area Ricerca CNR, via
Moruzzi, 1 Pisa 56125, Italy.

Erratum in
    Neuron. 2007 Apr 5;54(1):177.

The action of visual experience on visual cortical circuits is maximal during a
critical period of postnatal development. The long-term effects of this
experience are likely mediated by signaling cascades regulating
experience-dependent gene transcription. Developmental modifications of these
pathways could explain the difference in plasticity between the young and adult
cortex. We studied the pathways linking experience-dependent activation of ERK to
CREB-mediated gene expression in vivo. In juvenile mice, visual stimulation that 
activates CREB-mediated gene transcription also induced ERK-dependent MSK and
histone H3 phosphorylation and H3-H4 acetylation, an epigenetic mechanism of gene
transcription activation. In adult animals, ERK and MSK were still inducible;
however, visual stimulation induced weak CREB-mediated gene expression and H3-H4 
posttranslational modifications. Stimulation of histone acetylation in adult
animals by means of trichostatin promoted ocular dominance plasticity. Thus,
differing, experience-dependent activations of signaling molecules might be at
the basis of the differences in experience-dependent plasticity between juvenile 
and adult cortex.

PMID: 17329213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2007 Jun;292(6):L1361-9. Epub 2007 Feb 23.

Asbestos-mediated CREB phosphorylation is regulated by protein kinase A and
extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2.

Barlow CA(1), Barrett TF, Shukla A, Mossman BT, Lounsbury KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont 05405, 
USA.

Asbestos is a ubiquitous, naturally occurring fiber that has been linked to the
development of malignant and fibrotic lung diseases. Asbestos exposure leads to
apoptosis, followed by compensatory proliferation, yet many of the signaling
cascades coupled to these outcomes are unclear. Because CREs
(Ca(2+)/cAMP-response elements) are found in the promoters of many genes
important for regulation of proliferation and apoptosis, CREB (CRE binding
protein) is likely to play an important role in the development of
asbestos-mediated lung injury. To explore this possibility, we tested the
hypotheses that asbestos exposure leads to CREB phosphorylation in lung
epithelial cells and that protein kinase A (PKA) and extracellular
signal-regulated kinases 1/2 (ERK1/2) are central regulators of the CREB pathway.
Persistent CREB phosphorylation was observed in lung sections from mice following
inhalation of crocidolite asbestos. Exposure of C10 lung epithelial cells to
crocidolite asbestos led to rapid CREB phosphorylation and apoptosis that was
decreased by the inhibition of PKA or ERK1/2 using the specific inhibitors H89
and U0126, respectively. Furthermore, crocidolite asbestos selectively induced a 
sustained increase in MAP kinase phosphatase-1 mRNA and protein. Silencing CREB
protein dramatically reduced asbestos-mediated ERK1/2 phosphorylation, yet
significantly increased the number of cells undergoing asbestos-induced
apoptosis. These data reveal a novel and selective role for CREB in
asbestos-mediated signaling through pathways regulated by PKA and ERK1/2, further
providing evidence that CREB is an important regulator of apoptosis in
asbestos-induced responses of lung epithelial cells.

PMID: 17322281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. FASEB J. 2007 Jun;21(8):1884-92. Epub 2007 Feb 16.

Cardiomyocyte-specific inactivation of transcription factor CREB in mice.

Matus M(1), Lewin G, Stümpel F, Buchwalow IB, Schneider MD, Schütz G, Schmitz W, 
Müller FU.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Münster, Domagkstrasse
12, 48129 Münster, Germany.

The transcription factor cAMP response element (CRE)-binding protein (CREB,
Creb1) plays a critical role in regulating gene expression in response to
activation of the cAMP-dependent signaling pathway, which is implicated in the
pathophysiology of heart failure. Using the Cre-loxP system, we generated mice
with a cardiomyocyte-specific inactivation of CREB and studied in this model
whether CREB is critical for cardiac function. CREB-deficient mice were viable
and displayed neither changes in cardiac morphology nor alterations of basal or
isoproterenol-stimulated left ventricular function in vivo or of important
cardiac regulatory proteins. Since CREB was proposed as a negative regulator of
cardiomyocyte apoptosis by enhancing the expression of the antiapoptotic protein 
Bcl-2, we analyzed the fragmentation of DNA, the activity of caspases 3/7 and the
expression of Bcl-2 and did not observe any differences between CREB-deficient
and CREB-normal hearts. Our results suggest that the presence of CREB is not
critical for normal cardiac function in mice.

PMID: 17307839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Biol Psychiatry. 2007 Sep 1;62(5):536-40. Epub 2007 Feb 14.

Clinical and genetic dissection of anger expression and CREB1 polymorphisms in
major depressive disorder.

Perlis RH(1), Purcell S, Fagerness J, Cusin C, Yamaki L, Fava M, Smoller JW.

Author information: 
(1)Depression Clinical and Research Program, Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. rperlis@partners.org

BACKGROUND: Anger and irritability are prominent in a subset of individuals with 
major depressive disorder (MDD). Phosphorylation of the transcription factor
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) Response Element Binding Protein (CREB) has
been associated with aggression or reward/aversion in rodents, and markers near
CREB1 have been linked to MDD. Therefore, we examined the association between
CREB1 polymorphisms and anger expression in MDD.
METHODS: A clinical sample of 94 Caucasian outpatients with MDD (42 male, 52
female) completed the Spielberger State-Trait Anger Expression Inventory. We
examined six tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) spanning CREB1 and
flanking regions for association with a summary measure of frequency and
intensity of anger expression. We also introduced a novel statistical method to
dissect the independent effect of individual SNPs and haplotypes.
RESULTS: For the sample as a whole, one of six SNPs tested was significantly
associated with anger expression (empirical p = .003). Among the male subsample, 
this association was particularly marked (empirical p = 8 x 10(-5)). A global
haplotype test of the six SNPs was likewise significant (p = 3.7 x 10(-6)). No
single SNP or haplotype accounted for all of the association observed.
CONCLUSION: These preliminary results suggest a strong, gender-specific
association between variation at the CREB1 locus and anger expression in MDD.

PMID: 17300755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 30;282(13):9482-91. Epub 2007 Feb 3.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3 represses cyclic AMP response element-binding protein 
(CREB)-targeted immediate early genes in quiescent cells.

Tullai JW(1), Chen J, Schaffer ME, Kamenetsky E, Kasif S, Cooper GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, MA 02215, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2007 May 11;282(19):14684.

Despite its central role in cell survival and proliferation, the transcriptional 
program controlled by GSK-3 is poorly understood. We have employed a systems
level approach to characterize gene regulation downstream of PI
3-kinase/Akt/GSK-3 signaling in response to growth factor stimulation of
quiescent cells. Of 31 immediate-early genes whose induction was dependent on PI 
3-kinase signaling, 12 were induced directly by inhibition of GSK-3. Most of the 
GSK-3-regulated genes encoded transcription factors, growth factors, and
signaling molecules. Binding sites for CREB were highly over-represented in the
upstream regions of these genes, with 9 genes containing CREB sites that were
conserved in mouse orthologs. Binding sites predicted in 6 genes were confirmed
by CREB chromatin immunoprecipitation and forskolin induction of CBP binding.
Moreover, CREB siRNA substantially blocked induction of 5 genes by forskolin and 
of 3 genes following inhibition of GSK-3. These results indicate that GSK-3
actively represses gene expression in quiescent cells, with inhibition of CREB
playing a key role in this transcriptional response.

PMCID: PMC1839957
PMID: 17277356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Biophys J. 2007 May 15;92(10):3407-24. Epub 2007 Feb 2.

Dynamics of a minimal model of interlocked positive and negative feedback loops
of transcriptional regulation by cAMP-response element binding proteins.

Song H(1), Smolen P, Av-Ron E, Baxter DA, Byrne JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, W. M. Keck Center for the Neurobiology
of Learning and Memory, The University of Texas Medical School at Houston,
Houston, Texas 77225, USA.

cAMP-response element binding (CREB) proteins are involved in transcriptional
regulation in a number of cellular processes (e.g., neural plasticity and
circadian rhythms). The CREB family contains activators and repressors that may
interact through positive and negative feedback loops. These loops can be
generated by auto- and cross-regulation of expression of CREB proteins, via CRE
elements in or near their genes. Experiments suggest that such feedback loops may
operate in several systems (e.g., Aplysia and rat). To understand the functional 
implications of such feedback loops, which are interlocked via cross-regulation
of transcription, a minimal model with a positive and negative loop was developed
and investigated using bifurcation analysis. Bifurcation analysis revealed
diverse nonlinear dynamics (e.g., bistability and oscillations). The stability of
steady states or oscillations could be changed by time delays in the synthesis of
the activator (CREB1) or the repressor (CREB2). Investigation of stochastic
fluctuations due to small numbers of molecules of CREB1 and CREB2 revealed a
bimodal distribution of CREB molecules in the bistability region. The robustness 
of the stable HIGH and LOW states of CREB expression to stochastic noise differs,
and a critical number of molecules was required to sustain the HIGH state for
days or longer. Increasing positive feedback or decreasing negative feedback also
increased the lifetime of the HIGH state, and persistence of this state may
correlate with long-term memory formation. A critical number of molecules was
also required to sustain robust oscillations of CREB expression. If a steady
state was near a deterministic Hopf bifurcation point, stochastic resonance could
induce oscillations. This comparative analysis of deterministic and stochastic
dynamics not only provides insights into the possible dynamics of CREB regulatory
motifs, but also demonstrates a framework for understanding other regulatory
processes with similar network architecture.

PMCID: PMC1853161
PMID: 17277187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Mar 23;354(4):1061-6. Epub 2007 Jan 25.

Differential activation of CREB by Akt1 and Akt2.

Kato S(1), Ding J, Du K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts-New England Medical Center,
Boston, MA 02111, USA.

Members of Akt family are highly conserved protein kinase and yet, they show
clearly distinct in vivo functions. Here, we have examined the abilities of Akt1 
and Akt2 to activate CREB. We found that, in contrast to Akt1 that induces CREB
phosphorylation at Ser-133 and CREB target gene expression, Akt2 was unable to
induce CREB phosphorylation at Ser-133 in vivo and CREB target gene expression.
This difference is specific to CREB as both Akt1 and Akt2 similarly inhibits
FoxO1 mediated gene expression. We further showed that the regulatory domain of
Akt plays a critical role to confer Akt substrate specificity as substitution of 
regulatory domain of Akt1 with that of Akt2 abolished the ability of Akt1 to
activate CREB. We suggest that the regulatory domain of Akts contributes to the
functional difference between Akt1 and Akt2.

PMID: 17276404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Jun;211(3):638-48.

Dual transcriptional control of claudin-11 via an overlapping GATA/NF-Y motif:
positive regulation through the interaction of GATA, NF-YA, and CREB and negative
regulation through the interaction of Smad, HDAC1, and mSin3A.

Lui WY(1), Wong EW, Guan Y, Lee WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

The expression of claudin-11, a key integral tight junction protein, is tightly
regulated to ensure that the integrity of the seminiferous epithelium could be
maintained during the translocation of spermatocytes at the blood-testis barrier 
at stages VIII-IX. In this study, we elucidate how the overlapping GATA/NF-Y
motif within the core promoter of claudin-11 gene is modulated by differential
binding of various transcription factors, resulting in dual transcriptional
control. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, we confirmed that GATA, nuclear factor YA
(NF-YA), and cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) form a complex in vivo 
and bind to the GATA/NF-Y region to promote claudin-11 gene transcription. Such
gene activations were significantly reduced in the presence of siRNA specific to 
these transcription factors. GATA and CREB transactivation could be further
modulated by the presence of Smad3 and Smad4 proteins. Binding of Smad proteins
at the GATA/NF-Y motif could repress the GATA and CREB transactivation of
claudin-11 gene. Such repression which required the recruitment and physical
interactions of histone deacetylase 1 and its co-repressor, mSin3A with Smad
proteins, was abolished by treatment with Trichostatin A, thus suggesting the
involvement of histone deacetylation at the site of the promoter region. It is
believed that cyclic changes in the ratio of positive regulators (GATA, NF-Y, and
CREB) to negative regulators (Smads) in the seminiferous epithelium during the
spermatogenic cycle might provide a precise control in claudin-11 gene
transcription.

PMID: 17226765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Cell Biochem. 2007 May 15;101(2):477-87.

Activating transcription factor 2 controls Bcl-2 promoter activity in growth
plate chondrocytes.

Ma Q(1), Li X, Vale-Cruz D, Brown ML, Beier F, LuValle P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610-0235, USA.

Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2) is expressed ubiquitously in mammals.
Mice deficient in ATF-2 (ATF-2 m/m) are slightly smaller than their normal
littermates at birth. Approximately 50% of mice born mutant in both alleles die
within the first month. Those that survive develop a hypochondroplasia-like
dwarfism, characterized by shortened growth plates and kyphosis. Expression of
ATF-2 within the growth plate is limited to the resting and proliferating zones. 
We have previously shown that ATF-2 targets the cyclic AMP response element (CRE)
in the promoters of cyclin A and cyclin D1 in growth plate chondrocytes to
activate their expression. Here, we demonstrate that Bcl-2, a cell death
inhibitor that regulates apoptosis, is expressed within the growth plate in
proliferative and prehypertrophic chondrocytes. However, Bcl-2 expression
declines in hypertrophic chondrocytes. The Bcl-2 promoter contains a CRE at
-1,552 bp upstream of the translation start. Mutations within this CRE cause
reduced Bcl-2 promoter activity. We show here that the absence of ATF-2 in growth
plate chondrocytes corresponds to a decline in Bcl-2 promoter activity, as well
as a reduction in Bcl-2 protein levels. In addition, we show that ATF-2 as well
as CREB, a transcription factor that can heterodimerize with ATF-2, bind to the
CRE within the Bcl-2 promoter. These data identify the Bcl-2 gene as a novel
target of ATF-2 and CREB in growth plate chondrocytes.

PMID: 17219413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Endocrinology. 2007 Apr;148(4):1804-12. Epub 2007 Jan 11.

Activating protein-1 cooperates with steroidogenic factor-1 to regulate
3',5'-cyclic adenosine 5'-monophosphate-dependent human CYP11A1 transcription in 
vitro and in vivo.

Guo IC(1), Huang CY, Wang CK, Chung BC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, 48, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei, 115
Taiwan. iguo@ntu.edu.tw

The CYP11A1 encodes cytochrome P450scc, catalyzing the first step of
steroidogenesis in adrenals and gonads under the control of cAMP-mediated
hormonal signals. The cAMP-induced activation of human CYP11A1 has been suggested
to depend on the transcription factor cAMP-responsive element-binding protein
(CREB), but the CREB action cannot explain the chronic cAMP effect on CYP11A1
activation. To further understand the mechanism of human CYP11A1 activation, we
dissected the functions of the upstream cAMP responsive sequences (U-CRS)
containing a core sequence, U identical to the steroidogenic factor-1
(SF-1)-binding site, and two flanking TPA-responsive element/cAMP-responsive
element-like elements, C1 and C2. The EMSA assays showed that the binding
activities of U with SF-1 as well as C1 or C2 with activating protein-1
(AP-1)/CREB-like proteins are induced by cAMP. The results from the site-directed
mutagenesis analyses revealed that all three elements are required for the U-CRS 
function and any mutation of C1, C2, or U impairs the response to cAMP
stimulation. In transgenic mice, the single or double mutations of C1 and C2
resulted in the reduction of reporter gene expression accompanied with poor
hormonal response. The cAMP induction on the U-CRS activity was mimicked and
enhanced by the overexpressed c-Jun in the presence of SF-1, but was abolished by
the overexpression of an AP-1 dominant-negative mutant, FosB2. Furthermore, we
have observed the interdependent transactivation between SF-1 and c-Jun on the
U-CRS function. These results collectively demonstrate that SF-1 and AP-1
cooperate to activate CYP11A1 transcription in vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 17218410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Apr;21(4):948-62. Epub 2007 Jan 9.

Transcriptional regulation of the cholesterol side chain cleavage cytochrome P450
gene (CYP11A1) revisited: binding of GATA, cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate
response element-binding protein and activating protein (AP)-1 proteins to a
distal novel cluster of cis-regulatory elements potentiates AP-2 and
steroidogenic factor-1-dependent gene expression in the rodent placenta and
ovary.

Sher N(1), Yivgi-Ohana N, Orly J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life 
Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel.

The first and key enzyme controlling the synthesis of steroid hormones is
cholesterol side chain cleavage cytochrome P450 (P450scc, CYP11A1). This study
sought to elucidate overlooked modes of regulation of P450scc transcription in
the rodent placenta and ovary. Transcription of P450scc requires two clusters of 
cis-regulatory elements: a proximal element (-40) known to bind either activating
protein 2 (AP-2) in the placenta, or steroidogenic factor 1 in the ovary, and a
distal region of the promoter (-475/-447) necessary for potentiation of the
AP-2/steroidogenic factor 1-dependent activity up to 7-fold. In primary cultures 
of mouse trophoblast giant cells and rat ovarian granulosa cells, binding of
trans-factors to the distal regulatory sequences generated transcriptional
activity in a tissue-specific pattern: in the placenta, cAMP response element
(CRE)-binding protein 1 (CREB-1) and GATA-2 binding generates promoter activity
in a cAMP-independent manner, whereas in ovarian cells, CREB-1 and GATA-4 are
required for FSH responsiveness. However, as ovarian follicles advance toward
ovulation, elevated Fra-2 expression replaces CREB-1 function by binding the same
CRE(1/2) motif. Our findings suggest that upon onset of follicular recruitment,
CREB-1 mediates FSH/cAMP signaling, which switches to cAMP-independent expression
of P450scc in luteinizing granulosa cells expressing Fra-2. In the placenta, the 
indispensable role of CREB-1 was demonstrated by use of dominant-negative CREB-1 
mutant, but neither cAMP nor Ser133 phosphorylation of CREB-1 is required for
P450scc transcription. These observations suggest that placental regulation of
P450scc expression is subjected to alternative signaling pathway(s) yet to be
found.

PMID: 17213386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2006 Dec;85(4):842-9. Epub 2007 Jan 3.

Chronic mild stress inhibits BDNF protein expression and CREB activation in the
dentate gyrus but not in the hippocampus proper.

Grønli J(1), Bramham C, Murison R, Kanhema T, Fiske E, Bjorvatn B, Ursin R,
Portas CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Section on Physiology, University of Bergen, Jonas 
Lies vei 91, N-5009 Bergen, Norway. janne.gronli@biomed.uib.no

Chronic stress is linked to development of depression and may trigger
neurobiological changes underlying the disease. Downregulation of the secretory
peptide brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and the transcriptional
regulator calcium/cyclic-AMP responsive binding protein (CREB) have been
implicated in stress and depression-related pathology in animal studies. When
animals are exposed to the chronic mild stress (CMS) protocol, multiple
depression-like symptoms are observed. Here we investigated the effect of CMS on 
BDNF protein expression and CREB activation in the dentate gyrus and hippocampus 
proper. Rats exposed for 5 weeks to repeated, unpredictable, mild stressors
showed reduced BDNF expression and inhibited phosphorylation of CREB (Ser-133) in
the dentate gyrus (-25.0%+/-3.5% and -29.7+/-7.3%, respectively), whereas no
significant effects were observed in the hippocampus proper. CMS-treated rats
consumed less sucrose compared to control rats, indicating a state of anhedonia. 
Moreover, phospho-CREB levels in the dentate gyrus were positively correlated
with the animals' sucrose intake at the end of the CMS protocol. These results
couple chronic mild stress to a downregulation of CREB activity and BDNF protein 
expression specifically within the dentate gyrus and support the possibility that
the BDNF-CREB system plays an important role in the response to environmental
challenges.

PMID: 17204313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Immunol. 2007 Jan 15;178(2):798-807.

IL-10 regulation by HIV-Tat in primary human monocytic cells: involvement of
calmodulin/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase-activated p38 MAPK and Sp-1 and
CREB-1 transcription factors.

Gee K(1), Angel JB, Mishra S, Blahoianu MA, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Division of Virology and
Molecular Immunology, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, 401 Smyth Road,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2012 Apr 1;188(7):3553.

The anti-inflammatory cytokine, IL-10 plays an important role in HIV
immunopathogenesis. The HIV accessory protein, Tat is not only critical for viral
replication, but affects the host immune system by influencing cytokine
production including IL-10. During HIV infection, IL-10 production by monocytic
cells is up-regulated, representing a critical pathway by which HIV may induce
immunodeficiency. Herein, we show that extracellular Tat-induced IL-10 expression
in normal human monocytes. To understand the signaling pathways underlying
HIV-Tat induced IL-10 transcription, we investigated the involvement of MAPK as
well as calcium signaling and the downstream transcription factor(s). Our results
suggest that Tat-induced calcium influx regulated IL-10 transcription in
monocytic cells. The experiments designed to further understand the molecules
involved in the calcium signaling suggested that calmodulin and
calmodulin-dependent protein kinase-II (CaMK-II)-activated p38 MAPK played a role
in extracellular Tat-induced IL-10 expression in primary human monocytes.
Furthermore, Tat-induced IL-10 expression was regulated by p38 MAPK- and CaMK
II-activated CREB-1 as well as Sp-1 transcription factors. Taken together, our
results suggest that extracellular HIV-Tat induced IL-10 transcription in primary
human monocytes is regulated by CREB-1 and Sp-1 transcription factors through the
activation of calmodulin/CaMK-II-dependent p38 MAPK.

PMID: 17202341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Atherosclerosis. 2007 Sep;194(1):88-101. Epub 2006 Nov 29.

Differential functions of tissue factor in the trans-activation of cellular
signalling pathways.

Ettelaie C(1), Li C, Collier ME, Pradier A, Frentzou GA, Wood CG, Chetter IC,
McCollum PT, Bruckdorfer KR, James NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Section, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Hull,
Cottingham Road, Hull HU6 7RX, UK. C.Ettelaie@hull.ac.uk

In this study we examined the ability of tissue factor (TF) alone, or in
conjunction with factor VIIa, factor Xa and TFPI in activating a number of key
signalling pathways associated with cellular growth, stress and differentiation
responses in human endothelial cells. We used luciferase reporter systems to
demonstrate the activation of p42/44 MAPK by the TF-FVIIa complex, mediated via
the PAR1 receptor. TF alone was capable of interacting with the cell surface and 
was sufficient to activate the JNK-SAPK pathway and subsequently AP-1, but the
level of activation was enhanced by the activity of FXa on PAR1 and 2.
Furthermore, the phosphorylated form of the transmembrane-cytoplasmic domain of
TF was directly responsible for activation of these pathways. CREB activation
occurred in response to TF-FVIIa in a non-protease dependent manner but was
lowered on addition of FXa. Finally, NFkappaB activation occurred in response to 
FVIIa or FXa, with the latter exhibiting higher levels of activation. In
conclusion, we have shown that TF is capable of activating differing signalling
pathways, via more than one mechanism. The differential influence of TF is
modified depending on the presence of other coagulation factors and ultimately
acts as a deciding factor in the determination of cellular fate.

PMID: 17137581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Cancer Gene Ther. 2007 Mar;14(3):287-96. Epub 2006 Nov 24.

A novel MASH1 enhancer with N-myc and CREB-binding sites is active in
neuroblastoma.

Watt F(1), Watanabe R, Yang W, Agren N, Arvidsson Y, Funa K.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Institute Australia for Medical Research, Randwick, New
South Wales, Australia.

Neuroblastoma is one of the most common solid tumors in childhood. With the aim
of developing a targeting vector for neuroblastoma, we cloned and characterized
an enhancer in the 5'-flanking regions of the MASH1 gene by a random-trap method 
from a 36 kb cosmid DNA. The enhancer-containing clone was identified by the
expression of GFP when transfected into neuroblastoma cell lines. The
enhancer-luciferase activity is higher in neuroblastoma cell lines, IMR32, BE2
and SH-SY5Y, compared with those in non-neuroblastoma cell lines, U1242 glioma,
N417 small cell lung cancer and EOMA hemangioma. The core enhancer was determined
within a 0.2 kb fragment, yielding three- to fourfold higher activity than that
of the MASH1 promoter alone in IMR32 and BE2. This area possesses GATA- and
CREB-binding sites, as well as the E-box. EMSA on this area demonstrated that
CREB/ATF could bind the DNA. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed that
N-myc, CREB, and co-activators CBP and PCAF, but not HDAC1, are bound to the core
enhancer at the same time as the co-activators and N-myc bind to the promoter.
This supports the idea that the commonly overexpressed genes HASH1 and N-myc are 
regulated in concert, confirming their importance as prognostic markers or
targets for therapy.

PMID: 17124508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jan 12;282(2):1507-17. Epub 2006 Nov 22.

Genetic evidence for adenylyl cyclase 1 as a target for preventing neuronal
excitotoxicity mediated by N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors.

Wang H(1), Gong B, Vadakkan KI, Toyoda H, Kaang BK, Zhuo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada.

The excessive activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors by glutamate
results in neuronal excitotoxicity. cAMP is a key second messenger and
contributes to NMDA receptor-dependent synaptic plasticity. Adenylyl cyclases 1
(AC1) and 8 (AC8) are the two major calcium-stimulated ACs in the central nervous
system. Previous studies demonstrate AC1 and AC8 play important roles in synaptic
plasticity, memory, and persistent pain. However, little is known about the
possible roles of these two ACs in glutamate-induced neuronal excitotoxicity.
Here, we report that genetic deletion of AC1 significantly attenuated neuronal
death induced by glutamate in primary cultures of cortical neurons, whereas AC8
deletion did not produce a significant effect. AC1, but not AC8, contributes to
intracellular cAMP production following NMDA receptor activation by glutamate in 
cultured cortical neurons. AC1 is involved in the dynamic modulation of
cAMP-response element-binding protein activity in neuronal excitotoxicity. To
explore the possible roles of AC1 in cell death in vivo, we studied neuronal
excitotoxicity induced by an intracortical injection of NMDA. Cortical lesions
induced by NMDA were significantly reduced in AC1 but not in AC8 knock-out mice. 
Our findings provide direct evidence that AC1 plays an important role in neuronal
excitotoxicity and may serve as a therapeutic target for preventing
excitotoxicity in stroke and neurodegenerative diseases.

PMID: 17121841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 15;66(22):10750-9.

Mutant p53 protects cells from 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-induced death
by attenuating activating transcription factor 3 induction.

Buganim Y(1), Kalo E, Brosh R, Besserglick H, Nachmany I, Rais Y, Stambolsky P,
Tang X, Milyavsky M, Shats I, Kalis M, Goldfinger N, Rotter V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.

Mutations in p53 are ubiquitous in human tumors. Some p53 mutations not only
result in loss of wild-type (WT) activity but also grant additional functions,
termed "gain of function." In this study, we explore how the status of p53
affects the immediate response gene activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) in
the 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)-protein kinase C (PKC) pathway. We
show that high doses of TPA induce ATF3 in a WT p53-independent manner
correlating with PKCs depletion and cell death. We show that cells harboring
mutant p53 have attenuated ATF3 induction and are less sensitive to TPA-induced
death compared with their p53-null counterparts. Mutagenesis analysis of the ATF3
promoter identified the regulatory motifs cyclic AMP-responsive element binding
protein/ATF and MEF2 as being responsible for the TPA-induced activation of ATF3.
Moreover, we show that mutant p53 attenuates ATF3 expression by two complementary
mechanisms. It interacts with the ATF3 promoter and influences its activity via
the MEF2 site, and additionally, it attenuates transcriptional expression of the 
ATF3 activator MEF2D. These data provide important insights into the molecular
mechanisms that underlie mutant p53 gain of function.

PMID: 17108111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Diabetologia. 2007 Jan;50(1):131-41. Epub 2006 Nov 9.

Amelioration of glucose tolerance by hepatic inhibition of nuclear factor kappaB 
in db/db mice.

Tamura Y(1), Ogihara T, Uchida T, Ikeda F, Kumashiro N, Nomiyama T, Sato F,
Hirose T, Tanaka Y, Mochizuki H, Kawamori R, Watada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Metabolism and Endocrinology, Juntendo University
School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8421, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Recent studies have identified the involvement of inhibitor
IkappaB kinase (IKK) in the pathogenesis of insulin resistance. To investigate
the mechanism involved, we examined the role of nuclear factor kappaB
(NF-kappaB), the distal target of IKK, in hepatic glucose metabolism.
METHODS: To inhibit NF-kappaB activity, db/db mice were infected with adenovirus 
expressing the IkappaBalpha super-repressor.
RESULTS: The IkappaBalpha super-repressor adenovirus infection caused a moderate 
reduction of NF-kappaB activity in liver. The treatment was associated with
improved glucose tolerance, reduction in the serum insulin level, and increased
hepatic triacylglycerol and glycogen contents, but had no effect on
insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of Akt. On the other hand, quantification of
mRNA in the liver revealed marked reduction of expression of gluconeogenic genes,
such as those encoding phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) and
glucose-6-phosphatase, concurrent with reduced expression of gene encoding
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha (PPARGC1A,
also known as PGC-1alpha). Furthermore, the production of super-repressor
IkappaBalpha suppressed the increase in blood glucose level after pyruvate
injection.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our results indicate that moderate inhibition of
NF-kappaB improved glucose tolerance through decreased gluconeogenesis associated
with reduced PGC-1alpha gene expression in db/db mice, and suggest that
inhibition of NF-kappaB activity in liver is a potentially suitable strategy for 
the normalisation of blood glucose concentration in type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 17093946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Immunol. 2006 Nov 15;177(10):7024-32.

Activating transcription factor/cAMP response element binding protein family
member regulated transcription of CD1A.

Colmone A(1), Li S, Wang CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

CD1a has a unique expression pattern among Ag-presenting molecules, expressed
specifically on cortical thymocytes and APCs. As autoimmune disease, infection,
and tumors can all result in alteration of CD1a expression, we are attempting to 
characterize the transcriptional regulation, and thus shed some light on specific
expression, of CD1A. In this study, we have identified a minimal proximal
promoter region required for CD1A transcription. Computer searches within this
region identified numerous potential binding sites for lymphoid-specific
transcription factors, including the ETS transcription factors, C/EBP, GATA, and 
CREB. Deletion and site-specific mutant analysis revealed a critical role of a
potential cAMP response element (CRE) 965 bp upstream of the CD1A translation
start site. Two activating transcription factor (ATF)/CREB family members, CREB-1
and ATF-2, are able to bind this site in vitro and in vivo. Notably, activation
of ATF/CREB family members decreases CD1A transcription, while decrease in ATF-2 
expression results in increased CD1A RNA level. The fact that these factors also 
bind the CD1A promoter in human monocytes strongly suggests a role for ATF/CREB
family members in regulation of CD1A expression.

PMID: 17082618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Endocrinol. 2006 Oct;191(1):327-37.

CREM confers cAMP responsiveness in human steroidogenic acute regulatory protein 
expression in NCI-H295R cells rather than SF-1/Ad4BP.

Sugawara T(1), Sakuragi N, Minakami H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan.

Steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR) protein plays a critical role in steroid
hormone synthesis. Tropic hormones induce human StAR gene expression by a
cAMP-dependent pathway. Steroidogenic factor-1/adrenal-4-binding protein
(SF-1/Ad4BP) plays an important role in the expression of human StAR gene. We
investigated the mechanism of cAMP responsiveness in human StAR gene expression
in NCI-H295R cells. The StAR promoter activity and protein levels in cells
subjected to various treatments were examined. Anti-SF-1/Ad4BP IgG transfection
treatment resulted in decreases in the basal StAR promoter activity and StAR
protein levels, but did not affect cAMP-stimulated promoter activity and protein 
levels. The basal and cAMP-stimulated StAR promoter activity levels were reduced 
in SF-1/Ad4BP mutant (G35E)-transfected cells, but the cAMP induction of StAR
promoter activity in response to 1 mM 8-Br-cAMP was not inhibited when G35E
SF-1/Ad4BP mutant expression vectors were co-transfected with cAMP-response
element-binding (CREB) expression vectors. Although the basal StAR mRNA
expression and protein levels were decreased by SF-1/Ad4BP-siRNA treatment, the
cAMP-stimulated StAR mRNA expression and protein levels did not change. The basal
StAR promoter activity level was not decreased by cAMP-response element modulator
(CREM)-siRNA treatment, but the cAMP-stimulated StAR promoter activity level, the
magnitude of cAMP induction of StAR promoter, and the cAMP-stimulated StAR
protein level were decreased. The cAMP induction of StAR promoter activity in
cells was inhibited when S117ACREM mutant expressionvectors were transfected. We 
conclude that inhibition of the function of SF-1/Ad4BP does not reduce the cAMP
induction of StAR promoter activity and protein level. CREM is needed to confer
cAMP responsiveness in human StAR protein expression.

PMID: 17065415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Eur J Pharmacol. 2006 Dec 15;552(1-3):1-10. Epub 2006 Sep 8.

Cholesterol depletion reduces serotonin binding and signaling via human
5-HT(7(a)) receptors.

Sjögren B(1), Hamblin MW, Svenningsson P.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Molecular Neuropharmacology, Department of Physiology and
Pharmacology, Karolinska Institute, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Lipids, including cholesterol, are critical components of the cell membrane where
they are enriched in microdomains, lipid rafts, which organize and concentrate
receptors and intracellular proteins involved in signal transduction. The present
study examined the effects of cholesterol depletion on serotonin (5-HT) binding
and signaling via 5-hydroxytryptamine(7) (5-HT(7)) receptors in stably
transfected HeLa cells. Immunohistochemical, ligand-binding and biotinylation
experiments demonstrated that the studied cells expressed high levels of 5-HT(7) 
receptors at their surface with a pharmacological profile resembling 5-HT(7)
receptors in native tissue. Depletion of cholesterol, by combined treatment with 
mevastatin, fumonisin B(1) and mevalonate or methyl-beta-cyclodextrin (MbetaCD), 
caused highly significant reductions in the B(max) values of [(3)H]5-HT- and
[(3)H]-(R)-3-(2-(2-(4-methylpiperidin-1-yl)-ethyl)pyrrolidine-1-sulfonyl)phenol
([(3)H]SB269970)-binding to 5-HT(7) receptors. Cholesterol depletion also reduced
the total level of 5-HT(7) receptor protein determined by Western blot analysis. 
None of the examined treatments affected the affinity of [(3)H]5-HT- or
[(3)H]SB269970-binding to 5-HT(7) receptors. Treatment with serotonin caused
strong inductions in the phosphorylation states of Ser(63)-ATF-1 and
Ser(133)-CREB. These effects of serotonin on signal transduction were
significantly counteracted by pre-treatment with cholesterol synthesis
inhibitors. Altogether, the present study demonstrates that cholesterol depletion
decreases binding of both agonist and antagonist radioligands to 5-HT(7)
receptors and counteract 5-HT(7) receptor-mediated intracellular signaling.

PMID: 17064686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Free Radic Res. 2006 Nov;40(11):1113-23.

Induction of Bcl-2 by functional regulation of G-protein coupled receptors
protects from oxidative glutamate toxicity by increasing glutathione.

Sahin M(1), Saxena A, Joost P, Lewerenz J, Methner A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Heinrich Heine Universität Düsseldorf, Moorenstreet
5, 40225, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Glutamate treatment depletes hippocampal HT22 cells of glutathione, which renders
the cells incapable to reduce reactive oxygen species and ultimately cumulates in
cell death by oxidative stress. HT22 cells resistant to glutamate displayed
increased phosphorylation of cAMP-response-element binding (CREB) and decreased
ERK1/2 suggestive of differences in signal transmission. We investigated the
amount of candidate G-protein-coupled receptors involved in this resistance and
found an increase in mRNA for receptors activated by the vasoactive intestinal
peptide VIP (VPAC2, 12.6-fold) and glutamate like the metabotropic glutamate
receptor mGlu1 (5.3-fold). Treating cells with VIP and glutamate led to the same 
changes in protein phosphorylation observed in resistant cells and induced the
proto-oncogene Bcl-2. Bcl-2 overexpression protected by increasing the amount of 
intracellular glutathione and Bcl-2 knockdown by small interfering RNAs (siRNA)
increased glutamate susceptibility of resistant cells. Other receptors
upregulated in this paradigm might represent useful targets in the treatment of
neurological diseases associated with oxidative stress.

PMID: 17050165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Apr 1;100(5):1217-31.

Differential regulation of cyclooxygenase-2 and inducible nitric oxide synthase
by 4-hydroxynonenal in human osteoarthritic chondrocytes through ATF-2/CREB-1
transactivation and concomitant inhibition of NF-kappaB signaling cascade.

Vaillancourt F(1), Morquette B, Shi Q, Fahmi H, Lavigne P, Di Battista JA,
Fernandes JC, Benderdour M.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic Research Laboratory, Sacre-Coeur Hospital, University of Montreal,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

4-hydroxynonenal (HNE), a lipid peroxidation end product, is produced abundantly 
in osteoarthritic (OA) articular tissues and was recently identified as a potent 
catabolic factor in OA cartilage. In this study, we provide additional evidence
that HNE acts as an inflammatory mediator by elucidating the signaling cascades
targeted in OA chondrocytes leading to cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and inducible
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) gene expression. HNE induced COX-2 protein and mRNA 
levels with accompanying increases in prostaglandin E2 (PGE(2)) production. In
contrast, HNE had no effect on basal iNOS expression or nitric oxide (NO)
release. However, HNE strongly inhibited IL-1beta-induced iNOS or NO production. 
Transient transfection experiments revealed that the ATF/CRE site (-58/-53) is
essential for HNE-induced COX-2 promoter activation and indeed HNE induced ATF-2 
and CREB-1 phosphorylation as well as ATF/CRE binding activity. Overexpression of
p38 MAPK enhanced the HNE-induced ATF/CRE luciferase reporter plasmid activation,
COX-2 synthesis and promoter activity. HNE abrogated IL-1beta-induced iNOS
expression and promoter activity mainly through NF-kappaB site (-5,817/-5,808)
possibly via suppression of IKKalpha-induced IkappaBalpha phosphorylation and
NF-kappaB/p65 nuclear translocation. Upon examination of upstream signaling
components, we found that IKKalpha was inactivated through HNE/IKKalpha adduct
formation. Taken together, these findings illustrate the central role played by
HNE in the regulation of COX-2 and iNOS in OA. The aldehyde induced selectively
COX-2 expression via ATF/CRE activation and inhibited iNOS via IKKalpha
inactivation.

c 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17031850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Sep 15;12(18):5356-62.

EWS-CREB1: a recurrent variant fusion in clear cell sarcoma--association with
gastrointestinal location and absence of melanocytic differentiation.

Antonescu CR(1), Nafa K, Segal NH, Dal Cin P, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, and Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

PURPOSE: Clear cell sarcoma (CCS) usually arises in the lower extremities of
young adults and is typically associated with a t(12;22) translocation resulting 
in the fusion of EWS (EWSR1) with ATF1, a gene encoding a member of the cyclic
AMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) family of transcription factors.
CCS arising in the gastrointestinal tract is rare and its pathologic and
molecular features are not well defined.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We report a novel variant fusion of EWS to CREB1, a gene at 
2q32 encoding another CREB family member highly related to ATF1, detected in
three women with gastrointestinal CCS. All three cases contained an identical
EWS-CREB1 fusion transcript that was shown by reverse transcription-PCR. In two
of the cases tested, EWS gene rearrangement was also confirmed by fluorescence in
situ hybridization and the EWS-CREB1 genomic junction fragments were isolated by 
long-range DNA PCR.
RESULTS: Morphologically, all three tumors lacked melanin pigmentation. By
immunohistochemistry, there was a strong and diffuse S100 protein reactivity,
whereas all melanocytic markers were negative. Ultrastructurally, two of the
cases lacked melanosomes. The melanocyte-specific transcript of MITF was absent
in two cases, and only weakly expressed in the third case. The Affymetrix gene
expression data available in one case showed lower expression of the melanocytic 
genes MITF, TYR, and TYRP1, compared with four EWS-ATF1-positive CCSs of
non-gastrointestinal origin.
CONCLUSIONS: EWS-CREB1 may define a novel subset of CCS that occurs
preferentially in the gastrointestinal tract and shows little or no melanocytic
differentiation. Thus, evidence of melanocytic lineage or differentiation is not 
a necessary feature of sarcomas with gene fusions involving CREB family members.

PMID: 17000668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. EMBO Rep. 2006 Nov;7(11):1124-7. Epub 2006 Sep 22.

Dcr2 targets Ire1 and downregulates the unfolded protein response in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Guo J(1), Polymenis M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics, Texas A&M University, 2128 TAMU,
College Station, Texas 77843, USA.

Accumulation of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum triggers the
unfolded protein response (UPR). How the UPR is downregulated is not well
understood. Inositol requirement 1 (Ire1) is an endoplasmic reticulum
transmembrane UPR sensor in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. When the UPR is triggered, 
Ire1 is autophosphorylated, on Ser 840 and Ser 841, inducing the cytosolic
endonuclease activity of Ire1, thereby initiating the splicing and translational 
de-repression of HAC1 mRNA. Homologous to Atf/Creb1 (Hac1) activates UPR
transcription. Here, we report that the dose-dependent cell-cycle regulator 2
(Dcr2) phosphatase functionally and physically interacts with Ire1. We identified
genetic interactions between DCR2 and genes, including IRE1, which are involved
in secretory processes. Overexpression of DCR2, but not of a catalytically
inactive DCR2 allele, significantly delays HAC1 splicing and sensitizes cells to 
the UPR. Furthermore, Dcr2 physically interacts in vivo with Ire1-S840E,S841E,
which mimics phosphorylated Ire1, and Dcr2 de-phosphorylates Ire1 in vitro. Our
results are consistent with de-phosphorylation of Ire1 being a mechanism for
antagonizing UPR signalling.

PMCID: PMC1679794
PMID: 16990850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Synapse. 2006 Dec 15;60(8):573-84.

Differential effects of chronic amphetamine and baclofen administration on cAMP
levels and phosphorylation of CREB in distinct brain regions of wild type and
monoamine oxidase B-deficient mice.

Yin HS(1), Chen K, Kalpana S, Shih JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. hsyin@ha.mc.ntu.edu.tw

Roles of GABA(B) transmission were explored in the action of amphetamine (Amph)
on the brain. Adult male wild type (WT) and monoamine oxidase B-knocked out
(MAOBKO) mice received i.p. injections of saline, d-Amph (5 mg/kg), plus baclofen
(GABA(B) receptor agonist, 10 mg/kg), or baclofen and Amph, twice daily for 3
days and single treatments on day 4, followed by immuno-cyclic-AMP (cAMP) and
immunoblotting assays on the brain tissue. The WT mice responded with higher
levels of behavioral responses than the KO to the daily Amph injection; however, 
baclofen blocked the Amph-induced behavioral hyperactivity of both WT and KO
mice. After the last treatment, levels of cAMP and phosphorylated (p) cyclic-AMP 
response element binding protein (CREB) were up-regulated in the striatum and
somatosensory cortex of Amph-treated WT mice, while similar to the
saline-controls in the baclofen+Amph-treated group, indicating the blockade by
baclofen to Amph. Baclofen similarly suppressed the Amph-induced increases in
pCREB levels of WT hippocampus and amygdala, and decreases of olfactory bulb and 
thalamus. For MAOBKO mice, baclofen hindered the Amph-generated increases in
motor cortical cAMP and pCREB, and amygdaloid pCREB, and the decrease in
olfactory bulb pCREB, whereas did not affect the Amph-raised hippocampal pCREB.
Furthermore, the levels of CREB were variably modified in distinct regions by the
drug exposures. The data reveal that the GABA(B)-mediated intracellular signaling
differentially participates in mechanisms underlying Amph perturbation to various
regions, and may thereby contribute explanations to the behavioral consequences. 
Moreover, MAOB is region-dependently involved in responses of the brain to Amph
and baclofen, supporting interactions between GABA and monoamines.

PMID: 16983645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Mol Psychiatry. 2007 Jan;12(1):36-46. Epub 2006 Sep 19.

n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid deprivation in rats decreases frontal cortex BDNF 
via a p38 MAPK-dependent mechanism.

Rao JS(1), Ertley RN, Lee HJ, DeMar JC Jr, Arnold JT, Rapoport SI, Bazinet RP.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Physiology and Metabolism Section, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. jrao@mail.nih.gov

Decreased docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)
have been implicated in bipolar disorder. It also has been reported that dietary 
deprivation of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) for 15 weeks in rats,
increased their depression and aggression scores. Here, we show that n-3 PUFA
deprivation for 15 weeks decreased the frontal cortex DHA level and reduced
frontal cortex BDNF expression, cAMP response element binding protein (CREB)
transcription factor activity and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
activity. Activities of other CREB activating protein kinases were not
significantly changed. The addition of DHA to rat primary cortical astrocytes in 
vitro, induced BDNF protein expression and this was blocked by a p38 MAPK
inhibitor. DHA's ability to regulate BDNF via a p38 MAPK-dependent mechanism may 
contribute to its therapeutic efficacy in brain diseases having disordered cell
survival and neuroplasticity.

PMID: 16983391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jan 12;282(2):1359-73. Epub 2006 Sep 8.

Leptin transcriptionally enhances peptide transporter (hPepT1) expression and
activity via the cAMP-response element-binding protein and Cdx2 transcription
factors.

Nduati V(1), Yan Y, Dalmasso G, Driss A, Sitaraman S, Merlin D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Digestive Diseases, Emory University
School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

PepT1 is an intestinal epithelial apical membrane transporter that is expressed
in the small intestine, with little or no expression in the normal colon.
However, we previously demonstrated that colonic PepT1 may be expressed during
chronic inflammation. To begin elucidating inflammatory hPepT1 signaling, we
herein investigated the long term leptin treatments, on PepT1 expression and
activity in Caco2-BBE cells, and began to reveal the involved signaling pathways.
We successfully cloned the 723-bp hPepT1 promoter region and identified the human
transcription initiation site 86 bp upstream from the translation start site.
Leptin treatment dose- and time-dependently increased hPepT1 promoter and
transport activities in Caco2-BBE cells, with maximal activity observed in cells 
treated with 100 nM leptin for 8 h. Under these conditions, we observed 2-fold
increases in hPepT1 mRNA and protein expression, as well as increased transport
activity. Our molecular analyses of possible signal-transduction pathways
revealed that leptin treatment enhanced the intracellular levels of cAMP and
phosphorylated cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) protein in Caco2-BBE 
cells, whereas our deletion, mutation, and CDX2 overexpression analyses
demonstrated that interaction of the Cdx2 and phosphorylated CREB transcription
factors was essential for leptin-induced hPepT1 transcription in Caco2-BBE cells.
Our results indicate that leptin, which is increased in inflamed colonic mucosa, 
triggers colonic expression of hPepT1 via the CREB and Cdx2 transcription
factors. These findings provide important new insights into the mechanisms of
intestinal inflammation and may suggest new therapeutic modalities in the future.

PMID: 16963449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Mol Neurobiol. 2006 Jun;33(3):199-213.

Changes in the expression of G protein-coupled receptor kinases and
beta-arrestins in mouse brain during cannabinoid tolerance: a role for RAS-ERK
cascade.

Rubino T(1), Viganò D, Premoli F, Castiglioni C, Bianchessi S, Zippel R, Parolaro
D.

Author information: 
(1)DBSF, Pharmacology Section, and Neuroscience Center, University of Insubria,
Busto Arsizio (VA), Italy. tiziana.rubino@uninsubria.it

The focus of our study was to determine the role of G protein-coupled receptor
kinases (GRKs) and beta-arrestins in agonist-induced CB1 receptor modulation
during cannabinoid tolerance and their dependence from the extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) cascade. In wild-type mice, chronic
Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) exposure significantly activated specific GRK
and beta- arrestin subunits in all the considered brain areas (striatum,
cerebellum, hippocampus, and prefrontal cortex), suggesting their involvement in 
the adaptive processes underlying CB1 receptor downregulation and
desensitization. These events were ERK-dependent in the striatum and cerebellum, 
because they were prevented in the genetic (Ras-GRF1 knockout mice) and
pharmacological (SL327-pretreated mice) models of ERK activation inhibition,
whereas in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex, they appeared to be mostly
ERK-independent. In the latter areas, ERK activation after chronic THC increased 
the transcription factors cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element-binding
protein and Fos B as well as a downstream protein known as brainderived
neurotrophic factor. As a whole, our data suggest that in the striatum and
cerebellum, THC-induced ERK activation could represent a key signaling event to
initiate homologous desensitization of CB1 receptor, accounting for the
development of tolerance to THC-induced hypolocomotion. In the prefrontal cortex 
and hippocampus, THC-induced alteration in GRKs and beta-arrestins primarily
depends on other kinases, whereas ERK activation could be part of the molecular
adaptations that underlie the complex behavioral phenotype that defines the
addicted state.

PMID: 16954596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Neuroscience. 2006 Nov 3;142(4):1281-92. Epub 2006 Aug 28.

The effect of single or repeated restraint stress on several signal molecules in 
paraventricular nucleus, arcuate nucleus and locus coeruleus.

Kwon MS(1), Seo YJ, Shim EJ, Choi SS, Lee JY, Suh HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, and Institute of Natural
Medicine, Hallym University, 1 Okchundong, Chuncheon, Gangwon-Do 200-702, South
Korea. hwsuh@hallym.ac.kr

The effect of single or repeated restraint stress on several signal molecules in 
the hypothalamus was studied in ICR mice. Single restraint stress was induced for
30, 60, and 120 min. A repeated restraint stress was induced for 2 h daily during
four consecutive days, and then induced in the same time course on the fifth day.
In the immunoblot assay, we observed that the signal molecules c-Fos,
phosphorylated extracellular cell-regulated protein kinase (pERK), phosphorylated
calcium/calmodulin dependent protein kinase II (pCaMKII) and phosphorylated
cyclic-AMP response element binding protein (pCREB) in the hypothalamus were
increased by single restraint, and the increased c-Fos and pERK levels were
attenuated by repeated restraint stress. However, pCaMKII and pCREB levels were
increased by both single and repeated restraint stress. We also observed in the
immunohistochemistry study that immunoreactivities (IR) of these signal molecules
were changed in paraventricular (PVN) and arcuate nuclei (ArcN) of the
hypothalamus in accordance with immunoblot results. Furthermore, in confocal
immunofluorescence, the pCaMKII and pCREB up-regulated by repeated restraint
stress were co-localized within many neurons of PVN and ArcN. In addition, we
found that c-Fos and pCaMKII IR in locus coeruleus (LC) were increased by single 
restraint, and were attenuated by repeated restraint stress. However, the pERK
and pCREB IR were increased by both single and repeated restraint stress. The
confocal study revealed that pERK and pCREB up-regulated by repeated restraint
stress were co-localized within many neurons of LC. Our results suggest that
single and repeated restraint stress differentially triggers the induction and
phosphorylation of several signal molecules in the PVN, ArcN, and LC. In
addition, single and repeated stress stimuli elicited the brain-region specific
changes of signal molecules examined. Furthermore, the upstream signal molecule
activating CREB may be also brain-region specific, especially in repeated stress 
stimuli.

PMID: 16938401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Virol. 2006 Nov;80(21):10497-505. Epub 2006 Aug 18.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 tax dysregulates beta-catenin signaling.

Tomita M(1), Kikuchi A, Akiyama T, Tanaka Y, Mori N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Virology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine,
University of the Ryukyus, 207 Uehara, Nishihara, Okinawa 903-0215, Japan.

Retraction in
    J Virol. 2011 Feb;85(3):1417.

Dysregulation of beta-catenin signaling has been implicated in the malignant
transformation of cells. However, the role of beta-catenin in the human T-cell
leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1)-induced transformation of T cells is unknown. Here
we found that beta-catenin protein was overexpressed in the nucleus and that
beta-catenin-dependent transcription was significantly enhanced in Tax-positive
HTLV-1-infected T-cell lines compared to that in Tax-negative HTLV-1-infected
T-cell lines. Transfection with beta-catenin-specific small interfering RNA
inhibited the growth of the Tax-positive HTLV-1-infected T-cell line HUT-102.
Transient transfection of Tax appeared to enhance beta-catenin-dependent
transcription by stabilizing the beta-catenin protein via activation of the
cyclic AMP (cAMP) response element-binding protein. HTLV-1-infected T-cell lines 
overexpressing beta-catenin also showed increased Akt activity via Tax activation
of the cAMP response element-binding protein, resulting in the phosphorylation
and inactivation of glycogen synthase kinase 3beta, which phosphorylates
beta-catenin for ubiquitination. The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor
LY294002 reduced beta-catenin expression in Tax-positive T-cell lines, and
inactivation of glycogen synthase kinase 3beta by lithium chloride restored
beta-catenin expression in Tax-negative T-cell lines. Finally, we showed that
dominant-negative Akt inhibited Tax-induced beta-catenin-dependent transcription.
These results indicate that Tax activates beta-catenin through the Akt signaling 
pathway. Our findings suggest that activation of beta-catenin by Tax may be
important in the transformation of T cells by HTLV-1 infection.

PMCID: PMC1641756
PMID: 16920823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Biol Chem. 2006 Oct 20;281(42):31647-58. Epub 2006 Aug 18.

Intracellular HIV-Tat expression induces IL-10 synthesis by the CREB-1
transcription factor through Ser133 phosphorylation and its regulation by the
ERK1/2 MAPK in human monocytic cells.

Gee K(1), Angel JB, Ma W, Mishra S, Gajanayaka N, Parato K, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Virology, Research Institute, Children's 
Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa K1H 8L1, Canada.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-Tat plays an important role in virus
replication and in various aspects of host immune responses, including
dysregulation of cytokine production. IL-10, an anti-inflammatory cytokine, is
up-regulated during the course of HIV infection representing an important pathway
by which HIV may induce immunodeficiency. Here we show that extracellular as well
as intracellular Tat induced IL-10 expression in normal human monocytes and
promonocytic THP-1 cells. The signaling pathways involved in the regulation of
IL-10 production by endogenous Tat remain unknown. To understand the molecular
mechanism underlying intracellular Tat-induced IL-10 transcription, we employed a
retroviral expression system to investigate the role of MAPKs and the
transcription factor(s) involved. Our results suggest that an inhibitor specific 
for the ERK1/2, PD98059, selectively blocked intracellular Tat-induced IL-10
expression in THP-1 cells. Furthermore, intracellular Tat activated the CREB-1
transcription factor through Ser(133) phosphorylation that was regulated by ERK
MAPK as determined by IL-10 promoter analysis and gel shift assays. Overall, our 
results suggest that intracellular HIV-Tat induces IL-10 transcription by ERK
MAPK-dependent CREB-1 transcription factor activation through Ser(133)
phosphorylation.

PMID: 16920714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Blood. 2006 Nov 15;108(10):3590-9. Epub 2006 Aug 8.

Mechanism for fetal hemoglobin induction by histone deacetylase inhibitors
involves gamma-globin activation by CREB1 and ATF-2.

Sangerman J(1), Lee MS, Yao X, Oteng E, Hsiao CH, Li W, Zein S, Ofori-Acquah SF, 
Pace BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.

The histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDA-CIs) butyrate and trichostatin A activate
gamma-globin expression via a p38 mitogen-activating protein kinase
(MAPK)-dependent mechanism. We hypothesized that down-stream effectors of p38
MAPK, namely activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) and cyclic AMP response
element (CRE) binding protein (CREB), are intimately involved in fetal hemoglobin
induction by these agents. In this study, we observed increased ATF-2 and CREB1
phosphorylation mediated by the HDACIs in K562 cells, in conjunction with histone
H4 hyperacetylation. Moreover, enhanced DNA-protein interactions occurred in the 
CRE in the (G)gamma-globin promoter (G-CRE) in vitro after drug treatments;
subsequent chromatin immunoprecipitation assay confirmed ATF-2 and CREB1 binding 
to the G-CRE in vivo. Enforced expression of ATF-2 and CREB produced
(G)gamma-promoter trans-activation which was abolished by a 2-base pair mutation 
in the putative G-CRE. The data presented herein demonstrate that gamma-gene
induction by butyrate and trichostatin A involves ATF-2 and CREB1 activation via 
p38 MAPK signaling.

PMCID: PMC1895433
PMID: 16896160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Jul;64 Suppl 5:221-8.

[Regulatory mechanisms of cardiovascular remodeling in hypertension].

[Article in Japanese]

Kurabayashi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Biological Science, Gunma University Graduate
School of Medicine.

PMID: 16895188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Biol Chem. 2006 Oct 6;281(40):29479-90. Epub 2006 Aug 4.

Requirement of Smad3 and CREB-1 in mediating transforming growth factor-beta (TGF
beta) induction of TGF beta 3 secretion.

Liu G(1), Ding W, Neiman J, Mulder KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey,
Pennsylvania 17033, USA.

Because increased transforming growth factor-beta (TGFbeta) production by tumor
cells contributes to cancer progression through paracrine mechanisms,
identification of critical points that can be targeted to block TGFbeta
production is important. Previous studies have identified the precise signaling
components and promoter elements required for TGFbeta induction of TGFbeta1
expression in epithelial cells (Yue, J., and Mulder, K. M. (2000) J. Biol. Chem. 
275, 30765-30773). To determine how regulation of TGFbeta3 expression differs
from that of TGFbeta1, we identified the precise signaling pathways and
transcription factor-binding sites that are required for TGFbeta3 gene
expression. By using mutational analysis in electrophoresis mobility shift assays
(EMSAs), we demonstrated that the c-AMP-responsive element (CRE) site in the
TGFbeta3 promoter was required for TGFbeta-inducible TGFbeta3 expression.
Electrophoresis mobility supershift assays indicated that CRE-binding protein 1
(CREB1) and Smad3 were the major components present in this TGFbeta-inducible
complex. Furthermore, by using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we
demonstrated that CREB-1, ATF-2, and c-Jun bound constitutively at the TGFbeta3
promoter (-100 to +1), whereas Smad3 bound at this site only after TGFbeta
stimulation. In addition, inhibition of JNK and p38 suppressed TGFbeta induction 
of TGFbeta3 transactivation, whereas inhibition of ERK and protein kinase A had
no effect. Small interfering RNA-CREB1 and small interfering RNA-Smad3
significantly inhibited TGFbeta stimulation of TGFbeta3 promoter reporter
activity and TGFbeta3 production. Our results indicate that TGFbeta activation of
the TGFbeta3 promoter CRE site, which leads to TGFbeta3 production, is required
for TGFbetaRII, JNK, p38, and Smad3 but was independent of protein kinase A, ERK,
and Smad4.

PMID: 16891311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Neurosci Res. 2006 Oct;84(5):954-60.

De Novo synthesis of CREB in a presynaptic neuron is required for synaptic
enhancement involved in memory consolidation.

Wagatsuma A(1), Azami S, Sakura M, Hatakeyama D, Aonuma H, Ito E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan.

Interaction between the activator type of cyclic AMP response element binding
protein (CREB1) and the repressor type (CREB2) results in determining the
emergence of long-lasting synaptic enhancement involved in memory consolidation. 
However, we still do not know whether the constitutively expressed forms of CREB 
are enough or the newly synthesized forms are required for the synaptic
enhancement. In addition, if the newly synthesized forms are needed, we must
determine the time for translation of CREB from its mRNA. We applied the methods 
of RNA interference and real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to CREB in the 
cerebral giant cells of Lymnaea. The cerebral giant cells play an important role 
in associative learning and employ a CREB cascade for the synaptic enhancement to
neurons such as the B1 motoneurons. We injected the small interfering RNA (siRNA)
of CREB1 or CREB2 into the cerebral giant cells and examined the changes in
amplitude of excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) recorded in the B1
motoneurons. The changes in the amounts of CREB1 and CREB2 mRNAs were also
examined in the cerebral giant cells. The EPSP amplitude was suppressed 15 min
after injection of CREB1 siRNA, whereas that was augmented 60 min after injection
of CREB2 siRNA. In the latter case, the decrease in the amount of CREB2 mRNA was 
confirmed by real-time PCR. Our results showed that the de novo synthesized forms
of CREB are required within tens of minutes for the synaptic enhancement in
memory consolidation.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16886187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Learn Mem. 2006 Jul-Aug;13(4):465-72.

CREB antisense oligodeoxynucleotide administration into the dorsal hippocampal
CA3 region impairs long- but not short-term spatial memory in mice.

Florian C(1), Mons N, Roullet P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherches sur la Cognition Animale, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche, CNRS UMR, 5169, Université Paul Sabatier,
31062 Toulouse cedex 9, France.

The transcription factor cAMP response-element binding protein (CREB) has a
pivotal role in hippocampal synaptic plasticity and hippocampus-dependent
long-term memory. We recently demonstrated that the dorsal hippocampal CA3 region
is involved in memory consolidation of spatial information tested on a Morris
water maze in mice. To test whether activation of CREB in the CA3 region is
required for memory consolidation of spatial information, bilaterally cannulated 
mice were infused 18 h before the beginning of the behavioral training with
antisense or control sense CREB oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) or buffer. Mice were
then subjected to massed training in a spatial version of the water maze and
tested for retention 0 or 24 h after the last training session. We showed that
CREB antisense ODN-infusion in the CA3 region impaired long-term memory when
tested 24 h later but had no effect on spatial acquisition or short-term memory
tested immediately after behavioral training. These findings provide evidence
that the regionally restricted activation of CREB in the dorsal hippocampal CA3
region is critical for the long-term memory consolidation phase of spatial
learning but not for short-term memory.

PMCID: PMC1538924
PMID: 16882863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Sep;18(3):433-9.

Nutrient control of phosphorylation and translocation of Foxo1 in C57BL/6 and
db/db mice.

Aoyama H(1), Daitoku H, Fukamizu A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, Graduate School of Life and
Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8577, Japan.

The nutrient response mediated by feeding or fasting plays an important role in
controlling gluconeogenic gene expression such as glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) 
and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPCK). The FOXO family of forkhead
transcription factor Foxo1 (mouse FOXO1) is a key regulator that stimulates the
expression of gluconeogenic genes in the nucleus but is phosphorylated by Akt
(also known as protein kinase B; PKB) and translocated to the cytoplasm in
response to insulin. Although it has been widely accepted that the cellular
signaling of insulin represses Foxo1 function through Akt-dependent
phosphorylation, the molecular mechanism behind the modulation of Foxo1 function 
by nutrient responses, including feeding or fasting, remains unknown in vivo. We 
investigated the consequences of the nutritional changes in Akt-mediated Foxo1
phosphorylation and translocation in the liver using control C57BL/6 and diabetic
db/db mice. We found that feeding promotes the phosphorylation and nuclear
exclusion of Foxo1, whereas fasting counteracted them in C57BL/6 mice. Notably,
db/db mice exhibited constitutive phosphorylation but dominant nuclear
accumulation of Foxo1, even though CREB phosphorylation usually occurred in the
fasted status. Furthermore, in contrast to C57BL/6 mice, the expression of
G6Pase, PEPCK and PGC-1alpha genes during feeding was not down-regulated in db/db
mice. Thus, we suggest that the accurate regulation of Foxo1 via Akt-dependent
phosphorylation is required for physiological adaptation to different nutritional
statuses.

PMID: 16865227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2006 Sep;33(1):29-35. Epub 2006 Jul 24.

Low concentrations of extracellular FGF-2 are sufficient but not essential for
neurogenesis from human neural progenitor cells.

Nelson AD(1), Svendsen CN.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Training Program, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA.

Secreted soluble growth factors have long been implicated in regulating or
modulating cortical neurogenesis through stimulation of neurogenic progenitors.
How a cortical progenitor cell interprets the growth factor signal may determine 
the progeny produced by the progenitor through a critical final round of cell
division prior to terminal differentiation. Given that low concentrations of
fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF-2) have previously been shown to stimulate
cortically derived rodent progenitors to produce neuroblasts, we hypothesized
that low levels of FGF-2 may also promote neurogenesis from human neural
progenitor cells (hNPC). hNPC were generated from the developing human cortex and
maintained in epidermal growth factor as neurospheres. CREB phosphorylation
revealed that a similar number of differentiating hNPC were stimulated by both
low (2 pg/ml) and high (20 ng/ml) levels of FGF-2. The majority of progenitor
cells that produced neurons underwent a final round of division during
differentiation. Low concentrations of FGF-2 increased neurogenesis while high
levels of FGF-2 maintained progenitor cell proliferation and blocked
neurogenesis. Application of an FGF-2 neutralizing antibody during
differentiation completely inhibited CREB phosphorylation but did not block
neurogenesis. Thus, while low levels of FGF-2 can increase neurogenesis;
extracellular stimulation by this factor is not required for new neuron
production from hNPC.

PMID: 16860999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Gene. 2006 Oct 1;380(2):95-103. Epub 2006 Jul 20.

Expression of the human TPT1 gene coding for translationally controlled tumor
protein (TCTP) is regulated by CREB transcription factors.

Andree H(1), Thiele H, Fähling M, Schmidt I, Thiele BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Charité, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Institut für Vegetative Physiologie,
Tucholskystr. 2, 10117 Berlin, Germany.

Re-evaluation of genomic and cDNA data revealed that the human TPT1 gene coding
for the translationally controlled tumor protein (TCTP) consists of at least 4211
base pairs. It is transcribed into two transcripts of about 0.8 and 1.2 kb, which
contain the same coding region and 5'-UTR, but differ in the length of 3'-UTRs by
the use of alternative polyadenylation signals. 459 bp promoter sequences were
analyzed by theoretical evaluation, reporter-gene assays, gelshift and
footprinting experiments to search for transcription factor binding sites. The
promoter contains two highly conserved CRE sites between -50 and -89 in close
vicinity to a TATA-box at -30. Supershift assays identified CREB I and Fra II of 
the CREB/ATF1/AP1 family as factors interacting with the CRE/AP1 site. A 3-5-fold
stimulation of TCTP synthesis by forskolin and phorbolester in T24 cells and
promoter-reporter experiments using CRE-deletion constructs suggested a
transcriptional control by cAMP signaling via phosphorylation dependent
activation of CRE/CREB interaction.

PMID: 16859841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Brain Res. 2006 Aug 23;1106(1):63-71. Epub 2006 Jul 18.

Ethanol activates cAMP response element-mediated gene expression in select
regions of the mouse brain.

Asyyed A(1), Storm D, Diamond I.

Author information: 
(1)Ernest Gallo Clinic and Research Center, Department of Neurology, University
of California, San Francisco, 5858 Horton St., Ste. 200, Emeryville, CA 94608,
USA. aasyyed@hotmail.com

The specific brain regions that contribute to behavioral changes produced by
ethanol are not clearly understood. We know that cAMP-PKA signaling has been
strongly implicated in the CNS effects of ethanol. Ethanol promotes activation
and translocation of the PKA catalytic subunit (Calpha) into the nucleus in cell 
lines and primary neuronal cultures. PKA Calpha translocation to the nucleus is
followed by cAMP Response Element protein phosphorylation (pCREB) and cAMP
Response Element (CRE)-mediated gene expression. Here, we use X-gal
histochemistry to map CRE-mediated gene transcription in the brain of CRE-lacZ
transgenic mice following ethanol injection.RESULTS: 3 h after i.p. ethanol
injection (3.2 g/kg, 16% wt/vol.), the number of X-gal positive cells was
increased in the nucleus accumbens (202 +/- 63 cells/field compared to 71 +/- 47 
cells/field in saline injected controls, P < 0.05 by paired t-test, n = 10).
Similar increases were found in other mesolimbic areas and brain regions
associated with rewarding and addictive responses. These include: prefrontal
cortex, lateral and medial septum, basolateral amygdala, paraventricular and
anterior hypothalamus, centromedial thalamus, CA1 region of hippocampus and
dentate gyrus, substantia nigra pars compacta, ventral tegmental area, geniculate
nucleus and the superior colliculus.
CONCLUSION: these results confirm and extend current concepts that ethanol
stimulates cAMP-PKA signaling in brain regions involved in CNS responses to
ethanol.

PMID: 16854384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Sep 8;347(4):895-903. Epub 2006 Jul 7.

Dual regulation of macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) expression in
hypoxia by CREB and HIF-1.

Baugh JA(1), Gantier M, Li L, Byrne A, Buckley A, Donnelly SC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and Medical Science, The Conway Institute for Biomolecular 
and Biomedical Research, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland. 
john.baugh@ucd.ie

Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is a well-described pro-inflammatory
mediator that has also been implicated in the process of oncogenic transformation
and tumor progression. However, despite the compelling evidence that MIF is
overexpressed in, and contributes to, the pathology of inflammatory and malignant
diseases the mechanisms that contribute to exaggerated expression of MIF have
been poorly described. Here we show that hypoxia, and specifically HIF-1alpha, is
a potent and rapid inducer of MIF expression. In addition, we demonstrate that
hypoxia-induced MIF expression is dependent upon a HRE in the 5'UTR of the MIF
gene but is further modulated by CREB expression. We propose a model where
hypoxia-induced MIF expression is driven by HIF-1 but amplified by
hypoxia-induced degradation of CREB. Given the importance of MIF in inflammatory 
and malignant diseases these data reveal a HIF-1-mediated pathway as a potential 
therapeutic target for suppression of MIF expression in hypoxic tissues.

PMID: 16854377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Virol. 2006 Aug;80(15):7459-68.

Versatile reporter systems show that transactivation by human T-cell leukemia
virus type 1 Tax occurs independently of chromatin remodeling factor BRG1.

Zhang L(1), Liu M, Merling R, Giam CZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Uniformed Services University of
the Health Sciences, 4301 Jones Bridge Rd., Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

Potent activation of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) gene expression 
is mediated by the virus-encoded transactivator protein Tax and three imperfect
21-bp repeats in the viral long terminal repeats. Each 21-bp repeat contains a
cAMP-responsive-element core flanked by 5' G-rich and 3' C-rich sequences. Tax
alone does not bind DNA. Rather, it interacts with basic domain-leucine zipper
transcription factors CREB and ATF-1 to form ternary complexes with the 21-bp
repeats. In the context of the ternary complexes, Tax contacts the G/C-rich
sequences and recruits transcriptional coactivators CREB-binding protein
(CBP)/p300 to effect potent transcriptional activation. Using an easily
transduced and chromosomally integrated reporter system derived from a
self-inactivating lentivirus vector, we showed in a BRG1- and BRM1-deficient
adrenal carcinoma cell line, SW-13, that Tax- and 21-bp repeat-mediated
transactivation does not require BRG1 or BRM1 and is not enhanced by BRG1. With a
similar reporter system, we further demonstrated that Tax- and tumor necrosis
factor alpha-induced NF-kappaB activation occurs readily in SW-13 cells in the
absence of BRG1 and BRM1. These results suggest that the assembly of stable
multiprotein complexes containing Tax, CREB/ATF-1, and CBP/p300 on the 21-bp
repeats is the principal mechanism employed by Tax to preclude nucleosome
formation at the HTLV-1 enhancer/promoter. This most likely bypasses the need for
BRG1-containing chromatin-remodeling complexes. Likewise, recruitment of CBP/p300
by NF-kappaB may be sufficient to disrupt histone-DNA interaction for the
initiation of transcription.

PMCID: PMC1563696
PMID: 16840326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Retrovirology. 2006 Jul 5;3:43.

Involvement of HTLV-I Tax and CREB in aneuploidy: a bioinformatics approach.

de la Fuente C(1), Gupta MV, Klase Z, Strouss K, Cahan P, McCaffery T, Galante A,
Soteropoulos P, Pumfery A, Fujii M, Kashanchi F.

Author information: 
(1)The George Washington University Medical Center, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Washington, DC 20037, USA. bcmclf@gwumc.edu

BACKGROUND: Adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) is a complex and multifaceted disease
associated with human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-I) infection. Tax, the
viral oncoprotein, is considered a major contributor to cell cycle deregulation
in HTLV-I transformed cells by either directly disrupting cellular factors
(protein-protein interactions) or altering their transcription profile. Tax
transactivates these cellular promoters by interacting with transcription factors
such as CREB/ATF, NF-kappaB, and SRF. Therefore by examining which factors
upregulate a particular set of promoters we may begin to understand how Tax
orchestrates leukemia development.
RESULTS: We observed that CTLL cells stably expressing wild-type Tax (CTLL/WT)
exhibited aneuploidy as compared to a Tax clone deficient for CREB
transactivation (CTLL/703). To better understand the contribution of Tax
transactivation through the CREB/ATF pathway to the aneuploid phenotype, we
performed microarray analysis comparing CTLL/WT to CTLL/703 cells. Promoter
analysis of altered genes revealed that a subset of these genes contain CREB/ATF 
consensus sequences. While these genes had diverse functions, smaller subsets of 
genes were found to be involved in G2/M phase regulation, in particular
kinetochore assembly. Furthermore, we confirmed the presence of CREB, Tax and RNA
Polymerase II at the p97Vcp and Sgt1 promoters in vivo through chromatin
immunoprecipitation in CTLL/WT cells.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that the development of aneuploidy in
Tax-expressing cells may occur in response to an alteration in the transcription 
profile, in addition to direct protein interactions.

PMCID: PMC1553470
PMID: 16822311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Virol. 2006 Jul;80(14):7052-9.

TORC1 and TORC2 coactivators are required for tax activation of the human T-cell 
leukemia virus type 1 long terminal repeats.

Siu YT(1), Chin KT, Siu KL, Yee Wai Choy E, Jeang KT, Jin DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong, 3/F Laboratory Block,
Faculty of Medicine Building, 21 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) Tax protein activates viral
transcription from the long terminal repeats (LTR). Mechanisms through which Tax 
activates LTR have been established, but coactivators of this process remain to
be identified and characterized. Here we show that all three members of the TORC 
family of transcriptional regulators are coactivators of Tax for LTR-driven
expression. TORC coactivation requires CREB, but not ATF4 or other bZIP factors. 
Tax physically interacts with TORC1, TORC2, and TORC3 (TORC1/2/3), and the
depletion of TORC1/2/3 inhibited Tax activity. TORC coactivation can be further
enhanced by transcriptional coactivator p300. In addition, coactivators in the
p300 family are required for full activity of Tax independently of TORC1/2/3.
Thus, both TORC and p300 families of coactivators are essential for optimal
activation of HTLV-1 transcription by Tax.

PMCID: PMC1489057
PMID: 16809310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mamm Genome. 2006 Jun;17(6):575-83. Epub 2006 Jun 12.

Combining gene expression QTL mapping and phenotypic spectrum analysis to uncover
gene regulatory relationships.

Bao L(1), Wei L, Peirce JL, Homayouni R, Li H, Zhou M, Chen H, Lu L, Williams RW,
Pfeffer LM, Goldowitz D, Cui Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Sciences, University of Tennessee Health Science
Center, 858 Madison Avenue, Memphis, TN 38163, USA.

Gene expression QTL (eQTL) mapping can suggest candidate regulatory relationships
between genes. Recent advances in mammalian phenotype annotation such as
mammalian phenotype ontology (MPO) enable systematic analysis of the phenotypic
spectrum subserved by many genes. In this study we combined eQTL mapping and
phenotypic spectrum analysis to predict gene regulatory relationships. Five pairs
of genes with similar phenotypic effects and potential regulatory relationships
suggested by eQTL mapping were identified. Lines of evidence supporting some of
the predicted regulatory relationships were obtained from biological literature. 
A particularly notable example is that promoter sequence analysis and real-time
PCR assays support the predicted regulation of protein kinase C epsilon (Prkce)
by cAMP responsive element binding protein 1 (Creb1). Our results show that the
combination of gene eQTL mapping and phenotypic spectrum analysis may provide a
valuable approach to uncovering gene regulatory relations underlying mammalian
phenotypes.

PMID: 16783639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Cancer Res. 2006 Jun 1;66(11):5960-7.

Grape seed extract is an aromatase inhibitor and a suppressor of aromatase
expression.

Kijima I(1), Phung S, Hur G, Kwok SL, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Research, Beckman Research Institute of the City of
Hope, Duarte, California, USA.

Aromatase is the enzyme that converts androgen to estrogen. It is expressed at
higher levels in breast cancer tissues than normal breast tissues. Grape seed
extract (GSE) contains high levels of procyanidin dimers that have been shown in 
our laboratory to be potent inhibitors of aromatase. In this study, GSE was found
to inhibit aromatase activity in a dose-dependent manner and reduce
androgen-dependent tumor growth in an aromatase-transfected MCF-7 (MCF-7aro)
breast cancer xenograft model, agreeing with our previous findings. We have also 
examined the effect of GSE on aromatase expression. Reverse transcription-PCR
experiments showed that treatment with 60 mug/mL of GSE suppressed the levels of 
exon I.3-, exon PII-, and exon I.6-containing aromatase mRNAs in MCF-7 and
SK-BR-3 cells. The levels of exon I.1-containing mRNA, however, did not change
with GSE treatment. Transient transfection experiments with luciferase-aromatase 
promoter I.3/II or I.4 reporter vectors showed the suppression of the promoter
activity in a dose-dependent manner. The GSE treatment also led to the
down-regulation of two transcription factors, cyclic AMP-responsive element
binding protein-1 (CREB-1) and glucocorticoid receptor (GR). CREB-1 and GR are
known to up-regulate aromatase gene expression through promoters I.3/II and I.4, 
respectively. We believe that these results are exciting in that they show GSE to
be potentially useful in the prevention/treatment of hormone-dependent breast
cancer through the inhibition of aromatase activity as well as its expression.

PMID: 16740737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. EMBO J. 2006 Jun 7;25(11):2443-52. Epub 2006 May 25.

Inhibition of IFN-gamma transcription by site-specific methylation during T
helper cell development.

Jones B(1), Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Polarization of naïve CD4 T cells into T helper type 2 (TH2) cells is
characterized by expression of IL-4 and silencing of IFN-gamma. Here we show that
during TH2 polarization, the DNA methyltransferase Dnmt3a is recruited to the
IFN-gamma promoter and correspondingly the promoter undergoes progressive de novo
methylation. Notably, the CpG located at the -53 position becomes methylated
rapidly and this methylation inhibits ATF2/c-Jun and CREB transcription factor
binding in vitro. In vivo, the same factors bind to the unmethylated IFN-gamma
promoter in T helper type 1 (TH1) cells but not the methylated IFN-gamma promoter
in TH2 cells. Furthermore, methylation at the -53 CpG alone is sufficient to
inhibit the IFN-gamma promoter-driven reporter gene expression in a TH1 cell
line. These findings suggest that rapid methylation of the evolutionarily
conserved -53 CpG by Dnmt3a may suppress IFN-gamma transcription in developing
TH2 cells by directly inhibiting transcription factor binding.

PMCID: PMC1478170
PMID: 16724115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. EMBO J. 2006 May 17;25(10):2107-18. Epub 2006 May 4.

Regulation of alphaA-crystallin via Pax6, c-Maf, CREB and a broad domain of
lens-specific chromatin.

Yang Y(1), Stopka T, Golestaneh N, Wang Y, Wu K, Li A, Chauhan BK, Gao CY,
Cveklová K, Duncan MK, Pestell RG, Chepelinsky AB, Skoultchi AI, Cvekl A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Pax6 and c-Maf regulate multiple stages of mammalian lens development. Here, we
identified novel distal control regions (DCRs) of the alphaA-crystallin gene, a
marker of lens fiber cell differentiation induced by FGF-signaling. DCR1
stimulated reporter gene expression in primary lens explants treated with FGF2
linking FGF-signaling with alphaA-crystallin synthesis. A DCR1/alphaA-crystallin 
promoter (including DCR2) coupled with EGFP virtually recapitulated the
expression pattern of alphaA-crystallin in lens epithelium and fibers. In
contrast, the DCR3/alphaA/EGFP reporter was expressed only in 'late' lens fibers.
Chromatin immunoprecipitations showed binding of Pax6 to DCR1 and the
alphaA-crystallin promoter in lens chromatin and demonstrated that high levels of
alphaA-crystallin expression correlate with increased binding of c-Maf and CREB
to the promoter and of CREB to DCR3, a broad domain of histone
H3K9-hyperacetylation extending from DCR1 to DCR3, and increased abundance of
chromatin remodeling enzymes Brg1 and Snf2h at the alphaA-crystallin locus. Our
data demonstrate a novel mechanism of Pax6, c-Maf and CREB function, through
regulation of chromatin-remodeling enzymes, and suggest a multistage model for
the activation of alphaA-crystallin during lens differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1462985
PMID: 16675956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 30;281(26):17635-43. Epub 2006 May 3.

The constitutive expression of anticoagulant protein S is regulated through
multiple binding sites for Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors in the protein S
gene promoter.

de Wolf CJ(1), Cupers RM, Bertina RM, Vos HL.

Author information: 
(1)Hemostasis and Thrombosis Research Center, Department of Hematology, Leiden
University Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands.

Protein S (PS) is a vitamin K-dependent plasma protein that inhibits blood
coagulation by serving as a nonenzymatic cofactor for activated protein C in the 
protein C anticoagulant pathway. Low PS levels are a risk factor for the
development of deep venous thrombosis. The regulation of PS levels through
transcriptional regulation of the PS gene was investigated in this report. A
minimal PS gene promoter 370 bp upstream from the translational initiation codon 
was sufficient for maximal promoter activity in transient transfections
regardless of the cell type. A pivotal role for Sp1 in the constitutive
expression of the PS gene was demonstrated through electrophoretic mobility shift
assay experiments, transient expression of mutant PS promoter-reporter gene
constructs, and chromatin immunoprecipitations in HepG2 cells. At least four
Sp-binding sites were identified. The two sites most proximal to the
translational start codon were found to be indispensable for PS promoter
activity, whereas mutation of the two most distal Sp-binding sites had a
negligible influence on basal promoter activity. In addition, all other major
promoter-binding proteins that were found by electrophoretic mobility shift assay
could be positively identified in supershift assays. We identified binding sites 
for the hepatocyte-specific forkhead transcription factor FOXA2, nuclear factor
Y, and the cAMP-response element-binding protein/activating transcription factor 
family of transcription factors. Their relevance was investigated using
site-directed mutagenesis.

PMID: 16672217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Eur J Clin Invest. 2006 May;36(5):353-61.

CREB transcription factor modulates Bcl2 transcription in response to C5a in
HL-60-derived neutrophils.

Perianayagam MC(1), Madias NE, Pereira BJ, Jaber BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Tufts University School of Medicine, and Department of
Medicine, Caritas St. Elizabeth's Medical Center, Boston, MA 02135, USA.

BACKGROUND: Complement fragment C5a and neutrophils have been implicated in the
pathogenesis of renal disease and C5a has also been shown to delay apoptosis of
human neutrophils via a transcription-independent pathway. However,
transcription-dependent pathways have not been well described. The present study 
examined whether activation of HL-60-derived neutrophils by C5a modulates the
transcription of two members of the Bcl2 family, Bax (pro-apoptotic) and Bcl2
(anti-apoptotic) molecules, and whether the cAMP-response element-binding protein
(CREB) transcription factor mediates these effects through the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt and extra-cellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK) signalling pathways.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The human promyelocytic leukaemia HL-60 cell line was
differentiated into neutrophils using 1.25% DMSO. Differentiated cells were
incubated with recombinant human C5a for 30-120 min with, or without,
pretreatment with wortmannin or PD98059. The cells were lysed and quantified for 
gene-specific Bax and Bcl2 mRNA. In separate experiments, cells were incubated
with C5a for 5-30 min with, or without, pretreatment with wortmannin, PD98059, or
alkaline phosphatase. Cells were then lysed and immunoblotted using antihuman
phospho-CREB (Ser133) antibody. Apoptosis was assessed by measuring active
caspase-3 in differentiated HL-60 cells.
RESULTS: C5a inhibited caspase-3 activation in HL-60-derived neutrophils
(P=0.003). C5a significantly increased the expression of Bcl2 mRNA (P=0.028),
which was time-dependent, peaking at 30 min, and was abrogated in the presence of
either wortmannin or PD98059 (both P=0.028). The C5a had no impact on Bax mRNA
expression. The Bax : Bcl2 mRNA ratio markedly decreased at 30 min (P=0.028).
Time-dependent effect of C5a on CREB phosphorylation was demonstrable and rapid, 
peaking at 5 min, and was abrogated by either wortmannin or PD98059 (both
P=0.028). Phosphorylation of CREB, but not of Akt and ERK, was inhibited by
alkaline phosphatase (P=0.028). The effect of C5a on Bcl2 mRNA expression was
abrogated by alkaline phosphatase (P=0.028). The Bax : Bcl2 mRNA ratio markedly
increased in the presence of alkaline phosphatase (P=0.046).
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that C5a induces Bcl2 mRNA transcription in 
HL-60-derived neutrophils, which is mediated in part by CREB through the
convergence of the PI3K/Akt and ERK-signalling pathways.

PMID: 16634840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Neurophysiol. 2006 May;95(5):3286-90.

TGF-beta1-induced long-term changes in neuronal excitability in aplysia sensory
neurons depend on MAPK.

Chin J(1), Liu RY, Cleary LJ, Eskin A, Byrne JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Texas-Houston Medical
School, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGF-beta1) plays important roles in the early 
development of the nervous system and has been implicated in neuronal plasticity 
in adult organisms. It induces long-term increases in sensory neuron excitability
in Aplysia as well as a long-term enhancement of synaptic efficacy at
sensorimotor synapses. In addition, TGF-beta1 acutely regulates synapsin
phosphorylation and reduces synaptic depression induced by low-frequency stimuli.
Because of the critical role of MAPK in other forms of long-term plasticity in
Aplysia, we examined the role of MAPK in TGF-beta1-induced long-term changes in
neuronal excitability. Prolonged (6 h) exposure to TGF-beta1 induced long-term
increases in excitability. We confirmed this finding and now report that exposure
to TGF-beta1 was sufficient to activate MAPK and increase nuclear levels of
active MAPK. Moreover, TGF-beta1 enhanced phosphorylation of the Aplysia
transcriptional activator cAMP response element binding protein (CREB)1, a
homologue to vertebrate CREB. Both the TGF-beta1-induced long-term changes in
neuronal excitability and the phosphorylation of CREB1 were blocked in the
presence of an inhibitor of the MAPK cascade, confirming a role for MAPK in
long-term modulation of sensory neuron function.

PMID: 16617179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Med Sci (Paris). 2006 Apr;22(4):348-50.

[From cancer to diabetes treatment : the tumor suppressor LKB1 as a new
pharmacological target].

[Article in French]

Foretz M, Guigas B, Viollet B.

PMID: 16597397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Apr;36(2):377-88.

Angiotensin II stimulates the synthesis of vascular endothelial growth factor
through the p38 mitogen activated protein kinase pathway in cultured mouse
podocytes.

Kang YS(1), Park YG, Kim BK, Han SY, Jee YH, Han KH, Lee MH, Song HK, Cha DR,
Kang SW, Han DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Korea University Hospital, 516 Kojan-Dong,
Ansan City, Kyungki-Do 425-020, Korea.

Angiotensin II (Ang-II) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) have an
important role in the pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy, but the signaling
cascade of VEGF regulation in response to Ang-II in podocytes is largely unknown.
In these experiments, we looked at the effect of Ang-II on the production of
VEGF, and investigated whether VEGF production depends on the p38 mitogen
activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway in cultured mouse podocytes. Incubation
of podocytes with Ang-II induced a rapid increase in VEGF mRNA expression and
protein synthesis as well as its transcriptional activity in an Ang-II
dose-dependent manner. To further define the role of angiotensin type 1 (AT1) and
type 2 (AT2) receptors involved in Ang-II-mediated VEGF synthesis, the effects of
selective AT1 and AT2 receptor antagonists were evaluated. Prior treatment with
losartan significantly inhibited VEGF mRNA and protein synthesis induced by
Ang-II, which suggests that the AT1 receptor is involved in Ang-II-mediated VEGF 
synthesis. Furthermore, stimulation of the cells with Ang-II increased both
phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and MAP kinase kinase 3/6 (MKK3/6). Additionally,
Ang-II enhanced the DNA binding activity to cAMP response element binding protein
(CREB) and phosphorylation of CREB. In addition, to investigate the role of p38
MAPK in Ang-II-induced VEGF synthesis, podocytes were pretreated with or without 
the p38 MAPK inhibitor, SB203580 for 24 h to observe whether Ang-II-mediated VEGF
synthesis was inhibited by blocking p38 MAPK. The addition of SB203580 led to a
marked inhibition of the increased VEGF mRNA and protein production induced by
Ang-II in a dose-dependent manner. Taken together, these results suggest that
Ang-II stimulates the synthesis of VEGF in podocytes and the production of VEGF
induced by Ang-II is mediated, in part, through the activation of the p38 MAPK
pathway.

PMID: 16595708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Biochem. 2006 Mar;139(3):527-34.

Binding of steroidogenic factor-1 to the regulatory region might not be critical 
for transcriptional regulation of the human CYP1B1 gene.

Tsuchiya Y(1), Nakajima M, Takagi S, Katoh M, Zheng W, Jefcoate CR, Yokoi T.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Metabolism and Toxicology, Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate 
School of Medical Science, Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa 920-1192.

Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1B1, which catalyzes 17beta-estradiol 4-hydroxylation, is
expressed in steroid-related tissues including ovary, testis, and adrenal gland. 
Generally, the expressions of steroidogenic CYPs are transcriptionally regulated 
by steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1) and cAMP response element (CRE) binding protein 
(CREB). In the present study, we examined the possibility that the human CYP1B1
gene might be regulated by SF-1 and CREB. Gel shift analyses revealed that in
vitro translated SF-1 can bind to the putative SF-1 binding sites, SF-1a (at
-1722) and SF-1b (at -2474), on the CYP1B1 gene. In vitro translated CREB barely 
binds to the putative SF-1 binding sites. Luciferase analysis revealed that a
reporter plasmid, pGL3 (-2623/+25), containing the SF-1a and SF-1b elements is
transactivated by the concomitant co-expression of SF-1 and protein kinase A
(PKA). However, the transcriptional activity is induced by PKA alone. Mutations
in the SF-1a and SF-1b elements did not affect the luciferase activity. Thus, the
binding of SF-1 to the putative SF-1 binding sites of the human CYP1B1 gene might
not be essential for transcriptional regulation. Interestingly, deletion and
mutation analyses indicated that the PKA signaling pathway is involved in the
xenobiotic responsive element (XRE)-mediated transactivation of the human CYP1B1 
gene.

PMID: 16567417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Invest Dermatol. 2006 Aug;126(8):1784-91. Epub 2006 Mar 16.

Mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase 1 is activated in lesional psoriatic
epidermis and regulates the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines.

Funding AT(1), Johansen C, Kragballe K, Otkjaer K, Jensen UB, Madsen MW, Fjording
MS, Finnemann J, Skak-Nielsen T, Paludan SR, Iversen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Aarhus Sygehus, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus 
C, Denmark. anne.funding@ki.au.dk

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2006 Aug;126(8):1689-91.

Mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase 1 (MSK1) is a downstream target of
both the p38 and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2)
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs). MSK1 stimulates transcription of
different pro-inflammatory genes through activation of transcription factors. The
purpose of this study was to investigate the expression and activation of MSK1 in
lesional psoriatic skin and its role in cytokine production in cultured normal
human keratinocytes. Western blotting revealed a consistent and significant
increase in phosphorylated (activated) MSK1(Ser376) in lesional psoriatic skin.
Immunofluorescence staining revealed the phosphorylated MSK1(Thr581) to be
localized in the basal layers of the epidermis in lesional psoriatic skin. No
staining was found in non-lesional psoriatic skin. Cultured human keratinocytes
incubated with anisomycin or IL-1beta resulted in the phosphorylation of the p38 
MAPK and MSK1(Ser376). MSK1(Ser376) phosphorylation was inhibited by
pre-incubation with the p38 inhibitor SB 202190. Transfection of the
keratinocytes with specific MSK1 small interfering RNA resulted in 80% reduction 
of MSK1 expression and 51, 40, and 31% decrease in IL-6, IL-8, and tumor necrosis
factor-alpha protein production, respectively. This study demonstrates for the
first time the expression of MSK1 in epidermal keratinocytes and increased
activation focally in psoriatic epidermis. As MSK1 regulates the production of
pro-inflammatory cytokines, it may play a role in the pathogenesis of psoriasis.

PMID: 16543895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Acta Neuropathol. 2006 Apr;111(4):341-50. Epub 2006 Feb 23.

Expression of transcription factors c-Fos, c-Jun, CREB-1 and ATF-2, and caspase-3
in relation with abnormal tau deposits in Pick's disease.

Nieto-Bodelón M(1), Santpere G, Torrejón-Escribano B, Puig B, Ferrer I.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Neuropatologia Experimental, Universitat de Barcelona, Hospitalet de
Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.

Hyper-phosphorylated tau deposition in Pick bodies and neuron loss are major
hallmarks of Pick's disease (PiD). However, there is no regional correlation
between neuron loss and Pick bodies, as illustrated in dentate gyrus, where Pick 
bodies are present in almost every neuron, whereas cell death, if present, is not
a major event. In order to better understand the possible role of selected
transcription factors and members of the caspase family in cell death and cell
survival, immunohistochemistry to c-Fos, c-Jun, CREB-1, ATF-2; c-Fos(P), c-Jun(P)
and CREB-1(P); and procaspase-8, procaspase-3 and active (cleaved) caspase-3
immunohistochemistry was carried out in the frontal cortex and hippocampus.
Increased expression of c-Fos, c-Jun, CREB-1 and ATF-2 was observed in PiD cases.
Increased c-Fos(P), c-Jun(P) and CREB-1(P) was also found in the nuclei of
neurons in diseased brains. Interestingly, c-Fos but not c-Fos(P) co-localized in
many Pick bodies, as observed by double labelling-immunofluorescence and confocal
microscopy. Pro-caspase-8 and pro-caspase-3 were increased in PiD. Moreover,
granular active caspase-3 was observed in the nuclei as was aggregated active
caspase-3 in the cytoplasm of neurons in PiD. Finally, double-labelling
immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy disclosed co-localization of
cytoplasmic active caspase-3 only in neurons with Pick bodies. Together, these
findings show an increased expression of selected transcription factors and
active (phosphorylated) forms in PiD, c-Fos sequestration in Pick bodies, and
increased active caspase-3 expression in relation with Pick bodies. Since all
these findings were observed equally in neurons of both vulnerable regions
(frontal cortex) and resistant regions (dentate gyrus), it may be suggested that 
transcription factors are only barely related with cell death. Active caspase-3
is associated with tau deposition in Pick bodies, but it is not a marker of cell 
death in the dentate gyrus in PiD. The present findings are in line with the
previous studies showing tau products cleaved by caspase-3, as recognized by
specific tau-cleaved antibodies, in Alzheimer's disease and other tauopathies.

PMID: 16496165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Immunol. 2006 Feb 15;176(4):2208-18.

Differential role for cyclic AMP response element binding protein-1 in multiple
stages of B cell development, differentiation, and survival.

Chen HC(1), Byrd JC, Muthusamy N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, 43210, USA.

CREB-1 is expressed in the bone marrow and in developing B cells. To determine
the role of CREB-1 in developing B cells in the bone marrow, several lines of
transgenic (Tg) mice overexpressing a dominant-negative Ser(119-ala)
phosphomutant CREB-1 in the bone marrow were generated. Analysis of RNA and
protein revealed expression of the transgene in the bone marrow. Flow cytometric 
analysis of bone marrow cells from Tg mice revealed approximately 70% increase in
pre-B1 (CD43(+)B220(+)CD24(+(int))) and approximately 60% decreased pre-BII
(CD43(+)B220(+)CD24(++(high))) cells, indicating a developmental block in pre-BI 
to pre-BII transition. Consistent with this, the Tg mice showed approximately
4-fold decrease in immature and mature B cells in the bone marrow. RT-PCR
analysis of RNA from Tg mice revealed increased JunB and c-Jun in pre-BII cells
associated with decreased S-phase entry. Adoptive transfer of bone marrow cells
into RAG-2(-/-) mice resulted in reconstitution of non-Tg but not Tg bone
marrow-derived CD43(+)B220(+)CD24(high) population that is normally absent in
RAG-2(-/-) mice. In the periphery, the Tg mice exhibited decreased
CD21(dim)CD23(high)IgM(+) follicular B cells in the spleen and increased B1a and 
B1b B cells in the peritoneum. While exhibiting normal Ab responses to
T-independent Ags and primary response to the T-dependent Ag DNP-keyhole limpet
hemocyanin, the Tg mice exhibited severely impaired secondary Ab responses. These
studies provide the first evidence for a differential role for CRE-binding
proteins in multiple stages of B cell development, functional maturation, and B1 
and B2 B cells.

PMID: 16455977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Feb;26(4):1347-54.

Transcriptional regulation of PEN-2, a key component of the gamma-secretase
complex, by CREB.

Wang R(1), Zhang YW, Sun P, Liu R, Zhang X, Zhang X, Xia K, Xia J, Xu H, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Genetics of China, Xiang-Ya Hospital, Central
South University, 410078 Changsha, Hunan, China.

Gamma-secretase, which is responsible for the intramembranous cleavage of
Alzheimer's beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP), the signaling receptor Notch,
and many other substrates, is a multiprotein complex consisting of at least four 
components: presenilin (PS), nicastrin, APH-1, and PEN-2. Despite the fact that
PEN-2 is known to mediate endoproteolytic cleavage of full-length PS and APH-1
and nicastrin are required for maintaining the stability of the complex, the
detailed physiological function of each component remain elusive. Unlike that of 
PS, the transcriptional regulation of PEN-2, APH-1, and nicastrin has not been
investigated. Here, we characterized the upstream regions of the human PEN-2 gene
and identified a 238-bp fragment located 353 bp upstream of the translational
start codon as the key region necessary for the promoter activity. Further
analysis revealed a CREB binding site located in the 238-bp region that is
essential for the transcriptional activity of the PEN-2 promoter. Mutation of the
CREB site abolished the transcriptional activity of the PEN-2 promoter.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis 
showed the binding of CREB to the PEN-2 promoter region both in vitro and in
vivo. Activation of the CREB transcriptional factor by forskolin dramatically
promoted the expression of PEN-2 mRNA and protein, whereas the other components
of the gamma-secretase complex remained unaffected. Forskolin treatment slightly 
increases the secretion of soluble APPalpha and Abeta without affecting Notch
cleavage. These results demonstrate that expression of PEN-2 is regulated by CREB
and suggest that the specific control of PEN-2 expression may imply additional
physiological functions uniquely assigned to PEN-2.

PMCID: PMC1367199
PMID: 16449647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Circ Res. 2006 Mar 3;98(4):540-8. Epub 2006 Jan 26.

Exercise can prevent and reverse the severity of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Konhilas JP(1), Watson PA, Maass A, Boucek DM, Horn T, Stauffer BL, Luckey SW,
Rosenberg P, Leinwand LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of
Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309-0347, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2006 Mar 3;98(4):443-5.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common form of sudden death in
young competitive athletes. However, exercise has also been shown to be
beneficial in the setting of other cardiac diseases. We examined the ability of
voluntary exercise to prevent or reverse the phenotypes of a murine model of HCM 
harboring a mutant myosin heavy chain (MyHC). No differences in voluntary cage
wheel performance between nontransgenic (NTG) and HCM male mice were seen.
Exercise prevented fibrosis, myocyte disarray, and induction of "hypertrophic"
markers including NFAT activity when initiated before established HCM pathology. 
If initiated in older HCM animals with documented disease, exercise reversed
myocyte disarray (but not fibrosis) and "hypertrophic" marker induction. In
addition, exercise returned the increased levels of phosphorylated GSK-3beta to
those of NTG and decreased levels of phosphorylated CREB in HCM mice to normal
levels. Exercise in HCM mice also favorably impacted components of the apoptotic 
signaling pathway, including Bcl-2 (an inhibitor of apoptosis) and procaspase-9
(an effector of apoptosis) expression, and caspase-3 activity. Remarkably, there 
were no differences in mortality between exercised NTG and HCM mice. Thus, not
only was exercise not harmful but also it was able to prevent and even reverse
established cardiac disease phenotypes in this HCM model.

PMID: 16439687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Neurosci. 2006 Jan 25;26(4):1065-76.

Splice variants of the NR1 subunit differentially induce NMDA receptor-dependent 
gene expression.

Bradley J(1), Carter SR, Rao VR, Wang J, Finkbeiner S.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Neurological Disease, University of California, San
Francisco, California 94141, USA.

Subunits of the NMDA receptor (NMDAR) associate with many postsynaptic proteins
that substantially broaden its signaling capacity. Although much work has been
focused on the signaling of NR2 subunits, little is known about the role of the
NR1 subunit. We set out to elucidate the role of the C terminus of the NR1
subunit in NMDAR signaling. By introducing a C-terminal deletion mutant of the
NR1 subunit into cultured neurons from NR1(-/-) mice, we found that the C
terminus was essential for NMDAR inactivation, downstream signaling, and gene
expression, but not for global increases in intracellular Ca2+. Therefore,
whereas NMDARs can increase Ca2+ throughout the neuron, NMDAR-dependent
signaling, both local and long range, requires coupling through the NR1 C
terminus. Two major NR1 splice variants differ by the presence or absence of a
C-terminal domain, C1, which is determined by alternative splicing of exon 21.
Analysis of these two variants showed that removal of this domain significantly
reduced the efficacy of NMDAR-induced gene expression without affecting receptor 
inactivation. Thus, the NR1 C terminus couples to multiple downstream signaling
pathways that can be modulated selectively by RNA splicing.

PMID: 16436592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Mol Cell. 2006 Jan 20;21(2):283-94.

A nitric oxide signaling pathway controls CREB-mediated gene expression in
neurons.

Riccio A(1), Alvania RS, Lonze BE, Ramanan N, Kim T, Huang Y, Dawson TM, Snyder
SH, Ginty DD.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, 725 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.
a.riccio@ucl.ac.uk

Prevailing views of neurotrophin action hold that the transcription factor CREB
is constitutively bound to target genes with transcriptional activation occurring
via CREB phosphorylation. However, we report that within several CRE-containing
genes, CREB is not constitutively bound. Upon exposure of neurons to
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), CREB becomes rapidly bound to DNA
coincident with phosphorylation at its transcriptional regulatory site, Ser133.
This inducible CREB-DNA binding is independent of CREB Ser133 phosphorylation and
is not affected by inhibition of the ERK or PI3K signaling pathways. Instead,
BDNF regulates CREB binding by initiating a nitric oxide-dependent signaling
pathway that leads to S-nitrosylation of nuclear proteins that associate with
CREB target genes. Pharmacological manipulation of neurons in vitro and analysis 
of mice lacking neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) suggest that NO mediates
BDNF and activity-dependent expression of CREB target genes. Thus, in conjunction
with CREB phosphorylation, the NO pathway controls CREB-DNA binding and
CRE-mediated gene expression.

PMID: 16427017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Nutr. 2006 Feb;136(2):366-72.

Docosahexaenoic acid consumption inhibits deoxynivalenol-induced CREB/ATF1
activation and IL-6 gene transcription in mouse macrophages.

Jia Q(1), Zhou HR, Shi Y, Pestka JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Toxicology, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
MI, USA.

The mycotoxin deoxynivalenol (DON) induces IgA nephropathy in mice by
upregulating IL-6 expression, which is suppressed by (n-3) PUFA consumption. The 
purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis that consumption of the (n-3)
PUFA docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) interferes with DON-induced transcriptional and
post-transcriptional upregulation of IL-6 mRNA in murine macrophages. DON evoked 
expression of IL-6 mRNA and IL-6 heterogenous nuclear RNA (hnRNA), an indicator
of ongoing IL-6 transcription, in macrophages elicited from mice fed control
AIN-93G diet for 4 wk, whereas expression of both RNA species was suppressed in
macrophages from mice fed AIN-93G modified to contain 30 g DHA/kg diet for the
same time period. DON enhanced IL-6 mRNA stability similarly in macrophages from 
control and DHA-fed mice suggesting that (n-3) PUFA effects were not
post-transcriptional. DON upregulated binding activity of cAMP response element
binding protein (CREB) and activator protein (AP-1) to their respective consensus
sequences in nuclear extracts from control-fed mice, whereas both activities were
suppressed in nuclear extracts from DHA-fed mice. DON induced phosphorylation of 
CREB at Ser-133 and ATF1 at Ser-63 as well as intranuclear binding of
phospho-CREB/ATF1 to the cis element of the IL-6 promoter in control macrophages,
whereas both activities were inhibited in macrophages from DHA-fed mice. DHA
consumption blocked DON-induced phosphorylation of the CREB kinase AKT.
Inhibition of AKT suppressed both CREB/ATF1 phosphorylation and IL-6
transcription. These data suggest that DHA consumption suppresses DON-induced
IL-6 transcription in macrophages in part by interfering with AKT-dependent
phosphorylation and subsequent binding of CREB/ATF1 to the IL-6 promoter.

PMID: 16424113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Neurochem. 2006 Feb;96(3):802-14. Epub 2006 Jan 9.

Calpain is activated in degenerating photoreceptors in the rd1 mouse.

Paquet-Durand F(1), Azadi S, Hauck SM, Ueffing M, van Veen T, Ekström P.

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmology Department, University of Lund, Lund, Sweden.
francois.paquet-durand@med.lu.se

The retinal degeneration (rd)1 mouse displays an inherited retinal degeneration
and therefore allows studies of the molecular mechanisms behind the blinding
disease retinitis pigmentosa. Activation of the calcium-dependent protease
calpain has been suggested to play an important role in cell death in various
tissues, but little is known about the expression and activity of calpain during 
inherited retinal degeneration. Using microarray techniques, transcript levels of
cyclic AMP response element-binding protein (CREB)-1, calpastatin and of various 
calpain genes were analysed in the rd1 mouse compared with its wild-type control.
Expression of distinct calpain isoforms and calpastatin was investigated using
immunofluorescence and immunoblotting. Gene transcription and protein expression 
levels were compared with calpain activity using an enzymatic assay that allowed 
monitoring of calpain activity at the cellular level. We found that CREB-1 and
calpastatin expression was reduced in rd1 retinas, whereas calpain activity was
substantially increased in rd1 photoreceptors. Calpain activity peaked at
postnatal day 13, together with rd1 photoreceptor cell death. Calpain-specific
inhibitors decreased calpain activity in situ. These results indicate that
activation of calpains correlates with rd1 photoreceptor cell death, which raises
the possibility of using calpain inhibitors to prevent or delay photoreceptor
degeneration.

PMID: 16405498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. FASEB J. 2006 Mar;20(3):512-4. Epub 2006 Jan 9.

The neuropeptide PACAP promotes the alpha-secretase pathway for processing the
Alzheimer amyloid precursor protein.

Kojro E(1), Postina R, Buro C, Meiringer C, Gehrig-Burger K, Fahrenholz F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Johannes Gutenberg University, Becherweg, Mainz,
Germany. kojro@uni-mainz.de

The neuropeptide pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) has
neurotrophic as well as anti-apoptotic properties and is involved in learning and
memory processes. Its specific G protein-coupled receptor PAC1 is expressed in
several central nervous system (CNS) regions, including the hippocampal
formation. Here we examined the effect of PAC1 receptor activation on
alpha-secretase cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) and the
production of secreted APP (APPsalpha). Stimulation of endogenously expressed
PAC1 receptors with PACAP in human neuroblastoma cells increased APPsalpha
secretion, which was completely inhibited by the PAC1 receptor specific
antagonist PACAP-(6-38). In HEK cells stably overexpressing functional PAC1
receptors, PACAP-27 and PACAP-38 strongly stimulated alpha-secretase cleavage of 
APP. The PACAP-induced APPsalpha production was dose dependent and saturable.
This increase of alpha-secretase activity was completely abolished by
hydroxamate-based metalloproteinase inhibitors, including a preferential ADAM 10 
inhibitor. By using several specific protein kinase inhibitors, we show that the 
MAP-kinase pathway [including extracellular-regulated kinase (ERK) 1 and ERK2]
and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase mediate the PACAP-induced alpha-secretase
activation. Our findings provide evidence for a role of the neuropeptide PACAP in
stimulation of the nonamyloidogenic pathway, which might be related to its
neuroprotective properties.

PMID: 16401644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Lipid Res. 2006 Apr;47(4):767-77. Epub 2005 Dec 28.

Involvement of cAMP-response element binding protein-1 in arachidonic
acid-induced vascular smooth muscle cell motility.

Dronadula N(1), Rizvi F, Blaskova E, Li Q, Rao GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Memphis, TN 38163, USA.

In addition to their role in many vital cellular functions, arachidonic acid (AA)
and its eicosanoid metabolites are involved in the pathogenesis of several
diseases, including atherosclerosis and cancer. To understand the potential
mechanisms by which these lipid molecules could influence the disease processes, 
particularly cardiovascular diseases, we studied AA's effects on vascular smooth 
muscle cell (VSMC) motility and the role of cAMP-response element binding
protein-1 (CREB-1) in this process. AA exerted differential effects on VSMC
motility; at lower doses, it stimulated motility, whereas at higher doses, it was
inhibitory. AA-induced VSMC motility requires its conversion via the lipoxygenase
(LOX) and cyclooxygenase (COX) pathways. AA stimulated the phosphorylation of
extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs), Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs), and
p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38MAPK) in a time-dependent manner, and
blockade of these serine/threonine kinases significantly attenuated AA-induced
VSMC motility. In addition, AA stimulated CREB-1 phosphorylation and activity in 
a manner that was also dependent on its metabolic conversion via the LOX and COX 
pathways and the activation of ERKs and p38MAPK but not JNKs. Furthermore,
suppression of CREB-1 activation inhibited AA-induced VSMC motility.
15(S)-Hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid and prostaglandin F2alpha, the 15-LOX and COX 
metabolites of AA, respectively, that are produced by VSMC at lower doses, were
also found to stimulate motility in these cells. Together, these results suggest 
that AA induces VSMC motility by complex mechanisms involving its metabolism via 
the LOX and COX pathways as well as the ERK- and p38MAPK-dependent and
JNK-independent activation of CREB-1.

PMID: 16382163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2006 Mar;26(3):527-33. Epub 2005 Dec 22.

Identification of the cAMP-responsive enhancer of the murine ABCA1 gene:
requirement for CREB1 and STAT3/4 elements.

Le Goff W(1), Zheng P, Brubaker G, Smith JD.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Cell Biology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the mechanism by which expression of the murine ABCA1
gene is highly induced by cAMP analogues.
METHODS AND RESULTS: ABCA1 mRNA turnover cannot account for its induction by
cAMP. Thus cAMP induction of ABCA1 mRNA occurs at a transcriptional level.
Shotgun cloning DNA fragments from the murine ABCA1 locus identified a strong
cAMP responsive enhancer located in the first intron, which led to 25- to
100-fold cAMP-mediated induction of reporter gene activity. Deletions and
mutations of this enhancer led to the identification a cAMP-responsive element
(CRE) that was essential for the cAMP induction. Furthermore, the capacity of
this CRE site to mediate the cAMP induction required the presence of a STAT3/4
element located 81 bp away. A dominant-negative CREB expression vector inhibited 
the cAMP induction of ABCA1, demonstrating that CREB was required for cAMP
induction of ABCA1 expression in RAW264.7 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Phospho-CREB1 controls the cAMP-mediated induction of murine ABCA1
gene expression through a CRE site acting in cooperation with a nearby STAT
element. This CRE site is not conserved in the human ABCA1 gene, explaining why
human ABCA1 is not strongly stimulated by cAMP analogs.

PMID: 16373613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 3;281(9):5445-52. Epub 2005 Dec 22.

CREB-AP1 protein complexes regulate transcription of the collagen XXIV gene
(Col24a1) in osteoblasts.

Matsuo N(1), Tanaka S, Gordon MK, Koch M, Yoshioka H, Ramirez F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Organogenesis, Research Division of the Hospital
for Special Surgery, and Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Medical
College, Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Collagen XXIV is a newly discovered and poorly characterized member of the
fibril-forming family of collagen molecules, which displays unique structural
features of invertebrate fibrillar collagens and is expressed predominantly in
bone tissue. Here we report the characterization of the proximal promoter of the 
mouse gene (Col24a1) and its regulation in osteoblastic cells. Using well
characterized murine models of osteoblast differentiation, we found that the
Col24a1 gene is activated sometime before onset of the late differentiation
marker osteocalcin. Additional analyses revealed that Col24a1 produces equal
amounts of two alternatively spliced products with different 5'-untranslated
sequences that originate from distinct transcriptional start sites. Cell
transfection experiments in combination with DNA binding assays demonstrated that
Col24a1 promoter activity in ROS17/2.8 osteosarcoma cells is under the control of
an upstream cis-acting element, which is shared by both transcripts and is
recognized by specific combinations of c-Jun, CREB1, ATF1, and ATF2 dimers.
Consistent with these results, overexpression of c-Jun, ATF1, ATF2, or CREB1 in
transiently transfected osteoblastic cells stimulated transcription from reporter
gene constructs driven by the Col24a1 promoter to different degrees. Moreover,
chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments showed that these nuclear factors bind 
the same upstream sequence of the endogenous Col24a1 gene. Collectively these
data provide new information about transcriptional control of collagen
fibrillogenesis, in addition to implicating for the first time CREB-AP1 protein
complexes in the regulation of collagen gene expression in osteoblasts.

PMID: 16373341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Neurosci Lett. 2006 Apr 3;396(3):235-40. Epub 2005 Dec 13.

The 5-HT- and FMRFa-activated signaling pathways interact at the level of the Erk
MAPK cascade: potential inhibitory constraints on memory formation.

Fioravante D(1), Smolen PD, Byrne JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, W.M. Keck Center for the Neurobiology 
of Learning and Memory, The University of Texas Medical School at Houston, 77030,
USA.

The sensorimotor synapse of Aplysia exhibits long-term facilitation (LTF) and
long-term depression (LTD) elicited by the neuromodulator serotonin (5-HT) and
the peptide Phe-Met-Arg-Phe-NH(2), respectively. 5-HT-induced LTF engages
extracellular-regulated kinase (Erk) and CREB1, whereas FMRFa-induced LTD engages
p38 MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) and CREB2. The interaction of the
5-HT and FMRFa pathways was recently investigated in Aplysia at the level of gene
expression. However, little is known about crosstalk of these pathways at the
level of the second messenger cascades. We investigated the potential interaction
of the 5-HT and FMRFa pathways at the level of the Erk cascade. We found that
FMRFa inhibited basal Erk activity through p38 MAPK. FMRFa also inhibited
5-HT-induced phosphorylation of Erk and nuclear accumulation of phospho-ERK,
suggesting that FMRFa may place inhibitory constraints on memory formation
through regulation of the Erk MAPK cascade.

PMID: 16356640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2005 Dec;230(11):872-84.

The HIV-1 Tat protein enhances megakaryocytic commitment of K562 cells by
facilitating CREB transcription factor coactivation by CBP.

Williams CA(1), Mondal D, Agrawal KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, New
Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Tat protein regulates
transcription factor functions and alters cellular gene expression. Because
hematopoietic progenitor cell (HPC) differentiation requires activation of
lineage-specific transcription factors, Tat may affect hematopoiesis in
HIV-1-infected micro-environments. We have monitored the molecular effects of Tat
on megakaryocytic differentiation in the HPC line, K562. Flow cytometry analysis 
of CD61 indicated that phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) (16 nM) stimulated
megakaryocytic commitment of K562 cells was increased (3- to 4-fold) following
exposure to Tat (1-100 ng/ml). Activation of the megakaryocytic transcription
factor cAMP regulatory element binding protein (CREB) and its coactivation by the
CREB binding protein (CBP) was subsequently monitored. CREB phosphorylation and
DNA binding were measured by Western immunodetection and electrophoretic mobility
shift assays (EMSA), respectively. Within 2 hrs after stimulation, Tat increased 
both CREB phosphorylation and DNA binding by 7- to 10-fold. Transient
cotransfection with CREB reporter and CBP expression plasmids demonstrated that
Tat treatment increases (3- to 4-fold) both PMA-stimulated and CBP-mediated
transcription via the cAMP regulatory element. Histone acetyl transferase (HAT)
activity was increased (8- to 10-fold) in Tat-stimulated cells, which suggested
increased chromosomal accessibility of transcription factors. Two-hybrid
cotransfection assays using reporter plasmid containing the GAL4 DNA-binding
domain and expression plasmid coding for the GAL4-CBP fusion protein, showed that
Tat increases (2-fold) CBP-mediated coactivation of CREB. Both reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blot analysis showed
that Tat treatment increases CBP gene expression (7- to 9-fold) and protein
levels (5- to 7-fold) within 6-12 hrs after stimulation. Our findings indicated
that Tat treatment increases both CREB function and CREB coactivation by CBP,
which may facilitate megakaryocytic commitment of K562 cells. Induction of this
molecular signaling by HIV-1 Tat protein may have relevance in understanding the 
HIV-induced hematologic manifestations and possibly in regulation of viral
infectivity parameters in progenitor cell reservoirs.

PMID: 16339753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2005 Dec 9;3:70.

Microarray analysis of androgen-regulated gene expression in testis: the use of
the androgen-binding protein (ABP)-transgenic mouse as a model.

Petrusz P(1), Jeyaraj DA, Grossman G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology and Laboratories for Reproductive
Biology, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, School of Medicine,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. petrusz@med.unc.edu

BACKGROUND: Spermatogenesis is an androgen-dependent process, yet the molecular
mechanisms of androgens' actions in testis are poorly understood. Transgenic mice
overexpressing rat androgen-binding protein (ABP) in their testes have reduced
levels of intratesticular androgens and, as a result, show a progressive
impairment of spermatogenesis. We used this model to characterize changes in
global gene expression in testis in response to reduced bioavailability of
androgens.
METHODS: Total RNA was extracted from testes of 30-day old transgenic and
wild-type control mice, converted to cRNA, labeled with biotin, and hybridized to
oligonucleotide microarrays. Microarray results were confirmed by real-time
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Three-hundred-eighty-one genes (3.05% of all transcripts represented on 
the chips) were up-regulated and 198 genes (1.59%) were down-regulated by at
least a factor of 2 in the androgen-deficient animals compared to controls. Genes
encoding membrane proteins, intracellular signaling molecules, enzymes, proteins 
participating in the immune response, and those involved in cytoskeleton
organization were significantly overrepresented in the up-regulated group. Among 
the down-regulated transcripts, those coding for extracellular proteins were
overrepresented most dramatically, followed by those related to proteolysis, cell
adhesion, immune response, and growth factor, cytokine, and ion channel
activities. Transcripts with the greatest potential impact on cellular activities
included several transcription factors, intracellular signal transducers,
secreted signaling molecules and enzymes, and various cell surface molecules.
Major nodes in the up-regulated network were IL-6, AGT, MYC, and A2M, those in
the down-regulated network were IL-2, -4, and -10, MAPK8, SOCS1, and CREB1.
CONCLUSION: Microarray analysis followed by gene ontology profiling and
connectivity analysis identified several functional groups of genes and
individual genes responding to sustained reduction of androgen levels in the
mouse testis. These include genes whose products function as transcription
factors, cell surface molecules including ion channels, extra- and intracellular 
signaling molecules, and secreted enzymes with the potential of regulating
cell-to-cell attachment. The transcription factors CREB1 (down-regulated) and MYC
(up-regulated) may mediate the most important initial phases of the testicular
response to reduced levels of androgens. These results suggest specific avenues
for further research that will lead to a better understanding of how androgens
regulate spermatogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1327675
PMID: 16336681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Steroids. 2006 Feb;71(2):91-5. Epub 2005 Oct 25.

Nongenomic effects of estrogen: why all the uncertainty?

Warner M, Gustafsson JA.

It is clear that estradiol has profound, rapid effects on the conformation of the
estrogen receptors (ERs), ERalpha and ERbeta, which mediate the transcriptional
effects of estradiol. Estrogen can elicit many other rapid changes in cells
including changes in ion fluxes across membranes and stimulation of kinases and
phosphatases. The proteins which are the targets of these actions are the subject
of intense investigation. One of the issues that have not been satisfactorily
resolved is whether ERalpha or ERbeta can reside in the plasma membrane and
participate in the rapid effects of estrogen. In the present commentary, we take 
a careful look at some of the published data in an attempt to understand why it
is so difficult to obtain a definitive answer to this question.

PMID: 16253301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Apr;207(1):144-57.

Nectin-2 expression in testicular cells is controlled via the functional
cooperation between transcription factors of the Sp1, CREB, and AP-1 families.

Lui WY(1), Sze KL, Lee WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

Nectin-2, a major protein component of the adherens junctions (AJs), is found
between Sertoli cells and germ cells in the seminiferous epithelium. Recent
studies have shown that the expression of nectin-2 gene in testis is crucial to
maintain normal spermatogenesis since male knockout mice lacking nectin-2 gene
are sterile and possess morphologically abnormal spermatozoa. However, the
molecular mechanisms governing its basal transcription remain poorly understood. 
By the use of Sertoli and germ cell-lines (TM4 and GC-2spd(ts) cells,
respectively) in transient transfection studies, we showed that the minimal mouse
nectin-2 promoter was located between nucleotides -316 and -211 (relative to the 
translation start site). Two putative Sp1 motifs and one each of the CRE, AP1,
and AP2 motifs were identified within this region. Mutational studies showed that
these two Sp1 motifs cooperated synergistically with the CRE motif, but not the
AP1 and AP2 motifs, to regulate nectin-2 gene transcription in both TM4 and
GC-2spd(ts) cells. By EMSAs, we found that an AP-1 consensus sequence was able to
inhibit DNA-protein complex formation with the CRE motif, suggesting an
interaction between the AP-1 transcription factor (c-Jun) and CREB within the CRE
motif. Overexpressions of CREB and c-Jun, but not c-Fos, also significantly
increased the promoter activity, which suggests that CREB and c-Jun are the
crucial transcription factors involved in regulating nectin-2 gene transcription.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay has shown that, in vivo, CREB, c-Jun, and Sp1
family proteins are bound to the mouse nectin-2 promoter. Analysis of the staged 
tubules has confirmed that the cyclic expressions of CREB and nectin-2 coincide
with the event of adherens junction restructuring between Sertoli cells and germ 
cells. The cross-talk between CREB, c-Jun, and Sp1 family protein is believed to 
be a major transcription machinery to drive nectin-2 expression in Sertoli cells.

PMID: 16250013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Clin Invest. 2005 Nov;115(11):3193-204. Epub 2005 Oct 13.

Protein phosphatase 2A is a negative regulator of IL-2 production in patients
with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Katsiari CG(1), Kyttaris VC, Juang YT, Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Injury, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver 
Spring, Maryland 20910, USA.

Decreased IL-2 production in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) represents a
central component of the disease immunopathology. We report that the message,
protein, and enzymatic activity of the catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase
2A (PP2Ac), but not PP1, are increased in patients with SLE regardless of disease
activity and treatment and in a disease-specific manner. Treatment of SLE T cells
with PP2Ac-siRNA decreased the protein levels and activity of PP2Ac in a specific
manner and increased the levels of phosphorylated cAMP response element-binding
protein and its binding to the IL2 and c-fos promoters, as well as increased
activator protein 1 activity, causing normalization of IL-2 production. Our data 
document increased activity of PP2A as a novel SLE disease-specific abnormality
and define a distinct mechanism whereby it represses IL-2 production. We propose 
the use of PP2Ac-siRNA as a novel tool to correct T cell IL-2 production in SLE
patients.

PMCID: PMC1253625
PMID: 16224536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 9;280(49):40398-401. Epub 2005 Oct 5.

Mitochondrial cyclic AMP response element-binding protein (CREB) mediates
mitochondrial gene expression and neuronal survival.

Lee J(1), Kim CH, Simon DK, Aminova LR, Andreyev AY, Kushnareva YE, Murphy AN,
Lonze BE, Kim KS, Ginty DD, Ferrante RJ, Ryu H, Ratan RR.

Author information: 
(1)Neurology Department, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

Cyclic AMP response element-binding protein (CREB) is a widely expressed
transcription factor whose role in neuronal protection is now well established.
Here we report that CREB is present in the mitochondrial matrix of neurons and
that it binds directly to cyclic AMP response elements (CREs) found within the
mitochondrial genome. Disruption of CREB activity in the mitochondria decreases
the expression of a subset of mitochondrial genes, including the ND5 subunit of
complex I, down-regulates complex I-dependent mitochondrial respiration, and
increases susceptibility to 3-nitropropionic acid, a mitochondrial toxin that
induces a clinical and pathological phenotype similar to Huntington disease.
These results demonstrate that regulation of mitochondrial gene expression by
mitochondrial CREB, in part, underlies the protective effects of CREB and raise
the possibility that decreased mitochondrial CREB activity contributes to the
mitochondrial dysfunction and neuronal loss associated with neurodegenerative
disorders.

PMCID: PMC2612541
PMID: 16207717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Int J Cancer. 2006 Mar 15;118(6):1370-80.

Growth stimulation of human pulmonary adenocarcinoma cells and small airway
epithelial cells by beta-carotene via activation of cAMP, PKA, CREB and ERK1/2.

Al-Wadei HA(1), Takahashi T, Schuller HM.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Oncology Laboratory, Department of Pathobiology, College of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA.

An alpha-tocopherol, beta-carotene supplementation trial (ATBC) and a
chemoprevention trial with beta-carotene and retinoids (CARET trial) were
conducted in the 1990s in populations at risk for the development of lung cancer.
Both trials had to be discontinued due to significant increases in lung cancer
and cardiovascular mortality. Clinical trials to test the cancer preventive
effects of beta-carotene are still ongoing, and high concentrations of this
provitamin are contained in numerous dietary supplements. Using a cell line
derived from a human pulmonary adenocarcinoma (PAC) of Clara cell lineage and
immortalized human small airway epithelial cells, our data show that low
concentrations of beta-carotene that can be realistically expected in human
tissues after oral administration caused a significant increase in intracellular 
cAMP and activated PKA, as well as in phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and CREB.
Furthermore, the proliferation of cells was significantly stimulated by identical
concentrations of beta-carotene as monitored by MTT assays. Control experiments
with retinol also showed stimulation of cell proliferation and activation of PKA 
in both cell lines. In light of the fact that PAC is the leading type of lung
cancer, these findings suggest that the growth promoting effects of beta-carotene
on this cancer type observed in our experiments may have contributed to the
unfortunate outcome of the ATBC and CARET trials. This interpretation is
supported by the fact that elevated levels of cAMP in the cardiovascular system
play a major role in the genesis of cardiovascular disease, which was also
greatly promoted in the CARET trial. Our data challenge the widely accepted view 
that beta-carotene may be useful as a cancer preventive agent.

PMID: 16206275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Toxicol Sci. 2005 Dec;88(2):495-504. Epub 2005 Sep 21.

Methoxychlor inhibits brain mitochondrial respiration and increases hydrogen
peroxide production and CREB phosphorylation.

Schuh RA(1), Kristián T, Gupta RK, Flaws JA, Fiskum G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, 21201, USA.

The organochlorine insecticide methoxychlor (mxc) is an established reproductive 
toxicant that affects other systems including the central nervous system (CNS),
possibly by mechanisms involving oxidative stress. This study tested the
hypothesis that mxc inhibits brain mitochondrial respiration, resulting in
increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Oxygen electrode
measurements of mitochondrial respiration and Amplex Red measurements of H(2)O(2)
production were performed with rat brain mitochondria exposed in vitro to mxc
(0-10 microg/ml) and with brain mitochondria from mice chronically exposed in
vivo to mxc (0-64 mg/kg/day) for 20 days by intraperitoneal injection. In vitro
mxc exposure inhibited ADP-dependent respiration (state 3) using both complex I- 
and II-supported substrates. Similarly, state 3 respiration was inhibited
following in vivo mxc exposure using complex I substrates. H(2)O(2) production
was stimulated after in vitro mxc treatment in the presence of complex I
substrates, but not in mitochondria isolated from in vivo mxc-treated mice.
Because previous studies demonstrated a relationship between oxidative stress and
CREB phosphorylation, we also tested the hypothesis that mxc elevates
phosphorylated CREB (pCREB) in mitochondria. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) measurements demonstrated that pCREB immunoreactivity was elevated by in 
vitro mxc exposure in the presence or absence of respiratory substrates,
indicating that stimulation of H(2)O(2) production is not necessary for this
effect. These multiple effects of mxc on mitochondria may play an important role 
in its toxicity, particularly in the CNS.

PMID: 16177237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Immunol. 2005 Oct 1;175(7):4499-507.

A novel NF-kappa B-regulated site within the human I gamma 1 promoter requires
p300 for optimal transcriptional activity.

Dryer RL(1), Covey LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Rutgers University, Piscataway,
NJ 08854, USA.

Transcriptional activation of germline (GL) promoters occurs through binding of
NF-kappaB to three evolutionarily conserved sites within a CD40 response region
in the human and mouse GL Igamma and Iepsilon promoters. Here we identify and
characterize a novel NF-kappaB binding site (kappaB6) within the human GL Igamma1
promoter that plays an essential role in basal- and CD40-induced transcription.
This site is adjacent to identified CREB/activating transcription factor (ATF)
sites, present in the Igamma1 but not the Igamma3 promoter, which are important
for the amplification of transcription. Our data suggest a cohesive protein
complex regulating Igamma1 promoter activity because disruption of any individual
NF-kappaB or CREB/ATF site markedly lowers the overall inducible activity of the 
promoter. In addition, alteration of helical phasing within the promoter
indicates spatial orientation of CREB/ATF and NF-kappaB, proteins contributes
directly to promoter activity. We found that CREB and p50 transactivators, as
well as coactivator p300, interact in vivo with the Igamma1 promoter in the
presence and absence of CD40 signaling in Ramos and primary B cells. However, the
level of CREB and p300 binding differs as a consequence of activation in primary 
B cells. Furthermore, overexpression of p300, and not a mutant lacking
acetyltransferase activity, significantly increases Igamma1 construct-specific
transcription. Together these data support a model whereby CREB and multiple
NF-kappaB complexes bind to the Igamma1 promoter and recruit p300. CD40 signals
induce p300-dependent changes that result in optimal Igamma1 promoter activity.

PMID: 16177093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Kidney Int. 2005 Oct;68(4):1573-82.

CREB mediates ERK-induced survival of mouse renal tubular cells after oxidant
stress.

Arany I(1), Megyesi JK, Reusch JE, Safirstein RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, 
Little Rock, Arkansas 72205, USA. iarany@uams.edu

BACKGROUND: We showed that extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK) is
prosurvival during oxidant stress both in the kidney and in cultured mouse
proximal tubule (TKPTS) cells and demonstrated concomitant activation of ERK as
well as the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-responsive element binding
protein (CREB), during survival in vitro. We now show that CREB is a necessary
prosurvival target of ERK.
METHODS: Ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury was induced in 129Sv mice. Oxidant
stress was induced by hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) in TKPTS cells. Activation of 
CREB was determined by immunohistochemistry and Western blotting. Inhibition and 
activation of CREB was achieved by mutant or activated CREB-containing
adenoviruses in vitro. The effects of oxidant stress on cell survival, CREB
binding, and CREB-mediated transcription was determined by cell counting,
gelshift analysis, and luciferase assay, respectively.
RESULTS: I/R activates CREB in the surviving distal nephron segments of the
kidney. Inhibition of ERK and CREB abrogates survival after 0.5 mmol/L H(2)O(2)
treatment, while overexpression of CREB ameliorates necrotic death caused by 1
mmol/L H(2)O(2). Inhibition of ERK also inhibited CREB activation. Binding of
phosphorylated CREB to a CREB oligonucleotide was significantly increased after
0.5 mmol/L H(2)O(2) but decreased after 1 mmol/L H(2)O(2). Similarly,
CREB-mediated transcription was significantly increased after 0.5 mmol/L H(2)O(2)
treatment, while 1 mmol/L H(2)O(2) inhibited it. Interestingly, transcription
from the CREB-driven bcl-2 promoter was unchanged after 0.5 mmol/L but decreased 
after 1 mmol/L H(2)O(2) treatment in agreement with Western blot studies.
CONCLUSION: We show that survival during oxidant stress is mediated through CREB 
and identification of its downstream targets will reveal important survival
pathways.

PMID: 16164634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2006 Jan;34(1):7-14. Epub 2005 Sep 8.

Oxidant-mediated cAMP response element binding protein activation: calcium
regulation and role in apoptosis of lung epithelial cells.

Barlow CA(1), Shukla A, Mossman BT, Lounsbury KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405, USA.

Oxidant stress-mediated regulation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases
(ERK1/2) is linked to pathologic outcomes in lung epithelium, yet a role for Ca2+
and Ca2+/cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB) in ERK1/2 signaling has not
been defined. In this study, we tested the hypotheses that oxidants induce
Ca2+-mediated phosphorylation of ERK and CREB, and that CREB is required for
oxidant-induced proliferation and apoptosis. H2O2 initiated an influx of
extracellular Ca2+ that was required for phosphorylation of both ERK and CREB in 
C10 lung epithelial cells. H2O2-mediated CREB phosphorylation was sensitive to
MEK inhibition, suggesting that crosstalk between Ca2+, ERK, and CREB signaling
pathways contributes to the oxidant-induced response. Reduction of CREB activity,
using a dominant-negative CREB construct, inhibited c-fos steady-state mRNA
levels, but unexpectedly enhanced bcl-2 steady-state mRNA levels after H2O2
exposure. Whereas inhibition of CREB activity had no detectable effect on H2O2
stimulation of cell cycle, loss of CREB activity significantly reduced the number
of cells undergoing apoptosis. These data support a novel communication between
Ca2+-ERK1/2 and CREB elicited by H2O2, and further provide evidence that CREB is 
an important regulator of apoptosis in oxidant-mediated responses of lung
epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC2644191
PMID: 16151051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. AAPS J. 2005 Sep 2;7(1):E259-65.

Cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript peptides play a role in drug abuse 
and are potential therapeutic targets.

Kuhar MJ(1), Jaworski JN, Hubert GW, Philpot KB, Dominguez G.

Author information: 
(1)Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30329, 
USA. michael.kuhar@emory.edu

Cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART) peptides (55 to 102 and 62
to 102) are neurotransmitters with important roles in a number of physiologic
processes. They have a role in drug abuse by virtue of the fact that they are
modulators of mesolimbic function. Key findings supporting a role in drug abuse
are as follows. First, high densities of CART-containing nerve terminals are
localized in mesolimbic areas. Second, CART 55 to 102 blunts some of the
behavioral effects of cocaine and dopamine (DA). This functional antagonism
suggests that CART peptides be considered as targets for medications development.
Third, CREB in the nucleus accumbens has been shown to have an opposing effect on
cocaine self-administration. CREB may activate CART expression in that region,
and, if so, CART may mediate at least some of the effects of CREB. Fourth, in
addition to the effects of CART on DA, DA can influence CART in the accumbens.
Thus a complex interacting circuitry likely exists. Fifth, in humans, CART is
altered in the ventral tegmental area of cocaine overdose victims, and a mutation
in the CART gene associates with alcoholism. Overall, it is clear that there are 
functional interactions among CART, DA, and cocaine and that plausible cellular
mechanisms exist to explain some of these actions. Future studies will clarify
and extend these findings.

PMCID: PMC2751515
PMID: 16146347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Jan;20(1):204-11. Epub 2005 Sep 1.

Hypothalamic 3',5'-cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element-binding
protein loss causes anterior pituitary hypoplasia and dwarfism in mice.

Mantamadiotis T(1), Kretz O, Ridder S, Bleckmann SC, Bock D, Gröne HJ, Malaterre 
J, Dworkin S, Ramsay RG, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology of the Cell, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg,
Germany. theo.mantamadiotis@petermac.org

The principal regulation of body growth is via a cascade of hormone signals
emanating from the hypothalamus, by release of GHRH, which then directs the
somatotroph cells of the pituitary to release GH into the blood stream. This in
turn leads to activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription
5-dependent expression of genes such as IGF-I in hepatocytes, acid labile
substance, and serine protease inhibitor 2.1, resulting in body growth. Here,
using conditional cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) mutant mice, we
show that loss of the CREB transcription factor in the brain, but not the
pituitary, results in reduced postnatal growth consistent with dwarfism caused by
GH deficiency. We demonstrate that although there appears to be no significant
impact upon the expression of GHRH mRNA in CREB mutant mice, the amount of GHRH
peptide is reduced. These findings show that CREB is required for the efficient
production of GHRH in hypothalamus, in addition to its previously reported role
in pituitary GH production and somatotroph expansion.

PMID: 16141355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Sep;25(18):8311-22.

Transcriptional synergy and the regulation of Ucp1 during brown adipocyte
induction in white fat depots.

Xue B(1), Coulter A, Rim JS, Koza RA, Kozak LP.

Author information: 
(1)Pennington Biomedical Research Center, 6400 Perkins Road, Baton Rouge, LA
70808, USA.

Induction of brown adipocytes in white fat depots by adrenergic stimulation is a 
complex genetic trait in mice that affects the ability of the animal to regulate 
body weight. An 80-fold difference in expression of the mitochondrial uncoupling 
gene (Ucp1) at the mRNA and protein levels between A/J and C57BL/6J (B6) mice is 
controlled by allelic interactions among nine quantitative trait loci (QTLs) on
eight chromosomes. Overlapping patterns of these QTLs also regulate expression
levels of Pgc-1alpha, Pparalpha, and type 2 deiodinase. Independent validation
that PPARalpha is associated with Ucp1 induction was obtained by treating mice
with the PPARalpha agonist clofibrate, but not from the analysis of PPARalpha
knockout mice. The most upstream sites of regulation for Ucp1 that differed
between A/J and B6 were the phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase and CREB and then followed by downstream changes in levels of mRNA for
PPARgamma, PPARalpha, PGC-1alpha, and type 2 deiodinase. However, compared to
Ucp1 expression, the two- to fourfold differences in the expression of these
regulatory components are very modest. It is proposed that small variations in
the levels of several transcriptional components of the Ucp1 enhanceosome
interact synergistically to achieve large differences in Ucp1 expression.

PMCID: PMC1234324
PMID: 16135818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Cancer Res. 2005 Aug 15;65(16):7137-44.

Mect1-Maml2 fusion oncogene linked to the aberrant activation of cyclic AMP/CREB 
regulated genes.

Coxon A(1), Rozenblum E, Park YS, Joshi N, Tsurutani J, Dennis PA, Kirsch IR,
Kaye FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch and Cancer Therapeutics Branch, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute and the National Naval Medical Center, Bethesda,
Maryland 20889, USA.

Malignant salivary gland tumors can arise from a t(11;19) translocation that
fuses 42 residues from Mect1/Torc1, a cyclic AMP (cAMP)/cAMP-responsive element
binding protein (CREB)-dependent transcriptional coactivator, with 982 residues
from Maml2, a NOTCH receptor coactivator. To determine if the Mect1-Maml2 fusion 
oncogene mediates tumorigenicity by disrupting cAMP/CREB signaling, we have
generated in-frame deletions within the CREB-binding domain of Mect1/Torc1 for
testing transformation activity and have also developed a doxycycline-regulated
Mect1-Maml2 mammalian expression vector for global gene expression profiling. We 
observed that small deletions within the CREB-binding domain completely abolished
transforming activity in RK3E epithelial cells. Further, we have shown that the
ectopic induction of Mect1-Maml2 in HeLa cells strongly activated the expression 
of a group of known cAMP/CREB-regulated genes. In addition, we detected candidate
cAMP-responsive element sites within 100 nucleotides of the transcriptional start
sites of other genes activated by Mect1-Maml2 expression. In contrast, we did not
observe alterations of known Notch-regulated target genes in these expression
array profile experiments. We validated the results by reverse transcription-PCR 
in transfected HeLa, RK3E, and H2009 lung tumor cells and in mucoepidermoid
cancer cells that endogenously express the fusion oncopeptide. Whereas
overexpression of components of the cAMP pathway has been associated with a
subset of human carcinomas, these data provide a direct genetic link between
deregulation of cAMP/CREB pathways and epithelial tumorigenesis and suggest
future therapeutic strategies for this group of salivary gland tumors.

PMID: 16103063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Cell Metab. 2005 Aug;2(2):141-8.

Foxa2 integrates the transcriptional response of the hepatocyte to fasting.

Zhang L(1), Rubins NE, Ahima RS, Greenbaum LE, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA.

Survival during prolonged food deprivation depends on the activation of hepatic
gluconeogenesis. Inappropriate regulation of this process is a hallmark of
diabetes and other metabolic diseases. Activation of the genes encoding
gluconeogenic enzymes is mediated by hormone-responsive transcription factors
such as the cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CREB) and the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR). Here we show using cell-type-specific gene ablation
that the winged helix transcription factor Foxa2 is required for activation of
the hepatic gluconeogenic program during fasting. Specifically, Foxa2 promotes
gene activation both by cyclic AMP, the second messenger for glucagon, and
glucocorticoids. Foxa2 mediates these effects by enabling recruitment of CREB and
GR to their respective target sites in chromatin. We conclude that Foxa2 is
required for execution of the hepatic gluconeogenic program by integrating the
transcriptional response of the hepatocyte to hormonal stimulation.

PMID: 16098831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Cell. 2005 Jul 29;122(2):275-87.

Par-4 links dopamine signaling and depression.

Park SK(1), Nguyen MD, Fischer A, Luke MP, Affar el B, Dieffenbach PB, Tseng HC, 
Shi Y, Tsai LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical
School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2005 Jul 29;122(2):153-5.

Prostate apoptosis response 4 (Par-4) is a leucine zipper containing protein that
plays a role in apoptosis. Although Par-4 is expressed in neurons, its
physiological role in the nervous system is unknown. Here we identify Par-4 as a 
regulatory component in dopamine signaling. Par-4 directly interacts with the
dopamine D2 receptor (D2DR) via the calmodulin binding motif in the third
cytoplasmic loop. Calmodulin can effectively compete with Par-4 binding in a
Ca2+-dependent manner, providing a route for Ca2+-mediated downregulation of D2DR
efficacy. To examine the importance of the Par-4/D2DR interaction in dopamine
signaling in vivo, we used a mutant mouse lacking the D2DR interaction domain of 
Par-4, Par-4DeltaLZ. Primary neurons from Par-4DeltaLZ embryos exhibit an
enhanced dopamine-cAMP-CREB signaling pathway, indicating an impairment in
dopamine signaling in these cells. Remarkably, Par-4DeltaLZ mice display
significantly increased depression-like behaviors. Collectively, these results
provide evidence that Par-4 constitutes a molecular link between impaired
dopamine signaling and depression.

PMID: 16051151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Seishin Shinkeigaku Zasshi. 2005;107(6):612-8.

[Study on mental diseases: neural stem cells].

[Article in Japanese]

Saito T.

The neurosciences to understand the pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders such
as depression and schizophrenia were started from the analysis of
neurotransmitter function change, and proceed to the cellular signaling change in
the brains. In the next step, it developed to the studies of neuroplasticity
change through expressions various cytokines and transcriptional factor
regulations. Recently, the existence of neural stem cells and lineage of stem
cells to neurons are identified in the adult mammalian brains. In addition, since
the brain structural changes in depression and schizophrenia have well defined by
the development of neuroimaging analysis, many researchers have been suggested
the relationship between the pathophysiology of these disorders and the
dysfunction of neurogenesis which strongly affects the maintenance and repair of 
brain neuronal network. In this report, we describe the new strategy and approach
to the investigation of the treatment of psychiatric illness, and introduce our
present study of the way to refine the neural network through promoted actions on
stem cell functions such as differentiation to neurons.

PMID: 16048110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Sep 9;334(4):1260-5.

CREB expression in cardiac fibroblasts and CREM expression in ventricular
myocytes.

Husse B(1), Isenberg G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Martin-Luther-University Halle, D-06097 Halle,
Germany. britta.husse@medizin.uni-halle.de

Activation of gene expression by the cAMP-dependent signaling pathway is
regulated by members of the cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) family
consisting of CREB, CREM, and ATF-1. It is decisively for the understanding of
the heart function as to which type of heart cells expresses CREB and/or CREM.
Ventricular myocytes and fibroblasts of young (3 months) and old (24 months) rat 
hearts were separately investigated to analyse CREB, CREM, and phospho-CREB.
Western blot showed CREB expression exclusively in fibroblasts but CREM was
predominantly detected in ventricular myocytes. CREB-positive nuclei in heart
sections were only revealed in fibroblasts. CREB was activated by forskolin (10
microM), PMA (500 nM), and cyclical mechanical strain (1 Hz, 5% elongation) in
fibroblasts. The number of CREB-positive myocytes in old rats was larger than in 
young rats. But CREB could not be activated by forskolin (10 microM) in all
myocytes. Our results suggest that the expression of CREB depends on the cell
type and the age of the animal. We discuss that modulation of gene expression as 
it occurs with a age could be affected by the change within the CREB family
members.

PMID: 16043122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. EMBO J. 2005 Aug 3;24(15):2753-67. Epub 2005 Jul 14.

TAF4 inactivation in embryonic fibroblasts activates TGF beta signalling and
autocrine growth.

Mengus G(1), Fadloun A, Kobi D, Thibault C, Perletti L, Michel I, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch, France.

We have inactivated transcription factor TFIID subunit TBP-associated factor 4
(TAF4) in mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Mutant taf4(-/-) cells are viable and
contain intact TFIID comprising the related TAF4b showing that TAF4 is not an
essential protein. TAF4 inactivation deregulates more than 1000 genes indicating 
that TFIID complexes containing TAF4 and TAF4b have distinct target gene
specificities. However, taf4(-/-) cell lines have altered morphology and exhibit 
serum-independent autocrine growth correlated with the induced expression of
several secreted mitotic factors and activators of the transforming growth factor
beta signalling pathway. In addition to TAF4 inactivation, many of these genes
can also be induced by overexpression of TAF4b. A competitive equilibrium between
TAF4 and TAF4b therefore regulates expression of genes controlling cell
proliferation. We have further identified a set of genes that are regulated both 
by TAF4 and upon adaptation to serum starvation and which may be important
downstream mediators of serum-independent growth. Our study also shows that TAF4 
is an essential cofactor for activation by the retinoic acid receptor and CREB,
but not for Sp1 and the vitamin D3 receptor.

PMCID: PMC1182243
PMID: 16015375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Neurosci. 2005 Jul 13;25(28):6641-50.

Abnormal long-lasting synaptic plasticity and cognition in mice lacking the
mental retardation gene Pak3.

Meng J(1), Meng Y, Hanna A, Janus C, Jia Z.

Author information: 
(1)The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1X8, Canada.

Mutations in the Pak3 gene lead to nonsyndromic mental retardation characterized 
by selective deficits in cognition. However, the underlying mechanisms are yet to
be elucidated. We report here that the knock-out mice deficient in the expression
of p21-activated kinase 3 (PAK3) exhibit significant abnormalities in synaptic
plasticity, specifically hippocampal late-phase long-term potentiation, and
deficiencies in learning and memory. A dramatic reduction in the active form of
transcription factor cAMP-responsive element-binding protein in the knock-out
mice implicates a novel signaling mechanism by which PAK3 and Rho signaling
regulate synaptic function and cognition.

PMID: 16014725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Oncogene. 2005 Oct 6;24(44):6689-98.

Nitric oxide upregulates the cyclooxygenase-2 expression through the
cAMP-response element in its promoter in several cancer cell lines.

Park SW(1), Sung MW, Heo DS, Inoue H, Shim SH, Kim KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, College of Medicine, Seoul National University,
Chongno-gu, Korea.

We previously showed that nitric oxide (NO) induces overexpression of
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and production of prostaglandin E(2) in cancer cells.
Here, we investigated the mechanisms by which NO induces COX-2 expression in
cancer cells. We found that the cAMP-response element (CRE) is a critical factor 
in NO-induced COX-2 expression in all cells tested. We found that in cancer
cells, three transcription factors (TFs) - cAMP response element-binding protein 
(CREB), activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) and c-jun, bound the CRE in the
COX-2 promoter, and their activities were increased by addition of the NO donor, 
S-nitroso-N-acetyl-D,L-penicillamine (SNAP). NO-induced activation of soluble
guanylate cyclase (sGC), p38 and c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK) upregulated
the three TFs, leading to COX-2 overexpression. Addition of dibutyryl-cGMP
(db-cGMP) induced COX-2 expression in a manner similar to SNAP; this induction
was blocked by a p38 inhibitor (SB202190), but not by a JNK inhibitor (SP600125).
NO-induced cGMP was found to activate CREB and ATF-2 in a p38, but not
c-jun-dependent manner, while NO induced JNK in a cGMP-independent manner,
leading to subsequent activation of c-jun and ATF-2. These results suggest that
the low concentrations of endogenous NO present in cancer cell may induce the
expression of many genes, including COX-2, which promotes the growth and survival
of tumor cells.

PMID: 16007171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Neurosci. 2005 Jul 6;25(27):6296-303.

cAMP responsive element-binding protein phosphorylation is necessary for
perirhinal long-term potentiation and recognition memory.

Warburton EC(1), Glover CP, Massey PV, Wan H, Johnson B, Bienemann A, Deuschle U,
Kew JN, Aggleton JP, Bashir ZI, Uney J, Brown MW.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Synaptic Plasticity, Department of
Anatomy, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1 TD, United Kingdom.

We established the importance of phosphorylation of cAMP responsive
element-binding protein (CREB) to both the familiarity discrimination component
of long-term recognition memory and plasticity within the perirhinal cortex of
the temporal lobe. Adenoviral transduction of perirhinal cortex (and adjacent
visual association cortex) with a dominant-negative inhibitor of CREB impaired
the preferential exploration of novel over familiar objects at a long (24 h) but 
not a short (15 min) delay, disrupted the normal reduced activation of perirhinal
neurons to familiar compared with novel pictures, and impaired long-term
potentiation of synaptic transmission in perirhinal slices. The consistency of
these effects across the behavioral, systems, and cellular levels of analysis
provides strong evidence for involvement of CREB phosphorylation in synaptic
plastic processes within perirhinal cortex necessary for long-term recognition
memory.

PMID: 16000619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2005 Aug 5;137B(1):45-50.

Association study of CREB1 and childhood-onset mood disorders.

Burcescu I(1), Wigg K, King N, Vetró A, Kiss E, Katay L, Kennedy JL, Kovacs M,
Barr CL.

Author information: 
(1)Toronto Western Research Institute, University Health Network, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. CBarr@uhnres.utoronto.ca

Several lines of evidence suggest that the cellular pathways involved in synaptic
plasticity contribute to the risk of depression. These findings include the
evidence that chronic antidepressant treatment upregulates the cAMP signal
transduction cascade resulting in increased expression and function of the cAMP
responsive element binding protein (CREB), a transcription factor that increases 
the expression of key growth factors involved in synaptogenesis and neurogenesis.
Recently, linkage to CREB1 was reported for early-onset depression in families
recruited from the Pittsburgh area. This finding was significant only in female
sibling pairs from those families. Two specific DNA variants, -656G/A and a C
insertion/deletion in intron 8, were identified in CREB1 that co-segregated with 
depression in two of the families. We sought to investigate the relationship of
CREB1 to childhood-onset mood disorders (COMD) using a sample of 195 nuclear
families (225 affected children) collected in Hungary. We genotyped the two CREB1
DNA variants previously identified as linked to depression as well as three
additional polymorphisms spanning the gene. In addition, we genotyped the -656G/A
DNA change and the intron 8 polymorphism in a sample of 112 probands with mood
disorders collected in the Pittsburgh area and matched controls, and examined the
distribution of alleles. The -656A allele was not observed in our samples and
there was no evidence for association of the intron 8 polymorphism in either the 
sample from Pittsburgh (chi(2) = 0.061, 1 d.f., P = 0.803) or Hungary (chi(2) =
0.040, 1 d.f., P = 0.842). We found no evidence for an association with the other
three polymorphisms or with the haplotypes of these markers. Further, we found no
sex-specific relationship. Our results, therefore, do not support the previous
evidence for this gene as a major factor contributing to depression.

PMID: 15999345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Neurochem. 2005 Sep;94(5):1457-70. Epub 2005 Jun 30.

Integration of G protein signals by extracellular signal-regulated protein
kinases in SK-N-MC neuroepithelioma cells.

Chan AS(1), Yeung WW, Wong YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, the Molecular Neuroscience Center, and the
Biotechnology Research Institute, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong.

Mammalian cells often receive multiple extracellular stimuli under physiological 
conditions, and the various signaling inputs have to be integrated for the
processing of complex biological responses. G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs)
are critical players in converting extracellular stimuli into intracellular
signals. In this report, we examined the integration of different GPCR signals by
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) using the SK-N-MC human brain
neuroepithelioma cells as a neuronal model. Stimulation of the Gi-coupled
neuropeptide Y1 and Gq-coupled muscarinic M1 acetylcholine receptors, but not the
Gs-coupled dopamine D1 receptor, led to the activation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK). All three receptors were also capable of
stimulating c-Jun NH2-terminal kinases (JNK) and p38 MAPK. The Gi-mediated ERK
activation was completely suppressed upon inhibition of Src tyrosine kinases by
PP1, while the Gq-induced response was suppressed by both PP1 and the Ca2+
chelator, BAPTA-AM. In contrast, activations of JNK and p38 by Gs-, Gi-, and
Gq-coupled receptors were sensitive to PP1 and BAPTA-AM pretreatments.
Simultaneous stimulation of Gi- and Gq-coupled receptors resulted in the
synergistic activation of ERK, but not JNK or p38 MAPK. The Gi/Gq-induced
synergistic ERK activation was PTX-sensitive, and appeared to be a co-operative
effect between Ca2+ and Src family tyrosine kinases. Enhanced ERK activation was 
associated with an increase in CREB phosphorylation, while the JNK and
p38-responsive transcription factor ATF-2 was weakly enhanced upon
Gi/Gq-induction. This report provides evidence that G protein signals can be
integrated at the level of MAPK, resulting in differential effects on ERK, JNK
and p38 MAPK in SK-N-MC cells.

PMID: 15992362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Pharmacol Sci. 2005 Jul;98(3):191-7. Epub 2005 Jun 19.

Hippocampus-dependent memory formation: do memory type-specific mechanisms exist?

Mizuno K(1), Giese KP.

Author information: 
(1)Wolfson Institute for Biomedical Research, University College London, UK.

Long-term memory (LTM) formation requires gene transcription and de novo protein 
synthesis. The transcription factor CREB is required for hippocampus-dependent
LTM formation, and it is activated by several signaling pathways, including
protein kinase A (PKA), the mitogen activated protein/extracellular
signal-regulated kinases (MAPK or ERKs), and Ca(2+)/calmodulin kinases (CaMKs).
However, it is unknown whether all types of hippocampus-dependent LTM use the
same signaling to activate transcription, and whether the transcriptional output 
is the same. Here we present molecular genetic and behavioral studies to
demonstrate that two types of hippocampus-dependent LTM formation, spatial and
contextual, require different signaling molecules. This can be illustrated by the
CaMK kinases, CaMKKalpha, and CaMKKbeta, which have converse roles. CaMKKalpha is
required for contextual and CaMKKbeta is required for spatial LTM formation. This
leads to the surprising conclusion that there are distinct types of
hippocampus-dependent LTM, which differ in their underlying molecular mechanisms.

PMID: 15968141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Jul;25(13):5329-38.

Inhibition of MuSK expression by CREB interacting with a CRE-like element and
MyoD.

Kim CH(1), Xiong WC, Mei L.

Author information: 
(1)Program of Developmental Neurobiology, Institute of Molecular Medicine and
Genetics, Medical College of Georgia, CB2803, 1120 15th Street, Augusta, Georgia 
30912, USA.

The type I receptor-like protein tyrosine kinase MuSK is essential for the
neuromuscular junction formation. MuSK expression is tightly regulated during
development, but the underlying mechanisms were unclear. Here we identified a
novel mechanism by which MuSK expression may be regulated. A cyclic AMP response 
element (CRE)-like element in the 5'-flanking region of the MuSK gene binds to
CREB1 (CRE-binding protein 1). Mutation of this element increases the MuSK
promoter activity, suggesting a role for CREB1 in attenuation of MuSK expression.
Interestingly, CREB mutants unable to bind to DNA also inhibit MuSK promoter
activity, suggesting a CRE-independent inhibitory mechanism. In agreement, CREB1 
could inhibit a mutant MuSK transgene reporter whose CRE site was mutated. We
provide evidence that CREB interacts directly with MyoD, a myogenic factor
essential for MuSK expression in muscle cells. Suppression of CREB expression by 
small interfering RNA increases MuSK promoter activity. These results demonstrate
an important role for CREB1 in the regulation of MuSK expression.

PMCID: PMC1156998
PMID: 15964791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. EMBO J. 2005 Jul 6;24(13):2391-402. Epub 2005 Jun 16.

Transforming activity of MECT1-MAML2 fusion oncoprotein is mediated by
constitutive CREB activation.

Wu L(1), Liu J, Gao P, Nakamura M, Cao Y, Shen H, Griffin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA. lizi_wu@dfci.harvard.edu

Salivary gland tumors, a group of histologically diverse benign and malignant
neoplasms, represent a challenging problem for diagnosis and treatment. A
specific recurring t(11;19)(q21;p13) translocation is associated with two types
of salivary gland tumors, mucoepidermoid carcinomas and Warthin's tumors. This
translocation generates a fusion protein comprised of the N-terminal CREB (cAMP
response element-binding protein)-binding domain of the CREB regulator MECT1
(Mucoepidermoid carcinoma translocated-1) and the C-terminal transcriptional
activation domain of the Notch coactivator Mastermind-like 2 (MAML2). Here, we
demonstrate that the MECT1-MAML2 fusion protein induces expression of multiple
genes known to be CREB transcriptional targets. MECT1-MAML2 was found to bind to 
CREB, recruit p300/CBP into the CREB complex through a binding domain on MAML2,
and constitutively activate CREB-dependent transcription. The transforming
activity of MECT1-MAML2 was markedly reduced by blocking CREB DNA binding. Thus, 
this fusion oncogene mimics constitutive activation of cAMP signaling, by
activating CREB directly. This study has identified a novel, critical mechanism
of transformation for an oncogene associated very specifically with salivary
gland tumors, and identified potential targets for the development of novel
therapies.

PMCID: PMC1173159
PMID: 15961999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2005 May;95(1-5):17-23.

Positive and negative transcriptional regulation of aromatase expression in human
breast cancer tissue.

Chen S(1), Ye J, Kijima I, Kinoshita Y, Zhou D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Research, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope
National Medical Center, Duarte, CA 91006, USA. schen@coh.org

By performing primer-specific RT-PCR analyses, three laboratories including ours 
have found that exons I.3 and PII are the two major exon Is present in aromatase 
mRNAs isolated from breast tumors. These results suggest that promoters I.3 and
II are the major promoters directing aromatase expression in breast tumors. The
characterization of transcription factors that interact with the two elements
near promoters I.3 and II, i.e., S1 and CREaro, helps us better understand the
mechanism of the switch of promoter usage between normal breast tissue and cancer
tissue. The positions of the two regulatory regions were mapped by DNase I
footprinting and DNA deletion analyses. We applied the yeast one-hybrid approach 
to screen a human breast tissue hybrid cDNA expression library for genes encoding
the proteins binding to these regions. Our results suggest that in normal breast 
tissue, the function of promoters I.3 and II is suppressed through the binding of
EAR-2, COUP-TFI, and RARgamma to S1, and through the binding of Snail/Slug
proteins to their binding site that quenches the CREaro activity. In cancer
tissue, the expression levels of EAR-2, COUP-TF1, EARgamma, Snail, and Slug
decrease, and aromatase expression is then up-regulated through the binding of
ERRalpha to S1 and the binding of CREB1 or related factors to CREaro. In a
separate study, we found that estrogen could up-regulate aromatase expression in 
breast cancer cells by a non-genomic action of ERalpha via cross-talk with growth
factor-mediated pathways. Our preliminary results suggest that protein kinase C
delta participates in this ERalpha-growth factor mediated regulation. To further 
understand the regulatory mechanism, we have recently initiated an in vivo
footprinting analysis of the -260/+76 bp region of promoter I.3. The experiments 
were conducted with both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Our results
revealed several footprinted sites. Five regions (sites 1-5) were then selected
for functional analysis through DNA site-directed mutagenesis experiments. This
analysis has also confirmed the promoter I.3 TATA site and Snail/Slug binding
site. These mutants showed higher luciferase activity when compared to the
wild-type, indicating that the proteins binding to these sites were acting as
repressors. By reviewing findings from our laboratory and other laboratories, a
detailed mechanism for the transcriptional regulation of aromatase expression in 
breast cancer tissue is summarized and discussed.

PMID: 15955695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Cell Tissue Res. 2005 Aug;321(2):211-7. Epub 2005 Jun 10.

Diurnal variation in CREB phosphorylation and PER1 protein levels in lactotroph
cells of melatonin-proficient C3H and melatonin-deficient C57BL mice:
similarities and differences.

Sheynzon P(1), Karolczak M, Dehghani F, Korf HW.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Senckenbergische Anatomie, Institut für Anatomie II, Fachbereich Medizin
der J.W. Goethe-Universität Frankfurt, Germany.

The pineal hormone melatonin plays an important role in the maintenance of
rhythmic functions of the hypophyseal pars tuberalis, which controls the
lactotroph cells of the pars distalis. To analyze the effects of melatonin
deficiency on the activity state of these cells, we have investigated the levels 
of Ser133-phosphorylated (p)CREB and PER1 protein in immunocytochemically
identified lactotroph cells of melatonin-proficient C3H and melatonin-deficient
C57BL mice at four different time points of a 12/12 LD cycle. At night, the
percentage of lactotroph cells showing a positive nuclear pCREB and PER1
immunoreaction is significantly smaller in C57BL than in C3H mice. In both mouse 
strains, the percentage of pCREB-immunoreactive cells is minimal in the early
morning and gradually increases to reach a maximum in the late night. PER1 levels
show a parallel temporal variation in C3H, but in C57BL, they are drastically
reduced in the early afternoon. The observation that, during darkness, the
percentage of lactotroph cells with nuclear pCREB immunoreaction is significantly
higher in C3H than in C57BL mice suggests the existence of a distinct cell
population that is under the control of melatonin-dependent intrapituitary
signaling. Interestingly, the percentage of pCREB- and PER1-immunoreactive
lactotroph cells reaches minimal and maximal values at the same time points. This
suggests that the correlation between CREB phosphorylation and PER1 induction
differs between these cells and other neuroendocrine centers, e.g., the pineal
organ and suprachiasmatic nucleus, displaying a temporal gap between CREB
phosphorylation and PER1 induction.

PMID: 15947965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Exp Biol. 2005 Jun;208(Pt 12):2389-98.

Determination of the exact copy numbers of particular mRNAs in a single cell by
quantitative real-time RT-PCR.

Wagatsuma A(1), Sadamoto H, Kitahashi T, Lukowiak K, Urano A, Ito E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Hokkaido
University, North 10, West 8, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0810, Japan.

Gene expression is differently regulated in every cell even though the cells are 
included in the same tissue. For this reason, we need to measure the amount of
mRNAs in a single cell to understand transcription mechanism better. However,
there are no accurate, rapid and appropriate methods to determine the exact copy 
numbers of particular mRNAs in a single cell. We therefore developed a procedure 
for isolating a single, identifiable cell and determining the exact copy numbers 
of mRNAs within it. We first isolated the cerebral giant cell of the pond snail
Lymnaea stagnalis as this neuron plays a key role in the process of memory
consolidation of a learned behavior brought about by associative learning of
feeding behavior. We then determined the copy numbers of mRNAs for the cyclic
AMP-responsive element binding proteins (CREBs). These transcription factors play
an important role in memory formation across animal species. The protocol uses
two techniques in concert with each other: a technique for isolating a single
neuron with newly developed micromanipulators coupled to an assay of mRNAs by
quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR).
The molecular assay determined the mRNA copy numbers, each of which was compared 
with a standard curve prepared from cDNA solutions corresponding to the serially 
diluted solutions of Lymnaea CREB mRNA. The standard curves were linear within a 
range of 10 to 10(5) copies, and the intra-assay variation was within 15%. Each
neuron removed from the ganglia was punctured to extract the total RNA directly
and was used for the assay without further purification. Using this two-step
procedure, we found that the mRNA copy number of CREB repressor (CREB2) was
30-240 in a single cerebral giant cell, whereas that of CREB activator (CREB1)
was below the detection limits of the assay (< 25). These results suggest that
the CREB cascade is regulated by an excess amount of CREB2 in the cerebral giant 
cells. Our procedure is the only quantitative analysis for elucidation of the
dynamics of gene transcription in a single cell.

PMID: 15939778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Neurochem. 2005 Jun;93(5):1168-76.

GalR1, but not GalR2 or GalR3, levels are regulated by galanin signaling in the
locus coeruleus through a cyclic AMP-dependent mechanism.

Hawes JJ(1), Brunzell DH, Wynick D, Zachariou V, Picciotto MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06508, USA.

The galanin receptors GalR1, GalR2 and GalR3 are widely expressed throughout the 
mouse brain and are enriched in catecholaminergic nuclei. Here, we show that
GalR1 protein levels are regulated by neuronal activity and changes in cAMP
levels. GalR1, but not GalR2 or GalR3, is specifically up-regulated in the
LC-like Cath.a cell line in a cAMP-dependent manner. GalR1 protein and mRNA
levels are also up-regulated in the LC of galanin knockout mice, whereas GalR2
and GalR3 are not. Lack of galanin-maintained cAMP tone in the galanin knockout
mouse appears to result in a loss of negative feedback resulting in increased
levels of CREB phosphorylation and increased GalR1 expression. These findings
suggest that changes in levels of GalR1 may play an important role in modulating 
signaling events and neuroplasticity underlying physiological functions of the
LC.

PMCID: PMC1352153
PMID: 15934937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Free Radic Biol Med. 2005 Jun 15;38(12):1653-61. Epub 2005 Apr 1.

Inhibition of CREB transcriptional activity in human T lymphocytes by oxidative
stress.

Rodriguez-Mora OG(1), Howe CJ, Lahair MM, McCubrey JA, Franklin RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Brody School of Medicine at East
Carolina University, Greenville, NC 27834, USA.

Hydrogen peroxide (HP) induced the phosphorylation of cAMP response element
binding protein (CREB) on Ser133 in Jurkat T lymphocytes via p38 and MSK1.
Although CREB Ser133 was phosphorylated, increases in HP-stimulated CREB-mediated
transcription were absent. T lymphocyte stimulation with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28
induced CREB Ser133 phosphorylation, as well as CREB-mediated transcriptional
activity. When CD3/CD28-stimulated lymphocytes were treated with HP, Ser133 was
phosphorylated, but TCR-induced CREB-mediated transcriptional activity was
reduced. These data provide insight into a potential mechanism by which oxidative
stress can alter T cell receptor-induced CREB activation and responsiveness.

PMID: 15917193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Cell Physiol. 2005 Nov;205(2):202-10.

cAMP induced modifications of HOX D gene expression in prostate cells allow the
identification of a chromosomal area involved in vivo with neuroendocrine
differentiation of human advanced prostate cancers.

Cantile M(1), Kisslinger A, Cindolo L, Schiavo G, D'Antò V, Franco R, Altieri V, 
Gallo A, Villacci A, Tramontano D, Cillo C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medical, Federico II University
Medical School, Naples, Italy.

The acquisition of epithelial-neuroendocrine differentiation (ND) is a
peculiarity of human advanced, androgen-independent, prostate cancers. The HOX
genes are a network of transcription factors controlling embryonal development
and playing an important role in crucial adult eukaryotic cell functions. The
molecular organization of this 39-gene network is unique in the genome and
probably acts by regulating phenotype cell identity. The expression patterns of
the HOX gene network in human prostate cell phenotypes, representing different
stages of prostate physiology and prostate cancer progression, make it possible
to discriminate between different human prostate cell lines and to identify loci 
and paralogous groups harboring the HOX genes mostly involved in prostate
organogenesis and cancerogenesis. Exposure of prostate epithelial phenotypes to
cAMP alters the expression of lumbo-sacral HOX D genes located on the chromosomal
region 2q31-33 where the cAMP effector genes CREB1, CREB2, and cAMP-GEFII are
present. Interestingly, this same chromosomal area harbors: (i) a global
cis-regulatory DNA control region able to coordinate the expression of HOX D and 
contiguous phylogenetically unrelated genes; (ii) a prostate specific ncRNA gene 
associated with high-risk prostate cancer (PCGEM1); (iii) a series of
neurogenic-related genes involved with epithelial-neuronal cell conversion. We
report the expression of neurexin 1, Neuro D1, dlx1, and dlx2 in untreated and
cAMP treated epithelial prostate cells. The in vivo expression of Neuro D1 in
human advanced prostate cancers correlate with the state of tumor differentiation
as measured by Gleason score. Thus, we suggest that the chromosomal area 2q 31-33
might be involved in the epithelial-ND characteristic of human advanced prostate 
cancers.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15895411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Neuroscience. 2005;133(3):647-55.

Cyclic AMP response element-binding protein is required for normal maternal
nurturing behavior.

Jin SH(1), Blendy JA, Thomas SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, 103 John Morgan Building, 3620 Hamilton Walk,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6084, USA.

Analysis of mice with targeted disruptions of fosB or the gene encoding dopamine 
beta-hydroxylase suggests that FosB and adrenergic signaling play critical roles 
in maternal nurturing behavior. The majority of neonates born to null females
from either mutation fail to thrive, and virgin mutant females of both lines
exhibit impaired pup retrieval. Considering whether FosB and adrenergic signaling
might share a signaling pathway important for maternal behavior, we examined the 
role of a potential intermediary, cyclic AMP response element-binding protein
(CREB). Here we report that approximately 40% of neonates (all heterozygous) born
to mice lacking the major isoforms of CREB (Creb-alphaDelta-/-) died within
several days of birth. In contrast, heterozygotes born to Creb-alphaDelta+/-
females thrived. Cross-fostering demonstrated that neonates born to
Creb-alphaDelta(-/dagger/-) females thrived when reared by wild-type females, and
that Creb-alphaDelta-/- females were capable of rearing neonates whose maternal
care was initiated by wild-type females. Further, virgin Creb-alphaDelta-/-
females were deficient in pup retrieval despite exhibiting normal investigation
of pups and of novel objects. No maternal behavior phenotype was present in mice 
with a null mutation of the cyclic AMP response element modulator (Crem) gene.
Interestingly, the number of cells immunostaining for phospho-CREB (on Ser(133)) 
in the medial preoptic area of the hypothalamus, a key region for the expression 
of maternal behavior, increased nearly three-fold in wild-type mice following
exposure to pups but not to novel objects. On the other hand, basal expression
and induction of FosB in response to pup exposure appeared to be independent of
CREB because levels were equivalent between wild-type and Creb-alphaDelta-/-
females. These results implicate CREB in maternal nurturing behavior and suggest 
that CREB is not critical for expression or induction of FosB in adult virgin
female mice.

PMID: 15893884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Neuroscience. 2005;133(3):797-806.

Up-regulated phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 
3 and cyclic AMP-responsive element binding protein by peripheral inflammation in
primary afferent neurons possibly through oncostatin M receptor.

Tamura S(1), Morikawa Y, Senba E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Wakayama Medical University, Kimiidera
811-1, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan.

Oncostatin M (OSM), a member of interleukin-6 family cytokines, contributes to
the development of nociceptive sensory neurons. However, little is known about
the role of OSM in dorsal root ganglia (DRGs) of adult mice after peripheral
inflammation. In the present study, we showed that OSM mRNA was highly expressed 
in the inflamed skin during acute inflammation induced by complete Freund's
adjuvant (CFA), while the expression of oncostatin M receptor (OSMR) did not
change in the ipsilateral DRG. Although peripheral inflammation induced
significant increases in the number of neurons with phosphorylated extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase (p-ERK) and phosphorylated p38 mitogen-activated protein 
kinase (p-p38) in ipsilateral DRGs, OSMR-positive neurons exhibited neither p-ERK
nor p-p38. In addition, we found significant increases in the number of neurons
with phosphorylated signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (p-STAT3) 
and phosphorylated cAMP-responsive element binding protein (p-CREB) in the
ipsilateral DRGs. Interestingly, OSMR-positive neurons with p-STAT3 and p-CREB
were significantly increased after peripheral inflammation. Thus, our results
suggest that acute inflammation induce the phosphorylations of several signal
molecules, including ERK, p38, cAMP-responsive element binding protein, and
STAT3. Among them, the up-regulation of p-STAT3 and p-CREB may be induced
possibly through OSMR.

PMID: 15893881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 22;280(29):27035-43. Epub 2005 May 11.

cAMP-response elements in Aplysia creb1, creb2, and Ap-uch promoters:
implications for feedback loops modulating long term memory.

Mohamed HA(1), Yao W, Fioravante D, Smolen PD, Byrne JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, W. M. Keck Center for the Neurobiology
of Learning and Memory, the University of Texas Medical School, Houston, Texas
77030, USA.

The Aplysia genes encoding for cAMP-response element-binding protein 1 (CREB1),
CREB2, and ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase (Ap-uch) have been implicated in the
formation of long term memory. However, nothing is known about the promoter
regions of these genes or the transcription factors that regulate them. We cloned
the promoter regions of creb1, creb2, and Ap-uch and identified a canonical
cAMP-response element (CRE) in the promoter region of creb1. Variants of the
canonical CRE were identified in all three promoters. TATA boxes and
C/EBP-binding motifs are also present in the promoter regions of these genes.
Promoter immunoprecipitation assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
indicated that CREB1 and CREB2 bind to the promoter regions of creb1 and creb2,
suggesting that feedback loops modulate the formation of long term memory. In a
positive feedback loop, phosphorylated CREB1 might induce its own gene via CREs. 
In support of this suggestion, treatment with serotonin enhanced binding of CREB1
to its promoter region and increased mRNA levels of creb1. Levels of Ap-uch mRNA 
also increased in response to serotonin; however, binding of CREB1 or CREB2 to
the promoter region of Ap-uch was not detected. The finding that the promoter
region of creb2 has a CRE raises the intriguing possibility that its expression
is regulated by CREB1 and/or CREB2. CREB2 may repress its own gene, forming a
negative feedback loop, and CREB2 up-regulation via CREB1 may limit the activity 
of the CREB1-mediated positive feedback loop.

PMID: 15888447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Gut. 2005 Sep;54(9):1309-17. Epub 2005 May 4.

CREB/PKA sensitive signalling pathways activate and maintain expression levels of
the hepatitis B virus pre-S2/S promoter.

Tacke F(1), Liedtke C, Bocklage S, Manns MP, Trautwein C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover
Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, D-30625 Hannover, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: CREB (cAMP response element binding protein) transcription
factors are key regulators of homeostatic functions in the liver, and CRE binding
is increased in hepatic inflammation. During chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV)
infection, mutations or deletions in the pre-S region are frequently observed.
These mutations can affect the pre-S2/S promoter controlling HBV envelope protein
expression (hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)) and have been associated with
worsened clinical outcome. We aimed to test if CREB activation impacts on HBsAg
expression.
METHODS: The effect of the CREB inducer protein kinase A (PKA) was tested by
coexpression with HBV wild-type vector in vitro. Luciferase reporter gene
constructs were cloned to identify novel regulatory regions for the HBV pre-S2/S 
promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) gelshift and supershift
experiments were conducted to confirm DNA transcription factor binding.
RESULTS: Coexpression of HBV and PKA resulted in HBV-S mRNA induction and
enhanced small envelope protein expression. We identified a CREB binding motif in
the transcribed part of the pre-S2 region, contributing to basal S promoter
activity via binding of activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2). A second CREB
motif closely linked to the S-ATG showed a similar binding pattern involving ATF2
and CREB1, without appearing essential for basal promoter activity. Moreover, a
sequence in the pre-S2 region is responsible for further transcriptional
induction via CREB activators such as PKA and forskolin. EMSA experiments
indicate that CREB1 and ATF4 are involved in complex formation conferring PKA
dependent promoter activation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest a novel mechanism by which HBV may utilise CREB/PKA
signal transduction pathways of hepatocytes to enhance its HBsAg expression
during homeostasis and hepatic inflammation.

PMCID: PMC1774645
PMID: 15871998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2005 Jan;34(1):70-3.

[Protective effects of Lovastatin on early diabetic renal tissue and the possible
mechanism].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang LH(1), Duan HJ, Shi YH, Liu QJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang 050017, China.
wanglh68@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the protective effects of Lovastatin on renal function 
in experimental diabetic nephropathy in rats. and the function of cAMP-responsive
element binding protein (CREB1) in this duration.
METHODS: Diabetes was induced in male Wistar rats by intrapetitoneal injection of
STZ (65 mg/kg). Three groups were divided as: Sham group, diabetic control group 
and Lovastatin treatment group. Lovastatin (20 mg/kg) was administered daily by
gavage from the next day of the induction diabetes for 4 weeks. Upro, ucr in
urine and Glu, Scr, BUN in serum were determined. Immunohistochemistry and
computer image-pattern analysis system were used to analyze expression of PCNA
and p-CREB1. Western blot were performed to valuate the expression of p-CREB1
with their specific corresponding antibodies. CREB1 mRNA was measured by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: After Lovastatin treatment, renal function were ameliorative in diabetic
rats. Decrements were also found in the expression of and PCNA, p-CREB1 and its
mRNA in the treatment group compared with the diabetic group.
CONCLUSION: Inhibition of glomerular cAMP-responsive element binding protein 1
may be responsible for the Lovastatin protective function that allevate the renal
proliferation and hypertrophy in diabetic rats.

PMID: 15862029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. FASEB J. 2005 Jul;19(9):1205-7. Epub 2005 Apr 27.

Mesenchymal stem cells from the outer ear: a novel adult stem cell model system
for the study of adipogenesis.

Rim JS(1), Mynatt RL, Gawronska-Kozak B.

Author information: 
(1)Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70808, USA.

Adipocytes arise from multipotent stem cells of mesodermal origin, which also
give rise to the muscle, bone, and cartilage lineages. However, signals and early
molecular events that commit multipotent stem cells into the adipocyte lineage
are not well established mainly due to lack of an adequate model system. We have 
identified a novel source of adult stem cells from the external murine ears
referred to here as an ear mesenchymal stem cells (EMSC). EMSC have been isolated
from several standard and mutant strains of mice. They are self-renewing,
clonogenic, and multipotent, since they give rise to osteocytes, chondrocytes,
and adipocytes. The in vitro characterization of EMSC indicates very facile
adipogenic differentiation. Morphological, histochemical, and molecular analysis 
after the induction of differentiation showed that EMSC maintain adipogenic
potentials up to fifth passage. A comparison of EMSC to the stromal-vascular
(S-V) fraction of fat depots, under identical culture conditions
(isobutyl-methylxanthine, dexamethasone, and insulin), revealed much more robust 
and consistent adipogenesis in EMSC than in the S-V fraction. In summary, we show
that EMSC can provide a novel, easily obtainable, primary culture model for the
study of adipogenesis.

PMID: 15857881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 1;280(26):24356-62. Epub 2005 Apr 27.

Role of CREB1 and NF{kappa}B-p65 in the down-regulation of renin gene expression 
by tumor necrosis factor {alpha}.

Todorov VT(1), Völkl S, Friedrich J, Kunz-Schughart LA, Hehlgans T, Vermeulen L, 
Haegeman G, Schmitz ML, Kurtz A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, Institute of Pathology, and Department of Immunology,
Regensburg University, D-93040 Regensburg, Germany.
vladimir.todorov@vkl.uniregensburg.de

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) is a potent inhibitor of renin gene
expression in renal juxtaglomerular cells. We have found that TNFalpha suppresses
renin transcription via transcription factor NFkappaB, which targets a cAMP
responsive element (CRE) in the renin promoter. Here we aimed to further clarify 
the role of NFkappaB and the canonical CRE-binding proteins of the CRE-binding
protein/activating transcription factor (CREB/ATF) family in the inhibition of
renin gene expression by TNFalpha in the juxtaglomerular cell line As4.1.
TNFalpha caused a moderate decrease in the binding of CREB1 to its cognate CRE
DNA binding site. On the other hand, NFkappaB-p65 transcriptional activity was
substantially reduced by TNFalpha, which targeted a trans-activation domain at
the very C terminus of the p65 molecule. Our results suggest that TNFalpha
inhibits renin gene expression by decreasing the transactivating capacity of
NFkappaB-p65 and partially by attenuating CREB1 binding to CRE.

PMID: 15857826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Cancer Cell. 2005 Apr;7(4):351-62.

The role of CREB as a proto-oncogene in hematopoiesis and in acute myeloid
leukemia.

Shankar DB(1), Cheng JC, Kinjo K, Federman N, Moore TB, Gill A, Rao NP, Landaw
EM, Sakamoto KM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Gwynne Hazen Cherry
Memorial Laboratories and Mattel Children's Hospital, Jonsson Comprehensive
Cancer Center, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California
90095, USA.

CREB is a transcription factor that functions in glucose homeostasis, growth
factor-dependent cell survival, and memory. In this study, we describe a role of 
CREB in human cancer. CREB overexpression is associated with increased risk of
relapse and decreased event-free survival. CREB levels are elevated in blast
cells from patients with acute myeloid leukemia. To understand the role of CREB
in leukemogenesis, we studied the biological consequences of CREB overexpression 
in primary human leukemia cells, leukemia cell lines, and transgenic mice. Our
results demonstrate that CREB promotes abnormal proliferation and survival of
myeloid cells in vitro and in vivo through upregulation of specific target genes.
Thus, we report that CREB is implicated in myeloid cell transformation.

PMID: 15837624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 May 15;14(10):1315-25. Epub 2005 Mar 30.

SNPs, microarrays and pooled DNA: identification of four loci associated with
mild mental impairment in a sample of 6000 children.

Butcher LM(1), Meaburn E, Knight J, Sham PC, Schalkwyk LC, Craig IW, Plomin R.

Author information: 
(1)Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, 
London, UK. l.butcher@iop.kcl.ac.uk

Mild mental impairment (MMI) represents the low extreme of the quantitative trait
of general intelligence and is highly heritable. Quantitative trait loci (QTLs)
conferring susceptibility to MMI, as for most complex traits, are likely to be of
small effect size. Using a novel approach we call SNP-MaP (SNP Microarrays and
Pooling), we have identified four loci associated with MMI. These four loci have 
been replicated in two SNP-MaP studies and verified by individual genotyping. The
two SNP-MaP studies conducted were a case versus control comparison (n = 515 and 
n = 1028, respectively) and a low versus high general intelligence extremes group
comparison (n = 503 and n = 505, respectively). Each of the four groups consisted
of five independent 'subpools', with each subpool assayed on a separate
microarray. Twelve loci showing the largest significant differences in both
SNP-MaP studies were individually genotyped on 6154 children. Of the four loci
positively associated with MMI, the minor allele of each conferred the greater
risk for MMI. Two of the loci are close to known genes and may be in linkage
disequilibrium with them. One of the loci is between the candidate genes KLF7 and
CREB1, but given possible long-range effects on expression and the unknown
importance of untranslated elements such as micro-RNAs, all four loci deserve
attention as candidates. Although each SNP accounts for a small amount of
variance, their effects are additive and they can be combined in a 'SNP set' that
can be used as a genetic risk index for MMI in behavioral genomic analyses.

PMID: 15800012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mol Pharmacol. 2005 Jun;67(6):2126-36. Epub 2005 Mar 17.

Potential role of cAMP response element-binding protein in ethanol-induced
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor 2B subunit gene transcription in fetal mouse
cortical cells.

Rani CS(1), Qiang M, Ticku MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, The University of Texas Health Science Center,
7703 Floyd Curl Dr., San Antonio, TX 78229-3900, USA. kadapakkam@uthscsa.edu

We have shown previously that long-term ethanol treatment causes an up-regulation
of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor 2B subunit (NR2B) number and function in 
cultured fetal mouse cortical neurons. To examine the intracellular signaling
pathways involved in this NR2B gene transcription, we have subjected fetal
cortical neurons to long-term treatment with ethanol and studied its effect on
cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) and extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK) levels by Western blot and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. We
find a significant increase in phosphorylated CREB, without change in total CREB 
protein, in cells treated with ethanol for 5 days. Long-term ethanol treatment
did not increase levels of both total and phospho-ERK in serum-free medium,
whereas it did increase ERK phosphorylation in medium containing serum, without
affecting total ERK levels. CREB phosphorylation was increased by ethanol
treatment in both media, irrespective of the presence of serum. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assay, using a 25-base pair (bp) double-stranded DNA fragment
containing the cyclic AMP response element (CRE)-like sequence of the NR2B
promoter as (32)P-labeled probe, showed an increase in specific CRE binding to
nuclear proteins isolated from cells undergoing long-term ethanol treatment. A
467-bp DNA fragment of the NR2B promoter containing the CRE sequence cloned into 
the luciferase vector exhibited high reporter activity in transient
cotransfection assay of mouse cortical neurons, and ethanol treatment increased
this activity. Introducing site-directed mutation in the CRE sequence
significantly reduced the reporter activity relative to the wild-type construct, 
and it also abolished the stimulatory effect by ethanol. Our results indicate
that CREB is probably involved in mediating ethanol-induced up-regulation of NR2B
gene.

PMID: 15774772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Virol. 2005 Apr;79(7):4180-90.

Activation of CREB/ATF sites by polyomavirus large T antigen.

Love TM(1), de Jesus R, Kean JA, Sheng Q, Leger A, Schaffhausen B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
02111, USA.

Polyomavirus large T antigen (LT) has a direct role in viral replication and a
profound effect on cell phenotype. It promotes cell cycle progression,
immortalizes primary cells, blocks differentiation, and causes apoptosis. While
much of large T function is related to its effects on tumor suppressors of the
retinoblastoma susceptibility (Rb) gene family, we have previously shown that
activation of the cyclin A promoter can occur through a non-Rb-dependent
mechanism. Here we show that activation occurs via an ATF/CREB site.
Investigation of the mechanism indicates that large T can synergize with CREB
family members to activate transcription. Experiments with Gal4-CREB constructs
show that synergy is independent of CREB phosphorylation by protein kinase A.
Examination of synergy with Gal4-CREB deletion constructs indicates that large T 
acts on the constitutive activation domain of CREB. Large T can bind to CREB in
vivo. Genetic analysis shows that the DNA-binding domain (residues 264 to 420) is
sufficient to activate transcription when it is localized to the nucleus. Further
analysis of the DNA-binding domain shows that while site-specific DNA binding is 
not required, non-site-specific DNA binding is important for the activation.
Thus, CREB binding and DNA binding are both important for large T activation of
CREB/ATF sites. In contrast to previous models where large T transactivation
occurred indirectly, these results also suggest that large T can act directly at 
promoters to activate transcription.

PMCID: PMC1061560
PMID: 15767419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Mar 22;102(12):4459-64. Epub 2005 Mar 7.

Genome-wide analysis of cAMP-response element binding protein occupancy,
phosphorylation, and target gene activation in human tissues.

Zhang X(1), Odom DT, Koo SH, Conkright MD, Canettieri G, Best J, Chen H, Jenner
R, Herbolsheimer E, Jacobsen E, Kadam S, Ecker JR, Emerson B, Hogenesch JB,
Unterman T, Young RA, Montminy M.

Author information: 
(1)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Hormones and nutrients often induce genetic programs via signaling pathways that 
interface with gene-specific activators. Activation of the cAMP pathway, for
example, stimulates cellular gene expression by means of the PKA-mediated
phosphorylation of cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB) at Ser-133. Here,
we use genome-wide approaches to characterize target genes that are regulated by 
CREB in different cellular contexts. CREB was found to occupy approximately 4,000
promoter sites in vivo, depending on the presence and methylation state of
consensus cAMP response elements near the promoter. The profiles for CREB
occupancy were very similar in different human tissues, and exposure to a cAMP
agonist stimulated CREB phosphorylation over a majority of these sites. Only a
small proportion of CREB target genes was induced by cAMP in any cell type,
however, due in part to the preferential recruitment of the coactivator
CREB-binding protein to those promoters. These results indicate that CREB
phosphorylation alone is not a reliable predictor of target gene activation and
that additional CREB regulatory partners are required for recruitment of the
transcriptional apparatus to the promoter.

PMCID: PMC555478
PMID: 15753290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Circulation. 2005 Mar 8;111(9):1184-91.

p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase downregulates endothelial progenitor cells.

Seeger FH(1), Haendeler J, Walter DH, Rochwalsky U, Reinhold J, Urbich C, Rössig 
L, Corbaz A, Chvatchko Y, Zeiher AM, Dimmeler S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine III, University of
Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, Frankfurt, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Transplantation of endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) improves
neovascularization after ischemia, but patients with coronary artery disease
(CAD) or diabetes mellitus show a reduced number of EPCs and impaired functional 
activity. Therefore, we investigated the effects of risk factors, such as glucose
and TNF-alpha, on the number of EPCs in vitro to elucidate the underlying
mechanisms.
METHODS AND RESULTS: EPCs of patients or healthy subjects were isolated from
peripheral blood. Incubation with glucose or TNF-alpha dose-dependently reduced
the number of EPCs (79.9+/-1.3% and 74.3+/-8.1% of control; P<0.05,
respectively). This reduction was not caused by apoptosis. TNF-alpha and glucose 
induced a dose- and time-dependent activation of the p38 MAP kinase, the
downstream kinase mitogen- and stress-activated kinase 1, and the transcription
factor cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB), in EPCs. Moreover, EPCs
from CAD patients had significantly higher basal p38-phosphorylation levels
(1.83+/-0.2-fold increase; P<0.05) compared with healthy subjects. The inhibition
of the p38-kinase by SB203580 or infection with a dominant negative p38 kinase
adenovirus significantly increased basal number of EPCs (136.7+/-6.3% and
142.9+/-18% versus control, respectively). Likewise, ex vivo cultivation of EPCs 
from patients with CAD with SB203580 significantly increased the number of EPCs
and partially reversed the impaired capacity for neovascularization of EPCs in
vivo (relative blood flow: 0.40+/-0.03 versus 0.64+/-0.08, P<0.05). The increased
numbers of EPCs by SB203580 were associated with an augmentation of EPC
proliferation and a reduction of cells expressing the monocytic marker proteins
CD14 and CD64, suggesting that p38 regulates proliferation and differentiation
events.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that p38 MAP kinase plays a pivotal role
in the signal transduction pathways regulating the number of EPCs ex vivo.
SB203580 can prevent the negative effects of TNF-alpha and glucose on the number 
of EPCs and may be useful to improve the number of EPCs for potential cell
therapy.

PMID: 15753227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 29;280(17):17497-506. Epub 2005 Feb 24.

Reactive oxygen species stimulates receptor activator of NF-kappaB ligand
expression in osteoblast.

Bai XC(1), Lu D, Liu AL, Zhang ZM, Li XM, Zou ZP, Zeng WS, Cheng BL, Luo SQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515,
China. baixc15@fimmu.com

It has been established that reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as H2O2 or
superoxide anion is involved in bone loss-related diseases by stimulating
osteoclast differentiation and bone resorption and that receptor activator of
NF-kappaB ligand (RANKL) is a critical osteoclastogenic factor expressed on
stromal/osteoblastic cells. However, the roles of ROS in RANKL expression and
signaling mechanisms through which ROS regulates RANKL genes are not known. Here 
we report that increased intracellular ROS levels by H2O2 or xanthine/xanthine
oxidase-generated superoxide anion stimulated RANKL mRNA and protein expression
in human osteoblast-like MG63 cell line and primary mouse bone marrow stromal
cells and calvarial osteoblasts. Further analysis revealed that ROS promoted
phosphorylation of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB)/ATF2 and its
binding to CRE-domain in the murine RANKL promoter region. Moreover, the results 
of protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor KT5720 and CREB1 RNA interference
transfection clearly showed that PKA-CREB signaling pathway was necessary for ROS
stimulation of RANKL in mouse osteoblasts. In human MG63 cells, however, we found
that ROS promoted heat shock factor 2 (HSF2) binding to heat shock element in
human RANKL promoter region and that HSF2, but not PKA, was required for ROS
up-regulation of RANKL as revealed by KT5720 and HSF2 RNA interference
transfection. We also found that ROS stimulated phosphorylation of extracellular 
signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) and that PD98059, the inhibitor for ERKs
suppressed ROS-induced RANKL expression either in mouse osteoblasts or in MG63
cells. These results demonstrate that ROS stimulates RANKL expression via ERKs
and PKA-CREB pathway in mouse osteoblasts and via ERKs and HSF2 in human MG63
cells.

PMID: 15731115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Mol Hum Reprod. 2005 Apr;11(4):237-43. Epub 2005 Feb 18.

Ligand activated relaxin receptor increases the transcription of IGFBP-1 and
prolactin in human decidual and endometrial stromal cells.

Tang M(1), Mazella J, Zhu HH, Tseng L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, State University 
of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794-8091, USA.

The aim of this study was to investigate relaxin (RLX) receptor-mediated gene
activation in human endometrium. We determined the promoter activities of
insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1) and prolactin (PRL) and
identified sequence(s) that mediate RLX activated transcription in human decidual
cells and endometrial stromal cells. In human decidual cells, the promoter
activity of IGFBP-1 was increased significantly in cells incubated with RLX. In
endometrial stromal cells, the RLX mediated activation was enhanced only when
stromal cells were co-transfected with RLX-receptor (LGR7) expression vector and 
RLX alone had little effect (Mazella et al., 2004). Deletion and mutation
analysis showed that the cAMP regulatory element (CRE, -263 to -259 bp) in the
IGFBP-1 promoter was essential for the activation. In addition, RLX increased the
phosphorylation of CRE binding protein (CREB to p-CREB) and p-CREB resided in the
nucleus, indicating that RLX activates the protein kinase (PKA) system in
decidual cells. Gel shift assay showed that nuclear extracts prepared from RLX
treated decidual cells increased the binding to the CRE site of the IGFBP-1
promoter. RLX increased the PRL promoter activity mediated through the region
containing multiple CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBP) binding sites that
have been shown to mediate the PRL gene activation by cAMP analogue (Pohnke et
al., 1999). RLX enhanced IGFBP-1 promoter activity was inhibited by cAMP
dependent PKA inhibitor, H-89. PRL promoter activity was inhibited by both H-89
and U0126 indicating multiple signalling pathways are activated by RLX in
endometrial cells for different target gene activation.

PMID: 15722441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. EMBO J. 2005 Mar 9;24(5):1068-78. Epub 2005 Feb 17.

Bcl-2 enhances Ca(2+) signaling to support the intrinsic regenerative capacity of
CNS axons.

Jiao J(1), Huang X, Feit-Leithman RA, Neve RL, Snider W, Dartt DA, Chen DF.

Author information: 
(1)Schepens Eye Research Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114,
USA.

At a certain point in development, axons in the mammalian CNS undergo a profound 
loss of intrinsic growth capacity, which leads to poor regeneration after injury.
Overexpression of Bcl-2 prevents this loss, but the molecular basis of this
effect remains unclear. Here, we report that Bcl-2 supports axonal growth by
enhancing intracellular Ca(2+) signaling and activating cAMP response element
binding protein (CREB) and extracellular-regulated kinase (Erk), which stimulate 
the regenerative response and neuritogenesis. Expression of Bcl-2 decreases
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) Ca(2+) uptake and storage, and thereby leads to a
larger intracellular Ca(2+) response induced by Ca(2+) influx or axotomy in
Bcl-2-expressing neurons than in control neurons. Bcl-x(L), an antiapoptotic
member of the Bcl-2 family that does not affect ER Ca(2+) uptake, supports
neuronal survival but cannot activate CREB and Erk or promote axon regeneration. 
These results suggest a novel role for ER Ca(2+) in the regulation of neuronal
response to injury and define a dedicated signaling event through which Bcl-2
supports CNS regeneration.

PMCID: PMC554135
PMID: 15719013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Comput Neurosci. 2005 Mar-Apr;18(2):163-81.

Dynamic properties of regulatory motifs associated with induction of three
temporal domains of memory in aplysia.

Pettigrew DB(1), Smolen P, Baxter DA, Byrne JH.

Author information: 
(1)W.M. Keck Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, Department of
Neurobiology and Anatomy, The University of Texas Medical School at Houston, P.O.
Box 20708, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. John.H.Byrne@uth.tmc.edu

A model was developed to examine dynamical properties of regulatory motifs
correlated with different temporal domains of memory. The model represents
short-, intermediate-, and long-term phases of protein kinase A (PKA) activation,
which appear related to corresponding phases of facilitation of the Aplysia
sensorimotor synapse. The model also represents phosphorylation of the
transcription factor CREB1 by PKA and consequent induction of the immediate-early
gene Aplysia ubiquitin hydrolase (Ap-uch), which is essential for long-term
synaptic facilitation (LTF). Simulations suggest mechanisms responsible for
differing profiles of synaptic facilitation following massed vs. spaced exposures
to 5-HT, and suggest a novel regulatory motif (gated positive feedback) is
important for LTF. Simulations suggest zero-order ultrasensitivity may underlie a
requirement of a threshold number of exposures to 5-HT for LTF induction. The
model makes predictions for the dynamics of PKA activation and Ap-uch induction
when MAP kinase is activated, or when repression of Ap-uch is relieved by
inhibiting the transcription factor CREB2. This model may therefore be useful for
understanding processes underlying memory formation in Aplysia and other systems.

PMID: 15714268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Jan 15;11(2 Pt 1):512-9.

Mutations and deletions of the CBP gene in human lung cancer.

Kishimoto M(1), Kohno T, Okudela K, Otsuka A, Sasaki H, Tanabe C, Sakiyama T,
Hirama C, Kitabayashi I, Minna JD, Takenoshita S, Yokota J.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1 Tsukiji
5-Chome Chuo-Ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

PURPOSE: Microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization analysis led us to
detect a homozygous deletion at the cyclic AMP response element binding
protein-binding protein (CBP) locus in a lung cancer cell line. Oncogenic roles
of CBP had been suggested by functional and genetic studies; thus, involvement of
CBP gene alterations in lung carcinogenesis was investigated by undertaking
comprehensive analysis of genetic CBP alterations in human lung cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Fifty-nine cell lines and 95 surgical specimens of lung
cancer were analyzed for mutations, homozygous and hemizygous deletions, and
expression of the CBP gene.
RESULTS: Homozygous CBP deletions, including two intragenic deletions, were
detected in three (5.1%) lung cancer cell lines. CBP mutations, including
missense, nonsense, and frame-shift mutations, were detected in six (10.2 %) cell
lines and five (5.3%) surgical specimens of lung cancer. The wild-type CBP allele
was retained in 9 of 11 cases with CBP mutations, and both the wild-type and
mutant alleles were expressed in all the six cases with heterozygous CBP
mutations examined. Three mutations with amino acid substitutions in the histone 
acetyltransferase domain caused significant reduction in transcription activation
activity of CBP protein in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: A fraction of lung cancers carried mutations and/or deletions of the
CBP gene, suggesting that genetic CBP alterations are involved in the genesis
and/or progression of a subset of lung cancers.

PMID: 15701835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Curr Biol. 2005 Feb 8;15(3):262-6.

Chlamydomonas IFT172 is encoded by FLA11, interacts with CrEB1, and regulates IFT
at the flagellar tip.

Pedersen LB(1), Miller MS, Geimer S, Leitch JM, Rosenbaum JL, Cole DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

The transport of flagellar precursors and removal of turnover products from the
flagellar tip is mediated by intraflagellar transport (IFT) , which is essential 
for both flagellar assembly and maintenance . Large groups of IFT particles are
moved from the flagellar base to the tip by kinesin-2, and smaller groups are
returned to the base by cytoplasmic dynein 1b. The IFT particles are composed of 
two protein complexes, A and B, comprising approximately 16-18 polypeptides. How 
cargo is unloaded from IFT particles, turnover products loaded, and active IFT
motors exchanged at the tip is unknown. We previously showed that the
Chlamydomonas microtubule end binding protein 1 (CrEB1) localizes to the
flagellar tip and is depleted from the tips of the temperature-sensitive (ts)
mutant fla11ts . We demonstrate here that FLA11 encodes IFT protein 172, a
component of IFT complex B, and show that IFT172 interacts with CrEB1. Because
fla11ts cells are defective in IFT particle turnaround at the tip, our results
indicate that IFT172 is involved in regulating the transition between anterograde
and retrograde IFT at the tip, perhaps by a mechanism involving CrEB1. Therefore,
IFT172 is involved in the control of flagellar assembly/disassembly at the tip.

PMID: 15694311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Feb;34(1):1-17.

Identification of human myometrial target genes of the cAMP pathway: the role of 
cAMP-response element binding (CREB) and modulator (CREMalpha and CREMtau2alpha) 
proteins.

Bailey J(1), Tyson-Capper AJ, Gilmore K, Robson SC, Europe-Finner GN.

Author information: 
(1)School of Surgical and Reproductive Sciences, The Medical School, University
of Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. jarrod.bailey@ncl.ac.uk

cAMP-response element (CRE) binding (CREB) and modulator (CREM) proteins,
activated by protein kinase A-mediated phosphorylation, bind as homo- and
heterodimers to promoters containing CRE and activator protein 1 (AP-1) sites to 
alter target-gene expression. We have previously reported differential expression
of CREB and CREM splice variants CREMalpha and CREMtau2alpha in human myometrium 
during pregnancy and labour. Via microarray studies with cultured myometrial
cells stably transfected with CREB, CREMalpha and CREMtau2alpha cDNAs, CREB
affected the expression of 958 genes; 522 being up-regulated and 436
down-regulated. CREMalpha altered the expression of 118 genes; 71 were increased 
and 47 decreased. CREMtau2alpha affected 220 genes; 148 were activated and 72
repressed. Notably, genes affected by CREB, CREMalpha and CREMtau2alpha belong to
largely discrete groups: less than 9% were affected by more than one factor.
Genes involved in regulation of cell death and apoptosis, growth and maintenance,
signal transduction, physiological and developmental processes, protein kinase
cascades, extracellular matrix, cytoskeleton, cell-cycle regulation, transport,
and a variety of enzymes, intracellular components and nucleic acid-binding
proteins have been described, many of which are involved in the modulation of
myometrial activity during pregnancy and parturition.

PMID: 15691874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2005 Feb 1;43(2):277-86.

A role of mitogen and stress-activated protein kinase 1/2 in survival of
lipopolysaccharide-stimulated RAW 264.7 macrophages.

Mu MM(1), Koide N, Hassan F, Islam S, Sugiyama T, Ito H, Mori I, Yoshida T,
Yokochi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Research Center for Infectious
Disease, Aichi Medical University School of Medicine, Nagakute, Aichi 480-1195,
Japan.

The effect of inhibition of mitogen and stress-activated protein kinases 1/2
(MSK1/2) on lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated RAW 264.7 macrophage cells was
investigated. Pretreatment with Ro 31-8220, an inhibitor of MSK1/2, induced cell 
death in LPS-stimulated RAW 264.7 cells. In contrast, calphostin C, another
inhibitor of protein kinase C, did not cause cell death. Cell death was not
mediated by the release of pro-inflammatory mediators from LPS-stimulated RAW
264.7 cells. Cell death was accompanied by DNA fragmentation and annexin V
binding, suggesting apoptotic cell death. Further, several caspase inhibitors did
not prevent LPS-induced cell death of Ro 31-8220-pretreated RAW 264.7 cells.
Nuclear translocation of apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) was detected in Ro
31-8220-pretreated cells after LPS stimulation. Cell death was due to
mitochondrial damage. Ro 31-8220 exclusively inhibited the phosphorylation of
cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB), a substrate of MSK1/2. RAW 264.7 
cells transfected with the dominant-negative MSK1 clones underwent cell death in 
response to LPS. Hence, it was suggested that MSK1/2 might play a critical role
in the survival of LPS-stimulated RAW 264.7 cells.

PMID: 15681159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Brain Res. 2005 Jan 25;1032(1-2):193-9.

Alterations in morphine-induced reward, locomotor activity, and thermoregulation 
in CREB-deficient mice.

Walters CL(1), Godfrey M, Li X, Blendy JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania, 125 John Morgan
Building, 3620 Hamilton Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6084, USA.

Previous studies in our lab have shown a robust decrease in the rewarding
properties of morphine in CREB(alphaDelta) mutant mice. To determine whether the 
genetic effects of the global CREB(alphaDelta) mutation are specific to reward or
generalizable, we examined a variety of morphine-induced behaviors regulated by
different neural circuitry. At low doses of morphine (5 and 10 mg/kg),
CREB(alphaDelta) mutant mice show a reduction in reward yet similar locomotor
activity in response to morphine compared to wild type littermates. However, at a
high dose (20 mg/kg), CREB(alphaDelta) mutant mice show an increase in reward and
locomotor activity. Morphine-induced thermoregulation is attenuated in
CREB(alphaDelta) mutant mice at high doses of morphine compared to wild type
animals. The behavioral differences in response to morphine seen in
CREB(alphaDelta) mutant mice are not due to changes in mu opioid receptor (MOR)
mRNA expression, as the CREB deletion has no effect on baseline MOR mRNA in three
of the brain regions involved in mediating these behaviors: the ventral tegmental
area (VTA), nucleus accumbens (NAc), and hypothalamus. These data demonstrate
that at low doses, deficits in morphine-induced changes in CREB deficient mice
are limited to reward and thermoregulation. However, at higher doses, CREB mutant
mice actually find morphine more rewarding and exhibit increased locomotor
activity compared to their wild type littermates. Together, these results
indicate that the role of CREB in dose-dependent changes in behaviors induced by 
morphine is different depending on the brain regions involved in mediating the
behavior.

PMID: 15680959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Dec;33(3):639-49.

Calcium/calmodulin kinase IV pathway is involved in the transcriptional
regulation of the corticotropin-releasing hormone gene promoter in neuronal
cells.

Yamamori E(1), Asai M, Yoshida M, Takano K, Itoi K, Oiso Y, Iwasaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine and
Hospital, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan.

Although corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) plays a pivotal role in the
regulation of the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis, the mechanism of CRH gene
expression in the neuronal cell is not completely understood. In this study, we
examined the transcriptional regulation of human CRH gene 5'-promoter, using a
human BE(2)C neuroblastoma cell line expressing intrinsic CRH. In particular, we 
focused on the involvement of calmodulin kinases (CaMKs), which are known to play
an important role in excitation-induced gene expression through the rise in
intracellular calcium in the central nervous system. RT-PCR analysis confirmed
the expression of CaMK as well as CRH mRNA in BE(2)C cells. When we introduced
approximately 1.1 kb of the 5'-promoter region of the human CRH fused with
luciferase reporter gene into the cells, a substantial transcriptional activity
was observed, and this was further increased by the activation of the cAMP/PKA
pathway. We then examined the effect of activation of CaMKs by introducing the
expression vectors of each kinase, revealing a potent stimulatory effect of
CaMKIV, but no effect of CaMKII. Depolarization of the cells caused an increase
in CRH promoter activity, which was completely abolished by the treatment with
the CaMK antagonist K252a. Interestingly, KCREB, a dominant negative form of
CREB, antagonized the effect of the CaMKIV-mediated effect. Altogether, we
conclude that not only the cAMP/PKA but also the calcium/CaMKIV signaling pathway
is involved in the regulation of CRH gene expression. Furthermore, CREB is
thought to be involved in CaMK- as well as cAMP/PKA-mediated CRH gene expression.
Since the CRH gene is expressed in the neuronal cells of the hypothalamus, the
calcium/CaMKIV signaling pathway may play an important role in the
excitation-mediated regulation of CRH synthesis.

PMID: 15591024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Curr Biol. 2004 Dec 14;14(23):2156-61.

Activation of cAMP response element-mediated gene expression by regulated nuclear
transport of TORC proteins.

Bittinger MA(1), McWhinnie E, Meltzer J, Iourgenko V, Latario B, Liu X, Chen CH, 
Song C, Garza D, Labow M.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, 250 Massachusetts Avenue,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

The CREB family of proteins are critical mediators of gene expression in response
to extracellular signals and are essential regulators of adaptive behavior and
long-term memory formation. The TORC proteins were recently described as potent
CREB coactivators, but their role in regulation of CREB activity remained
unknown. TORC proteins were found to be exported from the nucleus in a
CRM1-dependent fashion. A high-throughput microscopy-based screen was developed
to identify genes and pathways capable of inducing nuclear TORC accumulation.
Expression of the catalytic subunit of PKA and the calcium channel TRPV6
relocalized TORC1 to the nucleus. Nuclear accumulation of the three human TORC
proteins was induced by increasing intracellular cAMP or calcium levels. TORC1
and TORC2 translocation in response to calcium, but not cAMP, was mediated by
calcineurin, and TORC1 was shown to be directly dephosphorylated by calcineurin. 
TORC function was shown to be essential for CRE-mediated gene expression induced 
by cAMP, calcium, or GPCR activation, and nuclear transport of TORC1 was
sufficient to activate CRE-dependent transcription. Drosophila TORC was also
shown to translocate in response to calcineurin activation in vivo. Thus, TORC
nuclear translocation is an essential, conserved step in activation of
cAMP-responsive genes.

PMID: 15589160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Neurosci. 2004 Dec 1;24(48):10858-67.

Nuclear calcium/calmodulin regulates memory consolidation.

Limbäck-Stokin K(1), Korzus E, Nagaoka-Yasuda R, Mayford M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Childhood and Neglected Diseases and Department of Cell Biology,
The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The neuronal response to a Ca2+ stimulus is a complex process involving direct
Ca2+/calmodulin (CaM) actions as well as secondary activation of multiple
signaling pathways such as cAMP and ERK (extracellular signal-regulated kinase). 
These signals can act in both the cytoplasm and the nucleus to control gene
expression. To dissect the role of nuclear from cytoplasmic Ca2+/CaM signaling in
memory formation, we generated transgenic mice that express a dominant inhibitor 
of Ca2+/CaM selectively in the nuclei of forebrain neurons and only after the
animals reach adulthood. These mice showed diminished neuronal activity-induced
phosphorylation of cAMP response element-binding protein, reduced expression of
activity-induced genes, altered maximum levels of hippocampal long-term
potentiation, and severely impaired formation of long-term, but not short-term,
memory. Our results demonstrate that nuclear Ca2+/CaM signaling plays a critical 
role in memory consolidation in the mouse.

PMID: 15574736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2005 Feb;25(2):321-6. Epub 2004 Nov 29.

Cytochrome P4502C9-derived epoxyeicosatrienoic acids induce the expression of
cyclooxygenase-2 in endothelial cells.

Michaelis UR(1), Falck JR, Schmidt R, Busse R, Fleming I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Kardiovaskuläre Physiologie, Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universität, 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Cytochrome P450 (CYP) epoxygenases metabolize arachidonic acid to
epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs). CYP2C9-derived EETs elicit endothelial cell
proliferation and angiogenesis, but the signaling pathways involved are
incompletely understood. Because cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is involved in
angiogenesis, we determined whether a link exists between CYP2C9 and COX-2
expression.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Human umbilical vein endothelial cells were infected with
CYP2C9 sense or antisense adenoviral constructs. Overexpression of CYP2C9
increased COX-2 promoter activity, an effect accompanied by a significant
increase in COX-2 protein expression and elevated prostacyclin production. The
CYP2C9-induced expression of COX-2 was inhibited by the CYP2C9 inhibitor,
sulfaphenazole, whereas 11,12-EET increased COX-2 expression. Overexpression of
CYP2C9 and stimulation with 11,12-EET increased intracellular cAMP levels and
stimulated DNA-binding of the cAMP-response element-binding protein. The protein 
kinase A inhibitor, KT5720, attenuated the CYP2C9-induced increase in COX-2
promoter activity and protein expression. Overexpression of CYP2C9 stimulated
endothelial tube formation, an effect that was attenuated by the COX-2 inhibitor 
celecoxib. Identical responses were observed in cells preconditioned by cyclic
strain to increase CYP2C expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that CYP2C9-derived EETs induce the expression
of COX-2 in endothelial cells via a cAMP-dependent pathway and that this
mechanism contributes to CYP2C9-induced angiogenesis. Overexpression of
cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C9 in endothelial cells increased cAMP levels, stimulated 
the cAMP-response element-binding protein, and enhanced cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) 
promoter activity, protein expression, and prostacyclin production. CYP2C9
overexpression stimulated endothelial tube formation, which was attenuated by the
COX-2 inhibitor celecoxib. Thus, COX-2 contributes to CYP2C9-induced
angiogenesis.

PMID: 15569819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Virol. 2004 Dec;78(23):12788-99.

Role of the proximal enhancer of the major immediate-early promoter in human
cytomegalovirus replication.

Isomura H(1), Tsurumi T, Stinski MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, 3-772 BSB, University 
of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

The human cytomegalovirus (CMV) enhancer has a distal component (positions -550
to -300) and a proximal component (-300 to -39) relative to the transcription
start site (+1) of the major immediate-early (MIE) promoter. Without the distal
enhancer, human CMV replicates slower and has a small-plaque phenotype. We
determined the sequence requirements of the proximal enhancer by making 5'-end
deletions to positions -223, -173, -116, -67, and -39. Even though recombinant
virus with the proximal enhancer deleted to -39 has the minimal TATA
box-containing MIE promoter element, it cannot replicate independently in human
fibroblast cells. Recombinant virus with a deletion to -67 has an Sp-1
transcription factor binding site which may represent a minimal enhancer element 
for recombinant virus replication in human fibroblast cells. Although recombinant
virus with a deletion to -223 replicates to titers at least 100-fold less than
that of the wild-type virus, it replicates to titers 8-fold higher than that of
recombinant virus with a deletion to -173 and 20-fold higher than that of virus
with a deletion to -67. Recombinant virus with a deletion to -173 replicates more
efficiently than that with a deletion to -116. There was a direct correlation
between the level of infectious virus replication and time after infection,
amount of MIE gene transcription, MIE and early viral protein synthesis, and
viral DNA synthesis. The extent of the proximal enhancer determines the
efficiency of viral replication.

PMCID: PMC525030
PMID: 15542631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Learn Mem. 2004 Nov-Dec;11(6):738-47. Epub 2004 Nov 10.

A semi-persistent adult ocular dominance plasticity in visual cortex is
stabilized by activated CREB.

Pham TA(1), Graham SJ, Suzuki S, Barco A, Kandel ER, Gordon B, Lickey ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington,
School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington 98104, USA. tonypham@u.washington.edu

The adult cerebral cortex can adapt to environmental change. Using monocular
deprivation as a paradigm, we find that rapid experience-dependent plasticity
exists even in the mature primary visual cortex. However, adult cortical
plasticity differs from developmental plasticity in two important ways. First,
the effect of adult, but not juvenile monocular deprivation is strongly
suppressed by administration of barbiturate just prior to recording visual evoked
potentials, suggesting that the effect of adult experience can be inactivated
acutely. Second, the effect of deprivation is less persistent over time in adults
than in juveniles. This correlates with the known decline in CREB function during
maturation of the visual cortex. To compensate for this decline in CREB function,
we expressed persistently active VP16-CREB and find that it causes adult
plasticity to become persistent. These results suggest that in development and
adulthood, the regulation of a trans-synaptic signaling pathway controls the
adaptive potential of cortical circuits.

PMCID: PMC534702
PMID: 15537732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Exp Cell Res. 2004 Dec 10;301(2):305-19.

HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors induce COX-2 gene expression in murine macrophages: 
role of MAPK cascades and promoter elements for CREB and C/EBPbeta.

Chen JC(1), Huang KC, Wingerd B, Wu WT, Lin WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Except functioning as lipid-lowering agents, HMG-CoA inhibitors, statins, are
good tools to clarify the signaling role of small G proteins. In this study, we
found in murine RAW264.7 macrophages, statins within 1-30 microM stimulated COX-2
gene transcription and PGE(2) formation, displaying potencies as lovastatin >
fluvastatin > atorvastatin >> pravastatin. Transfection experiments with COX-2
promoter construct showed the necessity of C/EBPbeta and CRE promoter sites, but 
not NF-kappaB promoter site. Effects of statins on the activation of COX-2
promoter, induction of COX-2 protein, and PGE(2) production were all prevented by
mevalonate and prenylated metabolites, FPP and GGPP. Consistent with the effect
of statins, manumycin A, farnesyltransferase inhibitor, and
geranylgeranyltransferase inhibitor increased PGE(2) production and COX-2
induction. Likewise, toxin B, an inhibitor of Rho family members, caused a
prominent COX-2 induction. Results also indicated that tyrosine kinase, ERK, and 
p38 MAPK play essential roles in statin action. Taken together, these results not
only demonstrate a unique action of statins in the upregulation of COX-2
expression in macrophages, but also suggest a negative role controlled by small G
proteins in COX-2 gene regulation. Removal of this negative control by impairing 
G protein prenylation with statins leads to MAPKs activation and promotes COX-2
gene expression through the activation at CRE and C/EBPbeta sites.

PMID: 15530865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Gene. 2004 Nov 10;342(1):137-43.

Transcriptional regulation of the MAIL gene in LPS-stimulated RAW264 mouse
macrophages.

Ito T(1), Morimatsu M, Oonuma T, Shiina T, Kitamura H, Syuto B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology, Faculty of Agriculture, Iwate University,
Ueda 3-18-8, Morioka 020-8550, Japan.

IkappaB inhibits nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB), which is known to regulate
the expression of various genes, including genes involved in inflammation.
Recently, a novel IkappaB family protein, 'molecule possessing ankyrin repeats
induced by lipopolysaccharide' (MAIL), was identified. MAIL is a nuclear-acting, 
inducible protein, unlike typical IkappaB proteins. However, the mechanism of its
induction by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is unclear. Using the LPS-reactive region
located upstream from the MAIL gene, we investigated the mechanism of MAIL
induction. MAIL expression was strongly regulated by NF-kappaB and partly
regulated by CREB. Furthermore, deletion, point mutation and binding analyses
revealed that the NF-kappaB binding site located at -229 to -220 bp is an
essential target of MAIL expression. Overexpression of MAIL protein suppressed
the LPS-induced promoter activity of the MAIL gene. These data indicate that MAIL
expression is strongly upregulated by NF-kappaB, and it is controlled, at least
in part, by an autoregulation mechanism.

PMID: 15527973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2005 Mar;8(1):5-16. Epub 2004 Oct 22.

Signal transduction abnormalities in melancholic depression.

Akin D(1), Manier DH, Sanders-Bush E, Shelton RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
TN 37212, USA.

Comment in
    Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2005 Mar;8(1):1-4.

Intracellular signal transduction cascades, particularly those linked to protein 
kinases A (PKA) and C (PKC), have been implicated in mood disorders. This study
examined the activity of PKA and PKC, as well as levels of PKA regulatory (R) and
catalytic (C) subunit proteins, in fibroblasts cultured from skin biopsies from
patients with major depression, melancholic subtype, in contrast to
non-melancholic depressives and controls (n = 12 each group). PKA activity was
determined as a function of the transfer of 32P to a target polypeptide,
Kemptide. R and C subunit expression was assayed in the melancholic depressed and
normal control groups by Western blots. In a separate experiment, the degree of
phosphorylation of the endogenous substrate cAMP response element-binding protein
(CREB) was estimated in samples from melancholic and non-melancholic patients and
normal controls (n = 8 each) after incubation with isoproterenol or phorbol
ester, which activate PKA and PKC respectively. Melancholics had significantly
reduced phosphorylation of Kemptide in contrast to non-melancholics and controls.
This was associated with lower levels of PKA RII alpha, C alpha, and C beta
subunit isoform proteins, but not RI alpha, RI beta, or RII beta. Furthermore,
activation of both PKA and PKC was associated with reduced CREB-P in melancholics
relative to normal controls. Finally, PKA activity was found to correlate
positively with Hamilton depression scores after 16 weeks of treatment with
serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressants. These data further implicate signal
transduction abnormalities in melancholic major depression, particularly PKA and 
PKC. This suggests an abnormality of factors controlling the expression or
degradation of these enzymes.

PMID: 15500705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Immunol. 2004 Oct 15;173(8):5054-63.

Developmental activation of the TCR alpha enhancer requires functional
collaboration among proteins bound inside and outside the core enhancer.

Balmelle N(1), Zamarreño N, Krangel MS, Hernández-Munain C.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid,
Spain.

The TCR delta enhancer (Edelta) and TCR alpha enhancer (Ealpha) play critical
roles in the temporal and lineage-specific control of V(D)J recombination and
transcription at the TCR alphadelta locus, working as a developmental switch
controlling a transition from TCR delta to TCR alpha activity during thymocyte
development. Previous experiments using a transgenic reporter substrate revealed 
that substitution of the 116-bp minimal Ealpha, denoted Talpha1-Talpha2, for the 
entire 1.4-kb Ealpha led to a premature activation of V(D)J recombination. This
suggested that binding sites outside of Talpha1-Talpha2 are critical for the
strict developmental regulation of TCR alpha rearrangement. We have further
analyzed Ealpha to better understand the mechanisms responsible for appropriate
developmental regulation in vivo. We found that a 275-bp Ealpha fragment, denoted
Talpha1-Talpha4, contains all binding sites required for proper developmental
regulation in vivo. This suggests that developmentally appropriate enhancer
activation results from a functional interaction between factors bound to
Talpha1-Talpha2 and Talpha3-Talpha4. In support of this, EMSAs reveal the
formation of a large enhanceosome complex that reflects the cooperative assembly 
of proteins bound to both Talpha1-Talpha2 and Talpha3-Talpha4. Our data suggest
that enhanceosome assembly is critical for developmentally appropriate activation
of Ealpha in vivo, and that transcription factors, Sp1 and pCREB, may play unique
roles in this process.

PMID: 15470049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Biochem J. 2005 Feb 15;386(Pt 1):63-72.

The expression of the human neuronal alpha3 Na+,K+-ATPase subunit gene is
regulated by the activity of the Sp1 and NF-Y transcription factors.

Benfante R(1), Antonini RA, Vaccari M, Flora A, Chen F, Clementi F, Fornasari D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of Milan, 32 via
Vanvitelli, 20129 Milan, Italy.

The Na+,K+-ATPase is a ubiquitous protein found in virtually all animal cells
which is involved in maintaining the electrochemical gradient across the plasma
membrane. It is a multimeric enzyme consisting of alpha, beta and gamma subunits 
that may be present as different isoforms, each of which has a tissue-specific
expression profile. The expression of the Na+,K+-ATPase alpha3 subunit in humans 
is confined to developing and adult brain and heart, thus suggesting that its
catalytic activity is strictly required in excitable tissues. In the present
study, we used structural, biochemical and functional criteria to analyse the
transcriptional mechanisms controlling the expression of the human gene in
neurons, and identified a minimal promoter region of approx. 100 bp upstream of
the major transcription start site which is capable of preferentially driving the
expression of a reporter gene in human neuronal cell lines. This region contains 
the cognate DNA sites for the transcription factors Sp1/3/4 (transcription
factors 1/3/4 purified from Sephacryl and phosphocellulose columns), NF-Y
(nuclear factor-Y) and a half CRE (cAMP-response element)-like element that binds
a still unknown protein. Although the expression of these factors is not
tissue-specific, co-operative functional interactions among them are required to 
direct the activity of the promoter predominantly in neuronal cells.

PMCID: PMC1134767
PMID: 15462673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2004 Sep;82(2):159-63.

Inducible repression of CREB function disrupts amygdala-dependent memory.

Josselyn SA(1), Kida S, Silva AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Brain Research Institute, 695 Young Drive South,
Gonda Building, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1761, USA.

Evidence from Aplysia, Drosophila, mice, and rats indicates that the CREB
(cAMP/Ca2+ responsive element binding protein) family of transcription factors is
critical for long-term memory. Recent findings, however, suggest that performance
abnormalities may contribute to the memory deficits attributed to CREB
manipulations in mammals. To clarify the role of CREB in memory, we used a
paradigm, conditioned taste avoidance, that places few performance demands on the
subject. We show that lesioning or blocking protein synthesis in the basolateral 
amygdala of mice disrupts conditioned taste aversion. Furthermore, either
chronically or acutely disrupting CREB function in two different types of
genetically modified mice blocks memory for conditioned taste aversion measured
24 h following training. Together, these findings indicate that CREB-mediated
transcription and protein synthesis are required for conditioned taste aversion
memory.

PMID: 15341801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Mol Pharmacol. 2004 Dec;66(6):1536-43. Epub 2004 Aug 31.

Impaired CREB-1 phosphorylation in antifolate-resistant cell lines with
down-regulation of the reduced folate carrier gene.

Rothem L(1), Stark M, Assaraf YG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
32000, Israel.

The human reduced folate carrier (hRFC) is the dominant transporter for the
uptake of antifolates used in cancer chemotherapy. We have shown recently that
decreased cAMP-responsive element (CRE)-dependent transcription contributes to
the loss of hRFC gene expression in multiple antifolate-resistant cell lines.
This was associated with markedly decreased levels of phosphorylated cAMP
response element-binding protein 1 (pCREB-1) and CRE-binding. Consistent with the
autoregulation of CREB-1 gene expression by pCREB-1, prominently decreased CREB-1
mRNA levels were observed in antifolate-resistant cells. We therefore explored
the possibility that these cells were defective in CREB-1 phosphorylation,
thereby resulting in down-regulation of some cAMP-responsive genes.
Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis revealed that CREB-1 and its phosphoisoforms 
were markedly decreased in these cells. Treatment with forskolin, an activator of
adenylyl cyclase, restored both CREB-1 and pCREB-1 levels; this resulted in the
restoration of CRE-binding, CRE-reporter activity, and CREB-1 and RFC mRNA
levels. Hence, the protein kinase A pathway was examined using various agents
that augment intracellular cAMP levels, including cholera toxin, an upstream
agonist that renders stimulatory G-proteins (Galphas) constitutively active.
Treatment of antifolate-resistant cells with these agents resulted in the
restoration of pCREB-1 levels and CRE-reporter activity. Furthermore, transient
transfection with a constitutively transcriptionally active VP16-CREB-1 that does
not require phosphorylation for its activity resulted in restoration of CREB mRNA
levels but not pCREB-1 levels. This is the first demonstration that resistance to
various antifolates may potentially be associated with impaired activity of
Galphas or their coupled receptors, resulting in loss of CREB-1 phosphorylation
and consequent down-regulation of cAMP-responsive genes.

PMID: 15340044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Eur J Pharmacol. 2004 Aug 30;497(3):267-77.

Anti-apoptotic action of
(2S,3S,4R)-N"-cyano-N-(6-amino-3,4-dihydro-3-hydroxy-2-methyl-2-dimethoxymethyl-2
H-benzopyran-4-yl)-N'-benzylguanidine (KR-31378) by suppression of the
phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted from chromosome 10 phosphorylation and
increased phosphorylation of casein kinase2/Akt/ cyclic AMP response element
binding protein via maxi-K channel opening in neuronal cells.

Kim KY(1), Lee JH, Park JH, Yoo MA, Kwak YG, Kim SO, Yoo SE, Hong KW.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Science Division, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology,
Yuseong, Daejeon 305-600, Korea.

This study shows the signaling pathway by which
(2S,3S,4R)-N"-cyano-N-(6-amino-3,4-dihydro-3-hydroxy-2-methyl-2-dimethoxymethyl-2
H-benzopyran-4-yl)-N'-benzylguanidine (KR-31378) prevents tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-alpha-induced neuronal cell death. KR-31378 restored TNF-alpha-induced
decreased cell viability of SK-N-SH. U87-MG cells (PTEN-null glioblastoma cell
line) transfected with expression vectors for sense PTEN (phosphatase and tensin 
homolog deleted from chromosome 10) showed significantly decreased cell
viability, which was restored by KR-31378. TNF-alpha-induced increased PTEN
phosphorylation and decreased phosphorylation of Akt/cyclic AMP response
element-binding protein (CREB) in SK-N-SH cells were concentration-dependently
reversed by KR-31378, those of which were antagonized by iberiotoxin, a maxi-K
channel blocker. TNF-alpha and apigenin, a casein kinase2 (CK2) inhibitor, showed
decreased CK2 phosphorylation and increased PTEN phosphorylation, which were
reversed by KR-31378. KR-31378 increased K(+) currents by activating the maxi-K
channels in SK-N-SH cells, with suppression of TNF-alpha-induced increase in
cytosolic Ca(2+) and elevation of suppressed mitochondrial membrane potential,
all of which were antagonized by iberiotoxin. It is suggested that increase in
cell viability by KR-31378 is ascribed to the maxi-K channel opening-coupled
upregulation of CK2/Akt/CREB phosphorylation and downregulation of PTEN
phosphorylation in association with increased Bcl-2 and decreased Bax levels.

PMID: 15336944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Immunol. 2004 Aug 15;173(4):2552-61.

Transcriptional regulation of the human TLR9 gene.

Takeshita F(1), Suzuki K, Sasaki S, Ishii N, Klinman DM, Ishii KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Retroviral Immunology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and
Research, Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
takesita@yokohama-cu.ac.jp

To clarify the molecular basis of human TLR9 (hTLR9) gene expression, the
activity of the hTLR9 gene promoter was characterized using the human myeloma
cell line RPMI 8226. Reporter gene analysis and EMSA demonstrated that hTLR9 gene
transcription was regulated via four cis-acting elements, cAMP response element, 
5'-PU box, 3'-PU box, and a C/EBP site, that interacted with the CREB1, Ets2,
Elf1, Elk1, and C/EBPalpha transcription factors. Other members of the C/EBP
family, such as C/EBPbeta, C/EBPdelta, and C/EBPepsilon, were also important for 
TLR9 gene transcription. CpG DNA-mediated suppression of TLR9 gene transcription 
led to decreased binding of the trans-acting factors to their corresponding
cis-acting elements. It appeared that suppression was mediated via c-Jun and
NF-kappaB p65 and that cooperation among CREB1, Ets2, Elf1, Elk1, and C/EBPalpha 
culminated in maximal transcription of the TLR9 gene. These findings will help to
elucidate the mechanism of TLR9 gene regulation and to provide insight into the
process by which TLR9 evolved in the mammalian immune system.

PMID: 15294971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Retrovirology. 2004 Jul 30;1:19.

The expanding role of Tax in transcription.

de la Fuente C(1), Kashanchi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The George Washington
University School of Medicine, Washington, DC 20037, USA. bcmclf@gwumc.edu

The viral transactivator of HTLV-I, Tax, has long been shown to target the
earliest steps of transcription by forming quaternary complexes with sequence
specific transcription factors and histone-modifying enzymes in the LTR of
HTLV-I. However, a new study suggests that Tax preferentially transactivates the 
21-bp repeats through CREB1 and not other bZIP proteins. The additional
transactivation of Tax-responsive promoters subsequent to initiation is also
presented. This result highlights a potentially novel role of Tax following TBP
recruitment (i.e. initiation) and may expand the mechanism of Tax transactivation
in promoter clearance and transcriptional elongation.

PMCID: PMC506788
PMID: 15285790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Neurosci. 2004 Jul 28;24(30):6686-92.

cAMP response element-binding protein is required for stress but not
cocaine-induced reinstatement.

Kreibich AS(1), Blendy JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Reinstatement of previously extinguished conditioned place preference (CPP) is
precipitated by stress or drug exposure. Here, we show that acute exposure to
forced swim stress (FS), in a context distinct from conditioning, induces
reinstatement of cocaine CPP in wild-type mice. This behavior is accompanied by a
pattern of phosphorylated cAMP response element-binding protein (pCREB)
activation in discrete brain regions that is distinct from the pattern observed
after cocaine-induced reinstatement. For example, previous cocaine conditioning
increases pCREB levels in the amygdala, and acute exposure to FS, but not to
cocaine, further augments these changes. In contrast, previous cocaine
conditioning does not alter levels of pCREB in the nucleus accumbens, but acute
exposure to FS increases pCREB levels in this region on reinstatement day.
Furthermore, to determine whether these alterations of CREB are necessary in FS
or cocaine-induced reinstatement, we examined the effect of these stimuli on
reinstatement behavior in mice deficient in alpha and Delta isoforms of CREB. The
CREB(alphaDelta) mutant mice show deficits in FS-induced reinstatement of
conditioned place preference. In contrast, they show robust cocaine-induced
reinstatement. This deficit in stress but not drug-induced reinstatement
indicates a specific requirement for CREB in stress-induced behavioral responses 
to drugs of abuse.

PMID: 15282271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Acta Biol Hung. 2004;55(1-4):163-6.

The expression pattern of CREB genes in the central nervous system of the pond
snail Lymnaea stagnalis.

Sadamoto H(1), Azami S, Ito E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Innovative Research, Creative Research Initiative Sousei, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo 060-0810, Japan. sada@sci.hokudai.ac.jp

To analyze the expression pattern of genes of cAMP responsive element binding
protein (CREB), we performed in situ hybridization for the whole central nervous 
system (CNS) of the pond snail Lymnaea stagnalis. The CREB1 (activator) and CREB2
(repressor) homologues have already been cloned in L. stagnalis, and they are
referred to as LymCREB1 and LymCREB2. Using the frozen sections and the whole
mount preparations of the CNS, we mapped the distribution of LymCREB1 and
LymCREB2 mRNA containing neurons. The present findings showed that the LymCREB1
mRNA containing neurons are a relatively few, whereas LymCREB2 mRNA is contained 
ubiquitously in the whole CNS of L. stagnalis.

PMID: 15270231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Immunol. 2004 Aug 1;173(3):1802-10.

Cyclic adenosine 5'-monophosphate response element binding protein plays a
central role in mediating proliferation and differentiation downstream of the
pre-TCR complex in developing thymocytes.

Grady GC(1), Mason SM, Stephen J, Zúñiga-Pflücker JC, Michie AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Infection, and Inflammation, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, Scotland, United Kingdom.

The roles played by specific transcription factors during the regulation of early
T cell development remain largely undefined. Several key genes induced during the
primary checkpoint of T cell development, beta-selection, contain cAMP response
element sites within their enhancer-promoter region that are regulated by CREB
activation. In this study, we show that CREB is constitutively phosphorylated in 
the thymus, but not the spleen. We also show that CREB is activated downstream of
the pre-TCR complex, and that the induction of CREB activity is regulated by
protein kinase C alpha- and ERK-MAPK-mediated signals. We addressed the
importance of this activation by expressing a naturally occurring inhibitor of
CREB, inducible cAMP early repressor in wild-type fetal liver-derived lymphoid
progenitor cells, and assessed their developmental potential. Fetal thymic organ 
cultures reconstituted with cells constitutively expressing inducible cAMP early 
repressor displayed a delay in generating CD4(+)CD8(+) thymocytes and a decrease 
in cellularity compared with control fetal thymic organ cultures. Taken together,
our studies establish that CREB plays a central role in relaying proliferation
and differentiation signals from the pre-TCR complex into the nucleus in
developing thymocytes.

PMID: 15265911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Eur J Immunol. 2004 Jul;34(7):1961-71.

CREB function is required for normal thymic cellularity and post-irradiation
recovery.

Baumann S(1), Kyewski B, Bleckmann SC, Greiner E, Rudolph D, Schmid W, Ramsay RG,
Krammer PH, Schütz G, Mantamadiotis T.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology of the Cell I, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg,
Germany.

Recent generation of genetically modified Creb1 mutant mice has revealed an
important role for CREB (cAMP responsive element binding protein) and the related
proteins CREM (cAMP responsive element modulator) and ATF1 (activating
transcription factor 1) in cell survival, in agreement with previous studies
using overexpression of dominant-negative CREB (dnCREB). CREB and ATF1 are
abundantly expressed in T cells and are rapidly activated by phosphorylation when
T cells are stimulated through the T cell antigen receptor. We show that T
cell-specific loss of CREB in mice, in combination with the loss of ATF1, results
in reduced thymic cellularity and delayed thymic recovery following sublethal
irradiation but no changes in T cell development or activation. These data show
that loss of CREB function has specific effects on thymic T lymphocyte
proliferation and homeostasis in vivo.

PMID: 15214044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 20;279(34):35403-11. Epub 2004 Jun 21.

Transcriptional regulation of cyclooxygenase-2 gene in pancreatic beta-cells.

Yang F(1), Bleich D.

Author information: 
(1)Susan and Leslie Gonda (Goldschmied) Diabetes & Genetic Research Center,
Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology, & Metabolism, City of Hope National
Medical Center, Duarte, California 91010, USA.

Prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) has been shown to negatively affect pancreatic
beta-cell function, and its inducible synthesis is mediated in part by
cycloxygenase-2 (COX-2). Regulation of basal and inducible COX-2 gene expression 
in pancreatic beta-cells is not fully understood. In this report, we used
pancreatic beta-cells (RINm5F) to explore the molecular mechanisms regulating
COX-2 promoter activity. Through deletion analysis of a -907/+70-bp 5' upstream
region of the mouse COX-2 gene, we identified an inhibition domain (-804/-371)
and an activation domain (-371/+70). The highest promoter activity was seen when 
the promoter was reduced to -371 bp. Several cis-acting elements were selected
for site-directed mutations in the activation domain. We identified three sites
that were essential for basal COX-2 promoter activity: 1) CCAAT/enhancer-binding 
protein (C/EBP), 2) aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), and 3) cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB). Single mutation of each individual site inhibited
70-80% of basal COX-2 promoter activity. Double mutation of the AhR and
CREB-binding sites showed synergy in repressing COX-2 promoter activity as did
mutation of all three sites. We demonstrated that the transcription factors from 
RINm5F nuclear extracts specifically bound to oligonucleotides containing C/EBP, 
AhR, or CREB consensus sites. Forskolin, an activator of adenyl cyclase,
increased COX-2 promoter activity via the CREB site. COX-2 promoter activity was 
also increased by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, an AhR activator, through 
the AhR site. Both forskolin and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin increased
COX-2 mRNA in a dose-dependent manner. We consider these three transcriptional
regulators of COX-2 expression to be potential targets for the prevention of
beta-cell damage mediated by PGE(2).

PMID: 15213229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2004 Oct;287(4):C903-11. Epub 2004 May 26.

CREB trans-activates the murine H(+)-K(+)-ATPase alpha(2)-subunit gene.

Xu X(1), Zhang W, Kone BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Medical School at
Houston, 6431 Fannin Ave., MSB 1.150, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Despite its key role in potassium homeostasis, transcriptional control of the
H(+)-K(+)-ATPase alpha(2)-subunit (HKalpha(2)) gene in the collecting duct
remains poorly characterized. cAMP increases H(+)-K(+)-ATPase activity in the
collecting duct, but its role in activating HKalpha(2) transcription has not been
explored. Previously, we demonstrated that the proximal 177 bp of the HKalpha(2) 
promoter confers basal collecting duct-selective expression. This region contains
several potential cAMP/Ca(2+)-responsive elements (CRE). Accordingly, we examined
the participation of CRE-binding protein (CREB) in HKalpha(2) transcriptional
control in murine inner medullary collecting duct (mIMCD)-3 cells. Forskolin and 
vasopressin induced HKalpha(2) mRNA levels, and CREB overexpression stimulated
the activity of HKalpha(2) promoter-luciferase constructs. Serial deletion
analysis revealed that CREB inducibility was retained in a construct containing
the proximal 100 bp of the HKalpha(2) promoter. In contrast, expression of a
dominant negative inhibitor (A-CREB) resulted in 60% lower HKalpha(2)
promoter-luciferase activity, suggesting that constitutive CREB participates in
basal HKalpha(2) transcriptional activity. A constitutively active CREB mutant
(CREB-VP16) strongly induced HKalpha(2) promoter-luciferase activity, whereas
overexpression of CREBdLZ-VP16, which lacks the CREB DNA-binding domain,
abolished this activation. In vitro DNase I footprinting and gel shift/supershift
analysis of the proximal promoter with recombinant glutathione S-transferase
(GST)-CREB-1 and mIMCD-3 cell nuclear extracts revealed sequence-specific
DNA-CREB-1 complexes at -86/-60. Mutation at three CRE-like sequences within this
region abolished CREB-1 DNA-binding activity and abrogated CREB-VP16
trans-activation of the HKalpha(2) promoter. In contrast, mutation of the
neighboring -104/-94 kappabeta element did not alter CREB-VP16 trans-activation
of the HKalpha(2) promoter. Thus CREB-1, binding to one or more CRE-like elements
in the -86/-60 region, trans-activates the HKalpha(2) gene and may represent an
important link between rapid and delayed effects of cAMP on HKalpha(2) activity.

PMID: 15163620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Neoplasia. 2004 May-Jun;6(3):279-86.

CREB regulates AChE-R-induced proliferation of human glioblastoma cells.

Perry C(1), Sklan EH, Soreq H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel.

The cyclic adenosine monophosphate (AMP) response element-binding protein, CREB, 
often modulates stress responses. Here, we report that CREB suppresses the
glioblastoma proliferative effect of the stress-induced acetylcholinesterase
variant, AChE-R. In human U87MG glioblastoma cells, AChE-R formed a triple
complex with protein kinase C (PKC) epsilon and the scaffold protein RACK1,
enhanced PKCepsilon phosphorylation, and facilitated BrdU incorporation. Either
overexpressed CREB, or antisense destruction of AChE-R mRNA, PKC, or protein
kinase A (PKA) inhibitors-but not CREB combined with PKC inhibition
suppressed-this proliferation, suggesting that CREB's repression of this process 
involves a PKC-mediated pathway, whereas impaired CREB regulation allows
AChE-R-induced, PKA-mediated proliferation of glioblastoma tumors.

PMCID: PMC1502102
PMID: 15153340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Dev Cell. 2004 May;6(5):673-84.

Deacetylase inhibitors increase muscle cell size by promoting myoblast
recruitment and fusion through induction of follistatin.

Iezzi S(1), Di Padova M, Serra C, Caretti G, Simone C, Maklan E, Minetti G, Zhao 
P, Hoffman EP, Puri PL, Sartorelli V.

Author information: 
(1)Muscle Gene Expression Group, Laboratory of Muscle Biology, NIAMS, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Fusion of undifferentiated myoblasts into multinucleated myotubes is a
prerequisite for developmental myogenesis and postnatal muscle growth. We report 
that deacetylase inhibitors favor the recruitment and fusion of myoblasts into
preformed myotubes. Muscle-restricted expression of follistatin is induced by
deacetylase inhibitors and mediates myoblast recruitment and fusion into myotubes
through a pathway distinct from those utilized by either IGF-1 or IL-4. Blockade 
of follistatin expression by RNAi-mediated knockdown, functional inactivation
with either neutralizing antibodies or the antagonist protein myostatin, render
myoblasts refractory to HDAC inhibitors. Muscles from animals treated with the
HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A display increased production of follistatin and
enhanced expression of markers of regeneration following muscle injury. These
data identify follistatin as a central mediator of the fusigenic effects exerted 
by deacetylase inhibitors on skeletal muscles and establish a rationale for their
use to manipulate skeletal myogenesis and promote muscle regeneration.

PMID: 15130492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Cell Biochem. 2004 Apr 1;91(5):915-25.

SPARC regulates TGF-beta1-dependent signaling in primary glomerular mesangial
cells.

Francki A(1), McClure TD, Brekken RA, Motamed K, Murri C, Wang T, Sage EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology, The Hope Heart Institute, Seattle, Washington 
98104, USA.

Secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC), a member of the family of
matricellular proteins, regulates the interaction of cells with pleiotropic
factors and proteins of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Although it has been
appreciated that transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-beta1) induces SPARC and 
collagen type I, we have recently shown that SPARC regulates the expression of
TGF-beta1 and collagen type I in renal mesangial cells via a TGF-beta1-dependent 
pathway, and have proposed a reciprocal, autocrine regulatory feedback loop
between SPARC and TGF-beta1. Herein, we sought to determine how SPARC regulates
TGF-beta1-dependent signal transduction. Our data indicate that SPARC modulates
the TGF-beta1-dependent phosphorylation of Smad-2 in primary mesangial cells
derived from wild-type and SPARC-null mice. We also show that SPARC regulates the
levels and activation of the stress-activated c-jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK) in
mesangial cells by augmentation of the stimulatory effects of TGF-beta1.
Furthermore, we found that SPARC increases the levels and the activity of the
transcription factor c-jun. These effects of SPARC on the TGF-beta1 signaling
pathway appear to be mediated through an interaction with the TGF-beta1-receptor 
complex, but only in the presence of TGF-beta1 bound to its cognate type II
receptor. That SPARC is directly involved in the regulation of the TGF-beta1
signaling cascade is consistent with the paradigm that matricellular proteins
modulate interactions among cells, growth factors, and their respective
receptors.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15034927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2004 Jun;29(6):1122-33.

Modulation of anxiety-like behavior and morphine dependence in CREB-deficient
mice.

Valverde O(1), Mantamadiotis T, Torrecilla M, Ugedo L, Pineda J, Bleckmann S,
Gass P, Kretz O, Mitchell JM, Schütz G, Maldonado R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratori de Neurofarmacologia, Facultat de Ciènces de la Salut i de la Vida,
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.

The transcription factor cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) has been 
shown to regulate different physiological responses including drug addiction and 
emotional behavior. Molecular changes including adaptive modifications of the
transcription factor CREB are produced during drug dependence in many regions of 
the brain, including the locus coeruleus (LC), but the molecular mechanisms
involving CREB within these regions have remained controversial. To further
investigate the involvement of CREB in emotional behavior, drug reward and opioid
physical dependence, we used two independently generated CREB-deficient mice. We 
employed the Cre/loxP system to generate mice with a conditional CREB mutation
restricted to the nervous system, where all CREB isoforms are lacking in the
brain (Crebl(NesCre)). A genetically defined cohort of the previously described
hypomorphic Crebl(alphadelta) mice, in which the two major transcriptionally
active isoforms (alpha and delta) are disrupted throughout the organism, were
also used. First, we investigated the responses to stress of the CREB-deficient
mice in several paradigms, and we found an increased anxiogenic-like response in 
the both Creb1 mutant mice in different behavioral models. We investigated the
rewarding properties of drugs of abuse (cocaine and morphine) and natural reward 
(food) using the conditioned place-preference paradigm. No modification of
motivational responses of morphine, cocaine, or food was observed in mutant mice.
Finally, we evaluated opioid dependence by measuring the behavioral expression of
morphine withdrawal and electrophysiological recordings of LC neurons. We showed 
an important attenuation of the behavioral expression of abstinence and a
decrease in the hyperactivity of LC neurons in both Creb1 mutant mice. Our
results emphasize the selective role played by neuronal CREB in emotional-like
behavior and the somatic expression morphine withdrawal, without participating in
the rewarding properties induced by morphine and cocaine.

Copyright 2004 Nature Publishing Group

PMID: 15029152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Brain Res Gene Expr Patterns. 2002 Jan;1(2):101-6.

In vivo CREB phosphorylation mediated by dopamine and NMDA receptor activation in
mouse hippocampus and caudate nucleus.

Nijholt I(1), Blank T, Ahi J, Spiess J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroendocrinology, Max Planck Institute for
Experimental Medicine, Hermann-Rein-Strasse 3, D-37075 Goettingen, Germany.
nijholt@mail.em.mpg.de <nijholt@mail.em.mpg.de>

The pattern of CREB phosphorylation was investigated in the caudate nucleus and
hippocampus 10 min or 3 h after i.p. injection of dopamine or NMDA receptor
agonists alone, or in combination with antagonists. Ten minutes after C57BL/6 J
mice were injected with either the dopamine D1 receptor agonist SKF-38393
hydrobromide or NMDA, immunoreactivity of phosphorylated CREB (pCREB) was
significantly increased in all parts of the caudate nucleus but not in
hippocampal regions. However, 3 h after the injection of SKF-38393, pCREB levels 
in the caudate nucleus did not differ significantly from the pCREB levels in
control animals, whereas pCREB levels were still elevated 3 h after NMDA
injection. Except for the D1 receptor antagonist SCH-23390, which induced CREB
phosphorylation in the caudate nucleus, dopamine and NMDA receptor antagonists
had little effect on pCREB levels by themselves. However, the NMDA receptor
antagonist CGS-19755 injected i.p. blocked both the NMDA- and SKF-38393-induced
rise of pCREB levels in the caudate nucleus. Similarly, the D1 receptor
antagonist SCH-23390 inhibited the effects produced by SKF-38393 or NMDA.
Interestingly, the D2 receptor antagonist sulpiride also blocked the
SKF-38393-triggered rise of pCREB. The results demonstrated that NMDA and
dopamine receptors modulate pCREB levels in the caudate nucleus and suggest
mutual permissive roles for both receptors.

PMID: 15018806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2004 May;24(5):871-7. Epub 2004 Mar 4.

HDL3 induces cyclooxygenase-2 expression and prostacyclin release in human
endothelial cells via a p38 MAPK/CRE-dependent pathway: effects on
COX-2/PGI-synthase coupling.

Norata GD(1), Callegari E, Inoue H, Catapano AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, University of Milan, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: In endothelial cells, cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) and COX-2 both
contribute to prostacyclin production. Recent findings suggest that COX-2
contributes significantly to systemic prostacyclin synthesis in humans; whether
COX-2 inhibition is related to an increased cardiovascular risk is undergoing
debate. HDLs have been shown to increase prostacyclin synthesis, thus in the
present study we investigated the molecular mechanisms involved in this effect in
endothelial cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: HDL3 (30 microg/mL) induced COX-2 expression in a time- and 
dose-dependent manner. COX-2 was found mainly in the perinuclear area where it
co-localizes with PGI synthase. Transient transfection experiments showed that
CRE is required for HDL-induced COX-2 transcription, and we demonstrated that p38
MAPK activation by HDL3 is involved in COX-2 mRNA transcription and
stabilization. As a consequence of COX-2-induction by HDL3 prostacyclin
production increased, incubation with a COX-2 selective inhibitor blocked this
effect. Moreover, HDL3 increased caveolin-1 phosphorylation, thus promoting
PGI-synthase shuttling from the membrane to the perinuclear area.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that in endothelial cells, HDL modulates COX-2/PGI-S
activity via both p38 MAPK-dependent COX-2 mRNA stability and transcription and
both caveolin-1-dependent PGI-synthase shuttling and COX-2 coupling. The
understanding of these mechanisms may provide new insights into the
antiatherogenic role of HDL.

PMID: 15001457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Clin Genet. 2003 Dec;64(6):497-501.

Chromosome 2 deletion encompassing the MAP2 gene in a patient with autism and
Rett-like features.

Pescucci C(1), Meloni I, Bruttini M, Ariani F, Longo I, Mari F, Canitano R, Hayek
G, Zappella M, Renieri A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, Department of Molecular Biology, University of Siena, Siena,
Italy.

We present here a unique case of a 14-year-old female with autism and some
features similar to Rett syndrome (RTT). Genetic analysis demonstrated a large
deletion of chromosome 2q instead of a MECP2 mutation. Like a Rett patient, she
is dyspraxic and shows frequent hand-washing stereotypic activities, hyperpnea,
and bruxism. Like a preserved speech variant (PSV) of RTT, she is obese, able to 
speak in second and third persons, frequently echolalic, and has final normal
head circumference and autistic behavior. In addition, she has dysmorphic
features such as down-slanting palpebral fissures, low set ears without lobuli,
bilateral flat feet, and bilateral syndactyly of the second and third toes, which
do not belong to the Rett spectrum. She has a de novo chromosomal deletion in
2q34 of paternal origin. Gene content analysis of the deleted region showed the
presence of 47 genes (14 putative and 33 known genes). This region contains some 
interesting genes such as ADAM23/MDC3, CREB1, KLF7, and MAP2. Because alteration 
of neuronal maturation, dendritic anomalies, and a decrease in MAP2
immunoreactivity in white matter neurons are well documented in RTT patients, we 
propose MAP2 gene as a good candidate for the generation of PSV phenotype in this
case.

PMID: 14986829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Neurobiol. 2004 Mar;58(4):455-66.

CREB in the pond snail Lymnaea stagnalis: cloning, gene expression, and function 
in identifiable neurons of the central nervous system.

Sadamoto H(1), Sato H, Kobayashi S, Murakami J, Aonuma H, Ando H, Fujito Y,
Hamano K, Awaji M, Lukowiak K, Urano A, Ito E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo 060-0810, Japan.

The pond snail Lymnaea stagnalis is an excellent model system in which to study
the neuronal and molecular substrates of associative learning and its
consolidation into long-term memory. Until now, the presence of cyclic AMP
(cAMP)-responsive element binding protein (CREB), which is believed to be a
necessary component in the process of a learned behavior that is consolidated
into long-term memory, has only been assumed in Lymnaea neurons. We therefore
cloned and analyzed the cDNA sequences of homologues of CREB1 and CREB2 and
determined the presence of these mRNAs in identifiable neurons of the central
nervous system (CNS) of L. stagnalis. The deduced amino acid sequence of Lymnaea 
CREB1 is homologous to transcriptional activators, mammalian CREB1 and Aplysia
CREB1a, in the C-terminal DNA binding (bZIP) and phosphorylation domains, whereas
the deduced amino acid sequence of Lymnaea CREB2 is homologous to transcriptional
repressors, human CREB2, mouse activating transcription factor-4, and Aplysia
CREB2 in the bZIP domain. In situ hybridization revealed that only a relatively
few neurons showed strongly positive signals for Lymnaea CREB1 mRNA, whereas all 
the neurons in the CNS contained Lymnaea CREB2 mRNA. Using one of the neurons
(the cerebral giant cell) containing Lymnaea CREB1 mRNA, we showed that the
injection of a CRE oligonucleotide inhibited a cAMP-induced, long-lasting
synaptic plasticity. We therefore conclude that CREBs are present in Lymnaea
neurons and may function as necessary players in behavioral plasticity.

Copyright 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Neurobiol 58: 455-466, 2004

PMID: 14978723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 23;279(17):17772-84. Epub 2004 Jan 30.

PE-1/METS, an antiproliferative Ets repressor factor, is induced by CREB-1/CREM-1
during macrophage differentiation.

Sawka-Verhelle D(1), Escoubet-Lozach L, Fong AL, Hester KD, Herzig S, Lebrun P,
Glass CK.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California at
San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA.

The molecular mechanisms involved in regulating the balance between cellular
proliferation and differentiation remain poorly understood. Members of the
Ets-domain family of transcription factors are candidates for proteins that might
differentially regulate cell cycle control and cell type-specific genes during
the differentiation of myeloid progenitor cells. The Ets repressor PE-1/METS has 
been suggested to contribute to growth arrest during terminal macrophage
differentiation by repressing Ets target genes involved in Ras-dependent
proliferation. An important feature of this regulatory model is that PE-1/METS is
itself induced by the program of macrophage differentiation elicited by M-CSF.
Here, we present evidence that the PE-1/METS gene is a transcriptional target of 
the cyclic AMP response element-binding protein-1 (CREB-1). CREB-1 expression is 
dramatically up-regulated during macrophage differentiation and phosphorylation
of CREB-1 and the related factor CREM-1 are stimulated by M-CSF in a
SAPK2/p38-dependent manner. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrate
that CREB-1/CREM-1 are recruited to the PE-1/METS promoter as well as to the
promoters of other genes that are up-regulated during terminal macrophage
differentiation. Overexpression of CREB-1 stimulates the activities of the
PE-1/METS, and macrosialin promoters, while expression of a dominant negative
form of CREB-1 during macrophage differentiation inhibits expression of the
PE-1/METS and macrosialin genes. Inhibition of CREB function also results in
reduced expression of CD54 and impaired cell adhesion. Taken together, these
findings reveal new roles of CREB-1/CREM-1 as regulators of macrophage
differentiation.

PMID: 14754893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 9;279(15):14803-11. Epub 2004 Jan 23.

Identification of a novel cyclic AMP-response element (CRE-II) and the role of
CREB-1 in the cAMP-induced expression of the survival motor neuron (SMN) gene.

Majumder S(1), Varadharaj S, Ghoshal K, Monani U, Burghes AH, Jacob ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA. jacob.42@osu.edu

Spinal muscular atrophy, an autosomal recessive disorder, is caused by loss of
the SMN1 (survival motor neuron) gene while retaining the SMN2 gene. SMN1
produces a majority of full-length SMN transcript, whereas SMN2 generates mostly 
an isoform lacking exon 7. Here, we demonstrate a novel cAMP-response element,
CRE-II, in the SMN promoter that interacts with the cAMP-response element-binding
(CREB) family of proteins. In vitro DNase I protection analysis and in vivo
genomic footprinting of the SMN promoter using the brain and liver nuclei from
SMN2 transgenic mice revealed footprinting at the CRE-II site. Site-directed
mutation of the CRE-II element caused a marked reduction in the SMN promoter
activity revealed by transient transfection assay. Activation of the cAMP pathway
by dibutyryl cAMP (0.5 mm) alone or in combination with forskolin (20 microm)
caused a 2-5-fold increase in the SMN promoter activity but had no effect on the 
CRE-II mutated promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay and a UV-induced
DNA-protein cross-linking experiment confirmed that CREB1 binds specifically to
the CRE-II site. Transient overexpression of CREB1 protein resulted in a 4-fold
increase of the SMN promoter activity. Intraperitoneal injection of epinephrine
in mice expressing two copies of the human SMN2 gene resulted in a 2-fold
increase in full-length SMN transcript in the liver. Combined treatment with
dibutyryl cAMP and forskolin significantly increased the level of both the
full-length and exon 7-deleted SMN (exonDelta7SMN) transcript in primary
hepatocytes from mice expressing two copies of human SMN2 gene. Similar
treatments of type I spinal muscular atrophy mouse and human fibroblasts as well 
as HeLa cells resulted in an augmented level of SMN transcript. These findings
suggest that the CRE-II site in SMN promoter positively regulates the expression 
of the SMN gene, and treatment with cAMP-elevating agents increases expression of
both the full-length and exonDelta7SMN transcript.

PMCID: PMC1761111
PMID: 14742439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2004 Jan;81(1):19-26.

Hippocampal CREB1 but not CREB2 is decreased in aged rats with spatial memory
impairments.

Brightwell JJ(1), Gallagher M, Colombo PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Program, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70118, USA.
jbright@tulane.edu

Recent evidence has shown that abnormal signal transduction is related to
non-pathological memory impairment among aged subjects. Members of the CREB
family of transcription factors contain enhancers (i.e., CREB1) and repressors
(i.e., CREB2) of transcription and interact with numerous signaling proteins to
mediate the transition from short-term to long-term memory. In this study,
quantitative Western blotting was used to determine the levels of CREB1 and CREB2
in homogenates from hippocampi of individual 6- and 24-month-old male Long-Evans 
rats trained first on a place-learning task in the Morris water maze, then on a
transfer task. Based on spatial memory performance, aged rats were characterized 
into two groups; aged-unimpaired rats (AU) had scores within the range of the
young (Y) and aged-impaired rats (AI) fell outside of that range. Overall, CREB1 
protein was significantly lower in aged rats in comparison with young rats.
Aposteriori analysis showed that this difference was due to a significant
decrease in CREB1 levels among aged-impaired rats, whereas aged-unimpaired rats
had CREB1 levels comparable to young rats. There was no significant change in
levels of CREB2 protein between young and aged rats. These results show that the 
dysregulation of CREB1 protein may contribute to the spatial memory deficits
observed among some aged subjects.

PMID: 14670355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Dec;23(24):9233-44.

Transcriptional regulation of cyclooxygenase 2 by bradykinin and
interleukin-1beta in human airway smooth muscle cells: involvement of different
promoter elements, transcription factors, and histone h4 acetylation.

Nie M(1), Pang L, Inoue H, Knox AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, City Hospital, University of Nottingham,
Hucknall Road, Nottingham NG5 1PB, United Kingdom. mszmn1@gwmail.nottingham.ac.uk

Bradykinin and interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) induce cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) in
human airway smooth muscle cells. Here we extended our study to explore the gene 
transcriptional regulation. By transfection with various COX-2 promoter reporter 
constructs, we found that the bp -327-to-+59 promoter region was essential for
COX-2 gene transcription by bradykinin and IL-1beta and that the cyclic AMP
response element (CRE) was critical in bradykinin-induced transcription, whereas 
nuclear factor IL-6 and CRE and, to a lesser extent, nuclear factor-kappaB
(NF-kappaB) were involved in IL-1beta-induced transcription. An electrophoretic
mobility shift assay revealed that both bradykinin and IL-1beta elicited
CRE-binding protein-1 (CREB-1) binding, and IL-1beta also elicited
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta and NF-kappaB binding to their respective
elements in the COX-2 promoter. These transcription factors were associated with 
the COX-2 promoter, which was dynamically linked to different patterns of histone
H4 acetylation by bradykinin and IL-1beta, as demonstrated by chromatin
immunoprecipitation. We also revealed that endogenous prostaglandin E(2) was
critical in bradykinin-induced COX-2 transcription initiation and involved in
IL-1beta-induced COX-2 transcription at a latter stage. Our result provide the
first evidence that COX-2 transcriptional regulation by different stimuli
involves different promoter elements and transcription factors and is associated 
with chromatin remodeling after selective histone H4 acetylation in a
stimulus-specific manner.

PMCID: PMC309638
PMID: 14645533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Feb;18(2):291-302. Epub 2003 Nov 26.

Potent ligand-independent estrogen receptor activation by 3,3'-diindolylmethane
is mediated by cross talk between the protein kinase A and mitogen-activated
protein kinase signaling pathways.

Leong H(1), Riby JE, Firestone GL, Bjeldanes LF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences and Toxicology, University of California,
Berkeley, California 94720, USA.

We investigated the mechanism of ligand-independent activation of the estrogen
receptor (ER) by 3,3'-diindolylmethane (DIM), a promising anticancer agent
derived from vegetables of the Brassica genus, in Ishikawa and HEC-1B human
endometrial cancer cells. DIM stimulated the activity of an ER-responsive
reporter by over 40-fold, equivalent to the maximum induction produced by
estradiol (E2), whereas cotreatment of cells with the ER antagonist, ICI-182,780 
(ICI), abolished the stimulatory effect of DIM. DIM also induced the expressions 
of the endogenous genes, TGF-alpha, alkaline phosphatase, and progesterone
receptor similar to levels induced by E2. Induction of gene expression by DIM was
inhibited by the protein synthesis inhibitor, cycloheximide. In addition,
cotreatment of cells with the protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor, H89, or the MAPK 
inhibitor, PD98059, reduced DIM activation of the ER by 75% and 50%,
respectively. Simultaneous treatment of cells with both inhibitors completely
abolished the effect of DIM. DIM stimulated MAPK activity and induced
phosphorylation of the endogenous PKA target, cAMP response element binding
protein (CREB), in a PKA-dependent manner. Expression of MCREB, a
nonphosphorylatable CREB mutant, partially abolished activation of the ER by DIM.
These results demonstrate that DIM is a mechanistically novel activator of the ER
that requires PKA-dependent phosphorylation of CREB.

PMID: 14645498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Curr Biol. 2003 Nov 11;13(22):1969-74.

The Microtubule plus end-tracking protein EB1 is localized to the flagellar tip
and basal bodies in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.

Pedersen LB(1), Geimer S, Sloboda RD, Rosenbaum JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Flagellar axonemes assemble and continuously turn over at the flagellar tip. The 
supply and removal of axonemal subunits at the tip are mediated by intraflagellar
transport (IFT), a motility process essential for the assembly and maintenance of
all eukaryotic flagella and cilia. IFT is characterized by the movement of large 
protein complexes (IFT particles) from the basal bodies to the flagellar tip by
kinesin-II and from the tip back to the basal bodies by cytoplasmic dynein 1b.
The IFT particles consist of approximately 16 polypeptides partitioned into two
complexes, A and B, and associate with axonemal precursors/turn over products.
The mechanisms by which IFT motor regulation and cargo loading/unloading occur at
the flagellar tip are unknown. We identified a Chlamydomonas reinhardtii ortholog
of the microtubule (MT) plus end-tracking protein EB1 [4] (CrEB1) and show here
that CrEB1 localizes to the tip of flagella and to the proximal part of the basal
bodies. Furthermore, we found that CrEB1 is depleted from flagella of the
temperature-sensitive (ts) flagellar assembly-defective (fla) mutant fla11(ts) at
the restrictive temperature. This depletion of CrEB1 is accompanied by a dramatic
accumulation of IFT particle polypeptides near the flagellar tip.

PMID: 14614822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2003 Nov 15;123B(1):1-18.

Genome-wide linkage survey for genetic loci that influence the development of
depressive disorders in families with recurrent, early-onset, major depression.

Zubenko GS(1), Maher B, Hughes HB 3rd, Zubenko WN, Stiffler JS, Kaplan BB,
Marazita ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA. zubenkog@pitt.edu

In this report, we describe the results of the first genome-wide linkage survey
for genetic loci that influence the development of unipolar Mood Disorders in 81 
families identified by individuals with Recurrent, Early-Onset, Major Depressive 
Disorder (RE-MDD). Model-free linkage analysis was performed using genotypes for 
392 highly informative polymorphisms with an average spacing of 9 cM. The highest
maximum LOD score observed, 8.19 (genome-wide adjusted P << 0.0001), occurred for
Recurrent Major Depressive Disorder (R-MDD) at D2S2321 (205 cM), located 121 kb
proximal to CREB1. Nineteen chromosomal regions contained linkage peaks that
reached genome-wide statistical significance (genome-wide adjusted P < 0.05) and 
ten of these were "highly significant" (adjusted P < 0.001). Six of the 19
linkage peaks were revealed only when the analysis included covariates to control
for the effects of sex and linkage to CREB1. Sex-specific susceptibility loci
were common and preferentially affected the vulnerability of women to developing 
unipolar Mood Disorders. Five loci revealed evidence of interaction with the
CREB1 locus in determining susceptibility (epistasis). A systematic candidate
gene analysis is presented and potential overlaps of the linkage regions for
unipolar Mood Disorders with those reported for other psychiatric disorders are
discussed. The findings suggest that genes whose products participate in cellular
signaling pathways that converge on CREB, as well as the target genes whose
expression they regulate, may also harbor alleles that affect the development of 
Mood Disorders and related conditions.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14582139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Oct 14;100(21):12147-52. Epub 2003 Sep 23.

Identification of a family of cAMP response element-binding protein coactivators 
by genome-scale functional analysis in mammalian cells.

Iourgenko V(1), Zhang W, Mickanin C, Daly I, Jiang C, Hexham JM, Orth AP,
Miraglia L, Meltzer J, Garza D, Chirn GW, McWhinnie E, Cohen D, Skelton J, Terry 
R, Yu Y, Bodian D, Buxton FP, Zhu J, Song C, Labow MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Genomics, Novartis Institute for Biomedical Research,
100 Technology Square, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

This report describes an unbiased method for systematically determining gene
function in mammalian cells. A total of 20,704 predicted human full-length cDNAs 
were tested for induction of the IL-8 promoter. A number of genes, including
those for cytokines, receptors, adapters, kinases, and transcription factors,
were identified that induced the IL-8 promoter through known regulatory sites.
Proteins that acted through a cooperative interaction between an AP-1 and an
unrecognized cAMP response element (CRE)-like site were also identified. A
protein, termed transducer of regulated cAMP response element-binding protein
(CREB) (TORC1), was identified that activated expression through the variant CRE 
and consensus CRE sites. TORC1 potently induced known CREB1 target genes, bound
CREB1, and activated expression through a potent transcription activation domain.
A functional Drosophila TORC gene was also identified. Thus, TORCs represent a
family of highly conserved CREB coactivators that may control the potency and
specificity of CRE-mediated responses.

PMCID: PMC218727
PMID: 14506290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Eur J Neurosci. 2003 Sep;18(5):1223-34.

Cyclic AMP response element-binding (CREB)-like proteins in a molluscan brain:
cellular localization and learning-induced phosphorylation.

Ribeiro MJ(1), Serfozo Z, Papp A, Kemenes I, O'Shea M, Yin JC, Benjamin PR,
Kemenes G.

Author information: 
(1)Sussex Centre for Neuroscience, School of Biological Sciences, University of
Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, UK.

The phosphorylation and the binding to DNA of the nuclear transcription factor,
cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP) response element-binding protein
(CREB) are conserved key steps in the molecular cascade leading to the formation 
of long-term memory (LTM). Here, we characterize, for the first time, a
CREB1-like protein in the central nervous system (CNS) of Lymnaea, a model system
used widely for the study of the fundamental mechanisms of learning and memory.
We demonstrate cAMP response element (CRE)-binding activity in CNS protein
extracts and show that one of the CRE-binding proteins is recognized by a
polyclonal antibody raised to mammalian (human) CREB1. The same antibody detects 
specific CREB1 immunoreactivity in CNS extracts and in the nuclei of most neurons
in the brain. Moreover, phospho-CREB1-specific immunoreactivity is increased
significantly in protein extracts of the CNS by forskolin, an activator of
adenylate cyclase. The forskolin-induced increase in phospho-CREB1
immunoreactivity is localized to the nuclei of CNS neurons, some of which have an
important role in the formation of LTM. Significantly, classical food-reward
conditioning increases phospho-CREB1 immunoreactivity in Lymnaea CNS protein
extracts. This increase in immunoreactivity is specific to the ganglia that
contain the feeding circuitry, which undergoes cellular changes after classical
conditioning. This work establishes the expression of a highly conserved
functional CREB1-like protein in the CNS of Lymnaea and opens the way for a
detailed analysis of the role of CREB proteins in LTM formation in this model
system.

PMID: 12956721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Eur J Immunol. 2003 Sep;33(9):2361-71.

Comparison of the transcriptional regulation of classical and non-classical MHC
class II genes.

Hake SB(1), Tobin HM, Steimle V, Denzin LK.

Author information: 
(1)Sloan-Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
USA.

The class II transactivator (CIITA) regulates expression of the classical and
non-classical MHC class II genes, HLA-DR, -DP, -DQ and -DM, but not the B
cell-specific HLA-DO (DO). Here we show that only HLA-DR expression is completely
dependent on CIITA, since residual expression of HLA-DM, -DP and the beta chain
of DQ was observed in CIITA-deficient RJ2.2.5 cells. Although DO shows a unique
expression pattern compared to other MHC class II genes, prolonged IFN-gamma
treatment of HeLa cells induced DOB expression. Similar to all MHC class II
promoters, the DOB promoter contains the highly conserved W, X1, and Y boxes in
addition to a putative OCT box. Mutational analysis of the DOB promoter
demonstrated that the X1, Y and OCT boxes are necessary for maximum promoter
activity.Furthermore, our results demonstrate that CREB-1, RFXANK and Oct-2
occupy the DOB promoter in vivo, However, CIITA and Bob-1 were only minimally
recruited. Finally, fusion of Bjab, a DOB-negative B cell line, with.174 B cells 
that lack the complete MHC class II region (including the DO genes), lead to DO
expression. These data indicate that the expression of DO is regulated by an
unidentified factor in B cells.

PMID: 12938212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Atherosclerosis. 2003 Aug;169(2):259-67.

Oxidised LDL decreases VEGFR-1 expression in human monocyte-derived macrophages.

Salomonsson L(1), Svensson L, Pettersson S, Wiklund O, Ohlsson BG.

Author information: 
(1)Wallenberg Laboratory for Cardiovascular Research, The Cardiovascular
Institute, Sahlgrenska Academy, Göteborg University, SE-413 45 Göteborg, Sweden. 
linda.salomonsson@wlab.gu.se

Monocyte infiltration followed by differentiation into macrophages and
accumulation of oxidised LDL (oxLDL) comprise early stages of atherosclerosis.
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which is upregulated by oxLDL, may
contribute to atherogenesis through monocyte recruitment, increased vascular
permeability and promotion of intraplaque vessels. The VEGF receptor-1
(VEGFR-1/Flt-1) mediates monocyte migration towards VEGF and regulates the levels
of available VEGF through ligand-entrapment. In this study we investigated the
effect of oxLDL on VEGFR-1 expression in human monocyte-derived macrophages. mRNA
expression was estimated using RT-PCR, protein secretion was measured with ELISA 
and the amount of membrane-bound VEGFR-1 was analysed using flow cytometry
analysis. Binding of transcription factors to the promoter was studied with EMSA.
Incubation with oxLDL decreased VEGFR-1 mRNA expression in a time- and
dose-dependent manner, followed by a subsequent decrease in protein secretion of 
VEGFR-1 and a reduction of the amount of receptor expressed on the cell surface. 
Furthermore, the PPARgamma agonists 9-hydroxy-(S)-10,12-octadecadienoic acid
(9-HODE) and darglitazone also decreased VEGFR-1 mRNA expression. Incubation of
macrophages with oxLDL or 9-HODE decreased binding of the transcription factor
AP-1 (c-jun/ATF-2) to the VEGFR-1 promoter. Together, these data suggest that
oxLDL decreases VEGFR-1 expression in macrophages, probably through a
PPARgamma-dependent reduction in the AP-1 transcriptional activity. This implies 
that oxLDL has effects on the biological availability of VEGF, besides its direct
effect on VEGF expression.

PMID: 12921977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Aug;31(1):105-21.

Genomic structure and transcriptional regulation of the human NAD+-dependent
15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase gene.

Nandy A(1), Jenatschke S, Hartung B, Milde-Langosch K, Bamberger AM, Gellersen B.

Author information: 
(1)IHF Institute for Hormone and Fertility Research, University of Hamburg,
Falkenried 88, 20251 Hamburg, Germany.

The NAD(+)-dependent 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (PGDH) is a catabolic 
enzyme that controls the biological activities of prostaglandins by converting
them into inactive keto-metabolites. Here we report the genomic organisation of
the complete human PGDH gene and characterise its transcriptional regulation. The
PGDH gene spans about 31 kb on chromosome 4 and contains 7 exons. Within 2.4 kb
of the 5'-flanking sequence we identified two regions with clustered putative
transcription factor binding sites. The distal promoter element PGDH-DE
(positions-2152/-1944 relative to the start codon) contains binding sites for Ets
and activating protein-1 (AP-1) flanked by two cAMP-responsive element-binding
protein binding sites (CREB1, CREB2), whereas the proximal element PGDH-PE
(-235/-153) includes an Ets and an AP-1 binding sequence. By electrophoretic
mobility shift assay, no high affinity binding of Ets or AP-1 factors was
observed with PGDH-PE, whereas we confirmed interaction of members of the Ets,
AP-1 and CREB families of transcription factors with PGDH-DE. Transcriptional
control of the PGDH promoter was assessed by transiently transfecting JEG-3
choriocarcinoma cells. A luciferase reporter gene construct containing the
PGDH-PE was not induced by c-jun/c-fos in the absence or presence of co-expressed
Ets-1. A construct carrying the PGDH-DE in front of the minimal homologous
promoter was activated by co-transfection of expression vectors for AP-1
proteins. Mutation of the AP-1 or CREB2 site reduced the response to c-jun/c-fos,
whereas mutation of the Ets site of the distal element reduced basal promoter
activity. CREB activated the PGDH-DE construct through the CREB1 site. These
results defined the distal element as an integrator of transcriptional regulation
by AP-1, Ets and CREB proteins.

PMID: 12914529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 26;278(39):37375-85. Epub 2003 Jul 18.

Induction of Grp78/BiP by translational block: activation of the Grp78 promoter
by ATF4 through and upstream ATF/CRE site independent of the endoplasmic
reticulum stress elements.

Luo S(1), Baumeister P, Yang S, Abcouwer SF, Lee AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90089-9176, USA.

Mammalian cells respond to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress by attenuation of
protein translation mediated through the PERK-eIF2alpha pathway and
transcriptional activation of genes such as Grp78/BiP encoding ER chaperone
proteins. The disruption of PERK function or the blocking of eIF2alpha Ser51
phosphorylation fails to attenuate translation after ER stress and also results
in substantial impairment of Grp78/BiP induction by ER stress. While the
activation of the Grp78 promoter by the ATF6 pathway through the endoplasmic
reticulum stress elements (ERSEs) is well documented, the molecular mechanism
linking PERK activation to Grp78 stress induction is unknown. We report here that
ATF4, a transcription factor whose translation is up-regulated by the
PERK-eIF2alpha pathway, can activate the Grp78 promoter independent of the ERSE. 
The ATF4-activating site is localized to an ATF/CRE sequence upstream of the
ERSEs and is distinct from the C/EBP-ATF composite site previously identified as 
the ATF4 binding site in the ER stress-inducible chop promoter. In vitro
translated ATF4 binding to the ATF/CRE site requires other nuclear co-factors
from non-stressed cells, forming a complex that exhibits identical
electrophoretic mobility as a thapsigargin-stress induced complex. Here we have
identified the closely related ATF1 and CREB1 as nuclear co-factors that form in 
vivo complexes with endogenous ATF4. ER stress induces CREB1 phosphorylation and 
ATF1/CREB1 binding to the Grp78 promoter. Through the use of adenoviral vector
expression systems, we provide evidence that when ATF4 function is suppressed and
its binding partners are not able to compensate for its function, Grp78 induction
by Tg and Tu is partially inhibited. Our studies resolve a mechanism responsible 
for inhibition of Grp78 mRNA induction by ER stress in cells that are
functionally null for PERK or devoid of eIF2alpha phosphorylation.

PMID: 12871976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Mol Psychiatry. 2003 Jun;8(6):611-8.

Sequence variations in CREB1 cosegregate with depressive disorders in women.

Zubenko GS(1), Hughes HB 3rd, Stiffler JS, Brechbiel A, Zubenko WN, Maher BS,
Marazita ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA. zubenkog@pitt.edu

Major depressive disorder (MDD) constitutes a major public health problem
worldwide and affects women twice as frequently as men. Previous linkage studies 
have identified a 451 kb region of 2q33-35 that exhibited significant evidence of
linkage to Mood Disorders among women (but not men) from families with recurrent,
early-onset MDD (RE-MDD), a severe and strongly familial subtype of MDD. This 451
kb region includes CREB1, an attractive susceptibility gene for MDD and related
disorders. Sequence variations in the CREB1 promoter and intron 8 have been
detected that cosegregate with Mood Disorders, or their absence, in women from
these families, identifying CREB1 as a sex-limited susceptibility gene for
unipolar Mood Disorders. These findings implicate the cAMP signaling pathway in
the pathophysiology of Mood Disorders and related conditions.

PMID: 12851637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Biol Chem. 2003 Jan;384(1):19-23.

DNA polymerase beta gene expression: the promoter activator CREB-1 is upregulated
in Chinese hamster ovary cells by DNA alkylating agent-induced stress.

He F(1), Yang XP, Srivastava DK, Wilson SH.

Author information: 
(1)Sealy Center for Molecular Science, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX 77555-1068, USA.

The DNA alkylating agent N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG) upregulates 
the level of the base excision DNA repair enzyme DNA polymerase beta (beta-pol)
in several mammalian cell types. Previous studies suggested that beta-pol
expression is upregulated via a transcriptional mechanism that requires: the
specific cAMP response element (CRE) in the beta-pol core promoter; a
phosphorylated form of CRE-binding protein-1 (CREB-1); and cellular protein
kinase A activity. A large family of CRE-binding proteins, ie., the ATF/CREB
factors, has been identified in various cell types. This study further examines
the role of CRE-binding proteins in regulating beta-pol expression through study 
of Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. In CHO cell nuclear extract, CREB-1 and
ATF-1 are the predominant CRE-binding protein family members recognizing the CRE 
in the beta-pol core promoter. The concentration of CREB-1 increases strongly in 
CHO cells after exposure to MNNG. In contrast, the level of ATF-1 does not change
after MNNG treatment. Recombinant expression of CREB-1 in CHO cells is sufficient
to increase expression of the endogenous beta-pol gene, even in the absence of
MNNG exposure. These results indicate that beta-pol gene expression in CHO cells 
can be upregulated by CREB-1 and that the activation of beta-pol gene expression 
in response to DNA alkylating agent exposure involves a strong increase in the
level of CREB-1.

PMID: 12674496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2002 Dec;83(1-5):93-9.

Transcriptional regulation of aromatase expression in human breast tissue.

Chen S(1), Itoh T, Wu K, Zhou D, Yang C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope,
Duarte, CA 91010, USA. schen@coh.org

Aromatase (CYP19) is the estrogen synthetase that converts androgen to estrogen. 
The expression of aromatase in breast cancer cells and surrounding stromal cells 
is up regulated compared to non-cancerous cells. In situ estrogen synthesis is
thought to stimulate breast cancer growth in both an autocrine and a paracrine
manner. A complex mechanism is involved in the control of human aromatase
expression, in that seven promoters have been identified and found to be utilized
in a tissue-selective manner. Increased aromatase expression in breast tumors is,
in part, attributed to changes in the transcriptional control of aromatase
expression. While promoter I.4 is the main promoter that controls aromatase
expression in non-cancer breast tissue, promoters II and I.3 are the dominant
promoters that drive aromatase expression in breast cancer tissue. During the
last several years, our laboratory performed a series of studies to examine the
transcription regulatory mechanism of aromatase expression in breast cancer
cells. We functionally characterized promoters II and I.3, and carried out DNase 
1 footprinting analysis that identified two regulatory elements, S1 and CREaro.
Using the yeast one-hybrid approach to screen a human breast tissue hybrid cDNA
expression library, we found that four orphan/nuclear receptors, ERR alpha-1,
EAR-2, COUP-TFI and RAR gamma, bind to the S1 element, and that CREB1, Snail
(SnaH) and Slug proteins bind to the CREaro element. Studies from this and other 
laboratories have revealed that in cancer tissue versus normal tissue, several
positive regulatory proteins (e.g. ERR alpha-1 and CREB1) are present at higher
levels and several negative regulatory proteins (e.g. EAR-2, COUP-TFI, RAR gamma,
Snail and Slug proteins) are present at lower levels. This may explain why the
activity of promoters II and I.3 is up regulated in cancer tissue. An
understanding of the molecular mechanisms of aromatase expression between
non-cancerous and cancerous breast tissue, at the transcriptional level, may help
in the design of a therapy based on the suppression of aromatase expression in
breast cancer tissue.

PMID: 12650705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2003 Feb;7(1):101-14.

CREB, memory enhancement and the treatment of memory disorders: promises,
pitfalls and prospects.

Barco A(1), Pittenger C, Kandel ER.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, College of Physicians and Surgeons of
Columbia University, 1051 Riverside Drive, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The treatment of memory disorders, such as the gradual weakening of memory with
age, the ravages of Alzheimer's disease and the cognitive deficits in various
forms of mental retardation, may greatly benefit from a better understanding of
the molecular and cellular mechanisms of memory formation. There is increasing
interest in the possibility of pharmacologically enhancing learning and memory
even in the absence of specific anatomically evident pathology. Substantial
evidence in experimental systems ranging from molluscs to humans indicates that
the cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) is a core component of the
molecular switch that converts short- to long-term memory. Recent studies have
greatly strengthened and refined our understanding of the role of CREB in
learning and memory in mammals, in addition to providing greater insight into the
molecular mechanisms of CREB regulation and function. This involvement of CREB
and the upstream signalling pathways leading to its activation in
learning-associated plasticity makes them attractive targets for drugs aimed at
improving memory function, in both diseased and healthy individuals. However,
CREB and its close relatives cAMP response element modulator and activating
transcription factor-1 are ubiquitous proteins with several critical functions.
This creates hurdles that the authors believe may limit the usefulness of CREB
per se as a target for the development of memory-enhancing drugs, and focus on
components of the upstream signalling pathways or on specific downstream targets 
will be required.

PMID: 12556206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Feb 4;100(3):1420-5. Epub 2003 Jan 13.

Beneficial effects of antioxidants and L-arginine on oxidation-sensitive gene
expression and endothelial NO synthase activity at sites of disturbed shear
stress.

de Nigris F(1), Lerman LO, Ignarro SW, Sica G, Lerman A, Palinski W, Ignarro LJ, 
Napoli C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine-0682, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093,
USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Dec 28;101(52):18262.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Feb 4;100(3):768-70.

Atherogenesis is enhanced in arterial segments exposed to disturbed blood flow,
indicating the active participation of the hemodynamic environment in lesion
formation. Turbulent shear stress selectively regulates responsive genes in the
endothelium and increases the damage induced by free radicals. The purpose of the
present study was to evaluate the effects of intervention with antioxidants and
l-arginine on endothelial NO synthase (eNOS) and oxidation-sensitive gene
perturbation induced by disturbed flow in vitro and in vivo. Both human
endothelial cells exposed to shear stress and high atherosclerosis-prone areas of
hypercholesterolemic low-density lipoprotein receptor knockout (LDLR(-/-)) mice
showed increased activities of redox-transcription factors (ELK-1, p-Jun, and
p-CREB) and decreased expression of eNOS. Intervention with antioxidants and
l-arginine reduced the activation of redox-transcription factors and increased
eNOS expression in cells and in vivo. These results demonstrate that atherogenic 
effects induced by turbulent shear stress can be prevented by cotreatment with
antioxidants and l-arginine. The therapeutic possibility to modulate shear
stress-response genes may have important implications for the prevention of
atherosclerosis and its clinical manifestations.

PMCID: PMC298788
PMID: 12525696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 14;278(11):8935-41. Epub 2003 Jan 7.

Alterations in the expression of transcription factors and the reduced folate
carrier as a novel mechanism of antifolate resistance in human leukemia cells.

Rothem L(1), Aronheim A, Assaraf YG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, the Rappaport Institute for Research in the Medical
Sciences and the B. Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, The Technion-Israel Institute 
of Technology, Haifa 31096, Israel.

The human reduced folate carrier (hRFC) is the dominant transporter mediating the
uptake of reduced folate cofactors and antifolate anticancer drugs. Defective
antifolate uptake due to inactivating mutations in the hRFC gene is an
established mechanism of drug resistance in various tumor cells. However, while
antifolate transport is frequently impaired, either no or only a single hRFC
allele is inactivated, suggesting that additional mechanism(s) of resistance are 
operative. Here we studied the relationship between the expression and function
of transcription factors and antifolate resistance in transport-defective
leukemia cells that poorly express or completely lack RFC mRNA. Stable
transfection with a hRFC expression construct resulted in restoration of normal
RFC mRNA expression and nearly wild type drug sensitivity in these
antifolate-resistant cells. The loss of RFC gene expression prompted us to
explore transcription factor binding to the hRFC promoter. The hRFC promoter
contains an upstream GC-box and a downstream cAMP-response element
(CRE)/AP-1-like element. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and
oligonucleotide competition revealed a substantial loss of nuclear factor binding
to CRE and GC-box in these drug-resistant cell lines. Consistently,
antibody-mediated supershift analysis showed a marked decrease in the binding of 
CRE-binding protein 1 (CREB-1) and specificity protein 1 (Sp1) to CRE and GC-box,
respectively. Western blot analysis revealed undetectable expression of CREB-1,
decreased ATF-1 levels, parental Sp1 levels, and increased levels of the short
Sp3 isoforms, recently shown to repress hRFC gene expression. Transient
transfections into these antifolate-resistant cells demonstrated a marked loss of
GC-box-dependent, and CRE-driven reporter gene activities and introduction of
CREB-1 or Sp1 expression constructs resulted in restoration of hRFC mRNA
expression. These results establish a novel mechanism of antifolate resistance
that is based on altered expression and function of transcription factors
resulting in transcriptional silencing of the hRFC promoter.

PMID: 12519783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Dec 8;114(8):980-7.

Genetic linkage of region containing the CREB1 gene to depressive disorders in
women from families with recurrent, early-onset, major depression.

Zubenko GS(1), Hughes HB 3rd, Maher BS, Stiffler JS, Zubenko WN, Marazita ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine,
Pennsylvania, USA. zubenkog@pitt.edu

This report describes the results of a model-free linkage analysis of six
polymorphic markers, located in a 15 cM region of chromosome 2q33-35, and
unipolar Mood Disorders in 81 families identified by probands with Recurrent,
Early-Onset Major Depressive Disorder (RE-MDD), a severe and familial form of
clinical depression. Our findings reveal significant evidence of linkage of
unipolar Mood Disorders to a 451 Kb region of 2q33-34 flanked by D2S2321 and
D2S2208 in these families. Increasing peak LOD scores were observed in both the
single point and multipoint analyses for Mood Disorder phenotypes whose
definitions embodied progressively less stringent severity criteria for inclusion
in the affected group. The sex-dependent multipoint linkage analysis of any Major
or Minor Mood Disorders produced LOD scores that reached 6.331 and 6.866 at
D2S2321 and D2S2208, respectively. Linkage of Mood Disorders to this region was
observed exclusively among female affected relative pairs; no suggestion of
linkage was observed when male affected relative pairs were analyzed. These
observations imply that a sex-specific susceptibility gene in this region
contributes to the vulnerability of women in these families to the development of
unipolar Mood Disorders that ranged in severity from minor to severe at the time 
of clinical assessment. The region between the markers that yielded the peak LOD 
score includes the CREB1 gene, which encodes a cAMP-responsive element-binding
protein (CREB) that is a member of the bZIP family of transcription factors.
Based on considerable clinical and preclinical evidence, CREB1 is an attractive
candidate for a susceptibility gene for unipolar Mood Disorders. The
sex-specificity of the susceptibility locus identified by our study may result
from reported synergistic interactions of CREB with nuclear estrogen receptors.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12457397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Cell. 2002 Nov 15;111(4):483-93.

Integration of long-term-memory-related synaptic plasticity involves
bidirectional regulation of gene expression and chromatin structure.

Guan Z(1), Giustetto M, Lomvardas S, Kim JH, Miniaci MC, Schwartz JH, Thanos D,
Kandel ER.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York State Psychiatric Institute, 1051 Riverside Drive, 
New York, NY 10032, USA.

Excitatory and inhibitory inputs converge on single neurons and are integrated
into a coherent output. Although much is known about short-term integration,
little is known about how neurons sum opposing signals for long-term synaptic
plasticity and memory storage. In Aplysia, we find that when a sensory neuron
simultaneously receives inputs from the facilitatory transmitter 5-HT at one set 
of synapses and the inhibitory transmitter FMRFamide at another, long-term
facilitation is blocked and synapse-specific long-term depression dominates.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays show that 5-HT induces the downstream gene
C/EBP by activating CREB1, which recruits CBP for histone acetylation, whereas
FMRFa leads to CREB1 displacement by CREB2 and recruitment of HDAC5 to
deacetylate histones. When the two transmitters are applied together,
facilitation is blocked because CREB2 and HDAC5 displace CREB1-CBP, thereby
deacetylating histones.

PMID: 12437922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Immunol. 2002 Nov 1;169(9):5061-71.

Transcriptional regulation of the MHC class II trans-activator (CIITA) promoter
III: identification of a novel regulatory region in the 5'-untranslated region
and an important role for cAMP-responsive element binding protein 1 and
activating transcription factor-1 in CIITA-promoter III transcriptional
activation in B lymphocytes.

van der Stoep N(1), Quinten E, van den Elsen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University
Medical Center, The Netherlands.

The class II trans-activator (CIITA), which acts as a master regulator for
expression of MHC class II genes, is expressed constitutively in mature B cells. 
This constitutive expression of CIITA is driven by CIITA promoter III
(CIITA-PIII). However, little is known about the factors that control the B
cell-mediated trans-activation of CIITA-PIII. In this study using B cells we have
identified several cAMP-responsive elements (CREs) in the proximal promoter and
in the 5'-untranslated region (5'-UTR) that are involved in the activation of
CIITA-PIII. We show that activating transcription factor (ATF)/CRE binding
protein (CREB) factors bind to the CREs in vitro and in vivo. Notably, our
results also reveal that the 5'-UTR of CIITA-PIII functions as an important
regulatory region in B lymphocytes. Furthermore, transient cotransfections of a
CIITA-PIII luciferase reporter construct with either CREB-1 or ATF-1 boost
CIITA-PIII trans-activation in a dose-dependent manner, which was further
enhanced by addition of general coactivator CREB-binding protein. Transient
transfections using mutant CIITA-PIII luciferase reporter constructs that either 
lack the (5'-UTR) or abolish binding of CREB-1 and ATF-1 to the CRE located in
activation response element-2, displayed severely reduced promoter activity in B 
cells. A similar successive deletion of the CREs resulted in a subsequent
reduction of CREB-1-induced activity of CIITA-PIII in B cells. Together our
results argue for an important role of ATF/CREB factors and the 5'-UTR of
CIITA-PIII in the trans-activation of CIITA-PIII in B cells.

PMID: 12391222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Cell Biochem. 2002;87(1):103-16.

Cyclic AMP mediated GSTP1 gene activation in tumor cells involves the interaction
of activated CREB-1 with the GSTP1 CRE: a novel mechanism of cellular GSTP1 gene 
regulation.

Lo HW(1), Ali-Osman F.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Therapeutics, Department of Neurosurgery, Brain Tumor
Center, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA.

The human GSTP1 gene is frequently over-expressed in many human cancers and the
expression increases with tumor progression and is associated with a more
aggressive biology, poor patient survival, and resistance to therapy. The
molecular regulation of the human GSTP1 gene during malignancy is, however, still
not well understood. Recently, we reported the presence of a cAMP response
element (CRE) in the 5'-region of the human GSTP1 gene, raising the possibility
that the cAMP signaling pathway, frequently aberrant in human cancers, may play
an important role in the transcriptional activation of the GSTP1 gene in human
tumors. In this study, we report that the GSTP1 gene is an early cAMP response
gene. Treatment of cells of the human lung carcinoma cell line, Calu-6, with 25
microM forskolin to activate the cAMP pathway resulted in a rapid and significant
(sevenfold after 30 min) increase in GSTP1 gene transcripts, which peaked at
12-fold after 4 h. The forskolin-activated GSTP1 transcription in Calu-6 cells
was suppressed dose-dependently by a 2-h pre-treatment with 0.1, 1.0, and 10
microM of the adenylate cyclase inhibitor, 2', 5'-dideoxyadenosine. Western blot 
analysis showed a rapid, fivefold increase, in GSTP1 protein levels after
treatment with 25 microM forskolin, with a peak at 2 h post-treatment. The levels
of phosphorylated CRE (Ser133) binding protein-1 (CREB-1) increased rapidly,
sevenfold at 30 min, and reached 10-fold at 4 h following forskolin treatment.
Intracellular cAMP levels also increased rapidly reaching 12-fold at 30 min. Gel 
mobility shift and supershift assays and DNase/footprinting analyses demonstrated
that CREB-1 bZIP and CREB-containing nuclear extracts recognized the GSTP1 CRE
with high affinity and specificity. Binding of CREB-1 bZIP to the GSTP1 CRE was
abolished when the GSTP1 CRE sequence 5'-CGTCA-3', was mutated at the core
nucleotides. Finally, transfection studies using luciferase plasmid constructs
showed the GSTP1 CRE to be required for the cAMP-activated gene expression.
Together, these findings describe a novel cAMP- and CREB-1-mediated mechanism of 
transcriptional regulation of the GSTP1 gene and suggest that this may be an
important mechanism underlying the increased GSTP1 expression observed in tumors 
with an aberrant cAMP signaling pathway and in normal cells under conditions of
stress, associated with increased intracellular cAMP.

PMID: 12210727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Br J Haematol. 2002 Sep;118(4):1065-70.

Gene expression analysis of 1,25(OH)2D3-dependent differentiation of HL-60 cells:
a cDNA array study.

Savli H(1), Aalto Y, Nagy B, Knuutila S, Pakkala S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Haartman Institute and Helsinki University Central
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

The alterations in gene expression associated with 1,25(OH)2D3-induced
differentiation of HL-60 cells were studied in order to identify potential
targets for further investigation of the genetic basis of acute myeloid
leukaemia. Atlas human haematology filters, including 406 genes (Clontech), were 
used to study gene expression in response to 1,25(OH)2D3 (concentration, 5 x 10-8
mol/l) for 24 and 72 h. Compared with untreated cells, expression differences
were found in 43 genes. Downregulated genes at both time-points were: IL2RA,
CMYC, NPM, DEK, AF4, FLI1, htlf, MNDA, BCR, IKAROS, BPI and NFAT4. Upregulated
genes at both time-points were IL1B, CD14 and MCL1. CD55, CD58, IRF2, CREB1,
ATF4, RAC1, TIAR, KIAA0053, BAT2, BTK, RCK, EV12B and EDN were downregulated at
24 h, while SPI1, MKK3, BTG1 and IL8 were upregulated. At 72 h the upregulated
genes were IL1RA, IL2RG, CXCR4, SCYA1, SCYA3, SCYA4, SCYA5, SCYA22, ANX2, CD83
and UPAR. cDNA array results were confirmed on randomly selected genes using
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction for three upregulated (CXCR4,
IL1B and CD14) and three downregulated (DEK, AF4 and FLI1) genes. Gene expression
analysis after differentiation induction may provide a tool to study the roles of
DEK, AF4 and FLI1 in cell proliferation and differentiation. To demonstrate the
genes that initiate differentiation, sequential gene expression analysis has to
be performed during the first 24 h of the differentiation process.

PMID: 12199786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2002 Sep;302(3):1238-45.

Quantitative trait loci affecting initial sensitivity and acute functional
tolerance to ethanol-induced ataxia and brain cAMP signaling in BXD recombinant
inbred mice.

Kirstein SL(1), Davidson KL, Ehringer MA, Sikela JM, Erwin VG, Tabakoff B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
4200 East Ninth Avenue, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

In previous work, we identified genetic correlations between cAMP accumulation in
the cerebellum and sensitivity to the incoordinating effects of ethanol. A
genetic correlation suggests that common genes underlie the phenotypes
investigated. One method for provisionally identifying genes involved in a given 
phenotypic measure is quantitative trait locus (QTL) analysis. Using a panel of
30 BXD recombinant inbred strains of mice and the progenitors (DBA/2J and
C57BL/6J), and the dowel test for ataxia, we measured the blood ethanol
concentrations at the time an animal first fell from the dowel and acute
functional tolerance (AFT), and investigated cAMP signaling in the cerebellum.
Cyclic AMP accumulation was measured in whole-cell preparations of cerebellar
minces from individual mice under basal or stimulated conditions. We conducted a 
genome-wide QTL analysis of the behavioral and biochemical measures with >2000
genetic markers to identify significant associations. Western blot and
comparative sequencing analysis were used to compare cAMP response element
binding protein (CREB) levels and protein-coding sequence, respectively. QTL
analyses correlating strain means with allelic status at genetic markers
identified several significant associations (p < 0.01). Analysis of variance
revealed an effect of strain on behavioral and biochemical measures. There was a 
significant genetic correlation between initial sensitivity and basal cAMP
accumulation in the cerebellum. We identified 6 provisional QTLs for initial
sensitivity on four chromosomes, 6 provisional QTLs for AFT on four chromosomes, 
and 11 provisional QTLs for cAMP signaling on nine chromosomes. Two loci were
found to overlap for measures of initial sensitivity and for cAMP signaling.
Given the genetic correlation between initial sensitivity and basal cAMP
accumulation, we investigated candidate genes in a QTL on chromosome 1.
Comparative sequence analysis was performed, and protein levels were compared
between C57 and DBA mice for Creb1. No significant differences were detected in
coding sequence or protein levels for CREB. These results suggest that although
ethanol sensitivity and cAMP signaling are determined by multiple genes, they may
share certain genetic codetermination.

PMID: 12183685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2002 Jun;963:229-38.

Prevention and treatment of breast cancer by suppressing aromatase activity and
expression.

Chen S(1), Zhou D, Okubo T, Kao YC, Eng ET, Grube B, Kwon A, Yang C, Yu B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope,
Duarte, California 91010, USA. schen@coh.org.

Estrogen promotes the proliferation of breast cancer cells. Aromatase is the
enzyme that converts androgen to estrogen. In tumors, expression of aromatase is 
upregulated compared to that of surrounding noncancerous tissue. Tumor aromatase 
is thought to stimulate breast cancer growth in both an autocrine and a paracrine
manner. A treatment strategy for breast cancer is to abolish in situ estrogen
formation with aromatase inhibitors. In addition, aromatase suppression in
postmenapausal women is being evaluated as a potential chemopreventive modality
against breast cancer. One area of aromatase research in this laboratory is the
identification of foods and dietary compounds that can suppress aromatase
activity. In vitro and in vivo studies have found that grapes and mushrooms
contain chemicals that can inhibit aromatase. Therefore, a diet that includes
grapes and mushrooms would be considered preventative against breast cancer.
Another area of our aromatase research is the elucidation of the regulatory
mechanism of aromatase expression in breast cancer tissue. Increased aromatase
expression in breast tumors is attributed to changes in the transcriptional
control of aromatase expression. Whereas promoter I.4 is the main promoter that
controls aromatase expression in noncancerous breast tissue, promoters II and I.3
are the dominant promoters that drive aromatase expression in breast cancer
tissue. Our recent gene regulation studies revealed that in cancerous versus
normal tissue, several positive regulatory proteins (e.g., nuclear receptors and 
CREB1) are present at higher levels and several negative regulatory proteins
(e.g., snail and slug proteins) are present at lower levels. This may explain why
the activity of promoters II and I.3 is upregulated in cancerous tissue. In
addition, our in vitro transcription/translation analysis using plasmids
containing T7 promoter and the human snail gene as a reporter capped with
different untranslated exon Is revealed that exon PII-containing transcripts were
translated more effectively than were exon I.3-containing transcripts. An
understanding of the molecular mechanisms of aromatase expression between
noncancerous and cancerous breast tissue, at both transcriptional and
translational levels, may help in the design of a therapy based on suppressing
aromatase expression in breast cancer tissue.

PMID: 12095949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Nat Genet. 2002 May;31(1):47-54. Epub 2002 Apr 22.

Disruption of CREB function in brain leads to neurodegeneration.

Mantamadiotis T(1), Lemberger T, Bleckmann SC, Kern H, Kretz O, Martin Villalba
A, Tronche F, Kellendonk C, Gau D, Kapfhammer J, Otto C, Schmid W, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg,
Germany.

Control of cellular survival and proliferation is dependent on extracellular
signals and is a prerequisite for ordered tissue development and maintenance.
Activation of the cAMP responsive element binding protein (CREB) by
phosphorylation has been implicated in the survival of mammalian cells. To define
its roles in the mouse central nervous system, we disrupted Creb1 in brain of
developing and adult mice using the Cre/loxP system. Mice with a Crem(-/-)
background and lacking Creb in the central nervous system during development show
extensive apoptosis of postmitotic neurons. By contrast, mice in which both Creb1
and Crem are disrupted in the postnatal forebrain show progressive
neurodegeneration in the hippocampus and in the dorsolateral striatum. The
striatal phenotype is reminiscent of Huntington disease and is consistent with
the postulated role of CREB-mediated signaling in polyglutamine-triggered
diseases.

PMID: 11967539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2001 Dec;79(1-5):35-40.

Modulation of aromatase expression in human breast tissue.

Chen S(1), Zhou D, Yang C, Okubo T, Kinoshita Y, Yu B, Kao YC, Itoh T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope,
Duarte, CA 91010, USA. schen@coh.org

Aromatase plays an important role in breast cancer development through its role
in the synthesis of estrogen. Aromatase expression in breast tissue can be
regulated by several mechanisms. The major promoter usage for aromatase
expression in breast tumors (i.e. cAMP-stimulated promoters I.3 and II) is
different from that in normal breast tissue (i.e. glucocorticoid-stimulated
promoter I.4). Recent characterization of transcription factors that interact
with the two important regulatory elements near promoters I.3 and II, i.e. S1 and
CREaro, helps us better understand the mechanism of the switch of promoter usage 
between normal breast tissue and cancer tissue. It is thought that in normal
breast tissue, the function of promoters I.3 and II is suppressed through the
binding of EAR-2, COUP-TFI, and EARgamma to S1, and through the binding of
Snail/Slug proteins to their binding site that quenchs the CREaro activity. In
cancer tissue, the expression levels of EAR-2, COUP-TFI, EARgamma, Snail, and
Slug decrease, and aromatase expression is then up regulated through the binding 
of ERRalpha-1 to S1 and the binding of CREB or related factors to CREaro. Results
from this and other laboratories reveal that aromatase activity in aromatase
expressing cells can also be modified by treatment with aromatase inhibitors and 
the antiestrogen ICI 182, 780. While aromatase inhibitors are used to treat
breast cancer, the treatment has been found to increase the level of aromatase in
the breast tissue of some patients. The enhancement of aromatase activity by
aromatase inhibitors is thought to be due to a decrease of aromatase protein
degradation by enzyme-inhibitor complex formation, up-regulation of the aromatase
gene transcription through a cAMP-mediated mechanism, and an induction of
aromatase expression by gonadtropins that are released from the pituitary in
response to a reduction of estrogen levels in circulation in premenopausal women.
Antiestrogen ICI 182, 780 has been found to suppress aromatase expression, but
the mechanism has not yet been determined. In addition, aromatase activity and
expression can be affected by environmental chemicals. A detailed
structure-function study has revealed that flavones, but not isoflavones, are
inhibitors of aromatase. It was found that flavones bind to the active site of
aromatase in an orientation in which their rings-A and -C mimic rings-D and -C of
the androgen substrate. The modulation of aromatase expression by endocrine
disrupting chemicals is exemplified by two organochlorine pesticides (i.e.
toxaphene and chlordane) that have been found to be antagonists of ERRalpha-1
orphan receptor. These compounds reduce ERRalpha-1 activity, resulting in a
suppression of aromatase expression.

PMID: 11850205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Oncogene. 2001 Sep 13;20(41):5920-9.

Chromosomal localization and promoter analysis of the adenomatous polyposis coli 
binding protein RP1.

Wadle A(1), Thiel G, Mischo A, Jung V, Pfreundschuh M, Renner C.

Author information: 
(1)Med. Department I, Saarland University Medical School, D-66421 Homburg,
Germany.

The EB1/RP1 family is a new protein family that is characterized by the ability
of its members to serve as interacting partners for the adenomatous polyposis
coli (APC) tumour suppressor protein and tubulin. Data obtained with highly
conserved yeast homologues suggest that the EB1/RP1 protein family promotes
cytoplasmic microtubule dynamics and contributes to the sensor mechanism
controlling the cytokinesis checkpoint during mitosis. However, the precise
function of this protein family in mammalian cells has not been elucidated so far
and remains unclear. Here, we report on the genomic localization of the RP1 gene 
and the characterization of the corresponding promoter. The RP1 gene was found to
be encoded on chromosome 18q21, a locus which is altered or deleted in up to 50% 
of all patients with colorectal cancer. Promoter analysis revealed that the RP1
gene is under the control of a strong promoter that was 10 times more active in
mammalian cells when compared to SV40 promoter. Members of the cyclic AMP
response element binding protein family (CREB1 and CREB2) could be identified as 
transcription factors binding specifically within the RP1 promoter sequence.

PMID: 11593399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Immunol Cell Biol. 2001 Oct;79(5):482-9.

Prostaglandin E2 signalling pathway in human T lymphocytes from healthy and
conjunctiva basal cell carcinoma-bearing subjects.

Venza I(1), Giordano L, Piraino G, Medici N, Ceci G, Teti D.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Patologia Generale, Università degli Studi di Messina, Policlinico
Universitario, Messina, Italy.

Prostaglandin E-induced signal transduction pathways in human T cells from
healthy and uveal melanoma-bearing subjects were studied. Transfection
experiments showed that PGE2 was able to phosphorylate and activate the fusion
trans-activator of the cAMP responsive element-binding protein (CREB).
Phosphorylation was at least partially mediated by protein kinase A, as evidenced
by the effects of specific kinase inhibitors. Western blotting experiments, which
were performed to identify the CREB/ATF2 family members involved in the response 
to PGE2, revealed a modulation of proteins CREB1, CREB2 and ATF2 and
phosphorylation of the 43 kDa form of CREB. Experiments of immunoprecipitation
with CREB-binding protein (CBP) demonstrated that, after PGE2 treatment, all of
the CREB/ATF isoforms studied, as well as the phosphorylated form of CREB
(p-CREB), interacted with CBP. In basal conditions, T cells from patients with
conjunctiva basal cell carcinoma showed the presence of p-CREB, which
coimmunoprecipitated with CBP. CREB phosphorylation did not modify after PGE2
treatment whereas the p-CREB fraction bound to CBP increased in a delayed manner 
compared to normal subjects.

PMID: 11564156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Blood. 2001 Mar 1;97(5):1518-21.

Locus-specific regulation of HLA-A and HLA-B expression is not determined by
nucleotide variation in the X2 box promoter element.

Gobin SJ, van den Elsen PJ.

Comment on
    Blood. 2000 Jun 15;95(12):3804-8.

PMID: 11243241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Cell. 2000 Nov 10;103(4):595-608.

Enhancement of memory-related long-term facilitation by ApAF, a novel
transcription factor that acts downstream from both CREB1 and CREB2.

Bartsch D(1), Ghirardi M, Casadio A, Giustetto M, Karl KA, Zhu H, Kandel ER.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, College
of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University and New York State Psychiatric 
Institute, 722 West 168th Street New York, NY 10032, USA.

The memory for sensitization of the gill withdrawal reflex in Aplysia is
reflected in facilitation of the monosynaptic connection between the sensory and 
motor neurons of the reflex. The switch from short- to long-term facilitation
requires activation of CREB1, derepression of ApCREB2, and induction of ApC/EBP. 
In search for genes that act downstream from CREB1, we have identified a
transcription activator, ApAF, which is stimulated by protein kinase A and can
dimerize with both ApC/EBP and ApCREB2. ApAF is necessary for long-term
facilitation induced by five pulses of serotonin, by activation of CREB1, or by
derepression of ApCREB2. Overexpression of ApAF enhances the long-term
facilitation further. Thus, ApAF is a candidate memory enhancer gene downstream
from both CREB1 and ApCREB2.

PMID: 11106730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Physiol Res. 2000;49(3):363-8.

Effects of vitamin E and prostaglandin E2 on expression of CREB1 and CREB2
proteins by human T lymphocytes.

Valenti A(1), Venza I, Venza M, Fimiani V, Teti D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of General Pathology, Medical School, University of Messina, Italy.

Both prostaglandins (PGs) and vitamin E are known to deeply affect immune
responses. It is shown here that they both influence T cell-mediated immunity
through reciprocal interference on the expression of cyclic-AMP responsive
element binding (CREB) family proteins. CREB1 protein of human T lymphocytes was 
significantly modulated by a brief treatment of 5 to 10 min with PGE2. On the
contrary, vitamin E appeared to be ineffective on the CREB1 behavior, while it
abolished the PGE2-induced modulation of this protein. The CREB2 protein
expression was also affected by PGE2 treatment, but a longer period of incubation
(>20 min) was needed to observe these changes. Vitamin E showed a strong
enhancing effect on CREB2 that was partially reversed by the subsequent treatment
with PGE2. Our results support the idea that there is reciprocal interference
between PGE2 and vitamin E on PGE2-induced signals in T lymphocytes. These data
are in agreement with the reports concerning different cell systems and
experimental conditions.

PMID: 11043924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Endocrinology. 2000 Oct;141(10):3737-48.

Promoter elements and transcription factors involved in differentiation-dependent
human chorionic gonadotrophin-alpha messenger ribonucleic acid expression of term
villous trophoblasts.

Knöfler M(1), Saleh L, Bauer S, Vasicek R, Griesinger G, Strohmer H, Helmer H,
Husslein P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Vienna, Austria.
martin.knoefler@akh-wien.ac.at

Differentiation of primary villous cytotrophoblasts into syncytia is associated
with increasing production of alpha and beta human CG subunits, which is
predominantly governed at the level of messenger RNA expression. Here, we present
a detailed study on the mechanisms involved in the differentiation-dependent
regulation of the trophoblast-specific CGalpha gene promoter. Site-directed
mutations in each of the five DNA-elements of the composite enhancer were
performed to investigate the contribution of the individual regulatory sequences 
to the overall transcriptional activity of the promoter at two different stages
of trophoblast in vitro differentiation. We show that deletion of one cyclic AMP 
response element (CRE) did not affect CGalpha promoter activity in
cytotrophoblasts; however, it reduced transcription by 33% in differentiating
cultures. Removal of both CREs almost abolished transcription at early and later 
stages of in vitro differentiation. Upon mutation the enhancer elements alphaACT,
JRE, and CCAAT significantly decreased luciferase reporter transcription; however
their contribution to the total promoter activity did not change during in vitro 
differentiation. Contrary to that, mutated TSE diminished promoter activity by
19% during 12 and 48 h of cultivation but reduced luciferase expression by 78%
between 48 and 84 h of differentiation. In electrophoretic mobility shift assay, 
the TSE interacted with activating protein (AP)-2alpha in both primary
trophoblasts and choriocarcinoma cells. While CRE-interacting proteins were
detectable 12 h after isolation, the TSE-binding complex did not appear before 36
h of in vitro differentiation. During syncytium formation increasing protein
expression of activating transcription factor (ATF)-1, cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB)-1, and AP-2alpha was observed on Western blots.
Moreover, phosphorylated CREB-1 and ATF-1 accumulated between 24 and 78 h of
trophoblast cultivation. By fluorescence immunohistochemistry, we show that
CREB-1 was predominantly expressed in syncytiotrophoblasts, whereas ATF-1 and
AP-2alpha localized to the syncytium and some cytototrophoblasts as well as to
stromal and endothelial cells of the placental villus. Phosphorylated
CREB-1/ATF-1 and the coactivator protein CBP were primarily detected in syncytial
nuclei, suggesting the presence of functional, cAMP-dependent transcriptional
complexes in the differentiated tissue. In agreement to the in vivo situation,
phosphorylated CREB-1/ATF-1 were observed in nuclei of the differentiated
trophoblast cultures. The activity of the CGalpha promoter as well as
CREB-1/ATF-1 phosphorylation increased upon elevation of cAMP levels and
overexpression of the catalytic subunit of protein kinase A. Additionally, we
demonstrate that overproduction of the enzyme enhanced protein expression and
binding of AP-2alpha to the TSE. We conclude that differentiation-dependent
transcription of the CGalpha gene in villous trophoblasts is mainly governed by
increasing expression of AP-2alpha and PKA-dependent phosphorylation of CREB-1
and ATF-1.

PMID: 11014230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Virology. 2000 Jul 5;272(2):357-65.

A novel link between stress and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection:
sympathetic hyperactivity stimulates HCMV activation.

Prösch S(1), Wendt CE, Reinke P, Priemer C, Oppert M, Krüger DH, Volk HD, Döcke
WD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Virology, Humboldt University, Berlin, D-10098, Germany.
susanna.proesch@charite.de

Recently, inflammatory mediators such as TNFalpha were identified as triggering
active human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection. Here, we demonstrate that a highly
stressful event in the absence of systemic inflammation, as observed in patients 
with acute myocardial infarction, leads to the development of an active HCMV
infection in latently infected patients. Elucidating the molecular mechanism of
virus activation, we could show that catecholamines directly stimulate the HCMV
immediate-early (IE) enhancer/promoter in monocytic cells via beta-2 adrenergic
receptors. Subsequent activation of the cAMP/PK-A-signaling pathway results in
enhanced synthesis and binding of the transcription factor CREB-1/ATF-1 to the
cAMP-responsive elements within the IE enhancer. Epinephrine also enhanced HCMV
gene expression in infected THP-1 cells by about 50% in three of four
experiments. These data suggest that HCMV, like HSV-1 and VZV, can be
(re)activated under stress conditions.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10873779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jul 14;275(28):21737-45.

The homeodomain protein Barx2 contains activator and repressor domains and
interacts with members of the CREB family.

Edelman DB(1), Meech R, Jones FS.

Author information: 
(1)Neurosciences Institute, San Diego, California 92121 and the Department of
Neurobiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Barx1 and Barx2 are homeodomain proteins originally identified using regulatory
elements of genes encoding certain cell adhesion molecules (CAMs). In the present
study, we characterize regions of Barx2 that bind to regulatory elements of genes
encoding three CAMs, L1, neuron-glia CAM (Ng-CAM), and neural CAM (N-CAM), and
identify domains of Barx2 that regulate N-CAM transcription. The homeodomain of
Barx2 was sufficient for binding to homeodomain binding sites (HBS) from all
three CAM genes. The presence of a 17-amino acid Barx basic region resulted in a 
2-fold decrease in binding to HBS sequences from the Ng-CAM and L1 genes, whereas
it led to a 6.5-fold increase in binding to the HBS from the N-CAM promoter.
Thus, the Barx basic region influences the strength and specificity of Barx2
binding to DNA. In co-transfection experiments, Barx2 repressed N-CAM promoter
activity. A 24-residue N-terminal region of Barx2 was essential for repression.
When this region was absent, Barx2 activated the N-CAM promoter. A 63-residue
C-terminal domain was required for this activation. In GST pull-down experiments,
Barx2 bound to proteins of the CREB family, CREB1 and ATF2. Overall, these
findings provide a framework for understanding developmental and physiological
contexts that influence repressor or activator functions of Barx2.

PMID: 10781615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Gen Virol. 2000 Apr;81(Pt 4):1057-66.

The activity of the Epstein-Barr virus BamHI W promoter in B cells is dependent
on the binding of CREB/ATF factors.

Kirby H(1), Rickinson A, Bell A.

Author information: 
(1)CRC Institute for Cancer Studies, The University of Birmingham, Edgbaston,
Birmingham B15 2TA, UK.

The programme of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) gene expression that leads to
virus-induced growth transformation of resting B lymphocytes is initiated through
activation of the BamHI W promoter, Wp. The factors regulating Wp, and the basis 
of its preferential activity in B cells, remain poorly understood. Previous work 
has identified a B cell-specific enhancer region which is critical for Wp
function and which contains three binding sites for cellular factors. Here we
focus on one of these sites and show, using bandshift assays, that it interacts
with three members of the CREB/ATF family of cell transcription factors, CREB1,
ATF1 and ATFa. A mutation which abrogates the binding of these factors reduces Wp
reporter activity specifically in B cell lines, whereas a mutation which converts
the site to a consensus CREB-binding sequence maintains wild-type promoter
function. Furthermore Wp activity in B cell, but not in non-B cell, lines could
be inhibited by cotransfection of expression plasmids expressing dominant
negative forms of CREB1 and ATF1. Increasing the basal activity of CREB/ATF
proteins in cells by treatment with protein kinase A or protein kinase C agonists
led to small increases in Wp activity in B cell lines, but did not restore
promoter activity in non-B cell lines up to B cell levels. We conclude that
CREB/ATF factors are important activators of Wp in a B cell environment but
require additional B cell-specific factors in order to mediate their effects.

PMID: 10725433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 24;275(12):8911-20.

cAMP-independent activation of the adenovirus type 12 E2 promoter correlates with
the recruitment of CREB-1/ATF-1, E1A(12S), and CBP to the E2-CRE.

Fax P(1), Lipinski KS, Esche H, Brockmann D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology (Cancer Research), University of Essen Medical 
School, Hufelandstrasse 55, 45122 Essen, Germany.

Expression of the transcription unit early region 2 (E2) is of crucial importance
for adenoviruses because this region encodes proteins essential for viral
replication. Here, we demonstrate that the E1A(12S) protein of the oncogenic
adenovirus serotype 12 activates the E2 promoter in dependence of the N terminus 
and the conserved region 1. Activation is mediated through a cAMP-response
element that is bound by CREB-1 and ATF-1. Moreover, the Ad12 E2 promoter is
inducible by protein kinase A and repressed by either a dominant-negative
cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) mutant or the highly specific
protein kinase A inhibitor protein underscoring the participation of CREB-1/ATF-1
in promoter activation. E1A(12S) binds to CREB-1 and ATF-1 in dependence of the N
terminus and CR1 and is recruited to the E2 cAMP-response element through both
cellular transcription factors. Most interestingly, point mutations revealed that
E1A(12S) domains essential for binding to CREB-1/ATF-1 and for activation of the 
Ad12 E2 promoter are also essential for binding to the CREB-binding protein. Due 
to these data and results obtained in DNA-dependent protein-protein interaction
assays, we propose a model in which the cAMP-independent activation of the Ad12
E2 promoter is mediated through a ternary complex consisting of CREB-1/ATF-1,
E1A(12S), and CREB-binding protein, which assembles on the E2 cAMP-response
element.

PMID: 10722738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 24;274(52):37455-60.

Transcriptional activation of the human manganese superoxide dismutase gene
mediated by tetradecanoylphorbol acetate.

Kim HP(1), Roe JH, Chock PB, Yim MB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, NHLBI, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-0342, USA.

Transcriptional activation of human manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) mRNA
induced by a phorbol ester, 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA), was
examined to identify the responsive transcriptional regulator. The effect of
various deletions and mutations within the 5'-flanking region of the human MnSOD 
gene promoter was evaluated using the luciferase reporter system in A549 human
lung carcinoma cells. Deletion of a region between -1292 and -1202 nucleotides
upstream of the transcription start site abolished TPA-responsive induction,
whereas deletion of the putative binding sequence for NF-kappaB or AP-1 did not. 
The region between -1292 and -1202 contains a cAMP-responsive element-like
sequence, TGACGTCT, which we identified as the manganese superoxide dismutase
TPA-responsive element, MSTRE. Site-specific mutation of the MSTRE abolished the 
TPA-responsive induction, validating the critical role of this sequence. We
detected specific MSTRE activity from nuclear extracts and demonstrated by
antibody supershift assay that this activity is closely related to CREB-1/ATF-1. 
TPA treatment rapidly induced phosphorylation of the CREB-1/ATF-1-like factor via
the protein kinase C pathway. These results led us to conclude that the human
MnSOD gene having the promoter construct used in this study is induced by TPA via
activation of a CREB-1/ATF-1-like factor and not via either NF-kappaB or AP-1. In
addition, we found that this induction was blocked by inhibitors of flavoproteins
and NADPH oxidases, indicating involvement of enhanced generation of superoxide
radical anion as an upstream signal.

PMID: 10601319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1999 Nov 15;371(2):179-90.

Identification and characterization of a cAMP-responsive element in the region
upstream from promoter 1.3 of the human aromatase gene.

Zhou D(1), Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope,
Duarte, California 91010, USA.

Aromatase converts androgens to estrogens. The expression of this enzyme is
driven by multiple tissue-specific promoters which are differentially regulated. 
Aromatase expression in breast cancer and the surrounding adipose cells is
directed mainly by promoters I.3 and II, while its expression in the normal
breast adipose tissue is driven by promoter I.4. Like promoter II, promoters I.3 
is thought to be a cAMP-driven promoter, demonstrated previously by cell culture 
experiments. In the present study, we have identified and characterized a
cAMP-responsive element (CREaro) upstream from promoter 1.3. This positive
element, TGAAGTCA, between -66 and -59 bp relative to the transcriptional start
site of promoter 1.3 was identified by DNA deletion and mutation analyses. The
sequence of CREaro is one base different from the consensus CRE sequence (CREpal;
TGACGTCA), and the mutational analysis revealed that CREaro had a higher enhancer
activity to promoter I.3 than CREpal. Nuclear proteins from both WS3TF breast
tumor fibroblasts and SK-BR-3 breast cancer cells bound to this CREaro, as
demonstrated by DNA mobility shift assay. The molecular weight of the major
binding protein in fibroblasts was determined to be approximately 60 kDa, as
shown by UV crosslinking, which is different from those of known CRE-binding
proteins. It is thought that CREB1 is not expressed in tumor fibroblasts because 
the Western blot analysis using anti-CREB1 antibody was not able to detect CREB1 
in the nuclear protein extract from these cells. DNA mobility shift analysis
using a nuclear protein extract from SK-BR-3 cells revealed that at least two
proteins bound to the CREaro and that one of these proteins was identified to be 
CREB1. These studies provide direct evidence that promoter I.3 is a
cAMP-responsive promoter.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10545204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 1999 Feb;20(2):352-8.

Forskolin inhibits cyclin D1 expression in cultured airway smooth-muscle cells.

Musa NL(1), Ramakrishnan M, Li J, Kartha S, Liu P, Pestell RG, Hershenson MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Accumulation of intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) has been
shown to inhibit the growth of cultured airway smooth-muscle cells, but the
precise mechanism underlying the antimitogenic action of cAMP in these cells is
unknown. We examined the effects of forskolin, an activator of adenylate cyclase,
on DNA synthesis, cyclin D1 expression, and cAMP response element-binding protein
(CREB) phosphorylation and DNA binding in bovine tracheal myocytes. DNA synthesis
was assessed by measurement of [3H]thymidine incorporation. Cyclin D1 protein
abundance and CREB phosphorylation were assessed by immunoblotting. Cyclin D1
promoter transcriptional activation was determined by measurement of luciferase
activity in cells transiently cotransfected with complementary DNAs encoding the 
full-length cyclin D1 promoter subcloned into a luciferase reporter and
beta-galactosidase (to normalize for transfection efficiency). The binding of
nuclear proteins to the cyclin D1 promoter cAMP response element (CRE) was
determined by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. We found that forskolin
attenuated platelet-derived growth factor-induced DNA synthesis in a
concentration-dependent manner. In addition, forskolin pretreatment decreased
both cyclin D1 promoter activity and protein levels. Forskolin treatment induced 
the phosphorylation of CREB and increased the binding of nuclear protein to the
cyclin D1 promoter CRE. Finally, addition of an antibody against CREB1 induced
supershift of at least one protein-DNA complex. Together, these data suggest that
cAMP suppresses cyclin D1 gene expression via phosphorylation and transactivation
of CREB. Further studies are needed to determine whether this is the primary
mechanism of cAMP-induced growth inhibition, or whether additional pathways are
also involved.

PMID: 9922228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Biol Chem. 1999 Feb 5;274(6):3887-96.

Regulation of the transglutaminase I gene. Identification of DNA elements
involved in its transcriptional control in tracheobronchial epithelial cells.

Medvedev A(1), Saunders NA, Matsuura H, Chistokhina A, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, Laboratory of Pulmonary Pathobiology, NIEHS, National
Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

The transglutaminase I (TGase I) gene encodes an enzyme that catalyzes the
cross-linking of structural proteins involved in the formation of the cornified
envelope during squamous cell differentiation. To identify DNA elements important
for the transcriptional control of the TGase I gene, we analyzed the ability of a
2.9-kilobase pair (kb) upstream regulatory region to control the expression of a 
reporter gene in vivo and in vitro. Transgenic mice bearing the pTG(-2.9kb)CAT
construct exhibited the same pattern of tissue-specific expression of CAT as
reported for TGase I. Deletion analysis in transiently transfected rabbit
tracheal epithelial cells indicated that two sequences from bp -490 to -470 and
from -54 to -37 are involved in the activation of TGase I transcription. Point
mutation analysis and mobility shift assays showed that the sequence located
between -54 and -37 is a functional Sp1-like transcription element. Sp1 and Sp3, 
but not Sp2, are part of nuclear protein complexes from differentiated RbTE cells
binding to this site. The element TGATGTCA between bp -490 and -470 is contained 
in a larger 22-bp palindrome and resembles the consensus cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB)/AP-1 element recognized by dimeric complexes of
members of the CREB, ATF, Fos, and Jun families. Mutations in this sequence
greatly reduced promoter activity. Supershift analysis identified CREB1, JunB,
c-Fos, Fra-1, and c-Jun in protein complexes isolated from differentiated rabbit 
tracheal epithelial cells binding to this site. Our study shows that the Sp1- and
CREB/AP-1-like sites act in concert to stimulate transcription of the TGase I
gene. The 2.9-kb promoter region could guide expression of specific genes in the 
granular layer of the epidermis and could be useful in gene therapy.

PMID: 9920944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Cell. 1998 Oct 16;95(2):211-23.

CREB1 encodes a nuclear activator, a repressor, and a cytoplasmic modulator that 
form a regulatory unit critical for long-term facilitation.

Bartsch D(1), Casadio A, Karl KA, Serodio P, Kandel ER.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, College of Physicians and Surgeons of
Columbia University and New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York 10032,
USA. db57@columbia.edu

Although CREB seems to be important for memory formation, it is not known which
of the isoforms of CREB, CREM, or ATF1 are expressed in the neurons that undergo 
long-term synaptic changes and what roles they have in memory formation. We have 
found a single Aplysia CREB1 gene homologous to both mammalian CREB and CREM and 
have characterized in the sensory neurons that mediate gill-withdrawal reflex the
expression and function of the three proteins that it encodes: CREB1a, CREB1b,
and CREB1c. CREB1a is a transcriptional activator that is both necessary and,
upon phosphorylation, sufficient for long-term facilitation. CREB1b is a
repressor of long-term facilitation. Cytoplasmic CREB1c modulates both the short-
and long-term facilitation. Thus, in the sensory neurons, CREB1 encodes a
critical regulatory unit converting short- to long-term synaptic changes.

PMID: 9790528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Immunol. 1997 Nov 15;159(10):4676-85.

Transcriptional regulation of the junB gene in B lymphocytes: role of protein
kinase A and a membrane Ig-regulated protein phosphatase.

Amato SF(1), Nakajima K, Hirano T, Chiles TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA 02167, USA.

We have examined herein whether membrane Ig (mIg) stimulates junB transcription
through a protein kinase A (PKA)-dependent or PKA-independent pathway. PKA
phosphotransferase activity was not increased following mIg cross-linking of
Bal17 B cells. However, junB transcriptional activation was dependent upon PKA
activity, as evidenced by inhibition of goat anti-mouse IgM-stimulated junB
promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene activity in transfected 
Bal17 B cells treated with the PKA inhibitor H-89. mIg-stimulated junB
promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase activity was also blocked in B cells
expressing a specific PKA inhibitor peptide, whereas in vivo expression of an
inactive PKA inhibitor peptide variant was not inhibitory. Expression of a mutant
cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) containing an inactivated kinase A
phosphoacceptor site at Ser133 reduced mIg-stimulated junB transcription. Okadaic
acid increased CREB1 phosphorylation at Ser133 and junB transcriptional
activation, suggesting the action of protein phosphatase-1 (PP-1) or -2A (PP-2A).
Extracts from unstimulated B cells exhibited phosphatase activity against an in
vitro PKA-phosphorylated peptide containing the Ser133 phosphoacceptor site. The 
involvement of a phosphatase activity in regulating mIg-stimulated junB
transcription is supported by our finding that extracts from goat anti-mouse
IgM-stimulated B cells exhibited a significantly reduced level of Ser133
phosphatase activity. Hence, the level of CREB1 phosphorylation is governed by
the balance between PKA and phosphatase activities. junB transcriptional
activation results in part from mIg signals that negatively regulate a
CREB1-targeted PP-1 or PP-2A activity.

PMID: 9366390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Mech Ageing Dev. 1996 Jul 5;88(1-2):111-24.

Alterations in transcription factor-binding activities to fibronectin promoter
during aging of vascular endothelial cells.

Kumazaki T(1), Mitsui Y.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Bioscience and Human Technology, Agency of Industrial
Science and Technology, Ibaraki, Japan.

Previously, we showed that the expression of the fibronectin (FN) gene is
enhanced during aging of human endothelial cells and fibroblasts. To elucidate
the mechanism, we explored binding proteins to the FN promoter. The promoter
contains sites for the general transcription factors: CAAT-binding transcription 
factor (CTF), promoter-specific transcription factor-1 (Sp1), and transcription
factor-IID (TFIID). The promoter also contains sites for inducible transcription 
factors, cAMP-responsive element (CRE)-binding protein (CREB), and Activator
protein 2 (AP-2). We synthesized 10 different oligonucleotides for these and
other potential transcription factor-binding sites. Using these oligonucleotides,
we searched for binding proteins in young and old endothelial cells by
electrophoretic mobility shift and supershift assays. Our results showed that
AP-1 decreased with aging, but Sp1 and CREB1 were unaffected. However, decreased 
binding activities to CRE at positions -170 and -415 were shown in old cells.
This could be explained by the decrease of AP-1 because these CREs bound not only
CREB1 but also AP-1. Moreover, we observed that the binding activities of TFIID, 
CTF, and binding proteins to -40, -120 and -260 regions increased. These
differential changes may cause the enhancement of FN expression in senescent
cells.

PMID: 8803927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Virol. 1995 Jun;69(6):3420-32.

Protein domains involved in both in vivo and in vitro interactions between human 
T-cell leukemia virus type I tax and CREB.

Yin MJ(1), Paulssen EJ, Seeler JS, Gaynor RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas 75235-8594, USA.

Gene expression from the human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) long
terminal repeat (LTR) is mediated by three cis-acting regulatory elements known
as 21-bp repeats and the transactivator protein Tax. The 21-bp repeats can be
subdivided into three motifs known as A, B, and C, each of which is important for
maximal gene expression in response to Tax. The B motif contains nucleotide
sequences known as a cyclic AMP response element (CRE) or tax-response element
which binds members of the ATF/CREB family of transcription factors. Though
mutations of this element in the HTLV-I LTR eliminate tax activation, Tax will
not activate most other promoters containing these CRE sites. In this study, we
investigated the mechanism by which Tax activates gene expression in conjunction 
with members of the ATF/CREB family. We found that Tax enhanced the binding of
one member of the ATF/CREB family, CREB 1, to each of the three HTLV-I LTR 21-bp 
repeats but not another member designated CRE-BP1 or CREB2. Tax enhanced the
binding of CREB1 to nonpalindromic CRE binding sites such as those found in the
HTLV-I LTR, but Tax did not enhance the binding of CREB1 to palindromic CRE
binding sites such as found in the somatostatin promoter. This finding may help
explain the failure of Tax to activate promoters containing consensus CRE sites. 
These studies were extended by use of the mammalian two-hybrid system. Tax was
demonstrated to interact directly with CREB1 but not with other bZIP proteins,
including CREB2 and Jun. Site-directed mutagenesis of both Tax and CREB1
demonstrated that the amino terminus of Tax and both the basic and the leucine
zipper regions of CREB1 were required for direct interactions between these
proteins both in vivo and in vitro. This interaction occurred in vivo and thus
did not require the presence of the HTLV-I 21-bp repeats, as previously
suggested. These results define the domains required for interaction between Tax 
and CREB that are likely critical for the activation of HTLV-I gene expression.

PMCID: PMC189054
PMID: 7745688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Apr 25;22(8):1463-9.

Different binding specificities and transactivation of variant CRE's by CREB
complexes.

Benbrook DM(1), Jones NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City 73190.

The DNA binding specificities of CREB1 and CREB2 homodimers and the CREB2/cJun
heterodimer were analyzed with a CASTing technique. All but one of the selected
sequences varied from the consensus CRE (TGACGTCA) by three nucleotides or less. 
The profile of variations selected and the binding affinity for these sequences
were unique for each CREB complex. The affinities were not effected by the
palindromic nature of the sequences, but were strongly effected by flanking
sequences. The strength of DNA binding in vitro correlated with the degree of
transactivation observed in JEG-3 cells transfected with reporter plasmids
harboring CRE variants, when hybrid CREB proteins fused to the VP16 activation
domain were expressed. When native CREB proteins were expressed, the correlation 
was attenuated by the nature of the variant sequence. A CRE variant (TGACATCA)
found in several natural promoters, exhibited the lowest basal transcription rate
of the variants and a lower level of induction than expected when compared with
the in vitro binding data. These results indicate that transactivation of DNA
sequence elements is strongly effected by the strength of transcription factor
binding, and that individual sequences can attenuate the level of induction.

PMCID: PMC308006
PMID: 8190638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Genomics. 1993 Jan;15(1):197-9.

Localization of the murine activating transcription factor 4 gene to mouse
chromosome 15.

Mielnicki LM(1), Elliott RW, Pruitt SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York 14263.

Restriction fragment length variant analysis employing a mouse cDNA probe was
used to localize the gene encoding murine activating transcription factor 4
(ATF-4) to mouse chromosome 15 in close proximity to Sis (the cellular homolog of
the simian sarcoma virus oncoprotein). Previous studies suggest that conserved
linkage relationships exist between this region of mouse chromosome 15 and human 
chromosome 22q. The chromosomal locations of genes encoding most members of the
ATF and cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CREB) subfamily of b-zip
proteins have not been determined. This study demonstrates that the location of
the gene for murine ATF-4 is not linked to the genes for JUN family members,
CREB1 and CREB2. Further mapping of individual ATF/CREB subfamily members in the 
mouse will provide insight into the evolution of this multigene family.

PMID: 8432535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Genomics. 1992 Nov;14(3):790-2.

Mapping Creb-1 to chromosome 1 in the mouse.

Barton CH(1), Ajioka JW, Roach TI, Blackwell JM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge Clinical School, Department of Medicine, Addenbrooke's
Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

The gene CREB1 encoding the cyclic AMP response element DNA binding protein was
previously assigned to human 2q32.3-q34. In this study, a panel of 207 backcross 
mice made between C57BL/10ScSn (=B10) females and (B10 x B10.L-Lsh)F1 males were 
used to map Creb-1 with respect to Cryg and Lsh/Vil on mouse chromosome 1. A
reverse-transcribed, polymerase chain reaction-amplified cDNA probe covering bp
39 to 554 of the human sequence identified restriction fragment length
polymorphisms with 7/18 restriction endonucleases used to digest whole genomic
mouse DNA from the parental strains. BglII and DraI RFLPs for Creb-1 were scored 
on a subpanel of 16/207 known recombinants between Cryg and Lsh/Vil, yielding
2/16 recombinants between Cryg and Creb-1 and 14/16 recombinants between Creb-1
and Lsh/Vil. The 16/207 recombinants observed between Lsh/Vil and Cryg provide an
estimated recombination frequency of 0.077 +/- 0.019, equivalent to a map
distance of 7.7 +/- 1.9 cM. This is in good agreement with previously published
map distances. The number of recombinants observed between Creb-1 and the other
markers place Creb-1 approximately 1 cM distal to Cryg and 7 cM proximal to
Lsh/Vil.

PMID: 1358811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Genomics. 1991 Dec;11(4):1161-3.

Assignment of the gene for cyclic AMP-response element binding protein 2 (CREB2) 
to human chromosome 2q24.1-q32.

Diep A(1), Li C, Klisak I, Mohandas T, Sparkes RS, Gaynor R, Lusis AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles 90024.

The regulatory element TGACGTCA is found upstream of a number of viral and
cellular genes. This element has been demonstrated to mediate cyclic AMP
induction of cellular genes and activation of viral genes. A group of closely
related cellular genes known as cyclic AMP-response element binding proteins
(CREB) or activating transcription factor (ATF) have been found to bind to this
motif and mediate activation by cyclic AMP and the adenovirus E1A protein. One of
these genes, CREB1, was previously mapped to human chromosome 2q32.3-q34.
Southern blot analysis of genomic DNA from a panel of mouse-human somatic cell
hybrids indicated that the CREB2 gene, another member of this family, also
resides on human chromosome 2. In situ hybridization further regionalized this
gene to 2q24.1-q32. Thus, the genes for CREB1 and CREB2 that have only limited
DNA sequence homology map to a similar region of the long arm of chromosome 2,
though whether they are part of a gene cluster is unclear.

PMID: 1838349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Oncogene. 1991 Nov;6(11):2019-26.

Differential regulation of three members of the ATF/CREB family of DNA-binding
proteins.

Flint KJ(1), Jones NC.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK.

The ATF/CRE binding site can mediate transcriptional activation by cAMP, the
adenovirus E1A protein and the human T-cell leukaemia virus 1 (HTLV1) tax
protein. A large number of different proteins bind specifically to this element
either as homodimers or as heterodimers. Using GAL4-ATF/CREB fusions, we have
investigated the regulatory functions of three members of this family. CREB1
(CREB) is strongly activated by cAMP and weakly activated by the E1A protein. In 
contrast, CREB2 (CRE-BP1, ATF2) is strongly activated by E1A but is insensitive
to cAMP stimulation. ATF1 is weakly activated by cAMP but is not activated by
E1A. All three proteins are insensitive to activation by the HTLV1 tax protein.
The N-terminal region of CREB2, from amino acid residues 19 to 112, is both
necessary and sufficient for E1A activation. This region contains a putative C2H2
metal-binding finger, and single amino acid substitutions of the cysteine
residues severely decreased CREB2 activity. In contrast, mutations affecting a
potential protein kinase A and casein kinase II phosphorylation site within this 
region had little effect.

PMID: 1658708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. EMBO J. 1990 Aug;9(8):2537-42.

Multiple cDNA clones encoding nuclear proteins that bind to the tax-dependent
enhancer of HTLV-1: all contain a leucine zipper structure and basic amino acid
domain.

Yoshimura T(1), Fujisawa J, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Cancer Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

A trans-activator protein, p40tax, of human T cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1)
activates its own promoter and cellular promoters of IL-2, IL-2 receptor alpha
and GM-CSF genes. We isolated three cDNA clones encoding cellular proteins that
bind to the p40tax-dependent enhancer of HTLV-1 by screening a lambda gt11 cDNA
library of an HTLV-1 infected cell line. All three proteins, TREB5, TREB7 and
TREB36, contained a leucine zipper structure and basic amino acid domain, which
are conserved in FOS, JUN and CREB, and also had multiple potential
phosphorylation sites. The proteins expressed in Escherichia coli bound to the
p40tax-dependent enhancer of the 21 bp sequence, but not to an inactive mutant
carrying a mutation in the CRE region. In DNase I footprint analysis, all three
proteins protected the 21 bp sequences in the LTR; however, the patterns were not
identical to each other. TREB7 and TREB36 protected all three repeats of the 21
bp, but TREB5 protected only the second repeat. TREB7 and TREB36 protected the 5'
and middle portions of the 21 bp which are essential for p40tax-mediated
trans-activation, whereas TREB5 and CREB1 protected a narrower part of the middle
region of the second 21 bp repeat containing the CRE consensus sequence. These
structural features and DNA binding properties suggest that TREB proteins are
members of a CREB protein family and that some of them (i.e., TREB7 and TREB36)
may be involved in p40tax-mediated trans-activation.

PMCID: PMC552284
PMID: 2196176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Genomics. 1990 Jul;7(3):416-21.

Assignment of the human gene for CREB1 to chromosome 2q32.3-q34.

Taylor AK(1), Klisak I, Mohandas T, Sparkes RS, Li C, Gaynor R, Lusis AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles 90024.

The nuclear phosphoprotein cAMP-response-element-binding-protein 1 (CREB1) is
involved in the transcriptional regulation of cAMP-inducible genes. We have
determined the chromosomal location of the human CREB1 gene by using a cDNA
probe. Southern blot analysis of genomic DNA from a panel of mouse-human somatic 
cell hybrids indicated that the CREB1 gene resides on human chromosome 2.
Analysis of a somatic cell hybrid containing a chromosome 2 translocation
narrowed assignment of the CREB1 locus to the terminal third of chromosome 2.
Finally, in situ hybridization allowed localization of the gene to the 2q32.3-q34
region. This knowledge may prove valuable in molecular analysis of translocations
occurring in this region and in exploring the possibility of a role for the CREB1
locus in malignancy.

PMID: 2142119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


