
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 4;6:22395. doi: 10.1038/srep22395.

Evolutionary diversification of the BetaM interactome acquired through co-option 
of the ATP1B4 gene in placental mammals.

Korneenko TV(1,)(2), Pestov NB(1,)(2), Ahmad N(2), Okkelman IA(1), Dmitriev
RI(1), Shakhparonov MI(1), Modyanov NN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shemyakin and Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Moscow 117871,
Russia. (2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology and Center for Diabetes and 
Endocrine Research, University of Toledo College of Medicine, 3000 Arlington Ave,
Toledo, OH 43614, USA.

ATP1B4 genes represent a rare instance of orthologous vertebrate gene co-option
that radically changed properties of the encoded BetaM proteins, which function
as Na,K-ATPase subunits in lower vertebrates and birds. Eutherian BetaM has lost 
its ancestral function and became a muscle-specific resident of the inner nuclear
membrane. Our earlier work implicated BetaM in regulation of gene expression
through direct interaction with the transcriptional co-regulator SKIP. To gain
insight into evolution of BetaM interactome we performed expanded screening of
eutherian and avian cDNA libraries using yeast-two-hybrid and split-ubiquitin
systems. The inventory of identified BetaM interactors includes lamina-associated
protein LAP-1, myocyte nuclear envelope protein Syne1, BetaM itself, heme
oxidases HMOX1 and HMOX2; transcription factor LZIP/CREB3, ERGIC3, PHF3,
reticulocalbin-3, and ß-sarcoglycan. No new interactions were found for chicken
BetaM and human Na,K-ATPase ß1, ß2 and ß3 isoforms, indicating the uniqueness of 
eutherian BetaM interactome. Analysis of truncated forms of BetaM indicates that 
residues 72-98 adjacent to the membrane in nucleoplasmic domain are important for
the interaction with SKIP. These findings demonstrate that evolutionary
alterations in structural and functional properties of eutherian BetaM proteins
are associated with the increase in its interactome complexity.

PMCID: PMC4778017
PMID: 26939788  [PubMed - in process]


2. Genet Mol Res. 2016 Jan 22;15(1). doi: 10.4238/gmr.150156091.

Corrigendum Expression and Localization of Luman/CREB3 in Mouse Embryos during
the Pre-implantation period - Genet. Mol. Res. 14 (4): 13595-13602. Published
online: October 28, 2015 (DOI: 10.4238/2015.October.28.20). Corrected after
publication: January 22, 2016 (DOI: 10.4238/gmr.150156091).

Mahmoud TN(1,)(2), Lin PF(1), Chen FL(1), Zhou JH(1), Wang XG(1), Wang N(1), Li
X(1), Jin YP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology of the Ministry of Agriculture,
Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China. (2)Department of Animal
Physiology and Biochemistry, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Nyala University,
Nyala, South Darfur, Sudan.

In regard to the affiliation mistake that was made during our correspondence in
our manuscript, we write this letter in order to correct it as per my PhD
requirements and this is the Final decision as I have no other option. The
correction is only in the affiliation and should be: T.N. Mahmoud(1,2), P.F.
Lin(1), F.L. Chen(1), J.H. Zhou(1), X.G. Wang(1), N. Wang(1), X. Li(1) and Y.P.
Jin(1). (1)Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology of the Ministry of Agriculture,
Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China. (2)Department of Animal
Physiology and Biochemistry, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Nyala University,
Nyala, South Darfur, Sudan.

PMID: 26909910  [PubMed - in process]


3. BMC Genomics. 2016 Jan 8;17(1):38. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-2359-6.

IL-10 and integrin signaling pathways are associated with head and neck cancer
progression.

Bornstein S(1), Schmidt M(2), Choonoo G(3), Levin T(4), Gray J(5,)(6), Thomas CR 
Jr(7,)(8), Wong M(9,)(10), McWeeney S(11,)(12,)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW 
Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR, 97239, USA. bornstei@ohsu.edu. (2)Department
of Cell, Developmental & Cancer Biology, Oregon Health & Science University 3,
3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR, 97239, USA. schmidma@ohsu.edu.
(3)OHSU Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW Sam 
Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR, 97239, USA. choonoo@ohsu.edu. (4)Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson
Park Road, Portland, OR, 97239, USA. levint@ohsu.edu. (5)OHSU Knight Cancer
Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road,
Portland, OR, 97239, USA. grayjo@ohsu.edu. (6)Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road,
Portland, OR, 97239, USA. grayjo@ohsu.edu. (7)Department of Radiation Medicine,
Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR, 
97239, USA. thomasch@ohsu.edu. (8)OHSU Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health &
Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR, 97239, USA.
thomasch@ohsu.edu. (9)Department of Cell, Developmental & Cancer Biology, Oregon 
Health & Science University 3, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR,
97239, USA. wongme@ohsu.edu. (10)OHSU Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health &
Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR, 97239, USA.
wongme@ohsu.edu. (11)OHSU Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health & Science
University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR, 97239, USA.
mcweeney@ohsu.edu. (12)Division of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology,
Department of Medical Informatics & Clinical Epidemiology, Oregon Health &
Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR, 97239, USA.
mcweeney@ohsu.edu. (13)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health and
Preventive Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park
Road, Portland, OR, 97239, USA. mcweeney@ohsu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Head and neck cancer is morbid with a poor prognosis that has not
significantly improved in the past several decades. The purpose of this study was
to identify biological pathways underlying progressive head and neck cancer to
inform prognostic and adjuvant strategies. We identified 235 head and neck cancer
patients in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) with sufficient clinical annotation
regarding therapeutic treatment and disease progression to identify progressors
and non-progressors. We compared primary tumor gene expression and mutational
status between these two groups.
RESULTS: 105 genes were differentially expressed between progressors and
nonprogressors (FDR<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Pathway analyses revealed deregulation (FDR<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) 
of multiple pathways related to integrin signaling as well as IL-10 signaling. A 
number of genes were uniquely mutated in the progressor cohort including
increased frequency of truncating mutations in CTCF (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.007). An 11-gene
signature derived from a combination of unique mutations and differential
expression was identified (PAGE4, SMTNL1, VTN, CA5A, C1orf43, KRTAP19-1, LEP,
HRH4, PAGE5, SEZ6L, CREB3). This signature was associated with decreased overall 
survival (Logrank Test; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03443). Cox modeling of both key clinical features 
and the signature was significant (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.032) with the greatest prognostic
improvement seen in the model based on nodal extracapsular spread and alcohol use
alone (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004).
CONCLUSIONS: Molecular analyses of head and neck cancer tumors that progressed
despite treatment, identified IL-10 and integrin pathways to be strongly
associated with cancer progression. In addition, we identified an 11-gene
signature with implications for patient prognostication. Mutational analysis
highlighted a potential role for CTCF, a crucial regulator of long-range
chromatin interactions, in head and neck cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC4706689
PMID: 26747525  [PubMed - in process]


4. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 23;10(12):e0145182. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145182.
eCollection 2015.

Expression Patterns of CREBs in Oocyte Growth and Maturation of Fish.

Senthilkumaran B(1,)(2), Sreenivasulu G(1), Wang DS(2), Sudhakumari CC(1,)(2),
Kobayashi T(2), Nagahama Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of
Hyderabad, P.O. Central University, Hyderabad, 500 046, Telangana, India.
(2)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, National Institute for Basic Biology,
Myodaiji, Okazaki, 444-8585, Japan.

In fish, oocyte meiotic maturation is regulated by 17a,
20ß-dihydroxy-progesterone through cAMP. To study the role of cAMP response
element binding protein (CREB) in meiotic maturation, we cloned and characterized
the expression pattern of CREBs from two fish models, the Nile tilapia and
catfish. In the Nile tilapia three different CREBs were identified where in CREB1
was found in many tissues including gonads with abundant expression in testis.
CREB2, few amino acids shorter than CREB1, was expressed in several tissues with 
abundant expression in ovary. In addition, a 3'UTR variant form, CREB3 was
exclusively found in ovary. During natural 14-day ovarian cycle of the Nile
tilapia, CREB1 expression was stable throughout vitellogenesis with a sharp
decrease on the day of spawning. In contrast, CREB2 remain unchanged throughout
the ovarian cycle, however elevated in 11-day full-grown immature ovarian
follicle and after hCG-induction. Interestingly, CREB3 expression was induced
three folds on the day of spawning as well as during hCG-induced oocyte
maturation. Based on the synergistic expression pattern, CREB1 is likely to
control oocyte growth, whereas CREB 2 and 3 contribute to oocyte maturation in
tilapia and the latter seems to be critical. In catfish, a single form of CREB
showed a maximum expression during spawning phase and hCG-induced maturation both
in vivo and in vitro augmented CREB expression. These results suggest that
spatial and temporal expression of CREBs seems to be important for final oocyte
maturation and may also regulate oocyte growth in fish.

PMCID: PMC4689397
PMID: 26700177  [PubMed - in process]


5. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Oct 29;14(4):13595-602. doi: 10.4238/2015.October.28.20.

Expression and localization of Luman/CREB3 in mouse embryos during the
pre-implantation period.

Mahmoud TN(1), Lin PF(2), Chen FL(2), Zhou JH(2), Wang XG(2), Wang N(2), Li X(2),
Jin YP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Physiology and Biochemistry, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Nyala University, Nyala, South Darfur, Sudan. (2)Key Laboratory of
Animal Biotechnology of the Ministry of Agriculture, Northwest A&F University,
Yangling, Shaanxi, China.

Luman/CREB3 is a transcription factor that is a member of the
cAMP-response-element-binding protein family of basic region-leucine zipper
transcription factors. This protein interacts with host cell factor 1, which also
associates with the herpes simplex virus protein VP16 to induce the transcription
of herpes simplex virus. Currently, the physiological function of Luman/CREB3 in 
reproductive processes remains unclear. In this study, quantitative real-time PCR
and immunofluorescence assays were used to investigate the expression and
localization of Luman in mouse oocytes as well as in early embryonic development.
Luman protein was detected in the germinal vesicle and metaphase II stage
oocytes, and was distributed in the cytoplasm, nucleus, and polar body of the
oocyte stage. However, Luman protein and mRNA expression levels were
significantly (P < 0.05) increased before activation of the zygotic genome, and
expression levels peaked in 4-cell embryos. Expression levels were significantly 
(P < 0.05) decreased following the 8-cell stage throughout the blastocyst stage. 
The Luman protein was also distributed in the nucleus and cytoplasm in the early 
preimplantation embryo and showed enhanced nuclear staining starting from the
2-cell stage embryo up to the 8-cell stage embryo. The differences in the
expression and localization of Luman in mouse oocytes and early embryo suggested 
that Luman plays an important role in oocyte maturation and early embryonic
development processes.

PMID: 26535673  [PubMed - in process]


6. J Neurosci. 2015 Oct 28;35(43):14557-70. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0012-15.2015.

The Unfolded Protein Response and Cholesterol Biosynthesis Link Luman/CREB3 to
Regenerative Axon Growth in Sensory Neurons.

Ying Z(1), Zhai R(2), McLean NA(2), Johnston JM(2), Misra V(3), Verge VM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Cameco MS Neuroscience Research
Center, and Department of Veterinary Microbiology, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 5E5, Canada. (2)Department of Anatomy and Cell
Biology, Cameco MS Neuroscience Research Center, and. (3)Department of Veterinary
Microbiology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 5E5,
Canada. (4)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Cameco MS Neuroscience
Research Center, and valerie.verge@usask.ca.

We recently revealed that the axon endoplasmic reticulum resident transcription
factor Luman/CREB3 (herein called Luman) serves as a unique retrograde injury
signal in regulation of the intrinsic elongating form of sensory axon
regeneration. Here, evidence supports that Luman contributes to axonal
regeneration through regulation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) and
cholesterol biosynthesis in adult rat sensory neurons. One day sciatic nerve
crush injury triggered a robust increase in UPR-associated mRNA and protein
expression in both neuronal cell bodies and the injured axons. Knockdown of Luman
expression in 1 d injury-conditioned neurons by siRNA attenuated axonal outgrowth
to 48% of control injured neurons and was concomitant with reduced UPR- and
cholesterol biosynthesis-associated gene expression. UPR PCR-array analysis
coupled with qRT-PCR identified and confirmed that four transcripts involved in
cholesterol regulation were downregulated >2-fold by the Luman siRNA treatment of
the injury-conditioned neurons. Further, the Luman siRNA-attenuated outgrowth
could be significantly rescued by either cholesterol supplementation or 2 ng/ml
of the UPR inducer tunicamycin, an amount determined to elevate the depressed UPR
gene expression to a level equivalent of that observed with crush injury. Using
these approaches, outgrowth increased significantly to 74% or 69% that of
injury-conditioned controls, respectively. The identification of Luman as a
regulator of the injury-induced UPR and cholesterol at levels that benefit the
intrinsic ability of axotomized adult rat sensory neurons to undergo axonal
regeneration reveals new therapeutic targets to bolster nerve repair.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3514557-14$15.00/0.

PMID: 26511246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Cell Sci. 2015 Dec 1;128(23):4353-65. doi: 10.1242/jcs.176057. Epub 2015 Oct
26.

Luman is involved in osteoclastogenesis through the regulation of DC-STAMP
expression, stability and localization.

Kanemoto S(1), Kobayashi Y(2), Yamashita T(2), Miyamoto T(3), Cui M(4), Asada
R(4), Cui X(4), Hino K(4), Kaneko M(4), Takai T(4), Matsuhisa K(4), Takahashi
N(2), Imaizumi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Biomedical and Health Sciences,
Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan
soshikanemoto@hiroshima-u.ac.jp imaizumi@hiroshima-u.ac.jp. (2)Institute for Oral
Science, Matsumoto Dental University, 1780 Gobara, Hiro-oka, Shiojiri, Nagano
399-0781, Japan. (3)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Keio University School of
Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. (4)Department of
Biochemistry, Institute of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.

Luman (also known as CREB3) is a type-II transmembrane transcription factor
belonging to the OASIS family that localizes to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
membrane under normal conditions. In response to ER stress, OASIS-family members 
are subjected to regulated intramembrane proteolysis (RIP), following which the
cleaved N-terminal fragments translocate to the nucleus. In this study, we show
that treatment of bone marrow macrophages (BMMs) with cytokines - macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) and RANKL (also known as TNFSF11) - causes a
time-dependent increase in Luman expression, and that Luman undergoes RIP and
becomes activated during osteoclast differentiation. Small hairpin
(sh)RNA-mediated knockdown of Luman in BMMs prevented the formation of
multinucleated osteoclasts, concomitant with the suppression of DC-STAMP, a
protein that is essential for cell-cell fusion in osteoclastogenesis. The
N-terminus of Luman facilitates promoter activity of DC-STAMP, resulting in
upregulation of DC-STAMP expression. Furthermore, Luman interacts with DC-STAMP, 
and controls its stability and localization. These results suggest that Luman
regulates the multinucleation of osteoclasts by promoting cell fusion of
mononuclear osteoclasts through DC-STAMP induction and intracellular distribution
during osteoclastogenesis.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4712816
PMID: 26503158  [PubMed - in process]


8. Front Biol (Beijing). 2015 Feb 1;10(1):28-51.

Transcriptional regulation of secretory capacity by bZip transcription factors.

Fox RM(1), Andrew DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Cells of specialized secretory organs expand their secretory pathways to
accommodate the increased protein load necessary for their function. The
endoplasmic reticulum (ER), the Golgi apparatus and the secretory vesicles,
expand not only the membrane components but also the protein machinery required
for increased protein production and transport. Increased protein load causes an 
ER stress response akin to the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR). Recent work has
implicated several bZip transcription factors in the regulation of protein
components of the early secretory pathway necessary to alleviate this stress.
Here, we highlight eight bZip transcription factors in regulating secretory
pathway component genes. These include components of the three canonical branches
of the UPR-ATF4, XBP1, and ATF6, as well as the five members of the Creb3 family 
of transcription factors. We review findings from both invertebrate and
vertebrate model systems suggesting that all of these proteins increase secretory
capacity in response to increased protein load. Finally, we propose that the
Creb3 family of factors may have a dual role in secretory cell differentiation by
also regulating the pathways necessary for cell cycle exit during terminal
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4374484
PMID: 25821458  [PubMed]


9. Biol Open. 2015 Feb 13;4(3):317-30. doi: 10.1242/bio.201411205.

Changes in organelle position and epithelial architecture associated with loss of
CrebA.

Fox RM(1), Andrew DJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. (2)The Department of Cell Biology, The Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA dandrew@jhmi.edu.

Drosophila CrebA facilitates high-level secretion by transcriptional upregulation
of the protein components of the core secretory machinery. In CrebA mutant
embryos, both salivary gland (SG) morphology and epidermal cuticle secretion are 
abnormal, phenotypes similar to those observed with mutations in core secretory
pathway component genes. Here, we examine the cellular defects associated with
CrebA loss in the SG epithelium. Apically localized secretory vesicles are
smaller and less abundant, consistent with overall reductions in secretion.
Unexpectedly, global mislocalization of cellular organelles and excess membrane
accumulation in the septate junctions (SJs) are also observed. Whereas mutations 
in core secretory pathway genes lead to organelle localization defects similar to
those of CrebA mutants, they have no effect on SJ-associated membrane. Mutations 
in tetraspanin genes, which are normally repressed by CrebA, have mild defects in
SJ morphology that are rescued by simultaneous CrebA loss. Correspondingly,
removal of several tetraspanins gives partial rescue of the CrebA SJ phenotype,
supporting a role for tetraspanins in SJ organization.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4359738
PMID: 25681391  [PubMed]


10. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Nov 20;5:e1527. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.490.

Identification of Creb3l4 as an essential negative regulator of adipogenesis.

Kim TH(1), Jo SH(2), Choi H(1), Park JM(1), Kim MY(1), Nojima H(3), Kim JW(1),
Ahn YH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Republic of Korea. (2)1] Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Republic
of Korea [2] Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project for Medical Sciences, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Molecular
Genetics, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka,
Japan.

Understanding the molecular networks that regulate adipogenesis is crucial for
combating obesity. However, the identity and molecular actions of negative
regulators that regulate the early development of adipocytes remain poorly
understood. In this study, we investigated the role of CREB3L4, a member of the
CREB3-like family, in the regulation of adiposity. Constitutive overexpression of
CREB3L4 resulted in the inhibition of adipocyte differentiation, whereas
knockdown of Creb3l4 expression caused differentiation of preadipocytes into
mature adipocytes, bypassing the mitotic clonal expansion step. In 3T3-L1
preadipocytes, Creb3l4 knockdown resulted in increased expression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>2) and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
(C/EBPa), either by increasing the protein stability of C/EBPß or by decreasing
the expression of GATA3, a negative regulator of PPAR<U+03B3>2 expression. Consequently,
increased PPAR<U+03B3>2 and C/EBPa levels induced adipocyte differentiation, even in the
presence of minimal hormonal inducer. Thus, it can be speculated that CREB3L4 has
a role as gatekeeper, inhibiting adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes. Moreover, 
adipocytes of Creb3l4-knockout mice showed hyperplasia caused by increased
adipogenesis, and exhibited improved glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity,
as compared with littermate wild-type mice. These results raise the possibility
that Creb3l4 could be a useful therapeutic target in the fight against obesity
and metabolic syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4260748
PMID: 25412305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Nov 11;111(45):16142-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1407462111. Epub 2014 Oct 27.

Sensing nerve injury at the axonal ER: activated Luman/CREB3 serves as a novel
axonally synthesized retrograde regeneration signal.

Ying Z(1), Misra V(2), Verge VM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Anatomy and Cell Biology and Cameco Multiple Sclerosis
Neuroscience Research Center, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada
S7N 5E5 Veterinary Microbiology and. (2)Veterinary Microbiology and.
(3)Departments of Anatomy and Cell Biology and Cameco Multiple Sclerosis
Neuroscience Research Center, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada
S7N 5E5 valerie.verge@usask.ca.

Luman/cAMP response element binding protein 3 is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
transmembrane basic leucine zipper transcription factor whose mRNA and protein
localize to adult sensory axons, the latter with axonal ER components along the
axon length. Here we show that axon-derived Luman plays an important role in
relaying information about axonal injury to the neuronal cell body. Axotomy
induces axonal Luman synthesis and also release from the axonal ER of Luman's
transcriptionally active amino terminus, which is transported to the cell body in
an importin-mediated manner. Visualization of the activation and retrograde
translocation of Luman into the nucleus in real time both in vivo and in vitro
was accomplished using a specially created N- and C-terminal-tagged Luman
adenoviral vector. Small interfering RNA used to reduce Luman expression either
neuronally or just axonally significantly impaired the ability of 24-h
injury-conditioned sensory neurons to extend the regeneration-associated
elongating form of axon growth but had no impact on axon outgrowth in naïve
neurons. Collectively, these findings link injury-associated axonal ER responses 
proximal to the site of injury to the intrinsic regenerative growth capacity of
adult sensory neurons.

PMCID: PMC4234591
PMID: 25349404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. FASEB J. 2014 Nov;28(11):5010-21. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-259218. Epub 2014 Jul 30.

Human sLZIP promotes atherosclerosis via MMP-9 transcription and vascular smooth 
muscle cell migration.

Kim J(1), Ko J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Sciences, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea. (2)Division
of Life Sciences, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea jesangko@korea.ac.kr.

Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory response of the vascular wall, and
immune responses are involved in every phase of atherosclerosis, from initiation,
to progression, and finally to plaque rupture. Cytokines are the major
atherogenic mediators that promote plaque formation and progression by activation
of inflammatory cells. They induce expressions of matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs), leading to vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) migration in
atherosclerotic lesions. Although chronic inflammatory mediators, including tumor
necrosis factor a (TNF-a) and MMPs, exacerbate atherosclerosis, the molecular
mechanism of atherogenesis remains unclear. In this study we investigated the
role of a novel transcription factor the human small leucine zipper protein
(sLZIP) in TNF-a-induced MMP expression, VSMC migration, and atherosclerosis
progression. The proinflammatory cytokine TNF-a enhanced sLZIP expression by
3-fold via activation of NF-<U+03BA>B signaling. sLZIP induced MMP-9 transcription and
the proteolytic activity of MMP-9 by 2.8- and 3.2-fold (P< 0.05), respectively,
in macrophages, leading to enhancement of VSMC migration by 2.7-fold (P<0.005).
sLZIP(OE/+) (sLZIP transgenic); LDLR(-/-) mice fed a high-cholesterol diet
exhibited enhanced arterial plaque formation and increased VSMC migration from
the media into the intima by 2.8- and 2.6-fold (P<0.01), respectively, compared
with atherosclerosis-prone LDLR(-/-) mice. These results indicate that human
sLZIP plays a critical role in development of atherosclerosis and can be used as 
a therapeutic target molecule for treatment of atherosclerosis.

© FASEB.

PMID: 25077563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Oct;21(10):1642-55. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.80. Epub 2014
Jun 20.

A novel PPAR<U+03B3>2 modulator sLZIP controls the balance between adipogenesis and
osteogenesis during mesenchymal stem cell differentiation.

Kim J(1), Ko J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Sciences, Korea University, Seoul 136-701, Korea.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), also known as multipotent stromal cells, are used 
in clinical trials. However, the use of MSCs for medical treatment of patients
poses a potential problem due to the possibility of transdifferentiation into
unwanted tissues. Disruption of the balance during MSC differentiation leads to
obesity, skeletal fragility, and osteoporosis. Differentiation of MSCs into
either adipocytes or osteoblasts is transcriptionally regulated by the two key
transcription factors PPAR<U+03B3>2 and Runx2. PPAR<U+03B3>2 is highly expressed during
adipocyte differentiation and regulates expression of genes involved in
adipogenesis. Runx2 induces osteogenic gene expression and, thereby, increases
osteoblast differentiation. Although transcriptional modulation of PPAR<U+03B3>2 has
been investigated in adipogenesis, the underlying molecular mechanisms to control
the balance between adipogenesis and osteogenesis in MSCs remain unclear. In this
study, the role of sLZIP in regulation of PPAR<U+03B3>2 transcriptional activation was
investigated along with sLZIP's involvement in differentiation of MSCs into
adipocytes and osteoblasts. sLZIP interacts with PPAR<U+03B3>2 and functions as a
corepressor of PPAR<U+03B3>2. sLZIP enhances formation of the PPAR<U+03B3>2 corepressor complex
through specific interaction with HDAC3, resulting in suppression of PPAR<U+03B3>2
transcriptional activity. We found that sLZIP prevents expression of PPAR<U+03B3>2
target genes and adipocyte differentiation both in vitro and in vivo. sLZIP also 
upregulates Runx2 transcriptional activity via inhibition of PPAR<U+03B3>2 activity, and
promotes osteoblast differentiation. sLZIP transgenic mice exhibited enhanced
bone mass and density, compared with wild-type mice. These results indicate that 
sLZIP has a critical role in the regulation of osteogenesis and bone development.
However, sLZIP does not affect chondrogenesis and osteoclastogenesis. We propose 
that sLZIP is a novel PPAR<U+03B3>2 modulator for control of the balance between
adipogenesis and osteogenesis during MSC differentiation, and that sLZIP can be
used as a therapeutic target molecule for treatment of obesity, osteodystrophy,
and osteoporosis.

PMCID: PMC4158692
PMID: 24948012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Mol Neurosci. 2015 Feb;55(2):347-54. doi: 10.1007/s12031-014-0330-7. Epub 2014 
Jun 5.

Cloning and characterization of rat Luman/CREB3, a transcription factor highly
expressed in nervous system tissue.

Ying Z(1), Zhang R, Verge VM, Misra V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon,
SK, S7N 5E5, Canada.

Human Luman/CREB3 is a basic leucine zipper transcription factor involved in
regulation of the unfolded protein response, dendritic cell maturation, and cell 
migration. But despite reported expression in primary sensory neurons, little is 
known about its role in the nervous system. To begin investigations into its role
in the adult rat nervous system, the rat Luman/CREB3 coding sequence was isolated
so its expression within the nervous system could be determined. The rat
Luman/CREB3 clone contains a full-length open reading frame encoding 387 amino
acids. The recombinant protein generated from this clone activated transcription 
in a manner equivalent to human Luman/CREB3 from a CAT reporter plasmid construct
containing the unfolded protein response element. Quantitative RT-PCR revealed
that rat Luman/CREB3 transcripts in a variety of rat tissues with the highest
levels in nervous system tissue. In situ hybridization performed on tissue
sections confirmed the findings and demonstrated that the Luman/CREB3 mRNA
hybridization signal localizes to neurons and satellite glial cells in dorsal
root ganglia, the cytoplasm of hepatocytes in liver, and the hippocampal
pyramidal cell layers of CA1 and CA3 and the granular cell layer of the dentate
gyrus. Collectively, these findings support a role for Luman/CREB3 in the
regulation of nervous system function.

PMID: 24894591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Surg Neurol Int. 2014 Mar 20;5:37. doi: 10.4103/2152-7806.129259. eCollection
2014.

Os odontoideum in identical twins: Comparative gene expression analysis.

Straus D(1), Xu S(2), Traynelis VC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago,
IL, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Ophthalmology and Neurological Sciences, 
Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Os odontoideum is a well identified anomaly of the craniovertebral
junction. Since its initial description, there has been a continuous debate
regarding the nature of its etiology: Whether congenital or traumatic. We sought 
to compare the gene expression profiles in patients with congenital os
odontoideum, those with traumatic os odontoideum and controls.
METHODS: We have evaluated a pair of identical twins both with os odontoideum. We
identified two additional patients with and four subjects without os odontoideum.
We analyzed the gene expression profiles in these patients using a custom TaqMan 
microarray and quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR). The relative gene expression profiles in the two identical twins, the 
two nontwin patients with os odontoideum and the controls were assessed.
RESULTS: A total of 213 genes with significantly different expression between the
twin os odontoideum patients and the subjects without os odontoideum were
detected. CACNG6, PHEX, CACNAD3, IL2, FAS, TUFT1, KIT, TGFBR2, and IGF2 were
expressed at levels greater than 100-fold more in the twins. There were six genes
with significantly different expression profiles in the twins as compared with
the nontwin os odontoideum patients: CMK4, ATF1, PLCG1, TAB1, E2F3, and ATF4.
There were no statistically significant differences in gene expression in the
four patients with os odontoideum and the subjects without. Trends, however, were
noted in MMP8, KIT, HIF1A, CREB3, PWHAZ, TGFBR1, NFKB2, FGFR1, IPO8, STAT1,
COL1A1, and BMP3.
CONCLUSIONS: Os odontoideum has multiple etiologies, both traumatic and
congenital and perhaps some represent a combination of the two. This work has
identified a number of genes that show increased expression in a pair of twins
with congenital os odontoideum and also demonstrates trends in gene expression
profiles between a larger group of os odontoideum patients and non-os patients. A
number of these genes are related to bone morphogenesis and maintenance.

PMCID: PMC4014826
PMID: 24818044  [PubMed]


16. Oncogene. 2015 Jan 8;34(2):226-36. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.538. Epub 2014 Jan 20.

The role of sLZIP in cyclin D3-mediated negative regulation of androgen receptor 
transactivation and its involvement in prostate cancer.

Kim Y(1), Kim J(1), Jang SW(2), Ko J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Sciences, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea. (2)Department
of Medicine, Graduate School, University of Ulsan, Seoul, South Korea.

Androgen and the androgen receptor (AR) have important roles in prostate cancer
(PCa) development, and androgen ablation has been the main therapeutic option for
the treatment of PCa. However, the transition mechanism from androgen-dependent
to -independent PCa after androgen depletion remains unclear. We investigated the
distinct roles of small leucine zipper protein (sLZIP) in proliferation of
androgen-dependent and -independent PCa cells. Cyclin D3 is known to interact
with AR and attenuates the ligand-dependent function of AR in PCa cells. sLZIP
regulates the transcription of cyclin D3 by binding directly to the AP-1 region
in the cyclin D3 promoter. sLZIP represses AR transcriptional activity by
interaction with AR that is phosphorylated by cyclin D3/cyclin-dependent
kinase11(p58), leading to the suppression of androgen-dependent proliferation of 
PCa cells. The expression level of sLZIP is elevated in androgen-independent PCa 
cells and advanced human prostate tumors. Knockdown of endogenous sLZIP
suppresses proliferation of androgen-independent PCa cells. LNCaP cells
transformed to androgen-independent PCa cells exhibit increased expressions of
sLZIP and cyclin D3. Tumor formation is inhibited in nude mouse xenografts from
two androgen-independent PCa cells that are stably transfected with sh-sLZIP. Our
findings indicate that sLZIP negatively regulates AR transactivation in
androgen-dependent PCa cells and functions as a positive regulator in tumor
progression of androgen-independent PCa. sLZIP contributes to the malignant
phenotype of PCa and constitutes a novel therapeutic target for human PCa.

PMID: 24441043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 21;289(8):4969-79. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.515395. Epub 2013 
Dec 29.

Small leucine zipper protein (sLZIP) negatively regulates skeletal muscle
differentiation via interaction with a-actinin-4.

An HT(1), Kim J, Yoo S, Ko J.

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Life Sciences, Korea University, Seoul 136-701, South
Korea.

The small leucine zipper protein (sLZIP) plays a role in transcriptional
regulation in various types of cells. However, the role of sLZIP in myogenesis is
unknown. We identified a-actinin-4 (ACTN4) as a sLZIP-binding protein. ACTN4
functions as a transcriptional regulator of myocyte enhancer factor (MEF)2, which
plays a critical role in expression of muscle-specific genes during skeletal
muscle differentiation. We found that ACTN4 translocates to the nucleus, induces 
myogenic gene expression, and promotes myotube formation during myogenesis. The
myogenic process is controlled by an association between myogenic factors and
MEF2 transcription factors. ACTN4 increased expression of muscle-specific
proteins via interaction with MEF2. However, sLZIP decreased myogenic gene
expression and myotube formation during myogenesis via disruption of the
association between ACTN4 and MEF2. ACTN4 increased the promoter activities of
myogenic genes, whereas sLZIP abrogated the effect of ACTN4 on transcriptional
activation of myogenic genes in myoblasts. The C terminus of sLZIP is required
for interaction with the C terminus of ACTN4, based on deletion mutant analysis, 
and sLZIP plays a role in regulation of MEF2 transactivation via interaction with
ACTN4. Our results indicate that sLZIP negatively regulates skeletal muscle
differentiation via interaction with ACTN4 and that sLZIP can be used as a
therapeutic target molecule for treatment of muscle hypertrophy and associated
diseases.

PMCID: PMC3931057
PMID: 24375477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Dec;15(12):1473-85. doi: 10.1038/ncb2865. Epub 2013 Nov 3.

A CREB3-ARF4 signalling pathway mediates the response to Golgi stress and
susceptibility to pathogens.

Reiling JH(1), Olive AJ, Sanyal S, Carette JE, Brummelkamp TR, Ploegh HL,
Starnbach MN, Sabatini DM.

Author information: 
(1)1] Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Nine Cambridge Center,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA [2] Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT), Department of Biology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA [3] Koch
Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02139, USA [4].

Treatment of cells with brefeldin A (BFA) blocks secretory vesicle transport and 
causes a collapse of the Golgi apparatus. To gain more insight into the cellular 
mechanisms mediating BFA toxicity, we conducted a genome-wide haploid genetic
screen that led to the identification of the small G protein ADP-ribosylation
factor 4 (ARF4). ARF4 depletion preserves viability, Golgi integrity and cargo
trafficking in the presence of BFA, and these effects depend on the guanine
nucleotide exchange factor GBF1 and other ARF isoforms including ARF1 and ARF5.
ARF4 knockdown cells show increased resistance to several human pathogens
including Chlamydia trachomatis and Shigella flexneri. Furthermore, ARF4
expression is induced when cells are exposed to several Golgi-disturbing agents
and requires the CREB3 (also known as Luman or LZIP) transcription factor, whose 
downregulation mimics ARF4 loss. Thus, we have uncovered a CREB3-ARF4 signalling 
cascade that may be part of a Golgi stress response set in motion by stimuli
compromising Golgi capacity.

PMCID: PMC3965854
PMID: 24185178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 14;8(10):e77256. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077256.
eCollection 2013.

Zhangfei/CREB-ZF - a potential regulator of the unfolded protein response.

Zhang R(1), Rapin N, Ying Z, Shklanka E, Bodnarchuk TW, Verge VM, Misra V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology,Western College of Veterinary Medicine, University 
of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan,Canada.

Cells respond to perturbations in the microenvironment of the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER), and to the overloading of its capacity to process secretory and
membrane-associate proteins, by activating the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR).
Genes that mediate the UPR are regulated by three basic leucine-zipper (bLZip)
motif-containing transcription factors - Xbp1s, ATF4 and ATF6. A failure of the
UPR to achieve homeostasis and its continued stimulation leads to apoptosis.
Mechanisms must therefore exist to turn off the UPR if it successfully restores
normalcy. The bLZip protein Zhangfei/CREBZF/SMILE is known to suppress the
ability of several, seemingly structurally unrelated, transcription factors.
These targets include Luman/CREB3 and CREBH, ER-resident bLZip proteins known to 
activate the UPR in some cell types. Here we show that Zhangfei had a suppressive
effect on most UPR genes activated by the calcium ionophore thapsigargin. This
effect was at least partially due to the interaction of Zhangfei with Xbp1s. The 
leucine zipper of Zhangfei was required for this interaction, which led to the
subsequent proteasomal degradation of Xbp1s. Zhangfei suppressed the ability of
Xbp1s to activate transcription from a promoter containing unfolded protein
response elements and significantly reduced the ability to Xbp1s to activate the 
UPR as measured by RNA and protein levels of UPR-related genes. Finally, specific
suppression of endogenous Zhangfei in thapsigargin-treated primary rat sensory
neurons with siRNA directed to Zhangfei transcripts, led to a significant
increase in transcripts and proteins of UPR genes, suggesting a potential role
for Zhangfei in modulating the UPR.

PMCID: PMC3796484
PMID: 24155933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Dec;1828(12):2926-32. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamem.2013.05.005.

Roles of regulated intramembrane proteolysis in virus infection and antiviral
immunity.

Ye J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390-9046, USA. Electronic address:
jin.ye@utsouthwestern.edu.

Regulated intramembrane proteolysis (RIP) is a signaling mechanism through which 
transmembrane precursor proteins are cleaved to liberate their cytoplasmic and/or
luminal/extracellular fragments from membranes so that these fragments are able
to function at a new location. Recent studies have indicated that this
proteolytic reaction plays an important role in host-virus interaction. On one
hand, RIP transfers the signal from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to nucleus to 
activate antiviral genes in response to alteration of the ER caused by viral
infection. On the other hand, RIP can be hijacked by virus to process
transmembrane viral protein precursors and to destroy transmembrane antiviral
proteins. Understanding this Yin and Yang side of RIP may lead to new strategies 
to combat viral infection. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled:
Intramembrane Proteases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3837687
PMID: 24099010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Biol Chem. 2013 Oct 4;288(40):28488-502. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.465179. Epub
2013 Aug 16.

F-box and WD repeat domain-containing-7 (Fbxw7) protein targets endoplasmic
reticulum-anchored osteogenic and chondrogenic transcriptional factors for
degradation.

Yumimoto K(1), Matsumoto M, Onoyama I, Imaizumi K, Nakayama KI.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Medical Institute of
Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Fukuoka
812-8582, Japan.

Although identification of substrates for an enzyme is a key step in elucidation 
of its biological functions, detection of the interaction between enzymes and
substrates remains challenging. We recently developed a new approach, termed
differential proteomics-based identification of ubiquitylation substrates
(DiPIUS), for the discovery of substrates of ubiquitin ligases. We have now
applied this approach to Fbxw7, the F-box protein component of an Skp1-Cul1-F-box
protein-type ubiquitin ligase and, thereby, identified two similar transcription 
factors, old astrocyte specifically induced substance (OASIS) and BBF2 human
homolog on chromosome 7 (BBF2H7), as candidate substrates. Coimmunoprecipitation 
analysis confirmed that the a and <U+03B3> isoforms of Fbxw7 interact with OASIS and
BBF2H7 in vivo. Sustained overexpression of Fbxw7 resulted in marked
down-regulation of OASIS and BBF2H7, whereas RNAi-mediated Fbxw7 depletion
stabilized both proteins. Mutation of a putative Cdc4 phosphodegron in OASIS and 
BBF2H7 attenuated their association with Fbxw7 and resulted in their
stabilization. Depletion of Fbxw7 promoted the differentiation of mouse C2C12
mesenchymal cells into osteoblasts in association with the accumulation of OASIS.
Conversely, overexpression of Fbxw7 in C2C12 cells resulted in down-regulation of
Col1A1 mRNA, a target of OASIS. Conditional ablation of Fbxw7 in primary mouse
mesenchymal cells promoted chondrogenesis in association with up-regulation of
BBF2H7, whereas overexpression of Fbxw7 inhibited chondrogenesis in ATDC5 cells. 
Collectively, our results suggest that OASIS and BBF2H7 are bona fide substrates 
of Fbxw7 and that Fbxw7 controls osteogenesis and chondrogenesis by targeting
OASIS and BBF2H7, respectively, for degradation.

PMCID: PMC3789950
PMID: 23955342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Immunoassay Immunochem. 2013;34(4):313-22. doi: 10.1080/15321819.2012.732169.

The expression and localization of LRF in the female reproductive tract of
cycling mice throughout the estrous cycle.

Yang Y(1), Jin Y, Lin P, Hu L, Cui C, Li X, Li Q, Wang A.

Author information: 
(1)Key Open Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture, College 
of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University , Yangling , Shaanxi , PR China.

In this article, the expression patterns of LRF in the mouse oviduct, uterus, and
ovary were checked during estrous cycle. The expression of LRF mRNA and protein
were remarkably changed in the ovary, oviduct, and uterus at four phases. LRF
immunostaining was detected in the follicle from primary to antral follicle,
luminal and glandular epithelial cells of the uterus, and cilia of the ciliated
cells of the oviduct at all phase. Our findings suggested that LRF may be related
to the processes of development and maturation of oocyte, gamete transport, and
the development of early embryo.

PMID: 23859782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Theriogenology. 2013 Jul 15;80(2):138-44.e1-2. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2013.02.024. Epub 2013 May 16.

Expression and localization of Luman RNA and protein during mouse implantation
and decidualization.

Lan X(1), Jin Y, Yang Y, Lin P, Hu L, Cui C, Li Q, Li X, Wang A.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture, Northwest A&F
University College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangling, Shaanxi, People's Republic
of China.

Luman (also known as LZIP and CREB3) is a basic leucine zipper transcription
factor of the cAMP response element-binding protein/activating transcription
factor gene family. Although Luman had specific roles near termination of
Drosophila embryogenesis, the physiological functions of Luman in female mammals 
have apparently not been reported. Therefore, our objective was to investigate
the spatiotemporal expression and regulation of Luman in the mouse uterus during 
the peri-implantation period. Luman protein was clearly present in the luminal
and glandular epithelium on days 1 to 4 of pregnancy (day 1, presence of a
vaginal plug) and was observed in decidual cells on day 6 of pregnancy.
Expression had progressively increased to day 7 when the second decidual zone was
formed. On day 8, apoptosis of the decidualized cells was present, and Luman
protein expression was decreased (in close association with decidualization).
Luman protein was also present in decidual cells of the artificially decidualized
uterus. The expression of Luman was regulated by an activated embryo (according
to its expression patterns during pseudopregnancy and delayed implantation).
Furthermore, expression of Luman was induced by estrogen in ovariectomized mice. 
We have concluded that Luman might have important roles in embryo implantation
and decidualization.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23683694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Sep;1829(9):921-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2013.04.001. 
Epub 2013 Apr 11.

JAB1/CSN5 inhibits the activity of Luman/CREB3 by promoting its degradation.

DenBoer LM(1), Iyer A, McCluggage AR, Li Y, Martyn AC, Lu R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph,
Ontario, Canada.

Luman/CREB3 (also called LZIP) is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-bound
transcription factor that has been implicated in the ER stress response. In this 
study, we used the region of Luman containing the basic DNA-binding domain as
bait in a yeast two-hybrid screen and identified the Jun activation
domain-binding protein 1 (JAB1) or the COP9 signalosome complex unit 5 (CSN5) as 
an interacting protein. We confirmed their direct binding by glutathione
S-transferase pull-down assays, and verified the existence of such interaction in
the cellular environment by mammalian two-hybrid and co-immunoprecipitation
assays. Deletion mapping studies revealed that the MPN domain in JAB1 was
essential and sufficient for the binding. JAB1 also colocalized with Luman in
transfected cells. More interestingly, the nuclear form of Luman was shown to
promote the translocation of JAB1 into the nucleus. We found that overexpression 
of JAB1 shortened the half-life of Luman by 67%, and repressed its
transactivation function on GAL4 and unfolded protein response element
(UPRE)-containing promoters. We therefore propose that JAB1 is a novel binding
partner of Luman, which negatively regulates the activity of Luman by promoting
its degradation.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23583719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Reprod Dev. 2013;59(3):245-51. Epub 2013 Feb 12.

Expression pattern implicates a potential role for luman recruitment factor in
the process of implantation in uteri and development of preimplantation embryos
in mice.

Yang Y(1), Jin Y, Martyn AC, Lin P, Song Y, Chen F, Hu L, Cui C, Li X, Li Q, Lu
R, Wang A.

Author information: 
(1)Key Open Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture, College 
of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling Shaanxi 712100, PR
China.

Luman/CREB3 recruitment factor (LRF or CREBRF) was identified as a regulator of
Luman (or CREB3) that is involved in the unfolded protein response during
endoplasmic reticulum stress. Luman is implicated in a multitude of functions
ranging from viral infection and immunity to cancer. The biological function of
LRF, however, is unknown. In this paper, we report that uteri of pregnant mice
and embryos displayed enhanced LRF expression at all stages, and the expressed
LRF was found to be localized specifically at implantation sites. On the other
hand, uteri of mice induced for delayed implantation or pseudopregnant mice
showed low levels of LRF expression, suggesting that LRF mediates uterine
receptivity during implantation. Further, expression of LRF was found to be
modulated by steroid hormones such as progesterone and estradiol. This study
thereby identifies a potential role for LRF in the process of implantation in
uteri and development of preimplantation embryos in mice.

PMCID: PMC3934142
PMID: 23400243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Traffic. 2013 Apr;14(4):382-98. doi: 10.1111/tra.12038. Epub 2013 Jan 24.

An orchestrated program regulating secretory pathway genes and cargos by the
transmembrane transcription factor CREB-H.

Barbosa S(1), Fasanella G, Carreira S, Llarena M, Fox R, Barreca C, Andrew D,
O'Hare P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Imperial College, London, W2 1PG, UK.

CREB3 proteins comprise a set of ER-localized bZip transcription factors defined 
by the presence of a transmembrane domain. They are regulated by
inter-compartmental transport, Golgi cleavage and nuclear transport where they
promote appropriate transcriptional responses. Although CREB3 proteins play key
roles in differentiation, inflammation and metabolism, a general framework
relating their defining features to these diverse activities is lacking. We
identify unique features of CREB3 organization including the ATB domain, which we
show it is essential for transcriptional activity. This domain is absent in all
other human bZip factors, but conserved in Drosophila CREBA, which controls
secretory pathway genes (SPGs). Furthermore, each of the five human CREB3 factors
was capable of activating SPGs in Drosophila, dependent upon the ATB domain.
Expression of the CREB3 protein, CREB-H, in 293 cells, upregulated genes involved
in secretory capacity, extracellular matrix formation and lipid metabolism and
increased secretion of specific cargos. In liver cells, which normally express
CREB-H, the active form specifically induced secretion of apolipoproteins,
including ApoA-IV, ApoAI, consistent with data implicating CREB-H in metabolic
homeostasis. Based on these data and other recent studies, we propose a general
role for the CREB3 family in regulating secretory capacity, with particular
relevance to specialized cargos.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMCID: PMC3593995
PMID: 23279168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Theriogenology. 2013 Mar 1;79(4):633-9.e1-3. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2012.11.017. Epub 2012 Dec 25.

Luman recruiting factor regulates endoplasmic reticulum stress in mouse ovarian
granulosa cell apoptosis.

Yang Y(1), Lin P, Chen F, Wang A, Lan X, Song Y, Jin Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, PR China.

Follicular atresia is primarily induced by granulosa cell apoptosis; however, the
molecular mechanisms that control apoptotic cell death in granulosa cells remain 
poorly understood. The present studies were undertaken to investigate the role of
a novel endoplasmic reticulum stress-regulated gene Luman recruiting factor (LRF)
in granulosa cell apoptosis during mouse follicular atresia. Based on
immunohistochemistry and confocal laser scanning microscope analysis, LRF protein
was localized in the cytoplasm of apoptotic granulosa cells, similar to
localization of the LRF, Luman, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein
and caspase-12 proteins were localized in apoptotic granulosa cells. However,
glucose-regulated protein 78 protein was only present in healthy cells of the
mural granulosa cell layers. A spontaneous onset of apoptotic cell death of
granulosa cells was induced by thapsigargin or tunicamycin treatment in vitro,
which was closely related to the increase of LRF, Luman, CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein homologous protein, and caspase-12 mRNA. Taken together, LRF might be
involved in inducing apoptosis of granulosa cells through the endoplasmic
reticulum stress pathway and might have a key role in mouse follicular selection.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23270862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2012 Sep;32(9):1180-7.

[Study on gene differential expressions of substance and energy metabolism in
chronic superficial gastritis patients of Pi deficiency syndrome and of pi-wei
hygropyrexia syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang ZM(1), Chen WW, Wang YF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Gastroenterology, Guangzhou University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Guangzhou 510405.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the metabolic levels of energy and substance in chronic
superficial gastritis (CSG) patients of Pi deficiency syndrome (PDS) and of
Pi-Wei hygropyrexia syndrome (PWHS), including lipid, protein, nucleic acid,
carbohydrate, trace element, and energy metabolism, and to study the pathogenesis
mechanism of PDS from substance and energy metabolisms.
METHODS: Recruited were 8 CSG patients who visited at First Affiliated Hospital
of Guangzhou University of Traditional Chinese Medicine and Guangdong Provincial 
Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine from June 2004 to March 2005, including 
4 patients of PDS and 4 of PWHS. Their gastric mucosae were used for experiments 
of DNA microarray. The dual-channel DNA microarray data were bioinformatically
analyzed by BRB ArrayTools and IPA Software.
RESULTS: Obtained were fifty-six differentially expressed genes involved in
substance and energy metabolisms with the expression fold more than 2, including 
11 genes up-regulated and 45 genes down-regulated. Of them, genes correlated to
lipid metabolism included CRLS1, LRP11, FUT9, GPCPD1, PIGL, SULT1A4, B3GNT1,
ST8SIA4, and ACADVL, mainly involved in the metabolic processes of fatty acid,
cholesterol, phospholipids, and glycolipid. Genes correlated to protein
metabolism included ASRGL1, AARSD1, EBNA1BP2, PUM2, MRPL52, C120RF65, PSMB8,
PSME2, UBA7, RNF11, FBXO44, ZFYVE26, CHMP2A, SSR4, SNX4, RAB3B, RABL2A, GOLGA2,
KDELR1, PHPT1, ACPP, PTPRF, CRKL, HDAC7, ADPRHL2, B3GNT1, ST8SIA4, DDOST, and
FUT9, mainly involved in the biosynthesis processes of protein, ubiquitination,
targeted transport and post-translation modification. Genes correlated to nucleic
acid metabolism included DFFB, FLJ35220, TOP2A, SF3A3, CREB3, CRTC2, NR1D2, MED6,
GTF2IRD1, C1ORF83, ZNF773, and ZMYND11, mainly involved in DNA replication and
repair, transcription regulation. Genes correlated to carbohydrate metabolism
included AGL, B3GNT1, FUT9, ST8SIA4, SULT1A4, DDOST, and PIGL, mainly involved in
glucogen degradation and glycoconjugate biosynthesis. Genes correlated to trace
element metabolism included COMMD1, SLC39A6, FTL, CHRFAM7A, SCGN, and S100A6,
mainly involved in ion metabolisms of copper, zinc, ferri, and calcium. Genes
correlated to energy metabolism included AK3 and COX7B, mainly involved in
mitochondria structure and oxidative phosphorylation processes.
CONCLUSION: The metabolic levels of energy and substance including lipid,
protein, nucleic acid, carbohydrate, and trace element were obviously reduced in 
patients of PDS, which might be an important pathogenesis mechanism for its
occurrence.

PMID: 23185754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Dec;32(24):5140-50. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01142-12. Epub 2012 Oct 
15.

Luman/CREB3 recruitment factor regulates glucocorticoid receptor activity and is 
essential for prolactin-mediated maternal instinct.

Martyn AC(1), Choleris E, Gillis DJ, Armstrong JN, Amor TR, McCluggage AR, Turner
PV, Liang G, Cai K, Lu R.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph,
Ontario, Canada.

The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis is a major part of the
neuroendocrine system in animal responses to stress. It is known that the HPA
axis is attenuated at parturition to prevent detrimental effects of
glucocorticoid secretion including inhibition of lactation and maternal
responsiveness. Luman/CREB3 recruitment factor (LRF) was identified as a negative
regulator of CREB3 which is involved in the endoplasmic reticulum stress
response. Here, we report a LRF gene knockout mouse line that has a severe
maternal behavioral defect. LRF(-/-) females lacked the instinct to tend pups;
80% of their litters died within 24 h, while most pups survived if
cross-fostered. Prolactin levels were significantly repressed in lactating
LRF(-/-) dams, with glucocorticoid receptor (GR) signaling markedly augmented. In
cell culture, LRF repressed transcriptional activity of GR and promoted its
protein degradation. LRF was found to colocalize with the known GR repressor,
RIP140/NRIP1, which inhibits the activity by GR within specific nuclear punctates
that are similar to LRF nuclear bodies. Furthermore, administration of prolactin 
or the GR antagonist RU486 restored maternal responses in mutant females. We thus
postulate that LRF plays a critical role in the attenuation of the HPA axis
through repression of glucocorticoid stress signaling during parturition and the 
postpartum period.

PMCID: PMC3510545
PMID: 23071095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Iran Biomed J. 2012;16(3):140-4. doi: 10.6091/IBJ.1050.2012.

GSK3ß and CREB3 gene expression profiling in benign and malignant salivary gland 
tumors.

Mohammadi Ghahhari N(1), Mohammadi Ghahhari H, Kadivar M.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biochemistry, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Salivary gland tumors (SGT) are rare lesions with uncertain
histopathology. One of the major signaling pathways that participate in the
development of several tumors is protein kinase A. In this pathway, glycogen
synthase kinase ß (GSK3ß) and cAMP responsive element binding protein (CREB3) are
two genes which are supposed to be down regulated in most human tumors. The
expression level of the genes was evaluated in SGT to scrutinize their possible
under expression in these tumors.
METHODS: Forty eight fresh tissue samples were obtained from patients with benign
and malignant SGT, including pleomorphic adenoma, warthin's tumor, mucoepidermoid
carcinoma (MEC), salivary duct carcinoma and carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma.
Eight normal samples were used as controls. Quantitative real-time PCR was used
to analyze the expression level of interest genes.
RESULTS: Data was analyzed by statistical methods. GSK3ß was downregulate in all 
samples and all results were statistically significant (P<0.05). CREB3 did not
show a significant decrease or increase in its mRNA expression, but the results
were significant in MEC and salivary duct carcinoma.
CONCLUSION: GSK3ß down regulation has been reported in many human tumors. This
gene stimulates CREB3, inducing cell proliferation and oncogenesis. Our findings 
showed GSK ß down regulation; however, CREB3 expression level was close to normal
group. No association between CREB3 expression and inactivated GSK3ß could be
postulated in SGT.

PMCID: PMC3629933
PMID: 23023215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Behav Brain Res. 2012 Jul 15;233(1):217-23. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2012.04.026. Epub 
2012 May 2.

Downregulation of cAMP response element-binding protein by lentiviral
vector-mediated RNAi attenuates morphine withdrawal syndromes in rats.

Wu Q(1), Cao M, Wang T, Jiang P, Zhou K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou 510089, Guangdong, China.

cAMP response element-binding protein(CREB) and the cAMP cascade play a pivotal
role in the opiate-dependence. The blockade of this cascade is believed to
attenuate signs of physical opiate withdrawal. A lentiviral vector (LV)
expressing a small hairpin RNA (shRNA) to silence CREB in vitro and in vivo was
used in this study. The effect of the shRNA on the regulation of the relevant
protein expression and the signs of opiate withdrawal were subsequently evaluated
in rats undergoing chronic morphine treatment. In cultured primary locus
coeruleus (LC) neurons, the designed lentiviral vectors were successfully
infected into the cells and led to 70% knockdown in CREB expression. In cells
treated with chronic morphine, the expression of CREB, adenylyl cyclase (AC) and 
protein kinase A (PKA) were increased, while in cells infected with LV-CREB3,
treated with chronic morphine treatment failed to increase the expressions of
CREB and AC. Consistently, in the rat model for chronic morphine treatment,
morphine increased the expression of CREB, AC and PKA in LC neurons. However, in 
rats received bilateral microinjections of LV-CREB3 into the LC, morphine did not
alter the levels of these proteins. Moreover, microinjection of LV-CREB3
significantly attenuated the appearance of certain withdrawal behaviors. In
conclusion, the lentiviral vectors expressing CREB shRNA inhibited the increase
of CREB and AC expression induced by chronic morphine treatment both in vivo and 
in vitro. This inhibition was associated with the alleviation of some withdrawal 
behaviors. These findings suggested that lentivirus-mediated RNA interference
could be useful for opiate-dependence therapy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22580231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mol Immunol. 2012 Feb;50(1-2):66-73. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2011.12.003. Epub 2011
Dec 30.

Analysis of genes regulated by the transcription factor LUMAN identifies ApoA4 as
a target gene in dendritic cells.

Sanecka A(1), Ansems M, van Hout-Kuijer MA, Looman MW, Prosser AC, Welten S,
Gilissen C, Sama IE, Huynen MA, Veltman JA, Jansen BJ, Eleveld-Trancikova D,
Adema GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Immunology, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences,
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Dendritic cells (DCs) are professional antigen presenting cells of the immune
system that play a crucial role in initiating immune responses and maintaining
self tolerance. Better understanding of the molecular basis of DC immunobiology
is required to improve DC-based immunotherapies. We previously described the
interaction of transcription factor LUMAN (also known as CREB3 or LZIP) with the 
DC-specific transmembrane protein DC-STAMP in DCs. Target genes of LUMAN and its 
role in DCs are currently unknown. In this study we set out to identify genes
regulated by LUMAN in DCs using microarray analysis. Expression of a
constitutively active form of LUMAN in mouse DC cell line D2SC/1 identified
Apolipoprotein A4 (ApoA4) as its target gene. Subsequent validation experiments, 
bioinformatics-based promoter analysis, and silencing studies confirmed that
ApoA4 is a true target gene of LUMAN in bone marrow-derived DCs (BMDCs).

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22209087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2012 May;221(1):143-53. doi:
10.1007/s00213-011-2559-y. Epub 2011 Nov 17.

CREB involvement in the regulation of striatal prodynorphin by nicotine.

McCarthy MJ(1), Duchemin AM, Neff NH, Hadjiconstantinou M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, The Ohio State University College of Medicine,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

RATIONALE: The transcription factor cAMP response element binding (CREB) protein 
plays a pivotal role in drug-dependent neuronal plasticity. CREB phosphorylation 
at Ser133 is enhanced by drugs of abuse, including nicotine. Dynorphin (Dyn)
contributes to the addictive process and its precursor gene prodynorphin (PD) is 
regulated by CREB. PD mRNA and Dyn synthesis were enhanced in the striatum
following acute nicotine, suggesting genomic regulation.
OBJECTIVE: These studies investigated PD transcription in mice acutely treated
with nicotine, determined the role of CREB, and characterized the receptors
involved.
RESULTS: Acute nicotine increased adenylyl cyclase activity, cAMP, and pCREB
Ser133 levels in striatum and enhanced CREB binding to CRE elements (DynCREs) of 
the PD promoter, preferentially DynCRE3. DynCRE3 binding was dose dependent with 
1 mg of nicotine giving a maximal response. Additionally, DynCRE binding was time
dependent, rising by 15 min, reaching a maximum at 1 h, and returning to control 
by 3 h, a temporal pattern similar to that of cAMP and pCREB. Supershift
experiments showed that CREB and pCREB Ser133 were the major contributors to
DynCRE3 binding complex. The nAChR antagonist mecamylamine and the dopamine
D1-like receptor antagonist SCH 23390 prevented the nicotine-induced increase of 
pCREB and nuclear protein binding to DynCRE3.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that nicotine regulates PD expression in
striatum at the transcriptional level and CREB is involved. Dopamine D1 receptor 
stimulation by nAChR-released dopamine appears to be an underlying mechanism.
Altered Dyn synthesis might be relevant for the behavioral actions of nicotine
and especially its aversive properties.

PMID: 22086359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 9;286(49):42072-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.272302. Epub 2011
Oct 18.

Human leucine zipper protein sLZIP induces migration and invasion of cervical
cancer cells via expression of matrix metalloproteinase-9.

Kang H(1), Jang SW, Ko J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul 136-701,
South Korea.

Extracellular proteolysis mediates tissue homeostasis. In cancer, altered
proteolysis leads to abnormal tumor growth, inflammation, tissue invasion, and
metastasis. Matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) represents one of the most
prominent proteinases associated with inflammation and tumorigenesis. The
recently identified human transcription factor sLZIP is a member of the leucine
zipper transcription factor family. Although sLZIP is known to function in
ligand-induced transactivation of the glucocorticoid receptor, its exact
functions and target genes are not known. In this study, we investigated the role
of sLZIP in MMP-9 expression and its involvement in cervical cancer development. 
Our results show that sLZIP increased the expression of MMP-9 at both the mRNA
and protein levels and the proteolytic activity of MMP-9 in HeLa and SiHa cells. 
sLZIP also increased the transcriptional activity of MMP-9 by binding directly to
the cAMP-responsive element of the MMP-9 promoter region. Involvement of sLZIP in
MMP-9 expression was further supported by the fact that ME-180 cells expressing
sLZIP siRNA were refractory to MMP-9 expression. Results from wound healing and
invasion assays showed that sLZIP enhanced both the migration and invasion of
cervical cancer cells. The increased migration and invasion of HeLa and SiHa
cells that were induced by sLZIP were abrogated by inhibition of the proteolytic 
activity of MMP-9. These results indicate that sLZIP plays a critical role in
MMP-9 expression and is probably involved in invasion and metastasis of cervical 
cancer.

PMCID: PMC3234971
PMID: 22009750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Cancer Lett. 2012 Jan 28;314(2):185-97. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2011.09.028. Epub
2011 Sep 29.

Regulation of ADP-ribosylation factor 4 expression by small leucine zipper
protein and involvement in breast cancer cell migration.

Jang SY(1), Jang SW, Ko J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul 136-701,
South Korea.

ADP-ribosylation factor 4 (ARF4) is a member of the Ras superfamily of small
guanine nucleotide-binding proteins. ARF4 is known to interact with the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) and mediates the EGF-dependent signal pathway, and 
has an anti-apoptotic function in human glioblastoma-derived U373MG cells.
Although ARF4 plays a role in cancer cells, the molecular mechanism underlying
regulation of its expression and its exact functions in breast cancer are
unknown. In this study, we investigated the regulatory mechanism of ARF4
expression and its involvement in breast cancer cell migration. Our results show 
that phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) treatment increases ARF4 expression at
both the transcriptional and translational levels. We found that the novel
transcription factor small leucine zipper protein (sLZIP) binds directly to the
CRE motif of the -43 to -35 region in the ARF4 promoter and regulates PMA-induced
ARF4 expression. We also found that PMA-stimulated ARF4 expression increases AP-1
promoter activity, leading to induction of breast cancer cell migration. These
results indicate that sLZIP-regulated ARF4 expression in response to PMA is
involved in breast cancer cell migration, and sLZIP and ARF4 are potential
therapeutic target molecules for treating breast cancer invasion and metastasis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22004728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cell Biosci. 2011 Feb 17;1(1):6. doi: 10.1186/2045-3701-1-6.

CREB3 subfamily transcription factors are not created equal: Recent insights from
global analyses and animal models.

Chan CP(1), Kok KH, Jin DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and State Key Laboratory for Liver Research, LKS
Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong. dyjin@hkucc.hku.hk.

The CREB3 subfamily of membrane-bound bZIP transcription factors has five members
in mammals known as CREB3 and CREB3L1-L4. One current model suggests that CREB3
subfamily transcription factors are similar to ATF6 in regulated intramembrane
proteolysis and transcriptional activation. Particularly, they were all thought
to be proteolytically activated in response to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress 
to stimulate genes that are involved in unfolded protein response (UPR). Although
the physiological inducers of their proteolytic activation remain to be
identified, recent findings from microarray analyses, RNAi screens and gene
knockouts not only demonstrated their critical roles in regulating development,
metabolism, secretion, survival and tumorigenesis, but also revealed cell
type-specific patterns in the activation of their target genes. Members of the
CREB3 subfamily show differential activity despite their structural similarity.
The spectrum of their biological function expands beyond ER stress and UPR.
Further analyses are required to elucidate the mechanism of their proteolytic
activation and the molecular basis of their target recognition.

PMCID: PMC3116243
PMID: 21711675  [PubMed]


37. J Biochem. 2011 May;149(5):507-18. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvr041. Epub 2011 Mar 30.

The signalling from endoplasmic reticulum-resident bZIP transcription factors
involved in diverse cellular physiology.

Asada R(1), Kanemoto S, Kondo S, Saito A, Imaizumi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 
University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

Comment in
    J Biochem. 2012 Mar;151(3):217-9.

Eukaryotic cells can adapt to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) dysfunction by producing
diverse signals from the ER to the cytosol or nucleus. These signalling pathways 
are collectively known as the unfolded protein response (UPR). The canonical
branches of the UPR are mediated by three ER membrane-bound proteins: PERK, IRE1 
and ATF6. These ER stress transducers basically play important roles in cell
survival after ER stress. Recently, novel types of ER stress transducers that
share a region of high sequence similarity with ATF6 have been identified. They
have a transmembrane domain, which allows them to associate with the ER, and
possess a transcription-activation domain and a bZIP domain. These membrane-bound
bZIP transcription factors include Luman, OASIS, BBF2H7, CREBH and CREB4. Despite
their structural similarities with ATF6, differences in activating stimuli,
tissue distribution and response element binding indicate specialized functions
of each member on regulating the UPR in specific organs and tissues. Here, we
summarize our current understanding of the biochemical characteristics and
physiological functions of the ER-resident bZIP transcription factors.

PMID: 21454302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Ann Neurol. 2011 Jun;69(6):1005-13. doi: 10.1002/ana.22338. Epub 2011 Mar 9.

TMEM43 mutations in Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy-related myopathy.

Liang WC(1), Mitsuhashi H, Keduka E, Nonaka I, Noguchi S, Nishino I, Hayashi YK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuromuscular Research, National Institute of Neuroscience,
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is a genetically
heterogeneous muscular disease that presents with muscular dystrophy, joint
contractures, and cardiomyopathy with conduction defects. Mutations in several
nuclear envelope protein genes have been associated with EDMD in less than half
of patients, implying the existence of other causative and modifier genes. We
therefore analyzed TMEM43, which encodes LUMA, a newly identified nuclear
membrane protein and also a binding partner of emerin and lamins, to investigate 
whether LUMA may contribute to the pathomechanism of EDMD-related myopathy.
METHODS: Forty-one patients with EDMD-related myopathy were enrolled. In vitro
and in vivo transfection analyses were performed to assay the binding partners
and oligomerization of mutant LUMA.
RESULTS: We identified heterozygous missense mutations, p.Glu85Lys and p.Ile91Val
in TMEM43, in 2 EDMD-related myopathy patients. Reduced nuclear staining of LUMA 
was observed in the muscle from the patient with p.Glu85Lys mutation. By in vitro
transfection analysis, p.Glu85Lys mutant LUMA resulted to failure in
oligomerization, a process that may be important for protein complex formation on
nuclear membrane. Furthermore, we demonstrated for the first time that LUMA can
interact with another nuclear membrane protein, SUN2, in addition to emerin.
Cells expressing mutant LUMA revealed reduced nuclear staining with or without
aggregates of emerin and SUN2 together with a higher proportion of abnormally
shaped nuclei. In vivo expression of mutant LUMA by electroporation in mouse
tibialis anterior muscles likewise demonstrated the decreased staining of emerin 
and SUN2 on myonuclei.
INTERPRETATION: Our results suggest that mutant LUMAs may be associated with
EDMD-related myopathy.

Copyright © 2011 American Neurological Association.

PMID: 21391237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Cell Biol. 2010 Nov 1;191(3):479-92. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201004062.

The CrebA/Creb3-like transcription factors are major and direct regulators of
secretory capacity.

Fox RM(1), Hanlon CD, Andrew DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Secretion occurs in all cells, with relatively low levels in most cells and
extremely high levels in specialized secretory cells, such as those of the
pancreas, salivary, and mammary glands. How secretory capacity is selectively
up-regulated in specialized secretory cells is unknown. Here, we find that the
CrebA/Creb3-like family of bZip transcription factors functions to up-regulate
expression of both the general protein machinery required in all cells for
secretion and of cell type-specific secreted proteins. Drosophila CrebA directly 
binds the enhancers of secretory pathway genes and is both necessary and
sufficient to activate expression of every secretory pathway component gene
examined thus far. Microarray profiling reveals that CrebA also up-regulates
expression of genes encoding cell type-specific secreted components. Finally, we 
found that the human CrebA orthologues, Creb3L1 and Creb3L2, have the ability to 
up-regulate the secretory pathway in nonsecretory cell types.

PMCID: PMC3003312
PMID: 21041443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Oncol Rep. 2010 Nov;24(5):1133-9.

Characterization of an alternative transcript of the human CREB3L2 gene.

Panagopoulos I(1), Monsef N, Collin A, Mertens F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University and Regional Laboratories, Lund
University Hospital, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
ioannis.panagopoulos@arklab.su.se

CREB3L2, a member of the CREB3 family of transcription factors, spans >120 kbp
and is composed of 12 exons. We characterized a widely expressed transcript of
CREB3L2 generated by an intronic polyadenylation site in intron 4 of the gene. It
could be translated to a CREB3L2 variant which is localized both in the nucleus
and the endoplasmatic reticulum. The protein retains the N-terminal
transactivation domain but lacks the DNA-binding domain, the transmembrane domain
and the C-terminal part. Experiments using a GAL4 DNA-binding domain fusion model
showed that the transcript is a transactivator but it cannot exert its function
through the CRE and ATF6 binding sites and has little effect on the GRP78
promoter. Whether this transcript has a cellular function or is targeted for
degradation by nonsense-mediated RNA decay system of RNA surveillance is
currently unknown.

PMID: 20878102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Immunol. 2010 Jul;47(11-12):1963-73. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2010.04.019. Epub 
2010 May 23.

DC-STAMP interacts with ER-resident transcription factor LUMAN which becomes
activated during DC maturation.

Eleveld-Trancikova D(1), Sanecka A, van Hout-Kuijer MA, Looman MW, Hendriks IA,
Jansen BJ, Adema GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Immunology, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences,
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, PO Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.

Dendritic cells (DCs) are the professional antigen-presenting cells (APC) which
efficiently prime the immune response or induce tolerance. We recently identified
Dendritic Cell Specific TrAnsMembrane Protein (DC-STAMP), a novel 470 amino acid 
protein preferentially expressed by dendritic cells. Previously we demonstrated
that DC-STAMP re-localizes towards the Golgi upon DC maturation. To identify
proteins that interact with DC-STAMP, a yeast-2-hybrid analysis was performed.
Here, we report a physically interacting partner of DC-STAMP in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER), called LUMAN (also known as CREB3 or LZIP). LUMAN was previously 
described as an ER-resident transcription factor with unknown function. It is
activated in a process called regulated intramembrane proteolysis (RIP), which
involves translocation to the Golgi and subsequent proteolytic cleavage. The
proteolytically activated form of the protein then translocates to the nucleus.
Our data indicate that DC-STAMP plays an important role in the modulation of
LUMAN activation. Moreover, we demonstrate that LUMAN is endogenously expressed
by DC and becomes activated by RIP upon DC maturation induced by various
different stimuli. These data define LUMAN/DC-STAMP as a novel regulatory circuit
in DC.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20546900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Lipids Health Dis. 2010 Jun 2;9:56. doi: 10.1186/1476-511X-9-56.

Polyunsaturated fatty acids synergize with lipid droplet binding thalidomide
analogs to induce oxidative stress in cancer cells.

Puskás LG(1), Fehér LZ, Vizler C, Ayaydin F, Rásó E, Molnár E, Magyary I,
Kanizsai I, Gyuris M, Madácsi R, Fábián G, Farkas K, Hegyi P, Baska F, Ozsvári B,
Kitajka K.

Author information: 
(1)Avidin Biotechnology, Közép fasor 52, Szeged H-6726, Hungary.
laszlo@avidinbiotech.com

BACKGROUND: Cytoplasmic lipid-droplets are common inclusions of eukaryotic cells.
Lipid-droplet binding thalidomide analogs
(2,6-dialkylphenyl-4/5-amino-substituted-5,6,7-trifluorophthalimides) with potent
anticancer activities were synthesized.
RESULTS: Cytotoxicity was detected in different cell lines including melanoma,
leukemia, hepatocellular carcinoma, glioblastoma at micromolar concentrations.
The synthesized analogs are non-toxic to adult animals up to 1 g/kg but are
teratogenic to zebrafish embryos at micromolar concentrations with defects in the
developing muscle. Treatment of tumor cells resulted in calcium release from the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER), induction of reactive oxygen species (ROS), ER stress
and cell death. Antioxidants could partially, while an intracellular calcium
chelator almost completely diminish ROS production. Exogenous docosahexaenoic
acid or eicosapentaenoic acid induced calcium release and ROS generation, and
synergized with the analogs in vitro, while oleic acid had no such an effect.
Gene expression analysis confirmed the induction of ER stress-mediated apoptosis 
pathway components, such as GADD153, ATF3, Luman/CREB3 and the ER-associated
degradation-related HERPUD1 genes. Tumor suppressors, P53, LATS2 and ING3 were
also up-regulated in various cell lines after drug treatment. Amino-phthalimides 
down-regulated the expression of CCL2, which is implicated in tumor metastasis
and angiogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Because of the anticancer, anti-angiogenic action and the wide range
of applicability of the immunomodulatory drugs, including thalidomide analogs,
lipid droplet-binding members of this family could represent a new class of
agents by affecting ER-membrane integrity and perturbations of ER homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC2902471
PMID: 20525221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2010 Oct;67(20):3499-510. doi: 10.1007/s00018-010-0388-5. Epub
2010 May 15.

HDAC3 selectively represses CREB3-mediated transcription and migration of
metastatic breast cancer cells.

Kim HC(1), Choi KC, Choi HK, Kang HB, Kim MJ, Lee YH, Lee OH, Lee J, Kim YJ, Jun 
W, Jeong JW, Yoon HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Chronic Metabolic
Disease Research, Brain Korea 21 Project for Medical Sciences, Severance Medical 
Research Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

We identified CREB3 as a novel HDAC3-interacting protein in a yeast two-hybrid
screen for HDAC3-interacting proteins. Among all class I HDACs, CREB3
specifically interacts with HDAC3, in vitro and in vivo. HDAC3 efficiently
inhibited CREB3-enhanced NF-<U+03BA>B activation, whereas the other class I HDACs did
not alter NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent promoter activities or the expression of NF-<U+03BA>B target
genes. Importantly, both knock-down of CREB3 and overexpression of HDAC3
suppressed the transcriptional activation of the novel CREB3-regulated gene,
CXCR4. Furthermore, CREB3 was shown to bind to the CRE element in the CXCR4
promoter and to activate the transcription of the CXCR4 gene by causing
dissociation of HDAC3 and subsequently increasing histone acetylation.
Importantly, both the depletion of HDAC3 and the overexpression of CREB3
substantially increased the migration of MDA-MB-231 metastatic breast cancer
cells. Taken together, these findings suggest that HDAC3 selectively represses
CREB3-mediated transcriptional activation and chemotactic signalling in human
metastatic breast cancer cells.

PMID: 20473547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Cell Sci. 2010 May 1;123(Pt 9):1438-48. doi: 10.1242/jcs.067819. Epub 2010 Mar 
31.

N-linked glycosylation is required for optimal proteolytic activation of
membrane-bound transcription factor CREB-H.

Chan CP(1), Mak TY, Chin KT, Ng IO, Jin DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong, Faculty of Medicine
Building, 21 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

CREB-H is a liver-enriched bZIP transcription factor of the CREB3 subfamily.
CREB-H is activated by intramembrane proteolysis that removes a C-terminal
transmembrane domain. Aberrant expression of CREB-H is implicated in liver
cancer. In this study we characterized N-linked glycosylation of CREB-H in the
luminal domain at the C-terminus. We found that CREB-H is modified at three
N-linked glycosylation sites in this region. Disruption of all three sites by
site-directed mutagenesis completely abrogated N-linked glycosylation of CREB-H. 
The unglycosylated mutant of CREB-H was not unstable, unfolded or aggregated.
Upon stimulation with an activator of intramembrane proteolysis such as brefeldin
A and KDEL-tailed site 1 protease, unglycosylated or deglycosylated CREB-H was
largely uncleaved, retained in an inactive form in the endoplasmic reticulum, and
less capable of activating transcription driven by unfolded protein response
element or C-reactive protein promoter. Taken together, our findings suggest that
N-linked glycosylation is required for full activation of CREB-H through
intramembrane proteolysis. Our work also reveals a novel mechanism for the
regulation of CREB-H-dependent transcription.

PMID: 20356926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Nov;23(11):1746-57. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0009. Epub 2009 Sep
24.

A novel isoform of human LZIP negatively regulates the transactivation of the
glucocorticoid receptor.

Kang H(1), Kim YS, Ko J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, 5-1 Anam-dong,
Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-701, Korea.

The human leucine zipper protein (LZIP) is a basic leucine zipper transcription
factor that is involved in leukocyte migration, tumor suppression, and
endoplasmic reticulum stress-associated protein degradation. Although evidence
suggests a diversity of roles for LZIP, its function is not fully understood, and
the subcellular localization of LZIP is still controversial. We identified a
novel isoform of LZIP and characterized its function in ligand-induced
transactivation of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in COS-7 and HeLa cells. A
novel isoform of human LZIP designated as "sLZIP" contains a deleted putative
transmembrane domain (amino acids 229-245) of LZIP and consists of 345 amino
acids. LZIP and sLZIP were ubiquitously expressed in a variety of cell lines and 
tissues, with LZIP being much more common. sLZIP was mainly localized in the
nucleus, whereas LZIP was located in the cytoplasm. Unlike LZIP, sLZIP was not
involved in the chemokine-mediated signal pathway. sLZIP recruited histone
deacetylases (HDACs) to the promoter region of the mouse mammary tumor virus
luciferase reporter gene and enhanced the activities of HDACs, resulting in
suppression of expression of the GR target genes. Our findings suggest that sLZIP
functions as a negative regulator in glucocorticoid-induced transcriptional
activation of GR by recruitment and activation of HDACs.

PMID: 19779205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Folia Biol (Praha). 2009;55(4):137-44.

Cloning, characterization, chromosomal mapping and tissue transcription analysis 
of porcine CREB2 and CREB3 genes.

Qi M(1), Lei T, Zhou L, Chen XD, Long H, Long QQ, Zhang RR, Yang ZQ, Gan L.

Author information: 
(1)College of Plant Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University,
Wuhan, China.

CREB2 and CREB3 are two important members of the ATF/CREB family, which
negatively and positively regulates CRE-dependent transcription in vitro. Here we
report the cloning, chromosome mapping and tissue transcription analysis of CREB2
and CREB3 in pigs. The full-length coding sequence of CREB2 and CREB3 is 1047 bp 
and 1098 bp, encoding 348 and 365 amino acids, respectively. Porcine CREB3
comprises nine exons and eight introns, whereas CREB2 consists of three exons and
two introns. CREB2 and CREB3 were cytogenetically assigned to porcine chromosome 
5p and 1q28, respectively. Tissue transcription analysis revealed that both
porcine CREB2 and CREB3 mRNA were ubiquitously detected in all examined tissues. 
Additionally, we cloned the 5' flank genomic sequence of porcine CREB3 and
characterized several putative transcription factor recognition sites including
SP1, NF-kappaB, AP-1 and AP-2 in its promoter region. Our studies provide basic
molecular information helpful for further investigation of the function of the
two genes in pig models.

PMID: 19691921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Oncol Rep. 2009 Mar;21(3):615-24.

Characterization of the human CREB3L2 gene promoter.

Panagopoulos I(1), Mertens F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, SE-221 85 Lund, Sweden. 
ioannis.panagopoulos@med.lu.se

CREB3L2 encodes a member of the CREB3 family of transcription factors. We
characterized its promoter region, showing that it is asymmetrically
bidirectional, also driving the expression of a variant of AKR1D1. It has a CRE
binding site which is conserved among mammalians; removal or alteration of it
resulted in reduced promoter activity. When transiently transfecting the HEK293
cell line with constructs with partially deleted promoter regions, 5' deletions
beyond 1058-bp upstream of the transcription starting site resulted in successive
reduction of the activity. The inclusion of the untranslated part of CREB3L2 exon
1 strongly inhibited the promoter activity. Forskolin resulted in a decreased
reporter activity, whereas phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate increased the promoter
activity irrespective of the status of the CRE binding site. The presence of the 
CRE site indicates autoregulation of CREB3L2 and/or regulation via other members 
of the CREB3 family or a variety of bZIP transcription factors.

PMID: 19212619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Virol. 2008 Oct;82(19):9555-63. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01174-08. Epub 2008 Jul 30.

Association of the cellular coactivator HCF-1 with the Golgi apparatus in sensory
neurons.

Kolb G(1), Kristie TM.

Author information: 
(1)National Institutes of Health, 4-129, 4 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

HCF-1 is a cellular transcriptional coactivator that is critical for mediating
the regulated expression of the immediate-early genes of the alphaherpesviruses
herpes simplex virus type 1 and varicella-zoster virus. HCF-1 functions, at least
in part, by modulating the modification of nucleosomes at these viral promoters
to reverse cell-mediated repressive marks and promote activating marks.
Strikingly, HCF-1 is specifically sequestered in the cytoplasm of sensory neurons
where these viruses establish latency and is rapidly relocalized to the nucleus
upon stimuli that result in viral reactivation. However, the analysis of HCF-1 in
latently infected neurons and the protein's specific subcellular location have
not been determined. Therefore, in this study, the localization of HCF-1 in
unstimulated and induced latently infected sensory neurons was investigated and
was found to be similar to that observed in uninfected mice, with a time course
of induced nuclear accumulation that correlated with viral reactivation. Using a 
primary neuronal cell culture system, HCF-1 was localized to the Golgi apparatus 
in unstimulated neurons, a unique location for a transcriptional coactivator.
Upon disruption of the Golgi body, HCF-1 was rapidly relocalized to the nucleus
in contrast to other Golgi apparatus-associated proteins. The location of HCF-1
is distinct from that of CREB3, an endoplasmic reticulum-resident HCF-1
interaction partner that has been proposed to sequester HCF-1. The results
support the model that HCF-1 is an important component of the viral
latency-reactivation cycle and that it is regulated by association with a
component that is distinct from the identified HCF-1 interaction factors.

PMCID: PMC2546983
PMID: 18667495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Exp Mol Med. 2008 Jun 30;40(3):332-8.

Human LZIP induces monocyte CC chemokine receptor 2 expression leading to
enhancement of monocyte chemoattractant protein 1/CCL2-induced cell migration.

Sung HJ(1), Kim YS, Kang H, Ko J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul, Korea.

Chemokines and chemokine receptors play a role in migration of circulating
leukocytes to the region of inflammation. Human LZIP is an uncharacterized
transcription factor and is known to participate in leukotactin
(Lkn)-1/CCL15-induced cell migration. We investigated the role of human LZIP in
expression of CC chemokine receptors (CCRs) and its involvement in monocyte
migration. RNase protection analysis showed that LZIP increased mRNA expression
of CCR2 and CCR1 in THP-1 cells. Surface expressions of both CCR2 and CCR1 were
also increased by LZIP. Results from an electrophoretic mobility shift assay
showed that LZIP binds to the C/EBP element in the CCR2 promoter. LZIP also
enhanced the chemotactic activities of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1/CCL2
and Lkn-1. These results suggest that LZIP regulates expression of chemokine
receptors that are involved in monocyte migration.

PMCID: PMC2679297
PMID: 18587271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jun;28(12):3952-66. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01439-07. Epub 2008 Apr 
7.

A novel protein, Luman/CREB3 recruitment factor, inhibits Luman activation of the
unfolded protein response.

Audas TE(1), Li Y, Liang G, Lu R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph,
Ontario, Canada N1G 2W1.

Luman/CREB3 (also called LZIP) is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-bound cellular
transcription factor. It has been implicated in the mammalian unfolded protein
response (UPR), as well as herpes simplex virus reactivation from latency in
sensory neurons. Here, we report the identification of a novel Luman recruitment 
factor (LRF). Like Luman, LRF is a UPR-responsive basic-region leucine zipper
protein that is prone to proteasomal degradation. Being a highly unstable
protein, LRF interacts with Luman through the leucine zipper region and promotes 
Luman degradation. LRF was found to recruit the nuclear form of Luman to discrete
nuclear foci, which overlap with the nuclear receptor coactivator GRIP1 bodies,
and repress the transactivation activity of Luman. Compared to LRF+/+ mouse
embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cells, the levels of CHOP, EDEM, and Herp were
elevated in LRF-/- MEF cells. We propose that LRF is a negative regulator of the 
UPR. For Luman, it may represent another level of regulation following Luman
proteolytic cleavage on the ER and nuclear translocation. In addition to inducing
rapid Luman turnover, LRF may repress the transactivation potential of Luman by
sequestering it in the LRF nuclear bodies away from key cofactors (such as HCF-1)
that are required for transcriptional activation.

PMCID: PMC2423117
PMID: 18391022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008 Jun 5;147B(4):500-4. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.30617.

Lithium response and genetic variation in the CREB family of genes.

Mamdani F(1), Alda M, Grof P, Young LT, Rouleau G, Turecki G.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Group for Suicide Studies-Depressive Disorders Group, Douglas Hospital,
Research Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Bipolar disorder (BD) is a severe psychiatric disorder that affects 1% of the
population. Recently, there have been many attempts to identify specific genes
that are involved in BD; however, the task of finding susceptibility genes is not
easy due to the complexity of the disorder. Since lithium (Li) has been used for 
over 40 years now as an effective prophylactic agent and response to Li treatment
seems to be, at least in part, genetically determined, classification according
to Li response is a manner through which more homogeneous populations can be
obtained for investigation. It has previously been suggested that Li exerts an
effect on signal transduction pathways, such as the cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) pathway. We carried out an association study of BD with
CREB1, CREB2 and CREB3 genes, located at ch 2q32.3-q34, 22q13.1 and 9pter-p22.1, 
respectively. A total of three promoter single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP), 14
SNPs in the UTR, 6 exonic and 15 intronic SNPs were investigated for their
frequency and haplotype distribution in a BD sample of 180 lithium responders and
69 nonresponders and 127 controls using a SNaPshot multiplex reaction from
Applied Biosystems, a modified fluorescent single base pair extension procedure. 
Following correction for multiple testing, our results suggest that the CREB1-1H 
SNP (G/A change, P < 0.002) and the CREB1-7H SNP (T/C change, P < 0.002) may be
associated with BD and/or lithium response.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3549998
PMID: 18189280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 May 8;104(19):7839-44. Epub 2007 May 1.

Conserved region I of human coactivator TAF4 binds to a short hydrophobic motif
present in transcriptional regulators.

Wang X(1), Truckses DM, Takada S, Matsumura T, Tanese N, Jacobson RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School in
Biomedical Sciences Program in Genes and Development, University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

TBP-associated factor 4 (TAF4), an essential subunit of the TFIID complex acts as
a coactivator for multiple transcriptional regulators, including Sp1 and CREB.
However, little is known regarding the structural properties of the TAF4 subunit 
that lead to the coactivator function. Here, we report the crystal structure at
2.0-A resolution of the human TAF4-TAFH domain, a conserved domain among all
metazoan TAF4, TAF4b, and ETO family members. The hTAF4-TAFH structure adopts a
completely helical fold with a large hydrophobic groove that forms a binding
surface for TAF4 interacting factors. Using peptide phage display, we have
characterized the binding preference of the hTAF4-TAFH domain for a hydrophobic
motif, DPsiPsizetazetaPsiPhi, that is present in a number of nuclear factors,
including several important transcriptional regulators with roles in activating, 
repressing, and modulating posttranslational modifications. A comparison of the
hTAF4-TAFH structure with the homologous ETO-TAFH domain reveals several critical
residues important for hTAF4-TAFH target specificity and suggests that TAF4 has
evolved in response to the increased transcriptional complexity of metazoans.

PMCID: PMC1876534
PMID: 17483474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Biol Chem. 2007 Apr 13;282(15):11092-100. Epub 2007 Feb 12.

Regulation of human LZIP expression by NF-kappaB and its involvement in monocyte 
cell migration induced by Lkn-1.

Jang SW(1), Kim YS, Kim YR, Sung HJ, Ko J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul 136-701,
Korea.

Human LZIP is a transcription factor that is involved in leukocyte cell mobility.
Expression of LZIP is known to differentially regulate monocyte cell migration
induced by CCR1-dependent chemokines. However, its transcriptional regulation has
not been characterized. Our results indicate that Lkn-1 induces LZIP expression
in a time- and dose-dependent manner, and the induction of LZIP shows an
immediate early response to Lkn-1. We identified and cloned approximately 1.4 kb 
of the LZIP promoter from a human genomic DNA. To identify regulatory elements
controlling restricted expression of LZIP, deletion mutants were constructed from
the 1469-bp LZIP promoter region (-1219/+251) linked to the luciferase reporter
gene. Maximal promoter activity was contained within 613 bp from the tentative
transcription initiation site and was sharply reduced in a truncated construct
(-338/+251). This promoter sequence contained consensus NF-kappaB- and
Sp-1-binding sites. Results from an inhibitor assay showed that NF-kappaB is
involved in Lkn-1-induced LZIP expression, but Sp-1 is not. We also demonstrated 
that NF-kappaB binds to the LZIP promoter and that the binding is specific, as
revealed by an electrophoretic mobility shift assay and a mutation analysis.
Chemotaxis analysis showed that LZIP expression because of the NF-kappaB
subfamily is specifically involved in Lkn-1-induced chemotaxis. Our findings
suggest that transcription factor NF-kappaB plays an important role in regulation
of LZIP expression, and LZIP expression regulates the monocyte cell migration
induced by Lkn-1.

PMID: 17296613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Jun;211(3):630-7.

Role of human LZIP in differential activation of the NF-kappaB pathway that is
induced by CCR1-dependent chemokines.

Jang SW(1), Kim YS, Lee YH, Ko J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul, Korea.

Human leucine zipper protein (LZIP) associates with CC chemokine receptor 1
(CCR1) and this protein-protein interaction should play an important role in
leukocyte cell mobility. LZIP is known to regulate leukotactin-1
(Lkn-1)-dependent cell migration without affecting the chemotactic activities of 
other CC chemokines that bind to CCR1. Since Lkn-1 is engaged in the
transcriptional activation of nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) and subsequent
activation of the chemoattractant ability of leukocytes, we investigated the
regulatory role of LZIP in the NF-kappaB pathway that is induced by
CCR1-dependent chemokines. LZIP increased NF-kappaB-dependent luciferase activity
in response to Lkn-1 in HOS/CCR1 cells and THP-1 cells. However, the
NF-kappaB-dependent luciferase activities induced by other CCR1-dependent
chemokines were not affected by LZIP overexpression. LZIP also increased
Lkn-1-induced chemotactic activity through activation of the NF-kappaB pathway,
whereas LZIP did not affect either the transactivation of NF-kappaB or the
chemotactic activities induced by other CCR1-dependent chemokines. Western blot
analysis showed that LZIP increased the degradation of IkappaBalpha induced by
Lkn-1 but not by other CCR1-dependent chemokines. Results from electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA) showed that LZIP enhanced the Lkn-1-induced
DNA-binding activity of NF-kappaB. These data indicate that LZIP functions as a
positive regulator in the NF-kappaB activation pathway that is triggered by Lkn-1
without affecting the transcriptional activation of NF-kappaB induced by other
CCR1-dependent chemokines.

PMID: 17192849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2007 Feb;46(2):181-91.

Characterization of the native CREB3L2 transcription factor and the FUS/CREB3L2
chimera.

Panagopoulos I(1), Möller E, Dahlén A, Isaksson M, Mandahl N, Vlamis-Gardikas A, 
Mertens F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
ioannis.panagopoulos@med.lu.se

CREB3L2 was first identified as the 3'-partner of FUS in a fusion gene that seems
to be specific for low grade fibromyxoid sarcoma. In silico analyses suggest that
the predicted CREB3L2 protein is a member of the CREB3 family of transcription
factors, with its bZIP domain being highly similar to that in CREB3L1, CREB3L3,
CREB3L4, CREB3, and Drosophila Bbf-2. In the present study, the authors assessed 
various cellular outcomes after transfection of NIH3T3 and HEK-293 cells with
constructs containing full-length and truncated versions of CREB3L2 and
FUS/CREB3L2. Northern blot of CREB3L2 mRNA revealed a 7.4 kbp band that contains 
0.4 kbp and 5.5 kbp untranslated 5' and 3' regions, respectively. CREB3L2
constructs containing the first 120 amino acids (aa) showed the highest
transcriptional activation. Much stronger transcriptional activation was
consistently seen for the FUS/CREB3L2 constructs than for the corresponding
CREB3L2 constructs. Transcriptional activity was achieved through the box-B
element, ATF6 and CRE binding sites, as well as the GRP78 promoter. Proteins
encoded by full-length CREB3L2 and FUS/CREB3L2 were localized to reticular
structures of the cytoplasm, whereas the corresponding, truncated proteins
lacking the transmembrane domain and the carboxy-terminal part of CREB3L2 resided
within the nucleus. The results of the present study show that CREB3L2 is not
only structurally, but also functionally very similar to CREB3L1. Thus, studies
regarding the pathways influenced by wild-type CREB3L2 should provide valuable
clues to the pathogenetic significance of the FUS/CREB3L2 chimera in low grade
fibromyxoid sarcoma.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17117415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Mol Biol. 2006 Dec 15;364(5):1034-47. Epub 2006 Oct 3.

Luman, a new partner of HIV-1 TMgp41, interferes with Tat-mediated transcription 
of the HIV-1 LTR.

Blot G(1), Lopez-Vergès S, Treand C, Kubat NJ, Delcroix-Genête D, Emiliani S,
Benarous R, Berlioz-Torrent C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Département Maladies Infectieuses, Paris F-75014, France.

In our search for new partners of the HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein (Env), we found
that the cytoplasmic domain of the TMgp41 (TMgp41 CD) subunit of HIV-1 Env
interacted with Luman, a transcription factor of the CREB/ATF family. Luman is
anchored in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane and subjected to activation by
regulated intramembrane proteolysis (RIP). The RIP process permits the release of
the activated amino-terminal fragment of Luman into the cytoplasm, and its import
into the nucleus. Here, we demonstrate that interaction between the TMgp41 CD and
Luman requires a region encompassing the b-Zip and TM domains of Luman and
decreases the stability of this factor. Moreover, we found that overexpression of
a constitutively active form of Luman in cells transfected with HXB2R HIV-1
provirus decreased the intracellular expression of Gag and Env and led to a
decrease in virion release. This negative effect of activated Luman on HIV-1
production was correlated to the inhibition of Tat transactivation of the HIV-1
LTR, which might be related to an interaction of activated Luman with Tat.
Altogether, these results show that Luman acts as a partner of two major HIV-1
proteins: the TMgp41 Env subunit and Tat. The interaction between the TMgp41
subunit of Env and Luman affects the stability of the full-length Luman protein, 
the precursor of the activated, nuclear form of Luman, which acts negatively on
Tat-mediated HIV-1 transactivation.

PMID: 17054986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Genes Cells. 2006 Oct;11(10):1161-71.

The testes-specific bZip type transcription factor Tisp40 plays a role in ER
stress responses and chromatin packaging during spermiogenesis.

Nagamori I(1), Yomogida K, Ikawa M, Okabe M, Yabuta N, Nojima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, Yamadaoka 3-1, Suita City, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

We previously reported that the spermatid-specific transcription factor Tisp40
functions through UPRE and CRE. To investigate Tisp40 function in vivo, we
generated TISP40(-/-) mice. TISP40(-/-) mice were born at expected ratios, were
healthy, and mutant males bred normally. However, the ER stress-response protein 
Grp78/BiP accumulated in the TISP40(-/-) testis and RAMP4 (Ribosome-associated
membrane protein 4) mRNA level was up-regulated. Disruption of TISP40 caused ER
stress and activation of caspase 12 but not caspase 9, leading to apoptosis of
meiotic/postmeiotic germ cells. On the other hand, DAPI staining and electron
microscopy revealed that epididymal sperm nuclei were abnormally relaxed in the
TISP40(-/-) testis, a phenotype that was independent of the expression and
maturation of transition proteins and protamines but due to abnormally retained
histones. Histones localized to the cytoplasm as well as to the nucleus and were 
also retained in epididymal sperm. Histones H2A and H4 were dramatically
up-regulated and the acetylation of H2A, H2B and H4 was also enhanced in the
TISP40(-/-) testis. Taken together, we conclude that Tisp40 plays an important
role in the unfolded protein response of the testis and in regulating the
maturation of sperm head nuclei.

PMID: 16999736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Mol Cell Biochem. 2007 Feb;296(1-2):109-19. Epub 2006 Sep 9.

Differential subcellular localization and activity of kelch repeat proteins
KLHDC1 and KLHDC2.

Chin KT(1), Xu HT, Ching YP, Jin DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong, 3/F, Laboratory
Block, Faculty of Medicine Building, 21 Sassoon Road, Hong Kong, China.

We have previously identified and characterized human KLHDC2/HCLP-1, a kelch
repeat protein that interacts with and inhibits transcription factor LZIP. In
this study, we identified and characterized a paralog of KLHDC2 called KLHDC1.
KLHDC1 and KLHDC2 share about 50% identity at the level of amino acid sequence
and both gene loci localize to human chromosome 14q21.3. This cluster of KLHDC1
and KLHDC2 genes is highly conserved in vertebrates ranging from pufferfish to
human. Both genes are expressed highly in skeletal muscle, but weakly in various 
other tissues. While KLHDC2 was predominantly found in the nucleus, KLHDC1 is a
cytoplasmic protein. Neither KLHDC1 nor KLHDC2 binds to actin. In addition,
KLHDC1 was unable to inhibit LZIP/CREB3-mediated transcriptional activation.
Thus, KLHDC1 and KLHDC2 have differential localization and activity in cultured
mammalian cells.

PMID: 16964437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Nov;26(21):7999-8010. Epub 2006 Aug 28.

Luman/CREB3 induces transcription of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
response protein Herp through an ER stress response element.

Liang G(1), Audas TE, Li Y, Cockram GP, Dean JD, Martyn AC, Kokame K, Lu R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph,
Ontario, Canada N1G 2W1.

Luman/CREB3 (also called LZIP) is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane-bound
transcription factor which is believed to undergo regulated intramembrane
proteolysis in response to cellular cues. We previously found that Luman
activates transcription from the unfolded protein response element. Here we
report the identification of Herp, a gene involved in ER stress-associated
protein degradation (ERAD), as a direct target of Luman. We found that Luman was 
transcriptionally induced and proteolytically activated by the ER stress inducer 
thaspsigargin. Overexpression of Luman activated transcription of cellular Herp
via ER stress response element II (ERSE-II; ATTGG-N-CCACG) in the promoter
region. Mutagenesis studies and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that 
Luman physically associates with the Herp promoter, specifically the second
half-site (CCACG) of ERSE-II. Luman was also necessary for the full activation of
Herp during the ER stress response, since Luman small interfering RNA knockdown
or functional repression by a dominant negative mutant attenuated Herp gene
expression. Like Herp, overexpression of Luman protected cells against ER
stress-induced apoptosis. With Luman structurally similar to ATF6 but resembling 
XBP1 in DNA-binding specificities, we propose that Luman is a novel factor that
plays a role in ERAD and a converging point for various signaling pathways
channeling through the ER.

PMCID: PMC1636730
PMID: 16940180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Dev Biol. 2006 Oct 1;298(1):201-11. Epub 2006 Jun 22.

The enigma of ATCE1, an acrosome-associated transcription factor.

Gil S(1), Yosef D, Golan N, Don J.

Author information: 
(1)The Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University,
Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel.

Atce1 belongs to the CREB3/LZIP subtype of the ATF/CREB transcription factor gene
family. Its transcription has previously been shown to be testis-specific and
within the testis to be restricted to haploid spermatids. In this study, we
characterized the protein's distribution in the testis and found that it
accumulates in late round and in elongating spermatids, corresponding to
developmental stages considered transcriptionally silent. ATCE1 accumulation is
acrosome-specific and persists up to mature epididymal cells, at which stage the 
protein remained associated with the inner acrosome membrane even after acrosomal
reaction. No nuclear localization was evident at any spermatogenic stage.
Expression of full-length ATCE1 in various cell lines revealed ER and Golgi
localization whereas truncation of the C-terminus allowed entrance into the
nucleus. Potent transcriptional activation activity, from kB-containing
regulatory elements (but not from CRE elements as one might expect), was observed
using the C-terminally truncated nuclear form of ATCE1. These results raise the
question of why would a transcription factor be specifically anchored to the
acrosome inner membrane? An intriguing speculation that ATCE1 might be paternally
delivered to the newly formed zygote is discussed.

PMID: 16925989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 2;281(22):15073-81. Epub 2006 Apr 4.

Transcription factors, cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) and Tisp40, act
in concert in postmeiotic transcriptional regulation.

Nagamori I(1), Yomogida K, Adams PD, Sassone-Corsi P, Nojima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, Yamadaoka 3-1, Suita City, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

We previously isolated 80 TISP (transcript induced in spermiogenesis) genes whose
transcription is dramatically induced during spermiogenesis. Our analysis here of
the expression of these genes in the testis of the cAMP-responsive element
modulator (CREM)-null mouse revealed that 54 TISP genes are under the
transcriptional regulation of CREM. One CREM-regulated gene is TISP40, which
encodes a basic leucine zipper (bZip)-type transcription factor bearing a
transmembrane domain that generates the two proteins Tisp40alpha and Tisp40beta. 
Both of these proteins function by binding to UPRE (unfolded protein-response
element) but do not recognize CRE motifs. We show here that Tisp40alpha mRNA is
generated under the direct transcriptional regulation of CREM. CREMtau and Tisp40
form a heterodimer, which functions through CRE but not through UPRE.
Furthermore, binding ability of CREM to CRE is dramatically up-regulated by
forming a heterodimer with Tisp40alphaDeltaTM, a truncated form of Tisp40alpha
that lacks the transmembrane domain. We confirmed that Tisp40 and CREM actually
bind to the Tisp40 promoter in vivo by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay.
Finally, we demonstrate that the Tisp40DeltaTM-CREMtau heterodimer acts as a
recruiter of HIRA, a histone chaperone, to CRE. Taken together, we propose that
Tisp40 is an important transcriptional regulator during spermiogenesis.

PMID: 16595651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Virol. 2005 Dec;79(23):14708-18.

The neuronal host cell factor-binding protein Zhangfei inhibits herpes simplex
virus replication.

Akhova O(1), Bainbridge M, Misra V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Western College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, 52 Campus Drive, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 5B4,
Canada.

During lytic infection in epithelial cells the expression of herpes simplex virus
type 1 (HSV-1) immediate-early (IE) genes is initiated by a multiprotein complex 
comprising the virion-associated protein VP16 and two cellular proteins, host
cellular factor (HCF) and Oct-1. Oct-1 directly recognizes TAATGARAT elements in 
promoters of IE genes. The role of HCF is not clear. HSV-1 also infects sensory
neurons innervating the site of productive infection and establishes a latent
infection in these cells. It is likely that some VP16 is retained by the HSV-1
nucleocapsid as it reaches the neuronal nucleus. Its activity must therefore be
suppressed for successful establishment of viral latency. Recently, we discovered
an HCF-binding cellular protein called Zhangfei. Zhangfei, in an HCF-dependent
manner, inhibits Luman/LZIP/CREB3, another cellular HCF-binding transcription
factor. Here we show that Zhangfei is selectively expressed in human neurons.
When delivered to cultured cells that do not normally express the protein,
Zhangfei inhibited the ability of VP16 to activate HSV-1 IE expression. The
inhibition was specific for HCF-dependent transcriptional activation by VP16,
since a Gal4-VP16 chimeric protein was inhibited only on a TAATGARAT-containing
promoter and not a on a Gal4-containing promoter. Zhangfei associated with VP16
and inhibited formation of the VP16-HCF-Oct-1 complex on TAATGARAT motifs.
Zhangfei also suppressed HSV-1-induced expression of several cellular genes
including topoisomerase IIalpha, suggesting that in addition to suppressing IE
expression Zhangfei may have an inhibitory effect on HSV-1 DNA replication and
late gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1287584
PMID: 16282471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Biol Cell. 2006 Jan;17(1):413-26. Epub 2005 Oct 19.

CREB4, a transmembrane bZip transcription factor and potential new substrate for 
regulation and cleavage by S1P.

Stirling J(1), O'hare P.

Author information: 
(1)Marie Curie Research Institute, Oxted RH8 0TL, United Kingdom.

Regulated intramembrane proteolysis of the factors SREBP and ATF6 represents a
central control mechanism in sterol homeostasis and stress response within the
endoplasmic reticulum. Here, we compare localization of ATF6-related bZip factors
CREB4, CREB-H, Luman, and OASIS. These factors contain the defining features of a
bZip domain, a predicted transmembrane domain and an adjacent cleavage site for
the Golgi protease S1P, with conserved features which indicate that it represents
a specific subclass of S1P sites. Each factor localizes to the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER), but a population of CREB4 was also observed in the Golgi.
Deletion of the transmembrane domain in CREB4 resulted in efficient nuclear
accumulation. An N-terminal variant of CREB4 containing the BZIp domain potently 
activated expression from a target gene containing ATF6 binding sites and from
the promoter for the ER chaperone GRP78/BIP. CREB4 was cleaved in a site-specific
manner in response to brefeldin A disruption of the Golgi or by coexpression with
S1P but only after deletion or substitution of its C-terminal lumenal domain.
Thus, S1P cleavage of CREB4 may be suppressed by a determinant in the C-terminal 
region. Dithiothreitol induced more complete transport of CREB4 to the Golgi, but
not cleavage. Together, the data identify at least one additional bZip factor
whose localization responds to ER stress, and we propose a model based on these
results that indicates additional levels of control of this novel class of
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC1345678
PMID: 16236796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Sep;25(17):7657-64.

Reduction of spermatogenesis but not fertility in Creb3l4-deficient mice.

Adham IM(1), Eck TJ, Mierau K, Müller N, Sallam MA, Paprotta I, Schubert S,
Hoyer-Fender S, Engel W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Göttingen, Germany. iadham@gwdg.de

Creb3l4 belongs to the CREB/ATF family of transcription factors that are involved
in mediating transcription in response to intracellular signaling. This study
shows that Creb3l4 is expressed at low levels in all organs and in different
stages of embryogenesis but is present at very high levels in the testis,
particularly in postmeiotic male germ cells. In contrast to CREB3L4 in the human 
prostate, of which specific expression was detected, Creb3l4 transcripts in the
mouse prostate could be detected only by RT-PCR. To identify the physiological
function of Creb3l4, the murine gene was inactivated by replacement with the gene
encoding green fluorescent protein. Surprisingly, Creb3l4-deficient mice were
born at expected ratios, were healthy, and displayed normal long-term survival
rates. Despite a significant reduction in the number of spermatozoa in the
epididymis of Creb3l4(-)(/)(-) mice, the breeding of mutant males with wild-type 
females was productive and the average litter size was not significantly altered 
in comparison to wild-type littermates. Further analyses revealed that the
seminiferous tubules of Creb3l4(-)(/)(-) mice contained all of the developmental 
stages, though there was evidence for increased apoptosis of meiotic/postmeiotic 
germ cells. These results suggest that Creb3l4 plays a role in male germ cell
development, but its loss is insufficient to completely compromise the production
of spermatozoa.

PMCID: PMC1190296
PMID: 16107712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 May 27;331(1):113-9.

Luman is capable of binding and activating transcription from the unfolded
protein response element.

DenBoer LM(1), Hardy-Smith PW, Hogan MR, Cockram GP, Audas TE, Lu R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Ont.,
Canada N1G 2W1.

Luman (or LZIP, CREB3) is a transcription factor with an endoplasmic reticulum
(ER)-transmembrane domain. Due to its structural similarities with ATF6, it is
thought that Luman might also be involved in cellular stress responses. Here we
report that Luman can bind and activate transcription from the consensus unfolded
protein response element (UPRE). Mutations that disrupted the binding of Luman to
the UPREs impaired its ability to activate transcription from these sites.
Overexpression of Luman stimulated transcription of EDEM, a downstream effector
of the mammalian unfolded protein response involved in ER-associated degradation 
(ERAD). Unlike ATF6, however, Luman was not activated by proteolytic cleavage in 
response to endoplasmic reticulum stressors such as tunicamycin and thapsigargin.
These results suggest that the activation of ERAD by Luman is likely through a
pathway different from the common ER stress response, and that additional
factor(s) are required for the activation of this Luman-mediated pathway.

PMID: 15845366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 15;280(15):15257-66. Epub 2005 Feb 9.

Zhangfei is a potent and specific inhibitor of the host cell factor-binding
transcription factor Luman.

Misra V(1), Rapin N, Akhova O, Bainbridge M, Korchinski P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Western College of Veterinary Medicine, University
of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada. vikram.misra@usask.ca <vikram.misra@usask.ca>

Host cell factor (HCF) was initially discovered as a cellular co-factor required 
for the activation of herpes simplex virus immediate early gene expression by the
virion associated transactivator VP16. HCF also participates in a variety of
cellular processes, although the mechanism of its action is not known. VP16 binds
to HCF through a 4-amino acid motif (EHAY), which closely resembles the HCF
binding domain of two cellular basic leucine-zipper proteins, Luman and Zhangfei.
Luman is a powerful transcription factor that, in transient expression assays,
activates promoters containing cAMP or unfolded protein response elements (UPRE).
In contrast, Zhangfei neither binds consensus recognition elements for basic
leucine-zipper proteins nor does it activate promoters containing them. Here we
show that Zhangfei suppresses the ability of Luman to activate transcription. HCF
appeared to be required for efficient suppression. A mutant of Zhangfei, which
was unable to bind HCF, was impaired in its ability to suppress Luman. Zhangfei
did not suppress ATF6, a transcription factor closely related to Luman but that
does not bind HCF, unless the HCF binding motif of Luman was grafted onto it.
Zhangfei inhibited the HCF-dependent activation of a UPRE-containing promoter by 
a Gal4-Luman fusion protein but was unable to inhibit the HCF-independent
activation by Gal4-Luman of a promoter that contained Gal4 binding motifs.
Binding of HCF by Zhangfei was required for the co-localization of Luman and
Zhangfei to nuclear domains, suggesting that HCF might target the proteins to a
common location.

PMID: 15705566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2004 Jul;40(3):218-28.

The chimeric FUS/CREB3l2 gene is specific for low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma.

Panagopoulos I(1), Storlazzi CT, Fletcher CD, Fletcher JA, Nascimento A, Domanski
HA, Wejde J, Brosjö O, Rydholm A, Isaksson M, Mandahl N, Mertens F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.

Low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma (LGFMS) is a variant of fibrosarcoma that was
recognized as a distinct tumor entity only quite recently. We previously
described a translocation, t(7;16)(q33;p11), that resulted in a fusion of the FUS
and CREB3L2 (also known as BBF2H7) genes in two soft tissue tumors that fulfilled
morphologic criteria for LGFMS. To delineate the spectrum of tumors that may
harbor the FUS/CREB3L2 gene, we selected 45 low-grade spindle cell sarcomas for
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and/or fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH) analyses; none of these tumors had originally been
diagnosed as LGFMS. Furthermore, also included were two benign soft tissue tumors
and nine high-grade sarcomas with supernumerary ring chromosomes or 7q3
rearrangement and three tumors diagnosed as LGFMS prior to the genetic analysis. 
Of the 59 tumors analyzed, 12 were FUS/CREB3L2-positive, all of which were
diagnosed at histopathologic re-examination as being LGFMS, of both the classical
subtype and the subtype with giant collagen rosettes. The breakpoints in the
fusion transcripts were always in exons 6 or 7 of FUS and exon 5 of CREB3L2. The 
results indicated that FUS/CREB3L2 is specifically associated with LGFMS and that
RT-PCR or FISH analysis may be useful for the differential diagnosis.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15139001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. FASEB J. 2004 May;18(7):890-2. Epub 2004 Mar 4.

Human LZIP binds to CCR1 and differentially affects the chemotactic activities of
CCR1-dependent chemokines.

Ko J(1), Jang SW, Kim YS, Kim IS, Sung HJ, Kim HH, Park JY, Lee YH, Kim J, Na DS.

Author information: 
(1)Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea. jesangko@amc.seoul.kr

Signaling molecules that bind to chemokine receptors should play key roles in
regulation of cell migration induced by chemokines. To characterize the
CCR1-mediated cellular signal transduction mechanism, we used the yeast
two-hybrid system to identify a cellular ligand for CCR1. LZIP, which has been
known as a transcription factor in various cell types, was identified as a CCR1
binding protein. Although the ability of LZIP to bind DNA is possibly what allows
it to function as a transcription factor, its detailed function and participation
in chemotaxis have not been established. We found that LZIP binds to CCR1 based
on results of a mammalian two-hybrid assay and immunoprecipitation experiments.
The 21-260 residues of LZIP were essential for interaction with CCR1. Results
from a chemotaxis assay using LZIP transfected cells showed that LZIP enhanced
Lkn-1-induced chemotaxis, whereas the chemotactic activities induced by other CC 
chemokines that bind to CCR1, including MIP-1alpha, RANTES, or HCC-4, were not
affected by LZIP overexpression. These data indicate that LZIP binds to CCR1 and 
that the interaction between CCR1 and LZIP participates in regulation of
Lkn-1-dependent cell migration without affecting the chemotactic activities of
other CC chemokines that bind to CCR1.

PMID: 15001559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Sep 15;12(18):2349-58. Epub 2003 Jul 22.

Fusion of the FUS and BBF2H7 genes in low grade fibromyxoid sarcoma.

Storlazzi CT(1), Mertens F, Nascimento A, Isaksson M, Wejde J, Brosjo O, Mandahl 
N, Panagopoulos I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.

The FUS gene at 16p11 fuses with DDIT3 and ATF1 as the result of translocations
with chromosome band 12q13 in myxoid liposarcoma and angiomatoid fibrous
histiocytoma, respectively, and with ERG as the result of a t(16;21)(p11;q22) in 
acute myeloid leukemia. We here show that a t(7;16)(q33;p11) in two cases of low 
grade fibromyxoid sarcoma fuses the FUS gene to BBF2H7, a previously
uncharacterized gene that is homologous to the Drosophila Bbf-2 gene. BBF2H7
spans more than 120 kbp genomic DNA, is composed of 12 exons and contains a 1560 
bp open reading frame. It codes for a 519 amino acid protein that contains a
basic DNA binding and leucine zipper dimerization (B-ZIP) motif, highly similar
to that in the OASIS, CREB-H, CREB4 and CREB3 transcription factors, followed by 
a hydrophobic region predicted to be an alpha-helical transmembrane domain.
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), using FUS forward and
BBF2H7 reverse primers, amplified FUS/BBF2H7 chimeric transcripts composed of the
first five exons and part of exon 6 of FUS and part of exon 5 and exons 6-12 of
BBF2H7. The FUS/BBF2H7 chimera codes for a protein containing the N-terminus of
FUS and the B-ZIP domain and the C-terminus of BBF2H7.

PMID: 12915480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Oct 15;99(21):13403-8. Epub 2002 Sep 23.

An activation domain in the C-terminal subunit of HCF-1 is important for
transactivation by VP16 and LZIP.

Luciano RL(1), Wilson AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Kaplan Comprehensive Cancer Center, New York
University School of Medicine, 550 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

In herpes simplex virus, lytic replication is initiated by the viral
transactivator VP16 acting with cellular cofactors Oct-1 and HCF-1. Although this
activator complex has been studied in detail, the role of HCF-1 remains elusive. 
Here, we show that HCF-1 contains an activation domain (HCF-1(AD)) required for
maximal transactivation by VP16 and its cellular counterpart LZIP. Expression of 
the VP16 cofactor p300 augments HCF-1(AD) activity, suggesting a mechanism of
synergy. Infection of cells lacking the HCF-1(AD) leads to reduced viral
immediate-early gene expression and lowered viral titers. These findings
underscore the importance of HCF-1 to herpes simplex virus replication and VP16
transactivation.

PMCID: PMC129685
PMID: 12271126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Aug;22(16):5639-49.

Luman, the cellular counterpart of herpes simplex virus VP16, is processed by
regulated intramembrane proteolysis.

Raggo C(1), Rapin N, Stirling J, Gobeil P, Smith-Windsor E, O'Hare P, Misra V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Western College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 5B4, Canada.

Luman is a human basic leucine zipper transcription factor that, like the herpes 
simplex virus transcription factor VP16, requires the host cell factor, HCF, for 
activity. Although both HCF and Luman have been implicated in cell growth, their 
biological roles have not been clearly defined. Luman conforms to a type II
membrane-associated glycoprotein with its carboxyl terminus embedded in cellular 
membranes and its amino terminus, which contains all its identified functional
domains, in the cytoplasm. Here we show that Luman is processed by regulated
intramembrane proteolysis (RIP). The site 1 protease (S1P), a Golgi
apparatus-resident enzyme responsible for catalyzing the first step in the RIP
pathway of the sterol regulatory element binding proteins (SREBPs) and ATF6, may 
also be involved in the processing of Luman. Thus, processing of Luman was highly
stimulated by brefeldin A, a compound that causes the reflux of Golgi apparatus
enzymes to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In addition, coexpression of Luman
with S1P containing a KDEL ER retrieval signal resulted in virtually quantitative
cleavage of Luman in the absence of any treatment. Finally, Luman contains a
sequence, RQLR, immediately downstream from the transmembrane domain which bears 
similarity to the consensus S1P cleavage site identified by others. Substitution 
of arginine residues within this motif abolished S1P cleavage, providing robust
evidence that S1P is involved in Luman processing. We observed that following S1P
cleavage, the majority of the cleaved Luman was retained in cytoplasmic
membranes, indicating that an additional step or enzymes yet to be identified are
involved in complete cleavage and release to yield the product which ultimately
enters the nuclei of cells.

PMCID: PMC133973
PMID: 12138176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Hum Genet. 2002;47(7):373-6.

Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel human cAMP response
element-binding ( CREB) gene ( CREB4).

Cao G(1), Ni X, Jiang M, Ma Y, Cheng H, Guo L, Ji C, Gu S, Xie Y, Mao Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of 
Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China, 200433. ymmao@fudan.edu.cn

Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) response element-binding (CREB) proteins
are a family of mammalian transcription activators. We identified a novel human
CREB gene ( CREB4) that was 1592 bp long and encoded a protein of 395 amino acid 
residues. The protein shared high homology to mouse CREB3 (identity 62%,
similarity 72%). The expression pattern of the human CREB4 gene showed
transcripts in prostate, brain, pancreas, skeletal muscle, small intestine,
testis, leukocyte, and thymus, whereas in heart, lung, liver, kidney, placenta,
spleen, ovary, and colon, specific bands of the transcript could not be detected.
The CREB4 gene consisted of ten exons and nine introns and was mapped to
chromosome 1q21.3 by means of a bioinformatics analysis.

PMID: 12111373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Virol. 2001 Dec;75(24):12402-11.

Stabilization but not the transcriptional activity of herpes simplex virus
VP16-induced complexes is evolutionarily conserved among HCF family members.

Lee S(1), Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA.

The human herpes simplex virus (HSV) protein VP16 induces formation of a
transcriptional regulatory complex with two cellular factors-the POU homeodomain 
transcription factor Oct-1 and the cell proliferation factor HCF-1-to activate
viral immediate-early-gene transcription. Although the cellular role of Oct-1 in 
transcription is relatively well understood, the cellular role of HCF-1 in cell
proliferation is enigmatic. HCF-1 and the related protein HCF-2 form an HCF
protein family in humans that is related to a Caenorhabditis elegans homolog
called CeHCF. In this study, we show that all three proteins can promote
VP16-induced-complex formation, indicating that VP16 targets a highly conserved
function of HCF proteins. The resulting VP16-induced complexes, however, display 
different transcriptional activities. In contrast to HCF-1 and CeHCF, HCF-2 fails
to support VP16 activation of transcription effectively. These results suggest
that, along with HCF-1, HCF-2 could have a role, albeit probably a different
role, in HSV infection. CeHCF can mimic HCF-1 for both association with viral and
cellular proteins and transcriptional activation, suggesting that the function(s)
of HCF-1 targeted by VP16 has been highly conserved throughout metazoan
evolution.

PMCID: PMC116136
PMID: 11711630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 3;276(31):28933-8. Epub 2001 May 30.

Inhibition of LZIP-mediated transcription through direct interaction with a novel
host cell factor-like protein.

Zhou HJ(1), Wong CM, Chen JH, Qiang BQ, Yuan JG, Jin DY.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100005, China.

Host cell factor 1 (HCF-1) is a cellular transcriptional coactivator which
coordinates the assembly of enhancer complex through direct interactions with
viral and cellular trans-activators such as VP16, Oct-1, LZIP, and GA-binding
protein. These interactions are mediated by the beta-propeller domain comprising 
the first 380 residues of HCF-1 with six kelch repeats. Here we describe the
identification and characterization of a novel HCF-like kelch repeat protein,
designated HCLP-1. HCLP-1 is a ubiquitously expressed nuclear protein which is
composed almost entirely of a six-bladed beta-propeller. HCLP-1 selectively
interacts with LZIP but not with VP16. The physical interaction between HCLP-1
and LZIP leads to the repression of the LZIP-dependent transcription. The
HCLP-1-binding domain of LZIP maps to residues 109-315, which contain the bZIP
DNA-binding motif. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay demonstrates that HCLP-1 
indeed interferes with the binding of LZIP to its DNA target. Thus, HCLP-1 serves
a transcriptional co-repressor function mediated through its inhibitory
interaction with the LZIP transcription factor. Our findings suggest a new
mechanism for transcriptional regulation by HCF-like proteins.

PMID: 11384994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Sep 26;97(20):10757-62.

N-terminal transcriptional activation domain of LZIP comprises two LxxLL motifs
and the host cell factor-1 binding motif.

Luciano RL(1), Wilson AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Kaplan Comprehensive Cancer Center, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Host Cell Factor-1 (HCF-1, C1) was first identified as a cellular target for the 
herpes simplex virus transcriptional activator VP16. Association between HCF and 
VP16 leads to the assembly of a multiprotein enhancer complex that stimulates
viral immediate-early gene transcription. HCF-1 is expressed in all cells and is 
required for progression through G(1) phase of the cell cycle. In addition to
VP16, HCF-1 associates with a cellular bZIP protein known as LZIP (or Luman).
Both LZIP and VP16 contain a four-amino acid HCF-binding motif, recognized by the
N-terminal beta-propeller domain of HCF-1. Herein, we show that the N-terminal 92
amino acids of LZIP contain a potent transcriptional activation domain composed
of three elements: the HCF-binding motif and two LxxLL motifs. LxxLL motifs are
found in a number of transcriptional coactivators and mediate protein-protein
interactions, notably recognition of the nuclear hormone receptors. LZIP is an
example of a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein that uses LxxLL motifs within 
its activation domain to stimulate transcription. The LxxLL motifs are not
required for association with the HCF-1 beta-propeller and instead interact with 
other regions in HCF-1 or recruit additional cofactors.

PMCID: PMC27096
PMID: 10984507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Jun 15;28(12):2446-54.

Zhangfei: a second cellular protein interacts with herpes simplex virus accessory
factor HCF in a manner similar to Luman and VP16.

Lu R(1), Misra V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Western College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, 52 Campus Drive, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 5B4,
Canada.

Host cell factor (HCF, C1, VCAF or CFF) is a cellular protein that is required
for transcription activation of herpes simplex virus (HSV) immediate-early (IE)
genes by the virion protein VP16. The biological function of HCF remains unclear.
Recently we identified a cellular transcription activator, Luman. As with VP16,
the transactivation function of Luman is also regulated by HCF. Here we report a 
second human protein, Zhangfei (ZF) that interacts with HCF in a fashion similar 
to Luman and VP16. Although ZF shares no significant sequence homology with
Luman, the two proteins have some structural similarities. These include: a basic
domain-leucine zipper (bZIP) region, an acidic activation domain and a consensus 
HCF-binding motif. Unlike Luman, or most other bZIP proteins, ZF by itself did
not appear to bind consensus bZIP-binding sites. It was also unable to activate
promoters containing these response elements. Although in transient expression
assays ectopically expressed ZF was unable to block transactivation by VP16 of a 
HSV IE promoter, ZF could prevent the expression of several HSV proteins in cells
infected with the virus. The ability of ZF to block the synthesis of the HSV IE
protein ICP0 relied on its binding to HCF, since a mutant of ZF that was unable
to bind HCF was also unable to prevent viral IE protein expression.

PMCID: PMC102720
PMID: 10871379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. EMBO J. 2000 Feb 15;19(4):729-40.

Hepatitis C virus core protein-induced loss of LZIP function correlates with
cellular transformation.

Jin DY(1), Wang HL, Zhou Y, Chun AC, Kibler KV, Hou YD, Kung H, Jeang KT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0460, USA.
dyjin@hkucc.hku.hk

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is the major etiological agent of blood-borne non-A non-B
hepatitis and a leading cause of liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma
worldwide. HCV core protein is a multifunctional protein with regulatory
functions in cellular transcription and virus-induced transformation and
pathogenesis. Here we report on the identification of a bZIP nuclear
transcription protein as an HCV core cofactor for transformation. This bZIP
factor, designated LZIP, activates CRE-dependent transcription and regulates cell
proliferation. Loss of LZIP function in NIH 3T3 cells triggers morphological
transformation and anchorage-independent growth. We show that HCV core protein
aberrantly sequesters LZIP in the cytoplasm, inactivates LZIP function and
potentiates cellular transformation. Our findings suggest that LZIP might serve a
novel cellular tumor suppressor function that is targeted by the HCV core.

PMCID: PMC305611
PMID: 10675342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Feb;20(3):919-28.

Mutations in host cell factor 1 separate its role in cell proliferation from
recruitment of VP16 and LZIP.

Mahajan SS(1), Wilson AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kaplan Comprehensive Cancer Center, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA.

Host cell factor 1 (HCF-1) is a nuclear protein required for progression through 
G(1) phase of the cell cycle and, via its association with VP16, transcriptional 
activation of the herpes simplex virus immediate-early genes. Both functions
require a six-bladed beta-propeller domain encoded by residues 1 to 380 of HCF-1 
as well as an additional amino-terminal region. The beta-propeller domain is well
conserved in HCF homologues, consistent with a critical cellular function. To
date, the only known cellular target of the beta-propeller is a bZIP
transcription factor known as LZIP or Luman. Whether the interaction between
HCF-1 and LZIP is required for cell proliferation remains to be determined. In
this study, we used directed mutations to show that all six blades of the HCF-1
beta-propeller contribute to VP16-induced complex assembly, association with
LZIP, and cell cycle progression. Although LZIP and VP16 share a common
tetrapeptide HCF-binding motif, our results reveal profound differences in their 
interaction with HCF-1. Importantly, with several of the mutants we observe a
poor correlation between the ability to associate with LZIP and promote cell
proliferation in the context of the full HCF-1 amino terminus, arguing that the
HCF-1 beta-propeller domain must target other cellular transcription factors in
order to contribute to G(1) progression.

PMCID: PMC85209
PMID: 10629049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Virol. 2000 Jan;74(2):934-43.

Potential role for luman, the cellular homologue of herpes simplex virus VP16
(alpha gene trans-inducing factor), in herpesvirus latency.

Lu R(1), Misra V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Western College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 5B4, Canada.

The cascade of herpes simplex virus (HSV) gene expression that results in viral
replication begins with the activation of viral immediate-early (IE) genes by the
virion-associated protein VP16. VP16 on its own is inefficient at associating
with complexes formed on IE gene promoters and depends upon the cellular factor
HCF for its activity. In this respect VP16 mimics the host basic leucine zipper
(bZIP) protein Luman, which also requires HCF for activating transcription. Our
objective is to explore interactions between Luman and HCF and to determine if
they play a role in the biology of herpesviruses. In this report we show that in 
cultured cells ectopically expressed Luman was retained in the cytoplasm, where
it colocalized with Calnexin, a protein normally associated with the endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER). Retention of Luman in the ER depends on a hydrophobic segment of 
the protein that probably serves as a transmembrane domain. Deletion of this
domain changed the intracellular location of Luman so that most of the mutant
protein was in the nucleus of cells. While HCF was present in the nucleus of most
cells, in cells expressing Luman it was retained in the cytoplasm where the two
proteins colocalized. This cytoplasmic association of Luman and HCF could also be
demonstrated in neurons in trigeminal ganglia removed from cattle soon after
death. Cells in tissue culture that expressed Luman, but not a mutant form of the
protein that fails to bind HCF, were resistant to a productive infection with HSV
type 1 (HSV-1). We hypothesize that similar Luman-HCF interactions in sensory
neurons in trigeminal ganglia result in the suppression of viral replication and 
the establishment of latency. Interestingly, Luman could activate the promoters
of IE110 and LAT, two genes that are critical for reactivation of HSV-1 from
latency. This suggests a role for Luman in the reactivation process as well.

PMCID: PMC111614
PMID: 10623756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Genomics. 1998 Dec 1;54(2):357-8.

Mapping of the murine LZIP gene (Creb3) to chromosome 4.

Burbelo PD(1), Kozak CA.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC, 
20007, USA.

PMID: 9828144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Virol. 1998 Aug;72(8):6291-7.

The herpesvirus transactivator VP16 mimics a human basic domain leucine zipper
protein, luman, in its interaction with HCF.

Lu R(1), Yang P, Padmakumar S, Misra V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Western College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 5B4.

In human cells infected with herpes simplex virus (HSV), viral gene expression is
initiated by the virion protein VP16. VP16 does not bind DNA directly but forms a
multiprotein complex on the viral immediate-early gene promoters with two
cellular proteins: the POU domain protein Oct-1 and host cell factor (HCF; also
called C1, VCAF, and CFF). Despite its apparent role in stabilizing the
VP16-induced transcription complex, the natural biological role of HCF is
unclear. Only recently HCF has been implicated in control of the cell cycle. To
determine the role of HCF in cells and answer why HSV has evolved an
HCF-dependent mechanism for the initiation of the lytic cycle, we identified the 
first human ligand for HCF (R. Lu et al., Mol. Cell. Biol. 17:5117-5126, 1997).
This protein, Luman, is a member of the CREB/ATF family of transcription factors 
that can activate transcription from promoters containing cyclic AMP response
elements (CRE). Here we provide evidence that Luman and VP16 share two important 
structural features: an acidic activation domain and a common mechanism for
binding HCF. We found that Luman, its homolog in Drosophila, dCREB-A (also known 
as BBF-2), and VP16 bind to HCF by a motif, (D/E)HXY(S/A), present in all three
proteins. In addition, a mutation (P134S) in HCF that prevents VP16 binding also 
abolishes its binding to Luman and dCREB-A. We also show that while interaction
with HCF is not required for the ability of Luman to activate transcription when 
tethered to the GAL4 promoter, it appears to be essential for Luman to activate
transcription through CRE sites. These data suggest that the HCF-Luman
interaction may represent a conserved mechanism for transcriptional regulation in
metazoans, and HSV mimics this interaction with HCF to monitor the physiological 
state of the host cell.

PMCID: PMC109766
PMID: 9658067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Sep;17(9):5117-26.

Luman, a new member of the CREB/ATF family, binds to herpes simplex virus
VP16-associated host cellular factor.

Lu R(1), Yang P, O'Hare P, Misra V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Western College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.

The human host cell factor (HCF) is expressed in a variety of adult and fetal
tissues, and its gene is conserved in animals as diverse as mammals and insects. 
However, its only known function is to stabilize the herpes simplex virus virion 
transactivator VP16 in a complex with the cellular POU domain protein Oct-1 and
cis-acting regulatory elements in promoters of immediate-early viral genes. To
identify a cellular function for HCF, we used the yeast two-hybrid system to
identify a cellular ligand for HCF. This protein, Luman, appears to be a cyclic
AMP response element (CRE)-binding protein/activating transcription factor 1
protein of the basic leucine zipper superfamily. It binds CREs in vitro and
activates CRE-containing promoters when transfected into COS7 cells. This
activation of transcription was synergistically enhanced by the presence of
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein elements and inhibited by AP-1 elements in the
promoter. In addition to a basic DNA binding domain, Luman possesses an unusually
long leucine zipper and an acidic amino-terminal activation domain. These
features in Luman are also present in what appear to be homologs in the mouse,
Drosophila melanogaster, and Caenorhabditis elegans. Luman and VP16 appear to
have similar mechanisms for binding HCF, as in vitro each competitively inhibited
the binding of the other to HCF. In transfected cells, however, while VP16
strongly inhibited the ability of GAL-Luman to activate transcription from a GAL4
upstream activation sequence-containing promoter, Luman was unable to inhibit the
activity of GAL-VP16. Luman appears to be a ubiquitous transcription factor, and 
its mRNA was detected in all human adult and fetal tissues examined. The possible
role of HCF in regulating the function of this ubiquitous transcription factor is
discussed.

PMCID: PMC232362
PMID: 9271389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Bacteriol. 1954 Aug;68(2):133-4.

Harry Luman Russell, 1866-1954.

FRED EB.

PMCID: PMC357354
PMID: 13183917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


