
1. BMC Biol. 2016 Mar 16;14(1):20. doi: 10.1186/s12915-016-0240-y.

The role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor in the development of cells with the
molecular and functional characteristics of cancer stem-like cells.

Stanford EA(1,)(2), Wang Z(1), Novikov O(1,)(2), Mulas F(3), Landesman-Bollag
E(4), Monti S(3), Smith BW(2,)(4,)(5), Seldin DC(4), Murphy GJ(4,)(5), Sherr
DH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, Boston University School of Public Health,
72 East Concord Street (R-408), Boston, Massachusetts, 02118, USA. (2)Boston
University Molecular and Translational Medicine Program, 72 E. Concord Street,
Boston, MA, 02118, USA. (3)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of
Medicine, Section of Computational Biomedicine, Boston, MA, 02118, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Section of
Hematology and Oncology, 650 Albany Street, Boston, MA, 02118, USA. (5)Boston
University and Boston Medical Center, Center for Regenerative Medicine (CReM),
710 Albany Street, Boston, MA, 02118, USA. (6)Department of Environmental Health,
Boston University School of Public Health, 72 East Concord Street (R-408),
Boston, Massachusetts, 02118, USA. dsherr@bu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Self-renewing, chemoresistant breast cancer stem cells are believed
to contribute significantly to cancer invasion, migration and patient relapse.
Therefore, the identification of signaling pathways that regulate the acquisition
of stem-like qualities is an important step towards understanding why patients
relapse and towards development of novel therapeutics that specifically target
cancer stem cell vulnerabilities. Recent studies identified a role for the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), an environmental carcinogen receptor implicated in
cancer initiation, in normal tissue-specific stem cell self-renewal. These
studies inspired the hypothesis that the AHR plays a role in the acquisition of
cancer stem cell-like qualities.
RESULTS: To test this hypothesis, AHR activity in Hs578T triple negative and
SUM149 inflammatory breast cancer cells were modulated with AHR ligands, shRNA or
AHR-specific inhibitors, and phenotypic, genomic and functional stem
cell-associated characteristics were evaluated. The data demonstrate that (1)
ALDH(high) cells express elevated levels of Ahr and Cyp1b1 and Cyp1a1, AHR-driven
genes, (2) AHR knockdown reduces ALDH activity by 80 %, (3) AHR hyper-activation 
with several ligands, including environmental ligands, significantly increases
ALDH1 activity, expression of stem cell- and invasion/migration-associated genes,
and accelerates cell migration, (4) a significant correlation between Ahr or
Cyp1b1 expression (as a surrogate marker for AHR activity) and expression of stem
cell- and invasion/migration-associated gene sets is seen with genomic data
obtained from 79 human breast cancer cell lines and over 1,850 primary human
breast cancers, (5) the AHR interacts directly with Sox2, a master regulator of
self-renewal; AHR ligands increase this interaction and nuclear SOX2
translocation, (6) AHR knockdown inhibits tumorsphere formation in low adherence 
conditions, (7) AHR inhibition blocks the rapid migration of ALDH(high) cells and
reduces ALDH(high) cell chemoresistance, (8) ALDH(high) cells are highly
efficient at initiating tumors in orthotopic xenografts, and (9) AHR knockdown
inhibits tumor initiation and reduces tumor Aldh1a1, Sox2, and Cyp1b1 expression 
in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that the AHR plays an important role in
development of cells with cancer stem cell-like qualities and that environmental 
AHR ligands may exacerbate breast cancer by enhancing expression of these
properties.

PMCID: PMC4794823
PMID: 26984638  [PubMed - in process]


2. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2016 Mar 4:1-7. [Epub ahead of print]

Phosphorylated testis-specific serine/threonine kinase 4 may phosphorylate Crem
at Ser-117.

Fu G(1), Wei Y(1), Wang X(2), Yu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)a State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences,
Institute of Genetics , Fudan University , Shanghai , P.R. China. (2)b Key
Laboratory of Combinatorial Biosynthesis and Drug Discovery (Wuhan University),
Ministry of Education, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences , Wuhan University ,
Wuhan , P.R. China.

We aimed to investigate the internal existence status of testis-specific
serine/threonine kinase 4 (Tssk4) and the interaction of Tssk4 and Cre-responsive
element modulator (Crem). The internal existence status of Tssk4 in testis of
mice was detected using western blotting and dephosphorylation method. The
interaction of Tssk4 and Crem was analyzed by western blotting,
immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence, in vitro co-immunoprecipitation assays,
and in vitro kinase assay. The results revealed that Tssk4 existed in testis both
in phosphorylation and unphosphorylation status by a temporal manner with the
development of testis. Immunofluorescence results showed that Tssk4 had identical
distribution pattern with Crem in testis, which was utterly different to the
localization of Cre-responsive element binding (Creb). In conclusion, our study
demonstrated that phosphorylated Tssk4 might participate in testis genes
expressions by phosphorylating Crem at Ser-117.

PMID: 26940607  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. J Fish Biol. 2016 Mar 1. doi: 10.1111/jfb.12921. [Epub ahead of print]

Population biology of an endangered species: the common guitarfish Rhinobatos
rhinobatos in Lebanese marine waters of the eastern Mediterranean Sea.

Lteif M(1,)(2,)(3), Mouawad R(4), Khalaf G(1), Lenfant P(2,)(3), Verdoit-Jarraya 
M(2,)(3,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Lebanese National Council for Scientific Research - National Centre for Marine
Sciences (CNRS-L/CNSM), Batroun, Lebanon. (2)Université de Perpignan Via Domitia,
Centre de Formation et de Recherche sur les Environnements Méditerranéens
(CEFREM), UMR 5110, 52 Avenue Paul Alduy, 66860, Perpignan, France. (3)CNRS,
Centre de Formation et de Recherche sur les Environnements Méditerranéens, UMR
5110, 52 Avenue Paul Alduy, 66860, Perpignan, France. (4)Lebanese
University - Faculty of Sciences II, Beirut, Lebanon. (5)Centre de Recherche sur 
les Ecosystèmes Marins (CREM), impasse du solarium, 66420, Port-Barcarès, France.

This study focuses on the population biology of the common guitarfish Rhinobatos 
rhinobatos, a cartilaginous fish listed as Endangered in the International Union 
for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List. Between December 2012 and January
2014, 67 individuals were collected by bottom longlining in coastal Lebanese
marine waters at different ports at depths ranging from 10 to 110<U+2009>m. The total
length (LT ) of the specimens ranged from 50 to 143<U+2009>cm, and the mean<U+2009>±<U+2009>s.d. was
76·2<U+2009>±<U+2009>19·7<U+2009>cm. The most common LT classes were between 60 and 70<U+2009>cm. The total
mass of the specimens ranged from 410 to 10<U+2009>000<U+2009>g, and the mean<U+2009>±<U+2009>s.d. was
1841<U+2009>±<U+2009>1987<U+2009>g. A total of 34 males and 33 females were collected, and the sex
ratio was not significantly different from 1:1. The mass and LT relationship
showed positive allometric growth (b<U+2009>=<U+2009>3·096 and r(2) <U+2009>=<U+2009>0·99), and the
mean<U+2009>±<U+2009>s.d. LT at which 50% of the individuals were sexually mature was
84·73<U+2009>±<U+2009>5·81<U+2009>cm for females and 78·57<U+2009>±<U+2009>4·88<U+2009>cm for males. The gonado-somatic and
hepato-somatic indices were determined along with a condition factor, and
parturition appeared to occur in winter. The primary prey items found in the fish
stomachs during the autumn and winter seasons were Penaeidae. The results of this
study will help to parameterize models of the population dynamics for this
exploited fish stock to ensure the long-term sustainability of its fishery.

© 2016 The Fisheries Society of the British Isles.

PMID: 26928654  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2016 Feb 26. [Epub ahead of print]

Lutein modulates transcription dysregulation of adhesion molecules and
spermatogenesis transcription factors induced by testicular ischemia reperfusion 
injury: it could be SAFE.

Al-Maghrebi M(1), Renno WM(2), Al-Somali HF(3), Botras MS(3), Qadhi IN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine-Kuwait University, P.O. Box:
24923, Safat, 13110, Jabriyah, Kuwait. malmaghrebi@hsc.edu.kw. (2)Department of
Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine-Kuwait University, Jabriyah, Kuwait. (3)Department
of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine-Kuwait University, P.O. Box: 24923, Safat,
13110, Jabriyah, Kuwait.

Testicular ischemia reperfusion injury (tIRI) is considered as the underlying
mechanism of testicular torsion, which can cause male infertility. tIRI-induced
damage was investigated by assessing the gene expression of spermatogenesis
master transcription factors (TFs) and that of major adhesion molecules of the
blood-testis barrier. The effect of lutein, a hydroxyl carotenoid, in alleviating
tIRI-induced damage was also studied. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into 
three groups: sham, unilateral tIRI, and tIRI<U+2009>+<U+2009>lutein (0.2 mg/kg). tIRI was
induced by occlusion of the testicular artery for 1 h, followed by 4 h of
reperfusion. Lutein was injected 15 min after the start of ischemia. Histological
analysis and real-time polymerase chain reaction revealed significant decreases
in tissue biopsy scores, reduced seminiferous tubule diameters, and downregulated
the mRNA expression of the TFs cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM), TATA
box-binding protein-related factor 2 (TRF2), and regulatory factor X 2 (RFX2)
compared with the sham group. Lutein treatment reversed these effects. The mRNA
expression of the adhesion molecules N-cadherin, nectin-2, claudin-11, occludin, 
and connexin-43 was significantly downregulated during tIRI, but this change was 
prevented by lutein treatment. In addition, lutein normalized the tIRI-induced
increase in total antioxidant capacity, increased malondialdehyde (MDA) levels,
augmented number of TdT-mediated dUTP-X nick-end labeling (TUNEL)-positive
nuclei, and activated caspase-8 pathway. The components of survivor activating
factor enhancement (SAFE) were also activated during tIRI. Increased tissue
expression of TNF-a and its receptor, TNFR1, was accompanied by increased
phosphorylation of Janus kinase (JAK) and STAT3, which was prevented by lutein
treatment. Our findings suggested that tIRI-induced spermatogenic damage may
involve modulation of the SAFE pathway and could benefit from lutein treatment.

PMID: 26915501  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. J Environ Sci (China). 2016 Jan;39:218-27. doi: 10.1016/j.jes.2015.11.011. Epub
2016 Jan 2.

Chronic TCDD exposure results in the dysregulation of gene expression in splenic 
B-lymphocytes and in the impairments in T-cell and B-cell differentiation in
mouse model.

Feng Y(1), Tian J(2), Krylova I(3), Xu T(2), Xie HQ(2), Guo TL(4), Zhao B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100085, China. Electronic address: fyuivy@163.com. (2)Research Center for
Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China.
(3)XCellAssay, LLC, San Francisco, CA, 94107, USA. (4)Department of Veterinary
Biosciences and Diagnostic Imaging, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Georgia, Athens, GA 30602-7382, USA. (5)Research Center for Eco-Environmental
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China. Electronic address:
binzhao@rcees.ac.cn.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) exposure in humans is associated with 
marked immune suppressions and increased incidence of lymphoblastic diseases. To 
elucidate mechanisms of impairments in humoral immune responses, we used a murine
model. Following a 20-week administration of low doses of TCDD, we observed
severely reduced antibody titers, dramatically decreased number of splenic Th1
and Th2 cells and an increase in CD19(+) B cells. Transcriptional profiling of
CD19(+) B cells showed that markers of pre-B cells were significantly elevated,
indicating delayed B cell maturation. These changes in B cells were accompanied
by decreases of T helper cell numbers and reduced IgM and IgG titers. A
transcriptome analysis of splenic B cells followed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis 
(IPA) revealed a set of differentially expressed genes known to play roles in
tumorigenesis, cell-proliferation and cell-migration. The most up-regulated
transcript gene was Eph receptor A2 (EphA2), a known oncogene, and the most
down-regulated transcript was ZBTB16 that codes for a negative transcriptional
regulator important in epigenetic chromatin remodeling. IPA identified
cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) and cAMP-responsive element binding
protein 1 (CREB1) as top upstream regulators. Consistently, a MAPPER promoter
database analysis showed that all top dysregulated genes had CREM and/or CREB1
binding sites in their promoter regions. In summary, our data showed that chronic
TCDD exposure in mice caused suppressed humoral immunity accompanied with
profound dysregulation of gene expression in splenic B-lymphocytes, likely
through cAMP-dependent pathways. This dysregulation resulted in impairments in
T-cell and B-cell differentiation and activation of the tumorigenic transcription
program.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26899660  [PubMed - in process]


6. Schizophr Res. 2016 Feb 15. pii: S0920-9964(16)30068-8. doi:
10.1016/j.schres.2016.02.012. [Epub ahead of print]

A network of synaptic genes associated with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.

Forero DA(1), Herteleer L(2), De Zutter S(3), Norrback KF(4), Nilsson LG(5),
Adolfsson R(4), Callaerts P(6), Del-Favero J(7).

Author information: 
(1)Applied Molecular Genomics Unit, Department of Molecular Genetics, VIB,
Belgium; University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium; Laboratory of Behavioral and
Developmental Genetics, VIB, Belgium; Catholic University of Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium; Laboratory of NeuroPsychiatric Genetics, School of Medicine, Universidad
Antonio Nariño, Bogotá, Colombia. (2)Laboratory of Behavioral and Developmental
Genetics, VIB, Belgium; Catholic University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Applied Molecular Genomics Unit, Department of Molecular Genetics, VIB,
Belgium; University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. (4)Department of Clinical
Sciences, Division of Psychiatry, University of Umeå, Umeå, Sweden; Sunderby
Hospital, Sweden. (5)Department of Psychology, Stockholm University, Stockholm,
Sweden. (6)Laboratory of Behavioral and Developmental Genetics, VIB, Belgium;
Catholic University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address:
Patrick.Callaerts@cme.vib-kuleuven.be. (7)Applied Molecular Genomics Unit,
Department of Molecular Genetics, VIB, Belgium; University of Antwerp, Antwerp,
Belgium. Electronic address: jurgen.delfavero@molgen.vib-ua.be.

Identification of novel candidate genes for schizophrenia (SZ) and bipolar
disorder (BP), two psychiatric disorders with large epidemiological impacts, is a
key research area in neurosciences and psychiatric genetics. Previous evidence
from genome-wide studies suggests an important role for genes involved in
synaptic plasticity in the risk for SZ and BP. We used a convergent genomics
approach, combining different lines of biological evidence, to identify genes
involved in the cAMP/PKA/CREB functional pathway that could be novel candidates
for BP and SZ: CREB1, CREM, GRIN2C, NPY2R, NF1, PPP3CB and PRKAR1A. These 7 genes
were analyzed in a HapMap based association study comprising 48 common SNPs in
486 SZ, 351 BP patients and 514 control individuals recruited from an isolated
population in Northern Sweden. Genetic analysis showed significant allelic
associations of SNPs in PRKAR1A with SZ and of PPP3CB and PRKAR1A with BP. Our
results highlight the feasibility and the importance of convergent genomic data
analysis for the identification of candidate genes and our data provide support
for the role of common inherited variants in synaptic genes and their involvement
in the etiology of BP and SZ.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26899345  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Anal Methods Accid Res. 2015 Jan;5-6:17-27.

Assessing Risk-Taking in a Driving Simulator Study: Modeling Longitudinal
Semi-Continuous Driving Data Using a Two-Part Regression Model with Correlated
Random Effects.

Tran V(1), Liu D(1), Pradhan AK(2), Li K(3), Bingham CR(4), Simons-Morton BG(3), 
Albert PS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Branch, Division of Intramural Population
Health Research, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (2)Health Behavior Branch, Division
of Intramural Population Health Research, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA;
University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute, Ann Arbor, MI 48109.
(3)Health Behavior Branch, Division of Intramural Population Health Research,
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (4)University of Michigan Transportation Research
Institute, Ann Arbor, MI 48109.

Signalized intersection management is a common measure of risky driving in
simulator studies. In a recent randomized trial, investigators were interested in
whether teenage males exposed to a risk-accepting passenger took more
intersection risks in a driving simulator compared with those exposed to a
risk-averse peer passenger. Analyses in this trial are complicated by the
longitudinal or repeated measures that are semi-continuous with clumping at zero.
Specifically, the dependent variable in a randomized trial looking at the effect 
of risk-accepting versus risk-averse peer passengers on teenage simulator driving
is comprised of two components. The discrete component measures whether the teen 
driver stops for a yellow light, and the continuous component measures the time
the teen driver, who does not stop, spends in the intersection during a red
light. To convey both components of this measure, we apply a two-part regression 
with correlated random effects model (CREM), consisting of a logistic regression 
to model whether the driver stops for a yellow light and a linear regression to
model the time spent in the intersection during a red light. These two components
are related through the correlation of their random effects. Using this novel
analysis, we found that those exposed to a risk-averse passenger have a higher
proportion of stopping at yellow lights and a longer mean time in the
intersection during a red light when they did not stop at the light compared to
those exposed to a risk-accepting passenger, consistent with the study hypotheses
and previous analyses. Examining the statistical properties of the CREM approach 
through simulations, we found that in most situations, the CREM achieves greater 
power than competing approaches. We also examined whether the treatment effect
changes across the length of the drive and provided a sample size recommendation 
for detecting such phenomenon in subsequent trials. Our findings suggest that
CREM provides an efficient method for analyzing the complex longitudinal data
encountered in driving simulation studies.

PMCID: PMC4755502
PMID: 26894036  [PubMed]


8. Exp Hematol. 2016 Feb 10. pii: S0301-472X(16)00039-4. doi:
10.1016/j.exphem.2016.01.010. [Epub ahead of print]

Insulin-like growth factor 2 modulates murine hematopoietic stem cell maintenance
through upregulation of p57.

Thomas DD(1), Sommer AG(1), Balazs AB(2), Beerman I(3), Murphy GJ(4), Rossi D(3),
Mostoslavsky G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Boston University School 
of Medicine, Boston, MA; Center for Regenerative Medicine (CReM), Boston
University and Boston Medical Center, Boston, MA. (2)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT 
and Harvard, Cambridge, MA. (3)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. (4)Center for Regenerative Medicine (CReM),
Boston University and Boston Medical Center, Boston, MA. (5)Section of
Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine,
Boston, MA; Center for Regenerative Medicine (CReM), Boston University and Boston
Medical Center, Boston, MA. Electronic address: gmostosl@bu.edu.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) rely on a highly regulated molecular network to
balance self-renewal and lineage specification to sustain life-long
hematopoiesis. Despite a plethora of studies aimed at identifying molecules
governing HSC fate, our current knowledge of the genes responsible is limited. We
have found insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2) to be expressed predominantly
within long-term HSCs. This study examines IGF2 expression patterns and the
effects of the gene in HSCs. Through the overexpression and knockdown of IGF2
within purified HSCs, we report that IGF2 expression increases HSC-derived
multilineage colonies in vitro and enhances hematopoietic contribution in vivo on
competitive bone marrow transplantation. The effects of IGF2 are mediated by
direct upregulation of the CDKi p57, exclusively within long-term HSCs, via
activation of the PI3K-Akt pathway. Increased expression of p57 resulted in a
concomitant increase in HSCs in the G0/G1 stage of the cell cycle. Analysis of
genomic DNA methylation revealed that HSCs exhibited a hypomethylated state
within the promoter region of the CDKN1C (p57) gene, providing a potential
mechanism for the exclusive effects of IGF2 within HSCs. Our studies indicate a
novel role for IGF2 in regulating HSC cell cycle and illustrate potential novel
therapeutic targets for hematologic diseases.

Copyright © 2016 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26872540  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Pharmacoeconomics. 2016 Jan 30. [Epub ahead of print]

Exploring Uncertainty in Economic Evaluations of Drugs and Medical Devices:
Lessons from the First Review of Manufacturers' Submissions to the French
National Authority for Health.

Ghabri S(1), Hamers FF(2), Josselin JM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Economic and Public Health Evaluation, Haute Autorité de Santé
(HAS), 5 Avenue Stade de France, 93218, Saint-Denis La Plaine cedex, France.
s.ghabri@has-sante.fr. (2)Department of Economic and Public Health Evaluation,
Haute Autorité de Santé (HAS), 5 Avenue Stade de France, 93218, Saint-Denis La
Plaine cedex, France. (3)Faculty of Economics, University of Rennes 1 and
CREM-CNRS, Place Hoche 7, 35065, Rennes cedex, France.

OBJECTIVES: The objective of this paper was to evaluate how uncertainty has been 
accounted for in the cost-effectiveness analyses (CEAs) submitted by
manufacturers to the French National Authority for Health (HAS) and to identify
recurring concerns in these submissions.
METHODS: We used a cross-sectional design to evaluate manufacturers' submissions 
from the beginning of the evaluation process in October 2013 to the end of May
2015 (n = 28). The sources of uncertainty attached to these CEAs were categorized
and assessed. Relevant data were extracted independently by two assessors.
RESULTS: Adherence to the HAS reference case was generally considered to be
acceptable. Methodological uncertainty and parameter uncertainty were the sources
of uncertainty that were most frequently explored by manufacturers. The quality
of reporting of deterministic sensitivity analysis and probabilistic sensitivity 
analysis varied substantially across submissions, with a frequent lack of
justification of the plausible range of parameter point estimates in 12
submissions (43 %). Structural uncertainty was explored much less frequently.
Concerns related to omission of either important clinical events or relevant
health states or extrapolation of the effects of the technology beyond the time
horizon of the clinical trials were identified in 16 submissions (57 %).
CONCLUSIONS: This study presented a characterization of the treatment of
uncertainty for the first 28 manufacturers' submissions to the HAS. This work
identified important concerns regarding the exploration of sources of
uncertainty. The findings may help manufacturers to improve the quality of their 
submissions and may provide useful insights for extending guidelines on
uncertainty analysis in CEAs submitted to the HAS.

PMID: 26829942  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Basic Res Cardiol. 2016 Mar;111(2):15. doi: 10.1007/s00395-016-0532-y. Epub 2016 
Jan 27.

Cardiac expression of the CREM repressor isoform CREM-Ib<U+0394>C-X in mice leads to
arrhythmogenic alterations in ventricular cardiomyocytes.

Schulte JS(1), Fehrmann E(2), Tekook MA(2), Kranick D(2), Fels B(2), Li N(3),
Wehrens XH(3), Heinick A(2), Seidl MD(2), Schmitz W(2), Müller FU(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Münster, Domagkstr.
12, 48149, Münster, Germany. j.s.schulte@uni-muenster.de. (2)Institute of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Münster, Domagkstr. 12, 48149,
Münster, Germany. (3)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Medicine 
(Cardiology), and Pediatrics, Cardiovascular Research Institute, Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Chronic ß-adrenergic stimulation is regarded as a pivotal step in the progression
of heart failure which is associated with a high risk for arrhythmia. The
cAMP-dependent transcription factors cAMP-responsive element binding protein
(CREB) and cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) mediate transcriptional
regulation in response to ß-adrenergic stimulation and CREM repressor isoforms
are induced after stimulation of the ß-adrenoceptor. Here, we investigate whether
CREM repressors contribute to the arrhythmogenic remodeling in the heart by
analyzing arrhythmogenic alterations in ventricular cardiomyocytes (VCMs) from
mice with transgenic expression of the CREM repressor isoform CREM-Ib<U+0394>C-X (TG).
Patch clamp analyses, calcium imaging, immunoblotting and real-time quantitative 
RT-PCR were conducted to study proarrhythmic alterations in TG VCMs vs. wild-type
controls. The percentage of VCMs displaying spontaneous supra-threshold
transient-like Ca(2+) releases was increased in TG accompanied by an enhanced
transduction rate of sub-threshold Ca(2+) waves into these supra-threshold
events. As a likely cause we discovered enhanced NCX-mediated Ca(2+) transport
and NCX1 protein level in TG. An increase in I NCX and decrease in I to and its
accessory channel subunit KChIP2 was associated with action potential
prolongation and an increased proportion of TG VCMs showing early
afterdepolarizations. Finally, ventricular extrasystoles were augmented in TG
mice underlining the in vivo relevance of our findings. Transgenic expression of 
CREM-Ib<U+0394>C-X in mouse VCMs leads to distinct arrhythmogenic alterations. Since
CREM repressors are inducible by chronic ß-adrenergic stimulation our results
suggest that the inhibition of CRE-dependent transcription contributes to the
formation of an arrhythmogenic substrate in chronic heart disease.

PMCID: PMC4729809
PMID: 26818679  [PubMed - in process]


11. Biol Reprod. 2016 Feb;94(2):34. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.115.134684. Epub 2015 Dec
23.

TauCstF-64 Mediates Correct mRNA Polyadenylation and Splicing of Activator and
Repressor Isoforms of the Cyclic AMP-Responsive Element Modulator (CREM) in Mouse
Testis.

Grozdanov PN(1), Amatullah A(1), Graber JH(2), MacDonald CC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, Texas. (2)Center for Genome Dynamics, The Jackson
Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine. (3)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry,
Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, Texas
clint.macdonald@ttuhsc.edu.

Spermatogenesis is coordinated by the spatial and temporal expression of many
transcriptional and posttranscriptional factors. The cyclic AMP-responsive
element modulator (CREM) gene encodes both activator and repressor isoforms that 
act as transcription factors to regulate spermiogenesis. We found that the
testis-expressed paralog of CstF-64, tauCstF-64 (gene symbol Cstf2t), is involved
in a polyadenylation site choice switch of Crem mRNA and leads to an overall
decrease of the Crem mRNAs that are generated from internal promoters in
Cstf2t(-/-) mice. More surprisingly, loss of tauCstF-64 also leads to alternative
splicing of Crem exon 4, which contains an important activation domain. Thus,
testis-specific CREMtau2 isoform protein levels are reduced in Cstf2t(-/-) mice. 
Consequently, expression of 15 CREM-regulated genes is decreased in testes of
Cstf2t(-/-) mice at 25 days postpartum. These effects might further contribute to
the infertility phenotype of these animals. This demonstrates that tauCstF-64 is 
an important stage-specific regulator of Crem mRNA processing that modulates the 
spatial and temporal expression of downstream stage-specific genes necessary for 
the proper development of sperm in mice.

© 2016 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4787626 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26700942  [PubMed - in process]


12. Tumour Biol. 2015 Dec 9. [Epub ahead of print]

In search of underlying mechanisms and potential drugs of melphalan-induced
vascular toxicity through retinal endothelial cells using bioinformatics
approach.

Yang Y(1), Xing Y(1), Liang C(1), Hu L(2), Xu F(2), Mei Q(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan,
430060, China. (2)Department of Oncology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Jiefang Avenue 1095,
Wuhan, 430030, China. (3)Department of Oncology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Jiefang Avenue 1095,
Wuhan, 430030, China. borismq@163.com.

We aimed to explore molecular mechanism and drug candidates of vascular
toxicities associated with melphalan after treating human retinal endothelial
cells (RECs). GSE34381 microarray data was firstly downloaded and used to
identify the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in human REC treated with
melphalan vs. untreated cells by limma package in R language. The transcription
network was constructed based on TRANSFAC database and the top five transcription
factors (TFs) were select with a measure of regulatory impact factor, followed by
the construction of function modules. Gene ontology enrichment analyses were
performed to explore the enriched functions. Connectivity Map analysis was
conducted to predict the potential drugs overcoming the melphalan's actions on
REC. Totally, 75 DEGs were identified, including 70 up-regulated and five
down-regulated genes. Transcription network with 1311 nodes and 1875 edges was
constructed and the top five TFs were CREM, MYC, FLI1, NF-<U+03BA>B1, and JUN.
Functional modules indicated that NF-<U+03BA>B1 and MYC were the important nodes. The
upregulated genes as well as the genes involved in the modules mainly
participated in biological process of immune response, cell proliferation, and
cell motion. Five small molecules were predicted to be potential drug candidates,
including doxorubicin, fipexide, daunorubicin, tiabendazole, and GW-8510. Based
on these results, we speculate that NF-<U+03BA>B1 and MYC might involve in the molecular
mechanism of vascular toxicity induced by melphalan through regulating their
target genes. Five small molecules might be drug candidates to overcome the
melphalan-induced vascular toxicity via targeting to MYC and JUN.

PMID: 26662105  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Toxicon. 2015 Dec 15;108:249-56. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2015.10.021. Epub 2015
Nov 2.

An updated ciguatoxin extraction method and silica cleanup for use with
HPLC-MS/MS for the analysis of P-CTX-1, PCTX-2 and P-CTX-3.

Meyer L(1), Carter S(2), Capper A(3).

Author information: 
(1)James Cook University, Centre for Sustainable Tropical Fisheries and
Aquaculture, James Cook University, James Cook Drive, Townsville, QLD 4811,
Australia. Electronic address: Lauren.meyer@my.jcu.edu.au. (2)Queensland Health
Forensic and Scientific Services, 39 Kessels Road, Coopers Plains, QLD 4108,
Australia. (3)James Cook University, Centre for Sustainable Tropical Fisheries
and Aquaculture, James Cook University, James Cook Drive, Townsville, QLD 4811,
Australia.

Ciguatera fish poisoning is a debilitating human neuro-intoxication caused by
consumption of tropical marine organisms, contaminated with bioaccumulated
ciguatoxins (CTXs). The growing number of cases coupled with the high toxicity of
CTXs makes their reliable detection and quantification of paramount importance.
Three commonly occurring ciguatoxins, P-CTX-1, 2 and 3 from five different
ciguatoxic Spanish mackerel (Scomberomorus commerson), were used to assess the
effectiveness of different extraction techniques: homogenization (high powered
blending vs. ultrasonication); C-18 column sizes (500 mg vs. 900 mg); and a novel
HILIC SPE cleanup. Despite minor differences, blending and sonication proved
equally effective. Larger 900 mg columns offered a greater extraction efficiency,
increasing detected P-CTX-1 by 37% (P < 0.001). The newly adapted cleanup was
highly effective at reducing co-eluting phospholipids thereby reducing matrix
effects and increasing detectable CTXs by HPLC-MS/MS. Silica cleanup extraction
efficiencies were also compared between the highly effective and validated
ciguatoxin rapid extraction method (CREM) and current best practice extraction
method employed by Queensland Health (QH). Overall, the QH protocol proved more
effective, especially when paired with the newly adapted cleanup, as this
increased the amount of extracted P-CTX-1 by 46% (P < 0.01), P-CTX-2 by 10% and
P-CTX-3 by 71% (P = 0.001). This study suggests the QH protocol utilizing a 900
mg C-18 column and newly adapted HILIC SPE cleanup was most effective at
extracting P-CTX-1, -2, -3. Specifically P-CTX-1, the primary ciguatoxin congener
of concern due to its extremely high potency and an ability to cause CFP at 0.1
µg/kg following consumption of carnivorous fish flesh. Despite being more time
intensive (an additional 85 min per batch of 12 samples), this will be especially
effective for assessing lower toxin burdens, which may be near the limit of
detection.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26541571  [PubMed - in process]


14. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 17;6(36):38538-51. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6041.

The cAMP response element modulator (CREM) regulates TH2 mediated inflammation.

Verjans E(1,)(2), Ohl K(1), Reiss LK(2), van Wijk F(3), Toncheva AA(4), Wiener
A(1), Yu Y(1), Rieg AD(2,)(5), Gaertner VD(4), Roth J(6), Knol E(3), Kabesch
M(4,)(7), Wagner N(1), Uhlig S(2), Martin C(2), Tenbrock K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany.
(2)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatric Immunology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, Netherlands. (4)Department of Pediatric Pneumology and Allergy,
University Children`s Hospital Regensburg (KUNO), Regensburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Anaesthesiology, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany. 
(6)Institute of Immunology, University of Münster, Münster, Germany. (7)Member of
The German Lung Research Center (DZL), Gießen, Germany.

A characteristic feature of allergic diseases is the appearance of a subset of
CD4+ cells known as TH2 cells, which is controlled by transcriptional and
epigenetic mechanisms. We aimed to analyze the role of CREM, a known
transcriptional activator of T cells, with regard to TH2 responses and allergic
diseases in men and mice. Here we demonstrate that T cells of asthmatic children 
and PBMCs of adults with atopy express lower mRNA levels of the transcription
factor CREM compared to cells from healthy controls. CREM deficiency in murine T 
cells results in enhanced TH2 effector cytokines in vitro and in vivo and CREM-/-
mice demonstrate stronger airway hyperresponsiveness in an OVA-induced asthma
model. Mechanistically, both direct CREM binding to the IL-4 and IL-13 promoter
as well as a decreased IL-2 dependent STAT5 activation suppress the TH2 response.
Accordingly, mice selectively overexpressing CREMa in T cells display decreased
TH2 type cytokines in vivo and in vitro, and are protected in an asthma model.
Thus, we provide evidence that CREM is a negative regulator of the TH2 response
and determines the outcome of allergic asthma.

PMCID: PMC4770719
PMID: 26459392  [PubMed - in process]


15. Thromb Res. 2015 Oct;136(4):749-53. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2015.07.030. Epub
2015 Aug 4.

Abnormal uterine bleeding in VTE patients treated with rivaroxaban compared to
vitamin K antagonists.

De Crem N(1), Peerlinck K(2), Vanassche T(2), Vanheule K(2), Debaveye B(2),
Middeldorp S(3), Verhamme P(2), Peetermans M(4).

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Leuven, Department of Internal Medicine, Herestraat 49,
Leuven, Belgium. (2)University Hospital Leuven, Department of Cardiovascular
Medicine, Herestraat 49, Leuven, Belgium. (3)Academic Medical Center Amsterdam,
Department of Vascular Medicine, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)University Hospital Leuven, Department of Internal Medicine, Herestraat 49,
Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address: marijke.peetermans@med.kuleuven.be.

INTRODUCTION: Rivaroxaban is a convenient oral anticoagulant for patients with
venous thromboembolism (VTE). The impact of rivaroxaban and vitamin K antagonists
(VKAs) on abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB) in real life has not been previously
explored.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed a single-center retrospective study on AUB in
female VTE patients of reproductive age who were treated with either rivaroxaban 
or VKAs.
RESULTS: Questionnaire results were available for 52 patients in each treatment
group. Approximately two thirds of all women reported AUB after initiation of
anticoagulant therapy. Patients using rivaroxaban were more likely to experience 
prolonged (>8days) menstrual bleeding (27 % vs. 8.3%, P=0.017). Rivaroxaban
treatment increased the duration of menstrual bleeding from median 5 (IQR
3.5-6.0) days before start of treatment to 6 (IQR 4.1-8.9) days (P<0.001). VKA
treatment did not lead to significant prolongation of the menstrual period.
Patients on rivaroxaban more frequently reported an unscheduled contact with a
physician for AUB than women using VKAs (41% vs. 25%, P=0.096). They also
reported increased need for menorrhagia-related medical or surgical intervention 
(25% vs. 7.7%, P=0.032) and had more adaptations of anticoagulant therapy (15%
vs. 1.9%, P=0.031).
CONCLUSION: AUB is frequent after initiation of anticoagulant therapy for acute
symptomatic VTE. Compared to VKAs, rivaroxaban was associated with prolonged
menstrual bleeding and more medical interventions and adaptation of anticoagulant
treatment for AUB. These data can guide proactive discussion with patients
starting anticoagulant therapy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26272306  [PubMed - in process]


16. J Health Econ. 2015 Sep;43:229-43. doi: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2015.07.006. Epub 2015
Jul 31.

Estimating sign-dependent societal preferences for quality of life.

Attema AE(1), Brouwer WB(2), l'Haridon O(3), Pinto JL(4).

Author information: 
(1)iBMG, Erasmus University, P.O. Box 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
Electronic address: attema@bmg.eur.nl. (2)iBMG, Erasmus University, The
Netherlands. (3)CREM, Université de Rennes, France. (4)Yunus Centre, Glasgow
Caledonian University, UK.

This paper is the first to apply prospect theory to societal health-related
decision making. In particular, we allow for utility curvature, equity weighting,
sign-dependence, and loss aversion in choices concerning quality of life of other
people. We find substantial inequity aversion, both for gains and losses, which
can be attributed to both diminishing marginal utility and differential weighting
of better-off and worse-off. There are also clear framing effects, which violate 
expected utility. Moreover, we observe loss aversion, indicating that subjects
give more weight to one group's loss than another group's gain of the same
absolute magnitude. We also elicited some information on the effect of the age of
the studied group. The amount of inequity aversion is to some extent influenced
by the age of the considered patients. In particular, more inequity aversion is
observed for gains of older people than gains of younger people.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26263893  [PubMed - in process]


17. Adv Clin Chem. 2015;70:247-314. doi: 10.1016/bs.acc.2015.03.003. Epub 2015 Apr
11.

Current Progress in Sports Genomics.

Ahmetov II(1), Fedotovskaya ON(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sport Technology Research Center, Volga Region State Academy of Physical
Culture, Sport and Tourism, Kazan, Russia; Laboratory of Molecular Genetics,
Kazan State Medical University, Kazan, Russia. Electronic address:
genoterra@mail.ru. (2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Understanding the genetic architecture of athletic performance is an important
step in the development of methods for talent identification in sport. Research
concerned with molecular predictors has highlighted a number of potentially
important DNA polymorphisms contributing to predisposition to success in certain 
types of sport. This review summarizes the evidence and mechanistic insights on
the associations between DNA polymorphisms and athletic performance. A literature
search (period: 1997-2014) revealed that at least 120 genetic markers are linked 
to elite athlete status (77 endurance-related genetic markers and 43
power/strength-related genetic markers). Notably, 11 (9%) of these genetic
markers (endurance markers: ACE I, ACTN3 577X, PPARA rs4253778 G, PPARGC1A
Gly482; power/strength markers: ACE D, ACTN3 Arg577, AMPD1 Gln12, HIF1A 582Ser,
MTHFR rs1801131 C, NOS3 rs2070744 T, PPARG 12Ala) have shown positive
associations with athlete status in three or more studies, and six markers (CREM 
rs1531550 A, DMD rs939787 T, GALNT13 rs10196189 G, NFIA-AS1 rs1572312 C, RBFOX1
rs7191721 G, TSHR rs7144481 C) were identified after performing genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) of African-American, Jamaican, Japanese, and Russian
athletes. On the other hand, the significance of 29 (24%) markers was not
replicated in at least one study. Future research including multicenter GWAS,
whole-genome sequencing, epigenetic, transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic
profiling and performing meta-analyses in large cohorts of athletes is needed
before these findings can be extended to practice in sport.

© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26231489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Gene. 2015 Nov 1;572(1):1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.07.043. Epub 2015 Jul 26.

The FHL2 regulation in the transcriptional circuitry of human cancers.

Cao CY(1), Mok SW(2), Cheng VW(1), Tsui SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
China. (2)School of Biomedical Sciences, the Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, China. Electronic address: simon_mok@cuhk.edu.hk.

The Four-and-a-half LIM (FHL)-only protein is a subfamily of protein members
under the LIM-only protein family. These proteins are identified by their
characteristic four and a half cysteinerich LIM homeodomain. Five members have
been categorized into the FHL subfamily, which are FHL1, FHL2, FHL3, FHL4 and
activator of CREM in testis (ACT) in human. FHL2 is amongst the most examined
members within the family. Fhl2, the gene that code for the protein, is
transcriptionally regulated by diverse types of transcription factors, for
example, p53, serum response factor (SRF), and specificity protein 1 (Sp1). The
expression of FHL2 is found in different tissues and organs and has been reported
as a critical participant influencing the wide types of cancer such as breast
cancer, gastrointestinal (GI) cancers, liver cancer and prostate cancer. The
expression profile of FHL2 appeared to have a significant functional role in the 
carcinogenesis of these cancers which are mediated by different types of
transcription factor including both tumor suppressors and inducers. In this
review, we will first describe the molecular network governing FHL2 expression,
which focus on the transcription factors conveying FHL2-initiated responses. In
the second part, FHL2-linked cancers and the underlying molecular machinery will 
be discussed. Factors other than transcriptional regulation which may involve the
cancer progression such as mutations of fhl2 and posttranslational modifications 
of the protein will also be mentioned.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26211626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Placenta. 2015 Sep;36(9):996-1001. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2015.07.003. Epub 2015
Jul 7.

Prospective evaluation of RASSF1A cell-free DNA as a biomarker of pre-eclampsia.

Salvianti F(1), Inversetti A(2), Smid M(3), Valsecchi L(4), Candiani M(5),
Pazzagli M(6), Cremonesi L(7), Ferrari M(8), Pinzani P(9), Galbiati S(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical, Experimental and Biomedical Sciences, University of
Florence, Florence, Italy. Electronic address: francesca.salvianti@unifi.it.
(2)San Raffaele Hospital, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Milan, Italy. 
Electronic address: annainve@gmail.com. (3)San Raffaele Hospital, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Milan, Italy. Electronic address:
smid.maddalena@hsr.it. (4)San Raffaele Hospital, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Milan, Italy. Electronic address: valsecchi.luca@hsr.it. (5)San
Raffaele Hospital, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Milan, Italy.
Electronic address: candiani.massimo@hsr.it. (6)Department of Clinical,
Experimental and Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
Electronic address: mario.pazzagli@unifi.it. (7)Unit of Genomic for the Diagnosis
of Human Pathologies, Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, IRCCS San Raffaele
Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy. Electronic address:
crem.lauraclara@libero.it. (8)Unit of Genomic for the Diagnosis of Human
Pathologies, Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific
Institute, Milan, Italy; Laboratory of Clinical Molecular Biology, IRCCS Ospedale
San Raffaele, Milan, Italy; Università Vita-Salute San Raffaele, Milan, Italy.
Electronic address: ferrari.maurizio@hsr.it. (9)Department of Clinical,
Experimental and Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
Electronic address: pamela.pinzani@unifi.it. (10)Unit of Genomic for the
Diagnosis of Human Pathologies, Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy. Electronic address:
galbiati.silvia@hsr.it.

INTRODUCTION: This study aims to quantify total and fetal cell-free DNA (cfDNA)
in maternal plasma at different gestational ages and to assess whether this could
represent a reliable predictive marker of pre-eclampsia (PE) before clinical
onset.
METHODS: We performed a qPCR assay to compare the cfDNA concentration of
hypermethylated and unmethylated RASSF1A promoter gene sequences in maternal
plasma among 3 groups of pregnant women. These included 17 women with overt PE,
33 women at risk for the disease subsequently differentiated into 9 who developed
PE and 24 who did not, and 73 controls. All women at risk were consecutively
sampled throughout the whole gestation.
RESULTS: Both total and fetal cfDNA had a good diagnostic performance in
distinguishing patients with overt PE from healthy controls. When comparing women
at risk who developed PE to women at risk who did not, the predictive capability 
was satisfactory at a gestational age ranging from 17 to 30 weeks. This allowed
establishing within this time interval a cut-off value of 735 GE/ml for total
cfDNA (87.5% sensitivity and 70.0% specificity), and a cut-off value of
7.49 GE/ml for fetal cfDNA (100% sensitivity and 50% specificity). cfDNA levels
turned positive several weeks before the onset of the disease: from 2 to 18 weeks
for total cfDNA and from 8 to 17 weeks for fetal cfDNA.
DISCUSSION: The simultaneous use of total and fetal cfDNA would allow an accurate
monitoring and prevention of PE development thus suggesting that RASSF1A could
represent a potential biomarker of PE.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26183647  [PubMed - in process]


20. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2015 Sep 15;119(6):583-603. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.00316.2015. Epub 2015 Jul 16.

Exercise-induced differential changes in gene expression among arterioles of
skeletal muscles of obese rats.

Laughlin MH(1), Padilla J(2), Jenkins NT(3), Thorne PK(4), Martin JS(5), Rector
RS(6), Akter S(7), Davis JW(8).

Author information: 
(1)Dalton Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Missouri, Columbia,
Missouri; Biomedical Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri;
Medical Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri
laughlinm@missouri.edu. (2)Nutrition and Exercise Physiology, University of
Missouri, Columbia, Missouri; Child Health, University of Missouri, Columbia,
Missouri; Dalton Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Missouri,
Columbia, Missouri; (3)Kinesiology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia;
(4)Biomedical Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri; (5)Cell
Biology and Physiology, Edward Via College of Osteopathic Medicine-Auburn Campus,
Auburn, Alabama; Kinesiology, Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama; (6)Nutrition
and Exercise Physiology, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri; Research
Service-Harry S Truman Memorial Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Columbia,
Missouri; Medicine-Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of
Missouri, Columbia, Missouri; (7)Statistics, University of Missouri, Columbia,
Missouri; (8)Health Management and Informatics, University of Missouri, Columbia,
Missouri; Statistics, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri; MU Informatics 
Institute, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri; and.

Using next-generation, transcriptome-wide RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) technology we 
assessed the effects of exercise training on transcriptional profiles in skeletal
muscle arterioles isolated from the soleus and gastrocnemius muscles of Otsuka
Long Evans Tokushima Fatty (OLETF) rats that underwent an endurance exercise
training program (EX; n = 13), interval sprint training program (SPRINT; n = 14),
or remained sedentary (Sed; n = 12). We hypothesized that the greatest effects of
exercise would be in the gastrocnemius arterioles. Results show that EX caused
the largest number of changes in gene expression in the soleus and white
gastrocnemius 2a arterioles with little to no changes in the feed arteries. In
contrast, SPRINT caused substantial changes in gene expression in the feed
arteries. IPA canonical pathway analysis revealed 18 pathways with significant
changes in gene expression when analyzed across vessels and revealed that EX
induces increased expression of the following genes in all arterioles examined:
Shc1, desert hedgehog protein (Dhh), adenylate cyclase 4 (Adcy4), G protein
binding protein, alpha (Gnat1), and Bcl2l1 and decreased expression of ubiquitin 
D (Ubd) and cAMP response element modulator (Crem). EX increased expression of
endothelin converting enzyme (Ece1), Hsp90b, Fkbp5, and Cdcl4b in four of five
arterioles. SPRINT had effects on expression of Crem, Dhh, Bcl2l1, and Ubd that
were similar to EX. SPRINT also increased expression of Nfkbia, Hspa5, Tubb 2a
and Tubb 2b, and Fkbp5 in all five arterioles and increased expression of Gnat1
in all but the soleus second-order arterioles. Many contractile and/or structural
protein genes were increased by SPRINT in the gastrocnemius feed artery, but the 
same genes exhibited decreased expression in red gastrocnemius arterioles. We
conclude that training-induced changes in arteriolar gene expression patterns
differ by muscle fiber type composition and along the arteriolar tree.

PMCID: PMC4687862 [Available on 2016-09-15]
PMID: 26183477  [PubMed - in process]


21. Nat Biotechnol. 2015 Jul;33(7):761-8. doi: 10.1038/nbt.3247. Epub 2015 Jun 22.

Lineage conversion induced by pluripotency factors involves transient passage
through an iPSC stage.

Bar-Nur O(1), Verheul C(1), Sommer AG(2), Brumbaugh J(1), Schwarz BA(1), Lipchina
I(1), Huebner AJ(1), Mostoslavsky G(2), Hochedlinger K(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Center for Regenerative Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. [2] Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [3] Department of Stem Cell and
Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. [4]
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland, USA. [5] Harvard Stem
Cell Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (2)1] Center for Regenerative
Medicine (CReM), Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA. [2] Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Methods. 2015 Aug;12(8):701.

Brief expression of pluripotency-associated factors such as Oct4, Klf4, Sox2 and 
c-Myc (OKSM), in combination with differentiation-inducing signals, has been
reported to trigger transdifferentiation of fibroblasts into other cell types.
Here we show that OKSM expression in mouse fibroblasts gives rise to both induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and induced neural stem cells (iNSCs) under
conditions previously shown to induce only iNSCs. Fibroblast-derived iNSC
colonies silenced retroviral transgenes and reactivated silenced X chromosomes,
both hallmarks of pluripotent stem cells. Moreover, lineage tracing with an
Oct4-CreER labeling system demonstrated that virtually all iNSC colonies
originated from cells transiently expressing Oct4, whereas ablation of Oct4(+)
cells prevented iNSC formation. Lastly, an alternative transdifferentiation
cocktail that lacks Oct4 and was reportedly unable to support induced
pluripotency yielded iPSCs and iNSCs carrying the Oct4-CreER-derived lineage
label. Together, these data suggest that iNSC generation from fibroblasts using
OKSM and other pluripotency-related reprogramming factors requires passage
through a transient iPSC state.

PMID: 26098450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Asian J Androl. 2015 Nov-Dec;17(6):972-80. doi: 10.4103/1008-682X.154994.

Application of three-dimensional culture systems to study mammalian
spermatogenesis, with an emphasis on the rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta).

Huleihel M(1), Nourashrafeddin S, Plant TM(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, Faculty 
of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel.
(2)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Magee-Womens Research Institute, Pittsburgh, PA
15213, USA.

In vitro culture of spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) has generally been performed
using two-dimensional (2D) culture systems; however, such cultures have not led
to the development of complete spermatogenesis. It seems that 2D systems do not
replicate optimal conditions of the seminiferous tubules (including those
generated by the SSC niche) and necessary for spermatogenesis. Recently, one of
our laboratories has been able to induce proliferation and differentiation of
mouse testicular germ cells to meiotic and postmeiotic stages including
generation of sperm in a 3D soft agar culture system (SACS) and a 3D
methylcellulose culture system (MCS). It was suggested that SACS and MCS form a
special 3D microenvironment that mimics germ cell niche formation in the
seminiferous tubules, and thus permits mouse spermatogenesis in vitro. In this
review, we (1) provide a brief overview of the differences in spermatogenesis in 
rodents and primates, (2) summarize data related to attempts to generate sperm in
vitro, (3) report for the first time formation of colonies/clusters of cells and 
differentiation of meiotic (expression of CREM-1) and postmeiotic (expression of 
acrosin) germ cells from undifferentiated spermatogonia isolated from the testis 
of prepubertal rhesus monkeys and cultured in SACS and MCS, and (4) indicate
research needed to optimize 3D systems for in vitro primate spermatogenesis and
for possible future application to man.

PMID: 26067870  [PubMed - in process]


23. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 5;10(6):e0128426. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128426.
eCollection 2015.

Natural Mutations in Streptococcus agalactiae Resulting in Abrogation of ß
Antigen Production.

Vasilyeva A(1), Santos Sanches I(2), Florindo C(3), Dmitriev A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Institute of Experimental Medicine,
Saint-Petersburg, Russia. (2)Department of Life Sciences, Centro de Recursos
Microbiológicos (CREM) and Research Unit on Applied Molecular Biosciences
(UCIBIO, REQUIMTE), Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de
Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal. (3)Department of Infectious Diseases, National
Institute of Health, Lisbon, Portugal. (4)Department of Molecular Microbiology,
Institute of Experimental Medicine, Saint-Petersburg, Russia; Department of
Fundamental Problems of Medicine and Medical Technologies, Saint-Petersburg State
University, Saint-Petersburg, Russia.

Streptococcus agalactiae genome encodes 21 two-component systems (TCS) and a
variety of regulatory proteins in order to control gene expression. One of the
TCS, BgrRS, comprising the BgrR DNA-binding regulatory protein and BgrS sensor
histidine kinase, was discovered within a putative virulence island. BgrRS
influences cell metabolism and positively control the expression of bac gene,
coding for ß antigen at transcriptional level. Inactivation of bgrR abrogated bac
gene expression and increased virulence properties of S. agalactiae. In this
study, a total of 140 strains were screened for the presence of bac gene, and the
TCS bgrR and bgrS genes. A total of 53 strains carried the bac, bgrR and bgrS
genes. Most of them (48 strains) expressed ß antigen, while five strains did not 
express ß antigen. Three strains, in which bac gene sequence was intact, while
bgrR and/or bgrS genes had mutations, and expression of ß antigen was absent,
were complemented with a constructed plasmid pBgrRS(P) encoding functionally
active bgrR and bgrS gene alleles. This procedure restored expression of ß
antigen indicating the crucial regulatory role of TCS BgrRS. The complemented
strain A49V/BgrRS demonstrated attenuated virulence in intraperitoneal mice model
of S. agalactiae infection compared to parental strain A49V. In conclusion we
showed that disruption of ß antigen expression is associated with: i) insertion
of ISSa4 upstream the bac gene just after the ribosomal binding site; ii) point
mutation G342A resulting a stop codon TGA within the bac gene and a truncated
form of ß antigen; iii) single deletion (G) in position 439 of the bgrR gene
resulting in a frameshift and the loss of DNA-binding domain of the BgrR protein,
and iv) single base substitutions in bgrR and bgrS genes causing single amino
acid substitutions in BgrR (Arg187Lys) and BgrS (Arg252Gln). The fact that BgrRS 
negatively controls virulent properties of S. agalactiae gives a novel clue for
understanding of S. agalactiae adaptation to the human.

PMCID: PMC4457541
PMID: 26047354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Phytomedicine. 2015 Apr 15;22(4):469-76. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2015.02.003. Epub 
2015 Mar 5.

Enhancing activity of antibiotics against Staphylococcus aureus: Zanthoxylum
capense constituents and derivatives.

Cabral V(1), Luo X(1), Junqueira E(2), Costa SS(3), Mulhovo S(4), Duarte A(1),
Couto I(3), Viveiros M(5), Ferreira MJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Medicines (iMed.ULisboa), Faculty of Pharmacy,
Universidade de Lisboa, Av. Professor Gama Pinto, 1649-003 Lisboa, Portugal.
(2)Grupo de Micobactérias, Unidade de Microbiologia Médica, Instituto de Higiene 
e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Rua da Junqueira 100, 1349-008 
Lisboa, Portugal. (3)Grupo de Micobactérias, Unidade de Microbiologia Médica,
Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Rua da
Junqueira 100, 1349-008 Lisboa, Portugal; Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos
(CREM), Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Quinta da Torre, 2829-516 Caparica,
Portugal. (4)Centro de Estudos Moçambicanos e de Etnociências (CEMEC), Faculdade 
de Ciências Naturais e Matemática, Universidade Pedagógica, Campus de Lhanguene, 
Av. de Moçambique, 21402161 Maputo, Moçambique. (5)Grupo de Micobactérias,
Unidade de Microbiologia Médica, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Rua da Junqueira 100, 1349-008 Lisboa, Portugal;
Centro de Malária e Outras Doenças Tropicais (CMDT), Instituto de Higiene e
Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Rua da Junqueira 100, 1349-008
Lisboa, Portugal. (6)Research Institute for Medicines (iMed.ULisboa), Faculty of 
Pharmacy, Universidade de Lisboa, Av. Professor Gama Pinto, 1649-003 Lisboa,
Portugal. Electronic address: mjuferreira@ff.ulisboa.pt.

Six compounds (1-6), isolated from the methanol extract of the roots of the
African medicinal plant Zanthoxylum capense Thunb. (Rutaceae), and seven ester
derivatives (7-13) were evaluated for their antibacterial activities and
modulatory effects on the MIC of antibiotics (erythromycin, oxacillin, and
tetracycline) and ethidium bromide (EtBr) against a Staphylococcus aureus
reference strain (ATCC 6538). Using the same model, compounds 1-13 were also
assessed for their potential as efflux pump inhibitors by a fluorometric assay
that measures the accumulation of the broad range efflux pump substrate EtBr.
Compounds 8 and 11 were further evaluated for their antibacterial, modulatory and
EtBr accumulation effects against four additional S. aureus strains, which
included two clinical methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) strains. Compounds
(1-13) have not shown antibacterial activity at the concentration ranges tested. 
When evaluated against S. aureus ATCC 6538, oxychelerythrine (1) a
benzophenanthridine alkaloid, showed the highest modulatory activity enhancing
the susceptibility of this strain to all the tested antibiotics from two to
four-fold. Ailanthoidiol diacetate (8) and ailanthoidiol di-2-ethylbutanoate (11)
were also good modulators when combined with EtBr, increasing the bacteria
susceptibility by four and two-fold, respectively. In the EtBr accumulation
assay, using ATCC 6538 strain, the phenylpropanoid (+)-ailanthoidiol (6) and most
of its ester derivatives (8-11) exhibited higher activity than the positive
control verapamil. The highest effects were found for compounds 8 and 11 that
also increased the accumulation of EtBr, using S. aureus ATCC 25923 as model.
Furthermore, both compounds (8, 11) were able to enhance the ciprofloxacin
activity against the MRSA clinical strains tested, causing a reduction of the
antibiotic MIC values from two to four-fold. The EtBr accumulation assay revealed
that this modulation activity was not due to an inhibition of efflux pumps
mechanism. These results suggested that Z. capense constituents may be valuable
as leads for restoring antibiotic activity against MRSA strains.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25925969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Nat Cell Biol. 2015 May;17(5):545-57. doi: 10.1038/ncb3147. Epub 2015 Apr 27.

The histone deacetylase SIRT6 controls embryonic stem cell fate via TET-mediated 
production of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine.

Etchegaray JP(1), Chavez L(2), Huang Y(2), Ross KN(1), Choi J(1), Martinez-Pastor
B(1), Walsh RM(1), Sommer CA(3), Lienhard M(2), Gladden A(4), Kugel S(1),
Silberman DM(5), Ramaswamy S(1), Mostoslavsky G(3), Hochedlinger K(6), Goren
A(4), Rao A(2), Mostoslavsky R(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] The Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA [2] The MGH Center for Regenerative Medicine,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA. (2)La Jolla Institute
for Allergy and Immunology, Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine, UCSD
Department of Pharmacology, UCSD Moores Cancer Center, La Jolla, California
92037, USA. (3)The Center for Regenerative Medicine (CReM), Boston Medical
Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.
(4)Broad Technology Labs (BTL), The Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA. (5)Department of Human Biochemistry, Medical
School, CEFyBO-UBA-CONICET, Buenos Aires, CP1121, Argentina. (6)1] The
Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114, USA [2] The MGH Center for Regenerative Medicine, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA [3] Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland 20815, USA.

How embryonic stem cells (ESCs) commit to specific cell lineages and yield all
cell types of a fully formed organism remains a major question. ESC
differentiation is accompanied by large-scale histone and DNA modifications, but 
the relations between these epigenetic categories are not understood. Here we
demonstrate the interplay between the histone deacetylase sirtuin 6 (SIRT6) and
the ten-eleven translocation enzymes (TETs). SIRT6 targets acetylated histone H3 
at Lys 9 and 56 (H3K9ac and H3K56ac), while TETs convert 5-methylcytosine into
5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC). ESCs derived from Sirt6 knockout (S6KO) mice are 
skewed towards neuroectoderm development. This phenotype involves derepression of
OCT4, SOX2 and NANOG, which causes an upregulation of TET-dependent production of
5hmC. Genome-wide analysis revealed neural genes marked with 5hmC in S6KO ESCs,
thereby implicating TET enzymes in the neuroectoderm-skewed differentiation
phenotype. We demonstrate that SIRT6 functions as a chromatin regulator
safeguarding the balance between pluripotency and differentiation through
Tet-mediated production of 5hmC.

PMCID: PMC4593707
PMID: 25915124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Aug;12(2):2181-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3620. Epub 2015 Apr 15.

Exogenous a-calcitonin gene-related peptide attenuates lipopolysaccharide-induced
acute lung injury in rats.

Yang W(1), Xv M(1), Yang WC(1), Wang N(1), Zhang XZ(1), Li WZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, P.R. China.

a-Calcitonin gene-related peptide (a-CGRP) is a 37 amino-acid neuropeptide that
is primarily released from C-type sensory neurons. a-CGRP exerts multiple
modulatory effects on immune responses and visceral organ function, but the role 
of exogenous a-CGRP in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced acute lung injury (ALI)
has remained to be elucidated. Forty-eight rats were randomized to receive
continuous intraperitoneal infusion of a-CGRP (0.4 µg/kg/min) or normal saline
for 30 min, followed by intratracheal injection of 0.5 mg/kg LPS or saline. There
were four groups of animals: The saline-saline (S-S) group; the saline-a-CGRP
(S-C) group; the LPS-saline (L-S) group and the LPS-a-CGRP (L-C) group. Mean
arterial pressure and arterial blood gases were assessed prior to a-CGRP and LPS 
administration and every hour following LPS treatment. After 4 h, bronchoalveolar
lavage was performed and used to assess total cell count and levels of tumor
necrosis factor-a, interleukin-1ß, intracellular cell adhesion molecule 1 and
macrophage inflammatory protein 2. Lung tissue was also collected for assessing
wet-to-dry (W/D) ratio, histology and Evans blue (EB) dye extravasation.
Pulmonary a-CGRP concentration and a-CGRP receptor expression were also examined,
and inducible cyclic adenosine monophosphate early repressor (ICER) and TNF-a
mRNA expression levels were measured. Treatment with exogenous a-CGRP improved
oxygenation during LPS-induced ALI. Correspondingly, histological injury, total
cell count, inflammatory cytokine levels, W/D ratio and EB dye extravasation were
also significantly reduced. a-CGRP receptor 1 expression was noted in pulmonary
endothelial cells and alveolar macrophages and a-CGRP receptor expression levels 
were decreased during ALI, whereas pulmonary a-CGRP expression was continuously
increased. Furthermore, exogenous a-CGRP induced upregulation of ICER during
LPS-induced ALI. In conclusion, exogenous a-CGRP improved oxygenation and
ameliorated lung damage in LPS-induced ALI, and these effects were associated
with the upregulation of ICER.

PMID: 25892548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Immunol. 2015 Jun 1;194(11):5120-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1403181. Epub 2015
Apr 17.

IFN-ß Selectively Inhibits IL-2 Production through CREM-Mediated Chromatin
Remodeling.

Otero DC(1), Fares-Frederickson NJ(1), Xiao M(1), Baker DP(2), David M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
CA 92093; (2)Biogen Idec, Cambridge, MA 02142; and. (3)Division of Biological
Sciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093; UC San Diego
Moores Cancer Center, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093
midavid@ucsd.edu.

IFN-ß is widely used in the treatment of multiple sclerosis, yet the mechanism
facilitating its efficacy remains unclear. IL-2 production by activated T cells, 
including those mediating autoimmunity, and subsequent autocrine stimulation is
vital for T cell expansion and function. In this study, we demonstrate that in
mouse and human T cells, IFN-ß specifically inhibits the production of IL-2 upon 
TCR engagement without affecting other cytokines or activation markers. Rather
than disrupting TCR signaling, IFN-ß alters histone modifications in the IL-2
promoter to retain the locus in an inaccessible configuration. This in turn is
mediated through the upregulation of the transcriptional suppressor CREM by IFN-ß
and consequent recruitment of histone deacetylases to the IL-2 promoter. In
accordance, ablation of CREM expression or inhibition of histone deacetylases
activity eliminates the suppressive effects of IFN-ß on IL-2 production.
Collectively, these findings provide a molecular basis by which IFN-ß limits T
cell responses.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4433809 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25888642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Stem Cell Reports. 2015 May 12;4(5):873-85. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2015.02.021.
Epub 2015 Apr 2.

Emergence of a stage-dependent human liver disease signature with directed
differentiation of alpha-1 antitrypsin-deficient iPS cells.

Wilson AA(1), Ying L(2), Liesa M(3), Segeritz CP(4), Mills JA(2), Shen SS(5),
Jean J(1), Lonza GC(1), Liberti DC(1), Lang AH(6), Nazaire J(7), Gower AC(5),
Müeller FJ(8), Mehta P(6), Ordóñez A(9), Lomas DA(9), Vallier L(4), Murphy GJ(1),
Mostoslavsky G(1), Spira A(5), Shirihai OS(3), Ramirez MI(7), Gadue P(2), Kotton 
DN(10).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Regenerative Medicine (CReM) of Boston University and Boston
Medical Center, Boston, MA 02118, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(3)Evans Center for Interdisciplinary Research, Department of Medicine,
Mitochondria ARC, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA.
(4)Wellcome Trust-Medical Research Council Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, Anne
McLaren Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine and Department of Surgery,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0SZ, UK. (5)Division of Computational
Biomedicine and Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Boston
University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA. (6)Physics Department,
Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA. (7)The Pulmonary Center and Department 
of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA.
(8)Zentrum für Integrative Psychiatrie, Universitätsklinikums Schleswig-Holstein,
Kiel 24105, Germany. (9)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge CB0
2XY, UK. (10)Center for Regenerative Medicine (CReM) of Boston University and
Boston Medical Center, Boston, MA 02118, USA. Electronic address: dkotton@bu.edu.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) provide an inexhaustible source of cells
for modeling disease and testing drugs. Here we develop a bioinformatic approach 
to detect differences between the genomic programs of iPSCs derived from diseased
versus normal human cohorts as they emerge during in vitro directed
differentiation. Using iPSCs generated from a cohort carrying mutations (PiZZ) in
the gene responsible for alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency, we find that the
global transcriptomes of PiZZ iPSCs diverge from normal controls upon
differentiation to hepatic cells. Expression of 135 genes distinguishes PiZZ
iPSC-hepatic cells, providing potential clues to liver disease pathogenesis. The 
disease-specific cells display intracellular accumulation of mutant AAT protein, 
resulting in increased autophagic flux. Furthermore, we detect beneficial
responses to the drug carbamazepine, which further augments autophagic flux, but 
adverse responses to known hepatotoxic drugs. Our findings support the utility of
iPSCs as tools for drug development or prediction of toxicity.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4437473
PMID: 25843048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. IET Nanobiotechnol. 2015 Apr;9(2):95-101. doi: 10.1049/iet-nbt.2014.0007.

DNA adduct identification using gold-aptamer nanoprobes.

Larguinho M(1), Santos S(2), Almeida J(3), Baptista PV(4).

Author information: 
(1)REQUIMTE, Departamento de Química, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Campus de Caparica, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal.
(2)CIGMH, Departamento Ciências da Vida, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Campus de Caparica, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal.
(3)CREM, Departamento Ciências da Vida, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Campus de Caparica, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal.
(4)CIGMH, Departamento Ciências da Vida, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Campus de Caparica, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal.
pmvb@fct.unl.pt.

The optical and physico-chemical properties of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) have
prompted new and improved approaches which have greatly evolved the fields of
biosensing and molecular detection. In this study, the authors took advantage of 
AuNPs' ease of modification and functionalised it with selected DNA aptamers
using a salt aging method to produce gold-aptamer nanoprobes. After
characterisation, these nanoprobes were subsequently used for biomolecular
detection of glycidamide (GA)-guanine (Gua) adducts generated in vitro. The
results are based on differences in nanoprobe stabilisation against salt-induced 
aggregation, similar to the non-cross-linking method developed by Baptista for
discrimination of specific sequences. Alkylated Guas were efficiently
discriminated from deoxyguanosine and GA in solution. Despite this, a clear
identification of DNA adducts derived from genomic DNA alkylation has proven to
be a more challenging task.

PMID: 25829175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cell Rep. 2015 Mar 31;10(12):2019-31. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.02.064. Epub
2015 Mar 26.

Differential association of chromatin proteins identifies BAF60a/SMARCD1 as a
regulator of embryonic stem cell differentiation.

Alajem A(1), Biran A(1), Harikumar A(1), Sailaja BS(1), Aaronson Y(1), Livyatan
I(1), Nissim-Rafinia M(1), Sommer AG(2), Mostoslavsky G(2), Gerbasi VR(3), Golden
DE(4), Datta A(5), Sze SK(5), Meshorer E(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel. (2)Section of Gastroenterology, Department of
Medicine, Center for Regenerative Medicine (CReM), Boston University School of
Medicine, 670 Albany Street, Suite 209, Boston, MA 02118, USA. (3)Department of
Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University, 2205 Tech Drive, Evanston, IL
60208, USA; Naval Medical Research Center, Silver Spring, MD 20910, USA.
(4)Merial Inc., a Sanofi Company, Duluth, GA 30096, USA. (5)School of Biological 
Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551,
Singapore. (6)Department of Genetics, Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel; The Edmond and Lily Safra
Center for Brain Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904,
Israel. Electronic address: meshorer@huji.ac.il.

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) possess a distinct chromatin conformation maintained 
by specialized chromatin proteins. To identify chromatin regulators in ESCs, we
developed a simple biochemical assay named D-CAP (differential
chromatin-associated proteins), using brief micrococcal nuclease digestion of
chromatin, followed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).
Using D-CAP, we identified several differentially chromatin-associated proteins
between undifferentiated and differentiated ESCs, including the chromatin
remodeling protein SMARCD1. SMARCD1 depletion in ESCs led to altered chromatin
and enhanced endodermal differentiation. Gene expression and chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) analyses suggested that SMARCD1 is both
an activator and a repressor and is enriched at developmental regulators and that
its chromatin binding coincides with H3K27me3. SMARCD1 knockdown caused H3K27me3 
redistribution and increased H3K4me3 around the transcription start site (TSS).
One of the identified SMARCD1 targets was Klf4. In SMARCD1-knockdown clones,
KLF4, as well as H3K4me3 at the Klf4 locus, remained high and H3K27me3 was
abolished. These results propose a role for SMARCD1 in restricting pluripotency
and activating lineage pathways by regulating H3K27 methylation.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25818293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Clin Exp Immunol. 2015 Jul;181(1):76-86. doi: 10.1111/cei.12629. Epub 2015 May
14.

Interleukin-2 treatment reverses effects of cAMP-responsive element modulator
a-over-expressing T cells in autoimmune-prone mice.

Ohl K(1,)(2), Wiener A(1), Schippers A(1), Wagner N(1), Tenbrock K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany. (2)IZKF Aachen,
Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany.

Systemic autoimmune diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), are
often characterized by a failure of self-tolerance and result in an uncontrolled 
activation of B cells and effector T cells. Interleukin (IL)-2 critically
maintains homeostasis of regulatory T cells (T(reg)) and effector T cells in the 
periphery. Previously, we identified the cAMP-responsive element modulator a
(CREMa) as a major factor responsible for decreased IL-2 production in T cells
from SLE patients. Additionally, using a transgenic mouse that specifically
over-expresses CREMa in T cells (CD2CREMatg), we provided in-vivo evidence that
CREMa indeed suppresses IL-2 production. To analyse the effects of CREMa in an
autoimmune prone mouse model we introduced a Fas mutation in the CD2CREMatg mice 
(FVB/Fas(-/-) CD2CREMatg). Overexpression of CREMa strongly accelerated the
lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly in the FVB/Fas(-/-) mice. This was accompanied
by a massive expansion of double-negative (DN) T cells, enhanced numbers of
interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>-producing T cells and reduced percentages of T(regs).
Treatment of FVB/Fas(-/-) CD2CREMatg mice with IL-2 restored the percentage of
T(regs) and reversed increased IFN-<U+03B3> production, but did not affect the number of
DNTs. Our data indicate that CREMa contributes to the failure of tolerance in SLE
by favouring effector T cells and decreasing regulatory T cells, partially
mediated by repression of IL-2 in vivo.

© 2015 British Society for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC4469157 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25817470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2015 Feb;70(2):144-51. doi: 10.6061/clinics/2015(02)12.

Steroidogenesis-related gene expression in the rat ovary exposed to melatonin
supplementation.

Lima GN(1), Maganhin CC(1), Simões RS(2), Baracat MC(2), Sasso GR(3), Fuchs
LF(2), Simões Mde J(3), Baracat EC(2), Soares Júnior JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Paulista School of Medicine at Federal University of
São Paulo (EPM/UNIFESP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (2)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo (FMUSP/USP), São
Paulo, SP, Brazil. (3)Department of Morphology and Genetics, (EPM/UNIFESP),
Paulista School of Medicine at Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze steroidogenesis-related gene expression in the rat ovary
exposed to melatonin supplementation.
METHODS: Thirty-two virgin adult female rats were randomized to two groups as
follows: the control group GI received vehicle and the experimental group GII
received melatonin supplementation (10 µg/night per animal) for 60 consecutive
days. After the treatment, animals were anesthetized and the collected ovaries
were immediately placed in liquid nitrogen for complementary deoxyribonucleic
acid microarray analyses. A GeneChip(®) Kit Rat Genome 230 2.0 Affymetrix Array
was used for gene analysis and the experiment was repeated three times for each
group. The results were normalized with the GeneChip(®) Operating Software
program and confirmed through analysis with the secondary deoxyribonucleic
acid-Chip Analyzer (dChip) software. The data were confirmed by real-time reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction analysis. Genes related to ovarian
function were further confirmed by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: We found the upregulation of the type 9 adenylate cyclase and inhibin
beta B genes and the downregulation of the cyclic adenosine monophosphate
response element modulator and cytochrome P450 family 17a1 genes in the ovarian
tissue of GII compared to those of the control group.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that melatonin supplementation decreases gene
expression of cyclic adenosine monophosphate, which changes ovarian
steroidogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4351306
PMID: 25789524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Iran J Reprod Med. 2014 Nov;12(11):765-70.

Molecullar and biochemical effect of alcohlic extract of Alpinia galanga on rat
spermatogenesis process.

Mazaheri M(1), Shahdadi V(2), Nazari Boron A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetic, Faculty of Medicine, Shahid Sadoughi University
of Medical Sciences, Yazd, Iran. (2)Department of Biology, University of
Peyam-Noor, Isfahan, Iran. ; Institute of Plant Biotechnology, University of
Zabol, Zabol, Iran. (3)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Zabol
University of Medical Sciences, Zabol, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Alpinia galanga (A. galanga) belongs to the Zingiberaceae family has 
anti-oxidant effects in animals and humans body and often is used as medicament
or part of medicaments in Asian folk medicine for various applications.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to investigate the molecular and
biochemical influence of alcoholic extract from the rhizomes of A. galangal on
the spermatogenesis process in male rat.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty five Wistar male rats were divided into three
groups, control (n=15) and two tested groups (n=30). Alcoholic extract (5%) of
plant was given by oral route at doses of 100 and 300 mg/day for 56 days and
spermatogenesis parameters, hormone changes and expression level of the
cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) gene were assessed.
RESULTS: Methanol extract of A. galanga increased serum testosterones level
significantly in both treated groups in comparison with control group (p<0.05).
Besides, the percentage of sperm viability and motility in both tested groups
were significantly increased. Follicle stimulating hormone FSH hormone,
morphology and weight were affected in both treated groups. With 300 mg/day an
increase in sperm count was observed. Sperm motility was increased in two treated
groups whereas testis weight was decreased in treated groups. Real time analysis 
of treated cells of testis showed increase level of mRNA related to CREM gene
involved in spermatogenesis process after 56 days induction.
CONCLUSION: It is concluded that application of ethanolic extract of A. galanga
significantly increased sperm percentage, viability, motility and testosterone
hormone. This suggested that this plant may be promising in enhancing sperm
healthy parameters.

PMCID: PMC4330656
PMID: 25709632  [PubMed]


34. Hepatology. 2015 Jul;62(1):147-57. doi: 10.1002/hep.27753. Epub 2015 Apr 13.

Induced pluripotent stem cells model personalized variations in liver disease
resulting from a1-antitrypsin deficiency.

Tafaleng EN(1,)(2), Chakraborty S(2,)(3), Han B(1,)(2), Hale P(2,)(3), Wu
W(1,)(2), Soto-Gutierrez A(2,)(4,)(5), Feghali-Bostwick CA(6), Wilson AA(7),
Kotton DN(7), Nagaya M(1,)(4), Strom SC(8), Roy-Chowdhury J(9), Stolz DB(10),
Perlmutter DH(2,)(3), Fox IJ(1,)(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA. (2)Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC, Pittsburgh, PA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA. (4)McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA. (5)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh 
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA. (6)Department of Medicine, Medical University
of South Carolina, Charleston, SC. (7)Center for Regenerative Medicine (CReM) of 
Boston University and Boston Medical Center, Boston, MA. (8)Department of
Laboratory Medicine, Division of Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden. (9)Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York,
NY. (10)Department of Cell Biology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh.

In the classical form of a1-antitrypsin deficiency (ATD), aberrant intracellular 
accumulation of misfolded mutant a1-antitrypsin Z (ATZ) in hepatocytes causes
hepatic damage by a gain-of-function, "proteotoxic" mechanism. Whereas some ATD
patients develop severe liver disease (SLD) that necessitates liver
transplantation, others with the same genetic defect completely escape this
clinical phenotype. We investigated whether induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSCs) from ATD individuals with or without SLD could model these personalized
variations in hepatic disease phenotypes. Patient-specific iPSCs were generated
from ATD patients and a control and differentiated into hepatocyte-like cells
(iHeps) having many characteristics of hepatocytes. Pulse-chase and
endoglycosidase H analysis demonstrate that the iHeps recapitulate the abnormal
accumulation and processing of the ATZ molecule, compared to the wild-type AT
molecule. Measurements of the fate of intracellular ATZ show a marked delay in
the rate of ATZ degradation in iHeps from SLD patients, compared to those from no
liver disease patients. Transmission electron microscopy showed dilated rough
endoplasmic reticulum in iHeps from all individuals with ATD, not in controls,
but globular inclusions that are partially covered with ribosomes were observed
only in iHeps from individuals with SLD.CONCLUSION: iHeps model the individual
disease phenotypes of ATD patients with more rapid degradation of misfolded ATZ
and lack of globular inclusions in cells from patients who have escaped liver
disease. The results support the concept that "proteostasis" mechanisms, such as 
intracellular degradation pathways, play a role in observed variations in
clinical phenotype and show that iPSCs can potentially be used to facilitate
predictions of disease susceptibility for more precise and timely application of 
therapeutic strategies.

© 2015 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC4482790 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25690322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Methods Mol Biol. 2016;1353:261-70. doi: 10.1007/7651_2014_194.

Multisystemic Disease Modeling of Liver-Derived Protein Folding Disorders Using
Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (iPSCs).

Leung A(1), Murphy GJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and the Center for Regenerative Medicine (CReM), Boston
University, Boston, MA, USA. (2)School of Medicine and the Center for
Regenerative Medicine (CReM), Boston University, Boston, MA, USA.
gjmurphy@bu.edu.

Familial transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTR) is an autosomal dominant
protein-folding disorder caused by over 100 distinct mutations in the
transthyretin (TTR) gene. In ATTR, protein secreted from the liver aggregates and
forms fibrils in target organs, chiefly the heart and peripheral nervous system, 
highlighting the need for a model capable of recapitulating the multisystem
complexity of this clinically variable disease. Here, we describe detailed
methodologies for the directed differentiation of protein folding
disease-specific iPSCs into hepatocytes that produce mutant protein, and
neural-lineage cells often targeted in disease. Methodologies are also described 
for the construction of multisystem models and drug screening using iPSCs.

PMID: 25646614  [PubMed - in process]


36. Meta Gene. 2014 Feb 20;2:206-17. doi: 10.1016/j.mgene.2014.01.003. eCollection
2014.

Bovine NR1I3 gene polymorphisms and its association with feed efficiency traits
in Nellore cattle.

Alexandre PA(1), Gomes RC(2), Santana MH(1), Silva SL(3), Leme PR(3), Mudadu
MA(4), Regitano LC(4), Meirelles FV(1), Ferraz JB(1), Fukumasu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Medicina Veterinária, Faculdade de Zootecnia e Engenharia de
Alimentos, Universidade de São Paulo, Pirassununga, São Paulo ZIP:13635-900,
Brazil. (2)EMBRAPA Gado de Corte, Campo Grande, Mato Grosso do Sul ZIP:70770-901,
Brazil. (3)Departamento de Zootecnia, Faculdade de Zootecnia e Engenharia de
Alimentos, Universidade de São Paulo, Pirassununga, São Paulo ZIP:13635-900,
Brazil. (4)EMBRAPA Pecuária Sudeste, São Carlos, São Paulo ZIP:13560-970, Brazil.

The Nuclear receptor 1 family I member 3 (NR1I3), also known as the Constitutive 
Androstane Receptor (CAR), was initially characterized as a key regulator of
xenobiotic metabolism. However, recent biochemical and structural data suggest
that NR1I3 is activated in response to metabolic and nutritional stress in a
ligand-independent manner. Thus, we prospected the Bovine NR1I3 gene for
polymorphisms and studied their association with feed efficiency traits in
Nellore cattle. First, 155 purebred Nellore bulls were individually measured for 
Residual Feed Intake (RFI) and the 25 best (High Feed Efficiency group, HFE) and 
the 25 worst animals (Low Feed Efficiency group, LFE) were selected for DNA
extraction. The entire Bovine NR1I3 gene was amplified and polymorphisms were
identified by sequencing. Then, one SNP different between HFE and LFE groups was 
genotyped in all the 155 animals and in another 288 animals totalizing 443
Nellore bulls genotyped for association of NR1I3 SNPs with feed efficiency
traits. We found 24 SNPs in the NR1I3 gene and choose a statistically different
SNP between HFE and LFE groups for further analysis. Genotyping of the 155
animals showed a significant association within SNP and RFI (p = 0.04), Residual 
Intake and BW Gain (p = 0.04) and Dry Matter Intake (p = 0.01). This SNP is
located in the 5'flanking promoter region of NR1I3 gene and different alleles
alter the binding site for predicted transcriptional factors as HNF4alpha, CREM
and c-MYB, leading us to conclude that NR1I3 expression and regulation might be
important to feed efficiency.

PMCID: PMC4287810
PMID: 25606404  [PubMed]


37. MBio. 2015 Jan 13;6(1). pii: e02250-14. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02250-14.

Comparative genomics suggests primary homothallism of Pneumocystis species.

Almeida JM(1), Cissé OH(2), Fonseca Á(1), Pagni M(3), Hauser PM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Departamento de Ciências da Vida,
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica,
Portugal. (2)Institute of Microbiology, Lausanne University Hospital and
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland Vital-IT Group, SIB Swiss Institute
of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland. (3)Vital-IT Group, SIB Swiss Institute 
of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland. (4)Institute of Microbiology, Lausanne 
University Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
Philippe.Hauser@chuv.ch.

Comment in
    MBio. 2015;6(3):e00583-15.

Pneumocystis species are fungal parasites of mammal lungs showing host
specificity. Pneumocystis jirovecii colonizes humans and causes severe pneumonia 
in immunosuppressed individuals. In the absence of in vitro cultures, the life
cycle of these fungi remains poorly known. Sexual reproduction probably occurs,
but the system of this process and the mating type (MAT) genes involved are not
characterized. In the present study, we used comparative genomics to investigate 
the issue in P. jirovecii and Pneumocystis carinii, the species infecting rats,
as well as in their relative Taphrina deformans. We searched sex-related genes
using 103 sequences from the relative Schizosaccharomyces pombe as queries. Genes
homologous to several sex-related role categories were identified in all species 
investigated, further supporting sexuality in these organisms. Extensive in
silico searches identified only three putative MAT genes in each species
investigated (matMc, matMi, and matPi). In P. jirovecii, these genes clustered on
the same contig, proving their contiguity in the genome. This organization seems 
compatible neither with heterothallism, because two different MAT loci on
separate DNA molecules would have been detected, nor with secondary homothallism,
because the latter involves generally more MAT genes. Consistently, we did not
detect cis-acting sequences for mating type switching in secondary homothallism, 
and PCR revealed identical MAT genes in P. jirovecii isolates from six patients. 
A strong synteny of the genomic region surrounding the putative MAT genes exists 
between the two Pneumocystis species. Our results suggest the hypothesis that
primary homothallism is the system of reproduction of Pneumocystis species and T.
deformans.IMPORTANCE: Sexual reproduction among fungi can involve a single
partner (homothallism) or two compatible partners (heterothallism). We
investigated the issue in three pathogenic fungal relatives: Pneumocystis
jirovecii, which causes severe pneumonia in immunocompromised humans;
Pneumocystis carinii, which infects rats; and the plant pathogen Taphrina
deformans. The nature, the number, and the organization within the genome of the 
genes involved in sexual reproduction were determined. The three species appeared
to harbor a single genomic region gathering only three genes involved in sexual
differentiation, an organization which is compatible with sexual reproduction
involving a single partner. These findings illuminate the strategy adopted by
fungal pathogens to infect their hosts.

Copyright © 2015 Almeida et al.

PMCID: PMC4313921
PMID: 25587012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Epidemiol Infect. 2015 Jul;143(10):2126-30. doi: 10.1017/S0950268814003331. Epub 
2014 Dec 18.

Prevalence of Leptospira antibodies in wild boars (Sus scrofa) from Northern
Portugal: risk factor analysis.

Vale-Gonçalves HM(1), Cabral JA(1), Faria MC(2), Nunes-Pereira M(2), Faria AS(3),
Veloso O(2), Vieira ML(4), Paiva-Cardoso MN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Applied Ecology,University of Trás-os-Montes and Alto Douro
(UTAD),Vila Real,Portugal. (2)Department of Veterinary Sciences,University of
Trás-os-Montes and Alto Douro (UTAD),Vila Real,Portugal. (3)Centre for the
Research and Technology of Agro-Environment and Biological Sciences
(CITAB),University of Trás-os-Montes and Alto Douro (UTAD),Vila Real,Portugal.
(4)Group of Leptospirosis and Lyme Borreliosis,Unit of Medical
Microbiology,Institute of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (IHMT), University Nova
of Lisboa (UNL),Centre for Microbial Resources (CREM),Faculty of Science and
Technology (FCT),Lisboa,Portugal.

Leptospirosis is a zoonosis of worldwide distribution, caused by infection with
pathogenic spirochaetes of the genus Leptospira. The wild boar (Sus scrofa), an
important hunting species in Europe, seems to play a significant role in the
epidemiological cycle of leptospirosis. A total of 101 serum samples from wild
boar hunted in Northern Portugal were analysed for leptospiral antibodies
detection by microscopic agglutination test. Sera were collected during hunting
seasons (2011-2013) and tested with 17 different pathogenic serovars of
Leptospira. Antibodies against nine serovars were detected in 66 (65·4%) of these
sera. Serovars Tarassovi and Altodouro exhibited the highest seroreactivity rates
(23·8% and 16·8%, respectively), followed by Autumnalis (7·9%) and Bratislava
(6·9%). Age and district of origin were found to be risk factors for the presence
of leptospiral antibodies in contrast to gender. From a One Health perspective,
this study revealed that wild boar should be considered as a potential source of 
leptospirosis dissemination for humans and animal species (domestic and wild) in 
shared environments, particularly in the Trás-os-Montes region.

PMID: 25519057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Nat Commun. 2014 Dec 17;5:5777. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6777.

The switching role of ß-adrenergic receptor signalling in cell survival or death 
decision of cardiomyocytes.

Shin SY(1), Kim T(2), Lee HS(3), Kang JH(3), Lee JY(2), Cho KH(3), Kim do H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bio and Brain Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 305-701, Korea. (2)School of Life Sciences and
Systems Biology Research Center, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology
(GIST), Gwangju 500-712, Korea. (3)1] Department of Bio and Brain Engineering,
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 305-701,
Korea [2] Graduate School of Medical Science and Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon
305-701, Korea.

How cell fate (survival or death) is determined and whether such determination
depends on the strength of stimulation has remained unclear. In this study, we
discover that the cell fate of cardiomyocytes switches from survival to death
with the increase of ß-adrenergic receptor (ß-AR) stimulation. Mathematical
simulations combined with biochemical experimentation of ß-AR signalling pathways
show that the gradual increment of isoproterenol (a non-selective ß1/ß2-AR
agonist) induces the switching response of Bcl-2 expression from the initial
increase followed by a decrease below its basal level. The ERK1/2 and
ICER-mediated feed-forward loop is the hidden design principle underlying such
cell fate switching characteristics. Moreover, we find that ß1-blocker treatment 
increases the survival effect of ß-AR stimuli through the regulation of Bcl-2
expression leading to the resistance to cell death, providing new insight into
the mechanism of therapeutic effects. Our systems analysis further suggests a
novel potential therapeutic strategy for heart disease.

PMCID: PMC4284638
PMID: 25517116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Tsitologiia. 2014;56(1):5-13.

[Soluble forms of adenylyl cyclases of spermatozoa].

[Article in Russian]

Shpakov AO, Derkach KV.

Soluble (cytosolic) forms of adenylyl cyclases (sAC), the enzymes catalyzing the 
conversion of ATP to the second messenger cAMP, play a key role in the regulation
of spermatogenesis, control maturation of spermatozoa in the epididymis and their
capacitation in the female genital tract, which determines their ability to
fertilize. In the last years the significant progress was made in the study of
the structural and functional organization and regulatory properties of sAC,
their localization in the spermatozoa as well as in the investigation of
intracellular cascades functionally coupled with sAC, including protein kinase A,
cAMP-dependent phosphodiesterase, non-receptor tyrosine kinases, tyrosine
phosphatases, transcription factors of CREB/CREM-family. The molecular mechanisms
involved in the regulation of the intracellular concentration of bicarbonate
anions, the main endogenous activators of sAC, were deciphered. Many evidences
were obtained that the decrease of functional activity of sAC and signaling
cascades and effector proteins coupled to it, as well as bicarbonate anion
transporters lead to disturbances of spermatogenesis. As a consequence, the
development of approaches for controlling the activity of sAC in spermatozoa is
one of the priority ways to treat dysfunctions of the male reproductive system.
Present review is devoted to advances in the study of soluble forms of AC and
functionally coupled to them signaling cascades and effector proteins in the
spermatozoa, as well as to the unresolved issues in this area.

PMID: 25509140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Front Behav Neurosci. 2014 Nov 27;8:407. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00407.
eCollection 2014.

Inducible forebrain-specific ablation of the transcription factor Creb during
adulthood induces anxiety but no spatial/contextual learning deficits.

Vogt MA(1), Inta D(1), Luoni A(2), Elkin H(1), Pfeiffer N(1), Riva MA(2), Gass
P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, RG Animal Models in Psychiatry,
Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim / Heidelberg
University Mannheim, Germany. (2)Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular
Sciences University of Milan, Milan, Italy.

The cyclic AMP (cAMP)-response element binding protein (CREB) is an
activity-dependent transcription factor playing a role in synaptic plasticity,
learning and memory, and emotional behavior. However, the impact of Creb ablation
on rodent behavior is vague as e.g., memory performance of different Creb mutant 
mice depends on the specific type of mutation per se but additionally on the
background and learning protocol differences. Here we present the first targeted 
ablation of CREB induced during adulthood selectively in principal forebrain
neurons in a pure background strain of C57BL/6 mice. All hippocampal principal
neurons exhibited lack of CREB expression. Mutant mice showed a severe anxiety
phenotype in the openfield and novel object exploration test as well as in the
Dark-Light Box Test, but unaltered hippocampus-dependent long-term memory in the 
Morris water maze and in context dependent fear conditioning. On the molecular
level, CREB ablation led to CREM up regulation in the hippocampus and frontal
cortex which may at least in part compensate for the loss of CREB. BDNF, a
postulated CREB target gene, was down regulated in the frontal lobe but not in
the hippocampus; neurogenesis remained unaltered. Our data indicate that in the
adult mouse forebrain the late onset of CREB ablation can, in case of memory
functionality, be compensated for and is not essential for memory consolidation
and retrieval during adulthood. In contrast, the presence of CREB protein during 
adulthood seems to be pivotal for the regulation of emotional behavior.

PMCID: PMC4245921
PMID: 25505876  [PubMed]


42. Neuroscience. 2015 Jan 29;285:34-46. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.11.013.
Epub 2014 Nov 14.

Self administration of oxycodone alters synaptic plasticity gene expression in
the hippocampus differentially in male adolescent and adult mice.

Zhang Y(1), Brownstein AJ(2), Buonora M(2), Niikura K(2), Ho A(2), Correa da Rosa
J(3), Kreek MJ(2), Ott J(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of the Biology of Addictive Diseases, The Rockefeller
University, New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address: zhangyo@rockefeller.edu.
(2)The Laboratory of the Biology of Addictive Diseases, The Rockefeller
University, New York, NY 10065, USA. (3)Laboratory of Investigative Dermatology, 
The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA. (4)Institute of Psychology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China; The Laboratory of Statistical
Genetics, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.

Abuse and addiction to prescription opioids such as oxycodone (a short-acting Mu 
opioid receptor (MOP-r) agonist) in adolescence is a pressing public health
issue. We have previously shown differences in oxycodone self-administration
behaviors between adolescent and adult C57BL/6J mice and expression of striatal
neurotransmitter receptor genes, in areas involved in reward. In this study, we
aimed to determine whether oxycodone self-administration differentially affects
genes regulating synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus of adolescent compared to
adult mice, since the hippocampus may be involved in learning aspects associated 
with chronic drug self administration. Hippocampus was isolated for mRNA analysis
from mice that had self administered oxycodone (0.25 mg/kg/infusion) 2h/day for
14 consecutive days or from yoked saline controls. Gene expression was analyzed
with real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using a commercially available
"synaptic plasticity" PCR array containing 84 genes. We found that adolescent and
adult control mice significantly differed in the expression of several genes in
the absence of oxycodone exposure, including those coding for mitogen-activated
protein kinase, calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II gamma subunit,
glutamate receptor, ionotropic AMPA2 and metabotropic 5. Chronic oxycodone self
administration increased proviral integration site 1 (Pim1) and thymoma viral
proto-oncogene 1 mRNA levels compared to controls in both age groups. Both Pim1
and cadherin 2 mRNAs showed a significant combined effect of Drug Condition and
Age × Drug Condition. Furthermore, the mRNA levels of both cadherin 2 and cAMP
response element modulators showed an experiment-wise significant difference
between oxycodone and saline control in adult but not in adolescent mice.
Overall, this study demonstrates for the first time that chronic oxycodone
self-administration differentially alters synaptic plasticity gene expression in 
the hippocampus of adolescent and adult mice.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 25446355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Pflugers Arch. 2015 Oct;467(10):2165-77. doi: 10.1007/s00424-014-1652-6. Epub
2014 Nov 27.

Transcription factor cAMP response element modulator (Crem) restrains
Pdgf-dependent proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells in mice.

Seidl MD(1), Steingräber AK(2), Wolf CT(2), Sur TM(2), Hildebrandt I(2), Witten
A(3), Stoll M(3), Fischer JW(4), Schmitz W(2), Müller FU(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Münster, Domagkstr.
12, D-48149, Münster, Germany. seidl@uni-muenster.de. (2)Institute for
Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Münster, Domagkstr. 12, D-48149,
Münster, Germany. (3)Institute for Human Genetics, Genetic Epidemiology,
University of Münster, D-48129, Münster, Germany. (4)Institute for Pharmacology
and Clinical Pharmacology, Düsseldorf University Hospital, D-40225, Düsseldorf,
Germany.

Transcription factors of the cAMP response element-binding protein (Creb)/cAMP
response element modulator (Crem) family were linked to the switch from a
contractile to a proliferating phenotype in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs).
Here, we analyzed the vascular function of Crem in mice with a global
inactivation of Crem (Crem(-/-)). CRE-mediated transcriptional activity was
enhanced in primary Crem(-/-) VSMCs under nonstimulated conditions and under
stimulation with Forskolin and platelet-derived growth factor (Pdgf) whereas
stimulation with nitric oxide or cGMP showed no effect. This elevated
CRE-mediated transcriptional activity as a result of Crem inactivation did not
alter aortic contractility or fractions of proliferating or apoptotic aortic
VSMCs in situ, and no impact of Crem inactivation on the development of
atherosclerotic plaques was observed. Crem(-/-) mice exhibited an increased
neointima formation after carotid ligation associated with an increased
proliferation of VSMCs in the carotid media. Pdgf-stimulated proliferation of
primary aortic Crem(-/-) VSMCs was increased along with an upregulation of
messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of Pdgf receptor, alpha polypeptide (Pdgfra),
cyclophilin A (Ppia), the regulator of G-protein signaling 5 (Rgs5), and Rho
GTPase-activating protein 12 (Arhgap12). Taken together, our data reveal the
inhibition of Pdgf-stimulated proliferation of VSMCs by repressing the
Pdgf-stimulated CRE-mediated transcriptional activation as the predominant
function of Crem in mouse vasculature suggesting an important role of Crem in
vasculoproliferative diseases.

PMCID: PMC4564437
PMID: 25425331  [PubMed - in process]


44. Oncotarget. 2014 Nov 15;5(21):10318-31.

Specific genomic and transcriptomic aberrations in tumors induced by partial
hepatectomy of a chronically inflamed murine liver.

Ella E(1), Heim D(2), Stoyanov E(1), Harari-Steinfeld R(1), Steinfeld I(3), Pappo
O(4), Perlman TS(1), Nachmansson N(5), Rivkin L(1), Olam D(1), Abramovitch R(6), 
Wege H(2), Galun E(1), Goldenberg D(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Goldyne Savad Institute of Gene Therapy, Hadassah-Hebrew University
Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. (2)Department of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Computer Science Department, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
Israel. (4)Department of Pathology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel. (5)Magnetic Resonance Imaging/Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
Laboratory, Human Biology Research Center, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical
Center, Jerusalem, Israel. (6)The Goldyne Savad Institute of Gene Therapy,
Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging/Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy Laboratory, Human Biology Research
Center, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.

Resection of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tumors by partial hepatectomy (PHx)
is associated with promoting hepatocarcinogenesis. We have previously reported
that PHx promotes hepatocarcinogenesis in the Mdr2-knockout (Mdr2-KO) mouse, a
model for inflammation-mediated HCC. Now, to explore the molecular mechanisms
underlying the tumor-promoting effect of PHx, we compared genomic and
transcriptomic profiles of HCC tumors developing in the Mdr2-KO mice either
spontaneously or following PHx. PHx accelerated HCC development in these mice by 
four months. PHx-induced tumors had major chromosomal aberrations: all were
amplifications affecting multiple chromosomes. Most of these amplifications were 
located near the acrocentric centromeres of murine chromosomes. Four different
chromosomal regions were amplified each in at least three tumors. The human
orthologs of these common amplified regions are known to be amplified in HCC. All
tumors of untreated mice had chromosomal aberrations, including both deletions
and amplifications. Amplifications in spontaneous tumors affected fewer
chromosomes and were not located preferentially at the chromosomal edges.
Comparison of gene expression profiles revealed a significantly enriched
expression of oncogenes, chromosomal instability markers and E2F1 targets in the 
post-PHx compared to spontaneous tumors. Both tumor groups shared the same
frequent amplification at chromosome 18. Here, we revealed that one of the
regulatory genes encoded by this amplified region, Crem, was over-expressed in
the nuclei of murine and human HCC cells in vivo, and that it stimulated
proliferation of human HCC cells in vitro. Our results demonstrate that PHx of a 
chronically inflamed liver directed tumor development to a discrete pathway
characterized by amplification of specific chromosomal regions and expression of 
specific tumor-promoting genes. Crem is a new candidate HCC oncogene frequently
amplified in this model and frequently over-expressed in human HCC.

PMCID: PMC4279375
PMID: 25401338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1247:323-34. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2004-4_23.

Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE): application in population structure
studies of bovine mastitis-causing streptococci.

Santos-Sanches I(1), Chambel L, Tenreiro R.

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia (FCT), Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos
(CREM) and Research Unit on Applied Molecular Biosciences (UCIBIO, REQUIMTE),
Universidade Nova de Lisboa (UNL), Campus de Caparica, 2829-516, Caparica,
Lisbon, Portugal, imgs@fct.unl.pt.

Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) separates large DNA molecules by the use 
of an alternating electrical field, such that greater size resolution can be
obtained when compared to normal agarose gel electrophoresis. PFGE is often
employed to track pathogens and is a valuable typing scheme to detect and
differentiate strains. Particularly, the contour-clamped homogeneous electric
field (CHEF) PFGE system is considered to be the gold standard for use in
epidemiological studies of many bacterial pathogens. Here we describe a PFGE
protocol that was applicable to the study of bovine streptococci, namely,
Streptococcus agalactiae (group B Streptococcus, GBS), Streptococcus dysgalactiae
subsp. dysgalactiae (group C Streptococcus, GCS), and Streptococcus uberis-which 
are relevant pathogens causing mastitis, a highly prevalent and costly disease in
dairy industry due to antibiotherapy and loss in milk production.

PMID: 25399106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Dis Model Mech. 2015 Jan;8(1):65-80. doi: 10.1242/dmm.017145. Epub 2014 Nov 7.

Upregulation of CREM/ICER suppresses wound endothelial CRE-HIF-1a-VEGF-dependent 
signaling and impairs angiogenesis in type 2 diabetes.

Bitar MS(1), Al-Mulla F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Kuwait University, Safat 13110,
Kuwait. milad.bitar@gmail.com. (2)Department of Pathology, Kuwait University,
Safat 13110, Kuwait.

Impaired angiogenesis and endothelial dysfunction in type 2 diabetes constitute
dominant risk factors for non-healing wounds and most forms of cardiovascular
disease. We propose that diabetes shifts the 'angiogenic balance' in favor of an 
excessive anti-angiogenic phenotype. Herein, we report that diabetes impairs in
vivo sponge angiogenic capacity by decreasing VEGF expression and fibrovascular
invasion, and reciprocally enhances the formation of angiostatic molecules, such 
as thrombospondins, NF<U+03BA>B and FasL. Defective in vivo angiogenesis prompted
cellular studies in cultured endothelial cells derived from subcutaneous sponge
implants (SIECs) of control and Goto-Kakizaki rats. Ensuing data from diabetic
SIECs demonstrated a marked upregulation in cAMP-PKA-CREB signaling, possibly
stemming from increased expression of adenylyl cyclase isoforms 3 and 8, and
decreased expression of PDE3. Mechanistically, we found that oxidative stress and
PKA activation in diabetes enhanced CREM/ICER expression. This reduces IRS2
cellular content by inhibiting cAMP response element (CRE) transcriptional
activity. Consequently, a decrease in the activity of Akt-mTOR ensued with a
concomitant reduction in the total and nuclear protein levels of HIF-1a. Limiting
HIF-1a availability for the specific hypoxia response elements in diabetic SIECs 
elicited a marked reduction in VEGF expression, both at the mRNA and protein
levels. These molecular abnormalities were illustrated functionally by a defect
in various pro-angiogenic properties, including cell proliferation, migration and
tube formation. A genetic-based strategy in diabetic SIECs using siRNAs against
CREM/ICER significantly augmented the PKA-dependent VEGF expression. To this end,
the current data identify the importance of CREM/ICER as a negative regulator of 
endothelial function and establish a link between CREM/ICER overexpression and
impaired angiogenesis during the course of diabetes. Moreover, it could also
point to CREM/ICER as a potential therapeutic target in the treatment of
pathological angiogenesis.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4283651
PMID: 25381014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 3;9(11):e111802. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111802.
eCollection 2014.

Towards novel amino acid-base contacts in gene regulatory proteins: AraR--a case 
study.

Correia IL(1), Franco IS(2), de Sá-Nogueira I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciências da Vida (DCV), Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos
(CREM), Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia (FCT-UNL), Caparica, Portugal;
Instituto Tecnologia Química e Biológica (ITQB-UNL), Oeiras, Portugal.
(2)Instituto Tecnologia Química e Biológica (ITQB-UNL), Oeiras, Portugal.
(3)Departamento de Ciências da Vida (DCV), Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos
(CREM), Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia (FCT-UNL), Caparica, Portugal.

AraR is a transcription factor involved in the regulation of carbon catabolism in
Bacillus subtilis. This regulator belongs to the vast GntR family of
helix-turn-helix (HTH) bacterial metabolite-responsive transcription factors. In 
this study, AraR-DNA specific interactions were analysed by an in vitro
missing-contact probing and validated using an in vivo model. We show that amino 
acid E30 of AraR, a highly conserved residue in GntR regulators, is indirectly
responsible for the specificity of amino acid-base contacts, and that by mutating
this residue it will be possible to achieve new specificities towards DNA
contacts. The results highlight the importance in DNA recognition and binding of 
highly conserved residues across certain families of transcription factors that
are located in the DNA-binding domain but not predicted to specifically contact
bases on the DNA. These new findings not only contribute to a more detailed
comprehension of AraR-operator interactions, but may also be useful for the
establishment of a framework of rules governing protein-DNA recognition.

PMCID: PMC4218819
PMID: 25364981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Hepatology. 2015 Mar;61(3):990-1002. doi: 10.1002/hep.27571. Epub 2015 Jan 30.

Cyclic adenosine monophosphate-responsive element modulator alpha overexpression 
impairs function of hepatic myeloid-derived suppressor cells and aggravates
immune-mediated hepatitis in mice.

Hammerich L(1), Warzecha KT, Stefkova M, Bartneck M, Ohl K, Gassler N, Luedde T, 
Trautwein C, Tenbrock K, Tacke F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III, RWTH University-Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany.

Molecular factors driving immune-mediated inflammation in the liver are
incompletely understood. The transcription factor, cyclic adenosine
monophosphate-responsive element modulator alpha (CREMa) can endorse
differentiation of T lymphocytes toward T-helper (Th)17 cells, thereby promoting 
autoimmunity in systemic lupus erythematosus or lung inflammation. To investigate
the role of CREMa in liver disease, we subjected transgenic (Tg) mice
overexpressing CREMa under control of the CD2 promoter (cremtg mice), which
restrains expression mainly to lymphocytes (T, natural killer [NK], and NKT
cells), to acute and chronic liver injury models. Already in steady state, Tg
CREMa overexpression broadly reduced hepatic immune cell numbers by decreasing
their viability, but did not affect immune cell migration or the fibrogenic
response to chronic liver injury. Strikingly, cremtg mice developed more severe
immune-mediated hepatitis with a higher mortality rate, compared to wild-type
(wt) mice, upon concanavalin A (ConA) administration. Unlike in T cells from
spleen, CREMa overexpression did not induce a predominant Th17 response in
intrahepatic T cells, given that hepatic cremtg CD4+ T cells expressed less
interleukin (IL)-17 than wt T cells. Reconstitution of Rag1-/- mice with Crem-/- 
T cells did not ameliorate ConA hepatitis. Overexpression of CREMa did not
influence NK and NKT-cell effector functions either. Interestingly, a subset of
monocytic myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) also expressed CD2 and CREMa. 
Cremtg MDSCs isolated from liver expressed reduced inducible nitric oxide
synthase and arginase 1 and displayed a reduced T-cell suppressive activity. The 
adoptive transfer of wt MDSCs was capable of reducing the fulminant
immune-mediated liver damage in cremtg mice to wt level.CONCLUSION: These results
suggest compartmental differences of T cell activation pathways between liver and
other organs in autoimmunity and define a functional role of CREMa in hepatic
monocytic MDSCs for the pathogenesis of immune-mediated liver disease.

© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 25330465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Microbiol Methods. 2014 Dec;107:13-22. doi: 10.1016/j.mimet.2014.08.017. Epub
2014 Sep 2.

Rapid identification of veterinary-relevant Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex
species using 16S rDNA, IS6110 and Regions of Difference-targeted dual-labelled
hydrolysis probes.

Costa P(1), Amaro A(2), Ferreira AS(3), Machado D(4), Albuquerque T(2), Couto
I(5), Botelho A(2), Viveiros M(6), Inácio J(7).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nacional de Investigação Agrária e Veterinária, I.P. (INIAV, I.P.), 
Unidade Estratégica de Investigação e Serviços em Produção e Saúde Animal,
Lisboa, Portugal; Grupo de Micobactérias, Unidade de Ensino e Investigação de
Microbiologia Médica, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova
de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal. (2)Instituto Nacional de Investigação Agrária e
Veterinária, I.P. (INIAV, I.P.), Unidade Estratégica de Investigação e Serviços
em Produção e Saúde Animal, Lisboa, Portugal. (3)Instituto Nacional de
Investigação Agrária e Veterinária, I.P. (INIAV, I.P.), Unidade Estratégica de
Investigação e Serviços em Produção e Saúde Animal, Lisboa, Portugal; Instituto
de Ciências Biomédicas de Abel Salazar, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(4)Grupo de Micobactérias, Unidade de Ensino e Investigação de Microbiologia
Médica, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa,
Lisboa, Portugal. (5)Grupo de Micobactérias, Unidade de Ensino e Investigação de 
Microbiologia Médica, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova
de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal; Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos, CREM,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Portugal. (6)Grupo de Micobactérias, Unidade de
Ensino e Investigação de Microbiologia Médica, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina
Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal; Centro de Malária e
Outras Doenças Tropicais, IHMT/UNL, Lisboa, Portugal. (7)Instituto Nacional de
Investigação Agrária e Veterinária, I.P. (INIAV, I.P.), Unidade Estratégica de
Investigação e Serviços em Produção e Saúde Animal, Lisboa, Portugal; School of
Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences, University of Brighton, United Kingdom.
Electronic address: j.inacio@brighton.ac.uk.

Members of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTC) are causative agents of
tuberculosis (TB) in both humans and animals. MTC species are genetically very
similar but may differ in their epidemiology, namely geographic distribution and 
host preferences, virulence traits and antimicrobial susceptibility patterns.
However, the conventional laboratory diagnosis does not routinely differentiate
between the species of the MTC. In this work we describe a rapid and robust
two-step five-target probe-based real-time PCR identification algorithm, based on
genomic deletion analysis, to identify the MTC species most commonly associated
with TB in livestock and other animals. The first step allows the confirmation of
the cultures as MTC members, by targeting their IS6110 element, or as a
mycobacterial species, if only a 16S rDNA product is detected in the duplex
amplification reaction. If a MTC member is identified, the second amplification
step allows the assessment of the presence or absence of the RD1, RD4 and RD9
genomic regions. The correspondent pattern allows us to infer the species of the 
isolate as M. tuberculosis (if all RDs are present), Mycobacterium caprae (if
only RD1 and RD4 are present) and Mycobacterium bovis (if only RD1 is present).
The identification algorithm developed presented an almost perfect agreement with
the results of the routine bacteriological analysis, with a kappa coefficient of 
0.970 (CI(P95%) 0.929-1.000). The assay is able to be adaptable to automation and
implementation in the routine diagnostic framework of veterinary diagnostic
laboratories, with a particular focus for reference laboratories.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25192844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Vet Microbiol. 2014 Sep 17;173(1-2):92-100. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2014.06.027.
Epub 2014 Jul 8.

Relatedness of Mycobacterium avium subspecies hominissuis clinical isolates of
human and porcine origins assessed by MLVA.

Leão C(1), Canto A(2), Machado D(3), Sanches IS(4), Couto I(5), Viveiros M(3),
Inácio J(6), Botelho A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nacional de Investigação Agrária e Veterinária (INIAV, IP), Estrada 
de Benfica 701, 1549-011 Lisboa, Portugal; Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos
(CREM), Departamento de Ciências da Vida, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Campus da Caparica, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal.
(2)Instituto Nacional de Investigação Agrária e Veterinária (INIAV, IP), Estrada 
de Benfica 701, 1549-011 Lisboa, Portugal. (3)Grupo de Micobactérias, Unidade de 
Microbiologia Médica, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical da Universidade
Nova deLisboa (IHMT/UNL), Rua da Junqueira, 100, 1349-008 Lisboa, Portugal.
(4)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Departamento de Ciências da Vida,
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Campus da
Caparica, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal. (5)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos
(CREM), Departamento de Ciências da Vida, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Campus da Caparica, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal;
Grupo de Micobactérias, Unidade de Microbiologia Médica, Instituto de Higiene e
Medicina Tropical da Universidade Nova deLisboa (IHMT/UNL), Rua da Junqueira,
100, 1349-008 Lisboa, Portugal. (6)Instituto Nacional de Investigação Agrária e
Veterinária (INIAV, IP), Estrada de Benfica 701, 1549-011 Lisboa, Portugal;
School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences, University of Brighton, Lewes Road,
Brighton BN2 4GJ, United Kingdom. Electronic address: joao.inacio@iniav.pt.
(7)Instituto Nacional de Investigação Agrária e Veterinária (INIAV, IP), Estrada 
de Benfica 701, 1549-011 Lisboa, Portugal. Electronic address:
ana.botelho@iniav.pt.

Mycobacterium avium subsp. hominissuis (MAH) is an important opportunistic
pathogen, infecting humans and animals, notably pigs. Several methods have been
used to characterize MAH strains. RFLP and PFGE typing techniques have been used 
as standard methods but are technically demanding. In contrast, the analysis of
VNTR loci is a simpler, affordable and highly reliable PCR-based technique,
allowing a numerical and reproductive digitalization of typing data. In this
study, the analysis of Mycobacterium avium tandem repeats (MATRs) loci was
adapted to evaluate the genetic diversity of epidemiological unrelated MAH
clinical strains of human (n=28) and porcine (n=69) origins, collected from
diverse geographical regions across mainland Portugal. These MAH isolates were
found to be genetically diverse and genotypes are randomly distributed across the
country. Some of the human strains shared identical VNTR profiles with porcine
isolates. Our study shows that the VNTR genotyping using selected MATR loci is a 
useful analysis technique for assessing the genetic diversity of MAH isolates
from Portugal. This typing method could be successfully applied in other
countries toward the implementation of a worldwide open-access database of
MATR-VNTR profiles of MAH isolates, allowing a better assessment of the global
epidemiology traits of this important pathogenic species.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25085520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Endocrinology. 2014 Oct;155(10):3829-42. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1254. Epub 2014 Jul
24.

ß-cell induction in vivo in severely diabetic male mice by changing the
circulating levels and pattern of the ratios of estradiol to androgens.

Inada A(1), Inada O, Fujii NL, Fujishima K, Inai T, Fujii H, Sueishi K, Kurachi
K.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Diabetes and Genes and Advanced Medical Initiatives (A.I.,
O.I., K.F.), Developmental Molecular Anatomy (T.I.), and Pathophysiological and
Experimental Pathology (HY.F., K.S.), and Medical Institute of Bioregulation
(K.K.), Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582,
Japan; and Department of Health Promotion Sciences (N.L.F.), Graduate School of
Human Health Sciences, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Tokyo 192-0397, Japan.

Previously we have generated transgenic (Tg) mice developing severe diabetes
early in life with a profound depletion of ß-cells with ß-cell-directed
expression of inducible cAMP early repressor-I<U+03B3>. Only male mice continue to
demonstrate hyperglycemia throughout life. To investigate this sexual dimorphism,
we treated severely diabetic male Tg mice with orchiectomy (ORX) or 17ß-estradiol
(E2) pellet implantation alone or in combination with ORX and E2-implantation to 
change the circulating levels and patterns of the ratio of estradiol to
androgens. In the Tg-ORX group, the blood-glucose levels decreased to a certain
level within several weeks but never reached the female Tg-control level. In
contrast, the Tg-ORX+E2 or Tg-E2 group showed a more rapid drop in blood glucose 
to the basal level with a substantial increase in ß-cells, thus preventing the
occurrence of severe diabetes in the male mice. The ß-cells, not only within
islet but also in and adjacent to ducts and scattered ß-cell clusters, were
strongly induced by 1 week after treatment, and the islet morphology dramatically
changed. Enhanced ß-cell induction in the ducts occurred concomitantly with
markedly increased levels of pancreatic duodenal homeobox-1 and related
transcription factors. The glucose-lowering and ß-cell-increasing effects were
independent of the age at which the treatment is started. These data provide
evidence that the circulating level of E2 and the ratio of E2 to T greatly affect
the blood glucose levels, the ß-cell induction, and the islet morphology in
diabetic male Tg mice. This novel mechanism offers great potential for developing
strategies to increase the number of ß-cells in vivo.

PMID: 25057794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Sex Transm Dis. 2014 Aug;41(8):467-9. doi: 10.1097/OLQ.0000000000000161.

Evaluation of an immunochromatographic point-of-care test for the simultaneous
detection of nontreponemal and treponemal antibodies in patients with syphilis.

Castro R(1), Lopes Â, da Luz Martins Pereira F.

Author information: 
(1)From the *Clin Path-Unidade de Microbiologia Médica/Instituto de Higiene e
Medicina Tropical, Lisboa, Portugal; Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM),
Lisboa, Portugal; and Chemical Engineering-§Unidade de Microbiologia
Médica/Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Lisboa, Portugal.

We described the evaluation of the Syphilis Screening & Confirm Assay for the
simultaneous detection of nontreponemal and treponemal antibodies. A total of 248
samples were evaluated. The sensitivity of the tests was 98.8%, 99.5% and 98.9%, 
while specificity was 94.7%, 88.9% and 93.2%, respectively, as compared with the 
rapid plasma reagin, Treponema pallidum hemagglutination assay, and fluorescent
treponemal antibody absorption tests.

PMID: 25013972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Biol Reprod. 2014 Aug;91(2):52. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.120527. Epub 2014 Jun
18.

CREM variants rs4934540 and rs2295415 conferred susceptibility to nonobstructive 
azoospermia risk in the Chinese population.

He XJ(1), Song B(1), Du WD(2), Cao YX(3), Zhang Y(4), Ruan J(5), Tian H(6), Zhou 
FS(7), Zuo XB(7), Wu H(1), Zha X(1), Xie XS(4), Wei ZL(1), Zhou P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, China Institute of Reproductive Medicine, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, China Anhui Provincial Engineering Technology Research Center 
of Biopreservation and Artificial Organs, Hefei, China. (2)Department of Biology,
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China State Key Laboratory Incubation Base of
Dermatology, Ministry of National Science and Technology, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, China weidongdu@hotmail.com. (3)Reproductive Medicine Center, 
The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China Institute
of Reproductive Medicine, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China Anhui Provincial
Engineering Technology Research Center of Biopreservation and Artificial Organs, 
Hefei, China caoyunxia6@126.com. (4)Department of Biology, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, China. (5)Reproductive Medicine Center, Yijishan Hospital of
Wannan Medical University, China. (6)Department of Cell and Developmental
Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, 
Hefei, China. (7)State Key Laboratory Incubation Base of Dermatology, Ministry of
National Science and Technology, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China.

To evaluate the association of variants related to spermatogenesis with
susceptibility to Chinese idiopathic nonobstructive azoospermia (NOA), seventeen 
tag single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in CREM, ACT, KIF17b, and SPAG8 were
analyzed in 361 NOA patients and 368 controls by Sequenom iplex technology. The
results showed that two CREM SNPs, rs4934540 and rs22954152, were significantly
associated with NOA and played protective roles against the disease (P value with
Bonferroni correction = 0.00017, odds ratio [OR] = 0.624 and P = 0.012, OR =
0.686, respectively). Haplotype analysis of CREM gene variants suggested that
haplotype CGTG of the SNPs, rs4934540, rs2295415, rs11592356, and rs1148247,
exhibited significant protective effect against the occurrence of NOA (P = 0.001,
OR = 0.659). The haplotype TATG conferred a significantly increased risk of NOA
(P = 0.011, OR = 1.317). Furthermore, making use of quantitative RT-PCR, we
demonstrated that relative mRNA expression of CREM in NOA patients with
maturation arrest was only one-third of that in the controls with normal
spermatogenesis (P < 0.0001). Our findings indicated that the polymorphisms of
CREM gene were associated with NOA in the Chinese population and low CREM
expression might be involved in the pathogenesis of spermatogenesis maturation
arrest.

© 2014 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 24943041  [PubMed - in process]


54. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 18;9(6):e96770. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096770. eCollection
2014.

Toxoplasma gondii decreases the reproductive fitness in mice.

Dvorakova-Hortova K(1), Sidlova A(1), Ded L(2), Hladovcova D(1), Vieweg M(3),
Weidner W(3), Steger K(3), Stopka P(1), Paradowska-Dogan A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biocev Group, Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Charles University in
Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. (2)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute 
of Biotechnology, Academy of Science, Prague, Czech Republic. (3)Department of
Urology, Pediatric Urology and Andrology, Justus Liebig University of Giessen,
Giessen, Germany.

Toxoplasma gondii is a common protozoan parasite that infects warm-blooded
animals throughout the world, including mice and humans. During infection, both, 
the parasite and the host, utilize various mechanisms to maximize their own
reproductive success. Mice and humans are both the intermediate hosts for
Toxoplasma gondii, which forms specialized vacuoles containing reproductive cysts
in the formers' tissue. As half of the human population is infected, developing a
disease called toxoplasmosis, along with an ever-growing number of couples
suffering with idiopathic infertility, it is therefore surprising that there is a
lack of research on how Toxoplasma gondii can alter reproductive parameters. In
this study, a detailed histometric screening of the testicular function along
with the levels of the pituitary luteinizing hormone (LH) were analysed in
infected mice. Data on relative testis and epididymis weight, and sperm count
were also collected. Based on the results obtained, the level of LH in the urine 
of Toxoplasma gondii infected mice was lower compared to the control. In direct
correlation with the hormone level, testicular function and sperm production was 
also significantly lower in Toxoplasma gondii positive group using sperm count
and histometric analysis as a marker. Not only were the number of leptotene
primary spermatocytes and spermatids lowered, but the number of Sertoli cells and
the tubule diameter were elevated. In parallel, a pilot epigenetic study on
global testicular methylation, and specific methylation of Crem, Creb1 and
Hspa1genes essential for successfully ongoing spermatogenesis was performed.
Global methylation was elevated in Toxoplasma infected mice, and differences in
the DNA methylation of selected genes were detected between the Toxoplasma
positive and control group. These findings demonstrate a direct relation between 
Toxoplasma gondii infection and the decrease of male reproductive fitness in
mice, which may contribute to an increase of idiopathic infertility in humans.

PMCID: PMC4062421
PMID: 24940596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Psychiatry Investig. 2014 Apr;11(2):200-3. doi: 10.4306/pi.2014.11.2.200. Epub
2014 Apr 11.

Epistatic Interactions between CREB and CREM Variants in Affective Disorder.

Chiesa A(1), Marsano A(2), Han C(3), Lee SJ(4), Patkar AA(5), Pae CU(6), Serretti
A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and NeuroMotor Sciences, University of Bologna,
Bologna, Italy. ; Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of
Messina, Messina, Italy. (2)Department of Biomedical and NeuroMotor Sciences,
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. (3)Department of Psychiatry, College of
Medicine, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of
Psychiatry, Bucheon St. Mary's Hospital, The Catholic University of Korea College
of Medicine, Bucheon, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, Bucheon St. Mary's Hospital, The Catholic University
of Korea College of Medicine, Bucheon, Republic of Korea. ; Department of
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC,
USA.

The aim of the present work is to investigate the existence of epistatic
interactions possibly influencing psychotropic agents' response between rs6740584
within Cyclic adenosine monophosphate Response Element Binding (CREB) and
rs12775799 within cAMP response element-modulator (CREM) variants in bipolar
disorder (BD) and major depressive disorder (MDD). All BD and MDD patients were
administered with the Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS) and Hamilton Depression
Rating Scale (HAMD) at baseline and at endpoint, respectively. A multiple
regression model was employed to investigate the existence of possible epistatic 
interactions between the two variants and diverse clinical factors including drug
response in affective disorders. No significant epistatic interaction was
observed between rs6740584 within CREB and rs12775799 within CREM on both symptom
improvement and other clinical factors in affective disorders. Our preliminary
results suggest that no epistatic interaction between rs6740584 within CREB and
rs12775799 within CREM should exist on clinical improvement and clinical factors 
in affective disorders.

PMCID: PMC4023096
PMID: 24843377  [PubMed]


56. Infect Immun. 2014 Jul;82(7):2923-34. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01385-13. Epub 2014 Apr
28.

The Salmonella effector SteA contributes to the control of membrane dynamics of
Salmonella-containing vacuoles.

Domingues L(1), Holden DW(2), Mota LJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Infection Biology Laboratory, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica
António Xavier, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Oeiras, Portugal Centro de Recursos 
Microbiológicos (CREM), Departamento de Ciências da Vida, Faculdade de Ciências e
Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal. (2)MRC Centre for
Molecular Bacteriology and Infection, Imperial College London, London, United
Kingdom. (3)Infection Biology Laboratory, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e
Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Oeiras, Portugal Centro de
Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Departamento de Ciências da Vida, Faculdade de
Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal
ljmota@fct.unl.pt.

Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium is a bacterial pathogen causing
gastroenteritis in humans and a typhoid-like systemic disease in mice. S.
Typhimurium virulence is related to its capacity to multiply intracellularly
within a membrane-bound compartment, the Salmonella-containing vacuole (SCV), and
depends on type III secretion systems that deliver bacterial effector proteins
into host cells. Here, we analyzed the cellular function of the Salmonella
effector SteA. We show that, compared to cells infected by wild-type S.
Typhimurium, cells infected by <U+0394>steA mutant bacteria displayed fewer
Salmonella-induced filaments (SIFs), an increased clustering of SCVs, and
morphologically abnormal vacuoles containing more than one bacterium. The
increased clustering of SCVs and the appearance of vacuoles containing more than 
one bacterium were suppressed by inhibition of the activity of the microtubule
motor dynein or kinesin-1. Clustering and positioning of SCVs are controlled by
the effectors SseF and SseG, possibly by helping to maintain a balanced activity 
of microtubule motors on the bacterial vacuoles. Deletion of steA in S.
Typhimurium <U+0394>sseF or <U+0394>sseG mutants revealed that SteA contributes to the
characteristic scattered distribution of <U+0394>sseF or <U+0394>sseG mutant SCVs in infected
cells. Overall, this shows that SteA participates in the control of SCV membrane 
dynamics. Moreover, it indicates that SteA is functionally linked to SseF and
SseG and suggests that it might contribute directly or indirectly to the
regulation of microtubule motors on the bacterial vacuoles.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4097631
PMID: 24778114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Diabetes Res. 2014;2014:768024. doi: 10.1155/2014/768024. Epub 2014 Feb 10.

Decompensation of ß-cells in diabetes: when pancreatic ß-cells are on ICE(R).

Salvi R(1), Abderrahmani A(2).

Author information: 
(1)European Genomic Institute for Diabetes (EGID), Lille 2 University, UMR 8199, 
3508 Lille, France. (2)European Genomic Institute for Diabetes (EGID), Lille 2
University, UMR 8199, 3508 Lille, France ; Faculty of Medicine West, 1 Place de
Verdun, 59045 Lille, France.

Insulin production and secretion are temporally regulated. Keeping insulin
secretion at rest after a rise of glucose prevents exhaustion and ultimately
failure of ß-cells. Among the mechanisms that reduce ß-cell activity is the
inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER). ICER is an immediate early gene, which is 
rapidly induced by the cyclic AMP (cAMP) signaling cascade. The seminal function 
of ICER is to negatively regulate the production and secretion of insulin by
repressing the genes expression. This is part of adaptive response required for
proper ß-cells function in response to environmental factors. Inappropriate
induction of ICER accounts for pancreatic ß-cells dysfunction and ultimately
death elicited by chronic hyperglycemia, fatty acids, and oxidized LDL. This
review underlines the importance of balancing the negative regulation achieved by
ICER for preserving ß-cell function and survival in diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3941242
PMID: 24672804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Clin Invest. 2014 May;124(5):2234-45. doi: 10.1172/JCI73411. Epub 2014 Mar 25.

CaMK4-dependent activation of AKT/mTOR and CREM-a underlies
autoimmunity-associated Th17 imbalance.

Koga T, Hedrich CM, Mizui M, Yoshida N, Otomo K, Lieberman LA, Rauen T, Crispín
JC, Tsokos GC.

Tissue inflammation in several autoimmune diseases, including SLE and MS, has
been linked to an imbalance of IL-17-producing Th (Th17) cells and Tregs;
however, the factors that promote Th17-driven autoimmunity are unclear. Here, we 
present evidence that the calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV (CaMK4) 
is increased and required during Th17 cell differentiation. Isolation of naive T 
cells from a murine model of lupus revealed increased levels of CaMK4 following
stimulation with Th17-inducing cytokines but not following Treg, Th1, or Th2
induction. Furthermore, naive T cells from mice lacking CaMK4 did not produce
IL-17. Genetic or pharmacologic inhibition of CaMK4 decreased the frequency of
IL-17-producing T cells and ameliorated EAE and lupus-like disease in murine
models. Inhibition of CaMK4 reduced Il17 transcription through decreased
activation of the cAMP response element modulator a (CREM-a) and reduced
activation of the AKT/mTOR pathway, which is known to enhance Th17
differentiation. Importantly, silencing CaMK4 in T cells from patients with SLE
and healthy individuals inhibited Th17 differentiation through reduction of IL17A
and IL17F mRNA. Collectively, our results suggest that CaMK4 inhibition has
potential as a therapeutic strategy for Th17-driven autoimmune diseases.

PMCID: PMC4001553
PMID: 24667640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Theriogenology. 2014 May;81(8):1012-1020.e1. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2014.01.014. Epub 2014 Jan 31.

Expression patterns of the activator type of cAMP-responsive element modulator in
testicular germ cells of Japanese Black bulls.

Noda T(1), Minami K(2), Kojima A(2), Mizuno Y(2), Isono A(2), Sakase M(3),
Fukushima M(3), Harayama H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Graduate School of Agricultural Science,
Kobe University, Kobe, Japan. Electronic address: noda@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(2)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Graduate School of Agricultural Science,
Kobe University, Kobe, Japan. (3)Northern Center of Agricultural Technology,
General Technological Center of Hyogo Prefecture for Agriculture, Forest, and
Fishery, Asago, Japan.

The characterization and quantitative analyses of the key transcription factors
for spermiogenesis are necessary in the identification of causal factors for the 
production of the seemingly normal sperm with dysfunctions in Japanese Black
bulls and further elucidation of whole aspect of molecular mechanisms for
spermiogenesis in livestock. The objective of this study was to obtain the
information regarding the characterization and individual changes of an activator
cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM), which is necessary to the normal
progress of spermiogenesis and is required for the transcriptional activity of
genes coding essential factors for the sperm fertilization ability in rodents,
using testes from 21 Japanese Black bulls with the ability to produce sperm
indicating the normal motility and morphology. The bull CREM ta<U+03B3> (one of
activator variants) was detected in testes more strongly than livers by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and Northern blotting. This variant was
localized in the nuclei of spermatids as shown by indirect immunofluorescence
with the homemade mouse antiserum. The motility and morphology of the cauda
epididymal sperm from 16 Japanese Black bulls were examined before the
quantitative analyses of testicular activator CREM to confirm the ability to
produce sperm with normal motility and morphology in these males. The percentages
of the motile sperm, those of the sperm with the normal acrosomes, and those of
morphologically normal sperm were 60.0% to 90.0%, 88.0% to 100%, and 83.0% to
97.9%, respectively. The quantitative analyses with real-time polymerase chain
reaction using the testicular RNA from the same bulls revealed that the relative 
expression levels of activator CREM variants in testes varied significantly among
these bulls in the range from 0.56 to 1.64 (P < 0.05). These results are
consistent with the suggestions that CREM ta<U+03B3> are involved in the spermiogenesis 
in the testes of Japanese Black bulls and that the expression levels of the
activator CREM variant mRNAs in the testes are varied significantly among
individual bulls that have the ability to produce sperm with the normal motility 
and morphology.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24612697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:398108. doi: 10.1155/2014/398108. Epub 2014 Jan 23.

Assessment of the BD MGIT TBc identification test for the detection of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex in a network of mycobacteriology laboratories.

Machado D(1), Ramos J(1), Couto I(2), Cadir N(3), Narciso I(3), Coelho E(4),
Viegas S(3), Viveiros M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Micobactérias, Unidade de Microbiologia Médica, Instituto de Higiene 
e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa (IHMT/UNL), Rua da Junqueira
100, 1349-008 Lisboa, Portugal. (2)Grupo de Micobactérias, Unidade de
Microbiologia Médica, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova
de Lisboa (IHMT/UNL), Rua da Junqueira 100, 1349-008 Lisboa, Portugal ; Centro de
Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), UNL, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal. (3)Instituto
Nacional de Saúde, Ministério da Saúde de Moçambique, 264 Cidade de Maputo,
Mozambique. (4)Programa Nacional de Controlo da Tuberculose, Ministério da Saúde 
de Moçambique, 264 Cidade de Maputo, Mozambique. (5)Grupo de Micobactérias,
Unidade de Microbiologia Médica, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa (IHMT/UNL), Rua da Junqueira 100, 1349-008 Lisboa,
Portugal ; Centro de Malária e Outras Doenças Tropicais/LA, IHMT/UNL, Rua da
Junqueira 100, 1349-008 Lisboa, Portugal.

We evaluate the performance of the TBcID assay in a panel of 100 acid-fast
bacilli cultures. Sixty-four isolates were TBcID positive for Mycobacterium
tuberculosis complex (MTBC), whereas 36 gave negative results. These included 28 
nontuberculous mycobacteria, one nonmycobacterial isolate, one M. tuberculosis,
and six M. bovis BCG strains. This corresponds to a sensitivity of 90.14%,
specificity of 100%, and positive and negative predictive values of 100% and
80.55%, respectively. The test is rapid, easy to perform and interpret, and does 
not require sample preparation or instrumentation. However, a negative result
does not exclude the presence of a strain belonging to MTBC, especially when
mutations in mpb64 gene are present or some M. bovis BCG strains are isolated.
The TBcID showed potential to assist in the identification of MTBC when the
implementation and usage of molecular methods are often not possible, principally
in resource-limited countries.

PMCID: PMC3920968
PMID: 24587985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Methods Mol Biol. 2014;1114:441-50. doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-761-7_29.

Efficient transduction of hematopoietic stem cells and its potential for gene
correction of hematopoietic diseases.

Thomas D(1), Mostoslavsky G.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Center for Regenerative
Medicine (CReM), Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.

The ability to efficiently transduce hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) represents a 
powerful methodology by which to study the role of specific genes on HSC
function, as well as to broaden the potential of gene therapy for hematopoietic
related diseases. While retroviruses have been used extensively to transduce a
variety of cell types, HIV-derived lentiviruses prove superior for transduction
of quiescent HSC due to their ability to infect non-dividing cells. Quality of
lentiviral supernatants and starting cells are vital to obtain reproducible
consistent results, and therefore, here we describe the production of
concentrated lentiviral preparations, the purification of HSC from total mouse
bone marrow, and their transduction to obtain long-term HSC engraftment with
persistent gene transfer and expression of the desired transgene.

PMID: 24557921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Cell J. 2014 Feb 3;16(1):79-90. Epub 2014 Feb 3.

Role of Somatic Testicular Cells during Mouse Spermatogenesis in
Three-Dimensional Collagen Gel Culture System.

Khajavi N(1), Akbari M(1), Abdolsamadi HR(2), Abolhassani F(1), Dehpour AR(3),
Koruji M(4), Habibi Roudkenar M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Sciences, School of Medicine, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (2)Department of Oral Medicine, Faculty of
Dentistry, Hamadan University of Medical Sciences, Hamadan, Iran. (3)Department
of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran. (4)Department of Anatomical Sciences, School of Medicine, Iran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (5)Research Center, Iranian Blood
Transfusion Organization, Tehran, Iran.

OBJECTIVE: Spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) are the only cell type that can
restore fertility to an infertile recipient following transplantation. Much
effort has been made to develop a protocol for differentiating isolated SSCs in
vitro. Recently, three-dimensional (3D) culture system has been introduced as an 
appropriate microenvironment for clonal expansion and differentiation of SSCs.
This system provides structural support and multiple options for several
manipulation such as addition of different cells. Somatic cells have a critical
role in stimulating spermatogenesis. They provide complex cell to cell
interaction, transport proteins and produce enzymes and regulatory factors. This 
study aimed to optimize the culture condition by adding somatic testicular cells 
to the collagen gel culture system in order to induce spermatogenesis
progression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this experimental study, the disassociation of SSCs was
performed by using a two-step enzymatic digestion of type I collagenase,
hyaluronidase and DNase. Somatic testicular cells including Sertoli cells and
peritubular cells were obtained after the second digestion. SSCs were isolated by
Magnetic Activated Cell Sorting (MACS) using GDNF family receptor alpha-1
(Gfra-1) antibody. Two experimental designs were investigated. 1. Gfra-1 positive
SSCs were cultured in a collagen solution. 2. Somatic testicular cells were added
to the Gfra-1 positive SSCs in a collagen solution. Spermatogenesis progression
was determined after three weeks by staining of synaptonemal complex protein 3
(SCP3)-positive cells. Semi-quantitative Reverse Transcription PCR was undertaken
for SCP3 as a meiotic marker and, Crem and Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF1) 
as post meiotic markers. For statistical analysis student t test was performed.
RESULTS: Testicular supporter cells increased the expression of meiotic and post 
meiotic markers and had a positive effect on extensive colony formation.
CONCLUSION: Collagen gel culture system supported by somatic testicular cells
provides a microenvironment that mimics seminiferous epithelium and induces
spermatogenesis in vitro.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Royan Institute (ACECR). The full text is avalible
in: www.celljournal.org.

PMCID: PMC3933442
PMID: 24518977  [PubMed]


63. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2014 May;94(3):332-7. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2013.12.009. Epub
2014 Jan 9.

Gold nanoprobes for multi loci assessment of multi-drug resistant tuberculosis.

Pedrosa P(1), Veigas B(2), Machado D(3), Couto I(4), Viveiros M(5), Baptista
PV(6).

Author information: 
(1)CIGMH, Departamento de Ciências da Vida, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal. (2)CIGMH, Departamento de
Ciências da Vida, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de
Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal; CENIMAT/I3N, Departamento de Ciência dos Materiais,
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica,
Portugal. (3)Grupo de Micobactérias, Unidade Microbiologia Médica, Universidade
Nova de Lisboa (IHMT/UNL), Portugal; Unidade de Parasitologia e Microbiologia
Médicas, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa
(IHMT/UNL), Portugal. (4)Grupo de Micobactérias, Unidade Microbiologia Médica,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa (IHMT/UNL), Portugal; CREM, Centro de Recursos
Microbiológicos, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Portugal. (5)Grupo de
Micobactérias, Unidade Microbiologia Médica, Universidade Nova de Lisboa
(IHMT/UNL), Portugal; Centro de Malária e Outras Doenças Tropicais, Instituto de 
Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa (IHMT/UNL), Portugal.
(6)CIGMH, Departamento de Ciências da Vida, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal. Electronic address:
pmvb@fct.unl.pt.

Tuberculosis, still one of the leading human infectious diseases, reported 8.7
million new cases in 2011 alone. Also, the increasing rate of multidrug-resistant
tuberculosis (MDRTB) and its treatment difficulties pose a serious public health 
threat especially in developing countries. Resistance to isoniazid and
rifampicin, first line antibiotics, is commonly associated with point mutations
in katG, inhA and rpoB genes of Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC).
Therefore, the development of cheap, fast and simple molecular methods to assess 
susceptibility profiles would have a huge impact in the capacity of early
diagnosis and treatment of MDRTB. Gold nanoparticles functionalized with
thiol-modified oligonucleotides (Au-nanoprobes) have shown the potential to
provide a rapid and sensitive detection method for MTBC and single base mutations
associated with antibiotic resistance, namely the characterization of the three
most relevant codons in rpoB gene associated to rifampicin resistance. Here we
extend the Au-nanoprobe approach towards discriminating specific mutations within
inhA and rpoB genes in PCR amplified DNA from isolates. Using a multiplex PCR
reaction for these two genes, it is possible to assess both loci in parallel, and
extend the potential of the Au-nanoprobe method to MDRTB molecular
characterization with special application in the most frequent Portuguese
genotypes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24461544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2014 Jan;66(1):163-72. doi: 10.1002/art.38187.

Estrogen receptor a regulates tripartite motif-containing protein 21 expression, 
contributing to dysregulated cytokine production in systemic lupus erythematosus.

Smith S(1), Ní Gabhann J, McCarthy E, Coffey B, Mahony R, Byrne JC, Stacey K,
Ball E, Bell A, Cunnane G, Doran MF, Molloy ES, Lee RZ, Harvey B, Kearns G,
Jefferies CA.

Author information: 
(1)Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the role of 17ß-estradiol in the regulation of the
autoantigen tripartite motif-containing protein 21 (TRIM-21) in patients with
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
METHODS: Monocytes isolated from healthy control subjects and patients with SLE
were stimulated with 17ß-estradiol and/or the estrogen receptor a (ERa)
antagonist methyl-piperidino-pyrazole dihydrochloride. TRIM-21, ERa, and CREMa
expression was determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis. 
MatInspector software was used to identify putative binding sites within the
TRIM-21 promoter. ERa binding to the TRIM-21 gene promoter region in monocytes
was analyzed by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. TRIM-21 and
interferon regulatory factor 3 protein levels were analyzed by Western blotting.
RESULTS: Real-time PCR analysis demonstrated a role of estrogen in the regulation
of TRIM-21 expression in monocytes, which correlated positively with ERa gene
expression in patients with SLE. Investigations into the human TRIM-21 promoter
revealed the presence of an estrogen response element, with ChIP assays
confirming ERa binding to this site. Studies into estrogen-induced TRIM-21
expression revealed a hyperresponsiveness of SLE patients to 17ß-estradiol, which
led to the enhanced levels of TRIM-21 observed in these individuals.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate a role of estrogen in the regulation of
TRIM-21 expression through an ERa-dependent mechanism, a pathway that we observed
to be overactive in SLE patients. Treatment of monocytes with an ERa antagonist
abrogated estrogen-induced TRIM-21 expression and, as a consequence, decreased
the expression of interleukin-23. These findings identify TRIM-21 as a novel
ERa-regulated gene and provide novel insights into the link between estrogen and 
the molecular pathogenesis of SLE.

Copyright © 2014 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 24449583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Ovarian Res. 2014 Jan 21;7:9. doi: 10.1186/1757-2215-7-9.

Risk miRNA screening of ovarian cancer based on miRNA functional synergistic
network.

Ying H(1), Lyu J, Ying T, Li J, Jin S, Shao J, Wang L, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical
University, No,36, Sanhao Street, Heping District, Shenyang, Liaoning Province
110004, China. huanchunying2@hotmail.com.

Retraction in
    J Ovarian Res. 2015;8(1):17.

BACKGROUND: miRNAs are proved to have causal roles in tumorgenesis involving
various types of human cancers, but the mechanism is not clear. We aimed to
explore the effect of miRNAs on the development of ovarian cancer and the
underlying mechanism.
METHODS: The miRNA expression profile GSE31801 was downloaded from GEO (Gene
Expression Omnibus) database. Firstly, the differentially expressed miRNAs were
screened. Target genes of the miRNAs were collected from TargetScan, PicTar,
miRanda, and DIANA-microT database, then the miRNA-miRNA co-regulating network
was constructed using miRNA pairs with common regulated target genes. Next, the
functional modules in the network were studied, the miRNA pairs regulated at
least one modules were enriched to form the miRNA functional synergistic network 
(MFSN).
RESULTS: Risk miRNA were selected in MFSN according to the topological structure.
Transcript factors (TFs) in MFSN were identified, followed by the
miRNA-transcript factor networks construction. Totally, 42 up- and 61
down-regulated differentially expressed miRNAs were identified, of which 68
formed 2292 miRNA pairs in the miRNA-miRNA co-regulating network. GO: 0007268
(synaptic transmission) and GO: 0019226 (transmission of nerve impulse) were the 
two common functions of miRNAs in MFSN, and hsa-miR-579 (36), hsa-miR-942 (31),
hsa-miR-105 (31), hsa-miR-150 (34), and hsa-miR-27a* (32) were selected as the
hub nodes in MFSN.
CONCLUSIONS: In all, 17 TFs, including CREM, ERG, and CREB1 were screened as the 
cancer related TFs in MFSN. Other TFs, such as BIN1, FOXN3, FOXK1, FOXP2, and
ESRRG with high degrees may be inhibited in ovarian cancer. MFSN gave us a new
shed light on the mechanism studies in ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC3902002
PMID: 24444095  [PubMed]


66. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2013 Dec;19(12):1059-67.

[Molecular genetic mechanisms of teratozoospermia].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu RZ(1), Wu J(2), Wang RX(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Prenatal Diagnosis/Center for Reproductive Medicine, The First
Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130021, China. lrz420@126.com
(2)Center for Prenatal Diagnosis/Center for Reproductive Medicine, The First
Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130021, China.

Teratozoospermia is one of the important factors contributing to male
infertility, and its pathogenesis is not yet clear. Recent years have witnessed
some progress in the researches on sperm morphology, and some genes have been
confirmed to be correlated with spermatogenesis. Aiming to provide some evidence 
for the pathogenesis of teratozoospermia, this paper reviews the relevant
literature in the past five years addressing such special teratozoospermia as
globozoospermia, nuclear vacuoles, decapitated spermatozoa, excessive residual
cytoplasm, dysplasia of the fibrous sheath, and primary ciliary dyskinesia, and
elaborates on the molecular genetic mechanisms of DPY19L2, AR, PRM1, GBA2, PCI,
CREM, TH2A, TH2B, ODF1, Cntrob, OAZ-t, HOOK1, SPEM1, GAT1, PRSS21, 15-LOX, Sptrx,
AKAP3, AKAP4, DNAI1, DNAH5, RSPH4A, TXNDC3, CCDC39, LRRC6, LRRC50, KTU and so on.
Meanwhile, this review also presents an overview on the latest advances in
assisted reproductive technology and its outcomes in the treatment of
teratozoospermia patients in order to provide a theoretical basis for the
diagnosis and treatment of male infertility.

PMID: 24432614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Med Mycol Case Rep. 2013 Feb 13;2:52-4. doi: 10.1016/j.mmcr.2013.02.002.
eCollection 2013.

Kerion caused by Microsporum audouinii in a child.

Fernandes S(1), Amaro C(1), da Luz Martins M(2), Inácio J(2), Araújo T(3), Vieira
R(1), Silvestre MJ(3), Cardoso J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Curry Cabral, Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Rua da
Beneficência no. 8, Lisbon 1069-166, Portugal. (2)Laboratório de Micologia,
Medical Microbiology Unit, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina
Tropical/CREM-Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Rua da Junqueira, Lisbon 1149-008,
Portugal. (3)Hospital Curry Cabral, Clinical Pathology Department, Rua da
Beneficência no. 8, Lisbon 1069-166, Portugal.

Kerion celsi is rarely associated with Microsporum audouinii infection. We report
the case of a 3-year-old girl with a kerion celsi caused by M. audouinii and
successfully treated with oral terbinafine. Fungi identification was made by
macro and microscopical colony morphology analyses and molecular (genotypic)
studies.

PMCID: PMC3885960
PMID: 24432216  [PubMed]


68. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2014 Apr 15;116(8):1033-47. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.01234.2013. Epub 2014 Jan 9.

Transcriptome-wide RNA sequencing analysis of rat skeletal muscle feed arteries. 
II. Impact of exercise training in obesity.

Padilla J(1), Jenkins NT, Thorne PK, Martin JS, Rector RS, Davis JW, Laughlin MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Exercise Physiology, University of Missouri,
Columbia, Missouri;

We employed next-generation RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) technology to determine the 
extent to which exercise training alters global gene expression in skeletal
muscle feed arteries and aortic endothelial cells of obese Otsuka Long-Evans
Tokushima Fatty (OLETF) rats. Transcriptional profiles of the soleus and
gastrocnemius muscle feed arteries (SFA and GFA, respectively) and aortic
endothelial cell-enriched samples from rats that underwent an endurance exercise 
training program (EndEx; n = 12) or a interval sprint training program (IST; n = 
12) or remained sedentary (Sed; n = 12) were examined. In response to EndEx,
there were 39 upregulated (e.g., MANF) and 20 downregulated (e.g., ALOX15) genes 
in SFA and 1 upregulated (i.e., Wisp2) and 1 downregulated (i.e., Crem) gene in
GFA [false discovery rate (FDR) < 10%]. In response to IST, there were 305
upregulated (e.g., MANF, HSPA12B) and 324 downregulated genes in SFA and 101
upregulated and 66 downregulated genes in GFA, with an overlap of 32 genes
between arteries. Furthermore, in aortic endothelial cells, there were 183
upregulated (e.g., eNOS, SOD-3) and 141 downregulated (e.g., ATF3, Clec1b, npy,
leptin) genes with EndEx and 71 upregulated and 69 downregulated genes with IST, 
with an overlap of 35 between exercise programs. Expression of only two genes
(Tubb2b and Slc9a3r2) was altered (i.e., increased) by exercise in all three
arteries. The finding that both EndEx and IST produced greater transcriptional
changes in the SFA compared with the GFA is intriguing when considering the fact 
that treadmill bouts of exercise are associated with greater relative increases
in blood flow to the gastrocnemius muscle compared with the soleus muscle.

PMCID: PMC4035783
PMID: 24408995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Circulation. 2014 Mar 25;129(12):1276-85. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.006611.
Epub 2014 Jan 7.

Ryanodine receptor-mediated calcium leak drives progressive development of an
atrial fibrillation substrate in a transgenic mouse model.

Li N(1), Chiang DY, Wang S, Wang Q, Sun L, Voigt N, Respress JL, Ather S, Skapura
DG, Jordan VK, Horrigan FT, Schmitz W, Müller FU, Valderrabano M, Nattel S,
Dobrev D, Wehrens XH.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of Molecular Physiology &
Biophysics (N.L., D.Y.C., L.S., J.L.R., S.A., D.G.S., V.K.J., F.T.H., X.H.T.W.), 
Translational Biology and Molecular Medicine Program (D.Y.C.), and Department of 
Medicine, Cardiology (X.H.T.W.), Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX;
Department of Cardiology, The Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX (S.W., M.V.);
Institute of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen,
Germany (N.V., D.D.); Division of Experimental Cardiology, Heidelberg University,
Mannheim, Germany (N.V., D.D.); Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology,
University of Münster, Münster, Germany (W.S., F.U.M.); and Department of
Medicine, Montreal Heart Institute and Université de Montréal, QC, Canada (S.N.).

BACKGROUND: The progression of atrial fibrillation (AF) from paroxysmal to
persistent forms remains a major clinical challenge. Abnormal sarcoplasmic
reticulum (SR) Ca(2+) leak via the ryanodine receptor type 2 (RyR2) has been
observed as a source of ectopic activity in various AF models. However, its
potential role in progression to long-lasting spontaneous AF (sAF) has never been
tested. This study was designed to test the hypothesis that enhanced
RyR2-mediated Ca(2+) release underlies the development of a substrate for sAF and
to elucidate the underlying mechanisms.
METHODS AND RESULTS: CREM-Ib<U+0394>C-X transgenic (CREM) mice developed age-dependent
progression from spontaneous atrial ectopy to paroxysmal and eventually
long-lasting AF. The development of sAF in CREM mice was preceded by enhanced
diastolic Ca(2+) release, atrial enlargement, and marked conduction
abnormalities. Genetic inhibition of Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase
II-mediated RyR2-S2814 phosphorylation in CREM mice normalized open probability
of RyR2 channels and SR Ca(2+) release, delayed the development of spontaneous
atrial ectopy, fully prevented sAF, suppressed atrial dilation, and forestalled
atrial conduction abnormalities. Hyperactive RyR2 channels directly stimulated
the Ca(2+)-dependent hypertrophic pathway nuclear factor of activated T
cell/Rcan1-4, suggesting a role for the nuclear factor of activated T
cell/Rcan1-4 system in the development of a substrate for long-lasting AF in CREM
mice.
CONCLUSIONS: RyR2-mediated SR Ca(2+) leak directly underlies the development of a
substrate for sAF in CREM mice, the first demonstration of a molecular mechanism 
underlying AF progression and sAF substrate development in an experimental model.
Our work demonstrates that the role of abnormal diastolic Ca(2+) release in AF
may not be restricted to the generation of atrial ectopy but extends to the
development of atrial remodeling underlying the AF substrate.

PMCID: PMC4026172
PMID: 24398018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Ecol. 2014 Feb;23(4):921-32. doi: 10.1111/mec.12642.

Global distribution, diversity hot spots and niche transitions of an
astaxanthin-producing eukaryotic microbe.

David-Palma M(1), Libkind D, Sampaio JP.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciências da Vida, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Centro
de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 2829-516,
Caparica, Portugal.

Microbes establish very diverse but still poorly understood associations with
other microscopic or macroscopic organisms that do not follow the more
conventional modes of competition or mutualism. Phaffia rhodozyma, an
orange-coloured yeast that produces the biotechnologically relevant carotenoid
astaxanthin, exhibits a Holarctic association with birch trees in temperate
forests that contrasts with the more recent finding of a South American
population associated with Nothofagus (southern beech) and with stromata of its
biotrophic fungal parasite Cyttaria spp. We investigated whether the association 
of Phaffia with Nothofagus-Cyttaria could be expanded to Australasia, the other
region of the world where Nothofagus are endemic, studied the genetic structure
of populations representing the known worldwide distribution of Phaffia and
analysed the evolution of the association with tree hosts. The phylogenetic
analysis revealed that Phaffia diversity in Australasia is much higher than in
other regions of the globe and that two endemic and markedly divergent lineages
seem to represent new species. The observed genetic diversity correlates with
host tree genera rather than with geography, which suggests that adaptation to
the different niches is driving population structure in this yeast. The high
genetic diversity and endemism in Australasia indicate that the genus evolved in 
this region and that the association with Nothofagus is the ancestral tree
association. Estimates of the divergence times of Phaffia lineages point to
splits that are much more recent than the break-up of Gondwana, supporting that
long-distance dispersal rather than vicariance is responsible for observed
distribution of P. rhodozyma.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24372735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Front Mol Biosci. 2014 Oct 15;1:16. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2014.00016. eCollection
2014.

Standing of nucleic acid testing strategies in veterinary diagnosis laboratories 
to uncover Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex members.

Costa P(1), Botelho A(2), Couto I(3), Viveiros M(4), Inácio J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nacional de Investigação Agrária e Veterinária IP Lisboa, Portugal ;
Grupo de Micobactérias, Unidade de Microbiologia Médica, Instituto de Higiene e
Medicina Tropical da Universidade Nova de Lisboa Lisboa, Portugal. (2)Instituto
Nacional de Investigação Agrária e Veterinária IP Lisboa, Portugal. (3)Grupo de
Micobactérias, Unidade de Microbiologia Médica, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina
Tropical da Universidade Nova de Lisboa Lisboa, Portugal ; Centro de Recursos
Microbiológicos (CREM), Universidade Nova de Lisboa Caparica, Portugal. (4)Grupo 
de Micobactérias, Unidade de Microbiologia Médica, Instituto de Higiene e
Medicina Tropical da Universidade Nova de Lisboa Lisboa, Portugal ; Centro de
Malária e Outras Doenças Tropicais, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical da
Universidade Nova de Lisboa Lisboa, Portugal. (5)School of Pharmacy and
Biomolecular Sciences, University of Brighton Brighton, UK.

Nucleic acid testing (NAT) designate any molecular approach used for the
detection, identification, and characterization of pathogenic microorganisms,
enabling the rapid, specific, and sensitive diagnostic of infectious diseases,
such as tuberculosis. These assays have been widely used since the 90s of the
last century in human clinical laboratories and, subsequently, also in veterinary
diagnostics. Most NAT strategies are based in the polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
and its several enhancements and variations. From the conventional PCR, real-time
PCR and its combinations, isothermal DNA amplification, to the nanotechnologies, 
here we review how the NAT assays have been applied to decipher if and which
member of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex is present in a clinical sample.
Recent advances in DNA sequencing also brought new challenges and have made
possible to generate rapidly and at a low cost, large amounts of sequence data.
This revolution with the high-throughput sequencing (HTS) technologies makes
whole genome sequencing (WGS) and metagenomics the trendiest NAT strategies,
today. The ranking of NAT techniques in the field of clinical diagnostics is
rising, and we provide a SWOT (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats)
analysis with our view of the use of molecular diagnostics for detecting
tuberculosis in veterinary laboratories, notwithstanding the gold standard being 
still the classical culture of the agent. The complementary use of both classical
and molecular diagnostics approaches is recommended to speed the diagnostic,
enabling a fast decision by competent authorities and rapid tackling of the
disease.

PMCID: PMC4428369
PMID: 25988157  [PubMed]


72. Sci Total Environ. 2014 Feb 15;472:1062-9. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.11.091. 
Epub 2013 Dec 17.

Routine screening of harmful microorganisms in beach sands: implications to
public health.

Sabino R(1), Rodrigues R(2), Costa I(3), Carneiro C(4), Cunha M(5), Duarte A(6), 
Faria N(2), Ferreira FC(2), Gargaté MJ(1), Júlio C(7), Martins ML(8), Nevers
MB(9), Oleastro M(3), Solo-Gabriele H(10), Veríssimo C(1), Viegas C(11), Whitman 
RL(9), Brandão J(12).

Author information: 
(1)Reference Unit for Systemic Infections and Zoonosis, Department of Infectious 
Diseases, National Institute of Health Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Portugal.
(2)Microbiology Laboratory, Department of Environmental Health, National
Institute of Health Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Portugal. (3)Laboratory of Molecular
Biology, Department of Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Health Dr.
Ricardo Jorge, Av. Padre Cruz, 1649-016 Lisbon, Portugal. (4)REQUIMTE/Centro de
Química Fina e Biotecnologia, Departamento de Química, Faculdade de Ciências e
Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Portugal. (5)Portuguese Environment
Agency, Environment Reference Laboratory, Portugal. (6)Faculty of Pharmacy,
iMed.UL-Research Institute for Medicines and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University 
of Lisboa, Portugal. (7)Reference Unit for Gastro-intestinal Infections,
Department of Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Health Dr. Ricardo
Jorge, Portugal. (8)Unit of Medical Microbiology, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina
Tropical-Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Universidade Nova de Lisboa
(UNL), Portugal. (9)United States Geological Survey, Great Lakes Science Center, 
Porter, IN, USA. (10)Department of Civil, Architectural, and Environmental
Engineering, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA. (11)Lisbon School of
Health Technology, Polytechnic Institute of Lisboa, Portugal. (12)Reference Unit 
for Systemic Infections and Zoonosis, Department of Infectious Diseases, National
Institute of Health Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Portugal. Electronic address:
joao.brandao@insa.min-saude.pt.

Beaches worldwide provide recreational opportunities to hundreds of millions of
people and serve as important components of coastal economies. Beach water is
often monitored for microbiological quality to detect the presence of indicators 
of human sewage contamination so as to prevent public health outbreaks associated
with water contact. However, growing evidence suggests that beach sand can harbor
microbes harmful to human health, often in concentrations greater than the beach 
water. Currently, there are no standards for monitoring, sampling, analyzing, or 
managing beach sand quality. In addition to indicator microbes, growing evidence 
has identified pathogenic bacteria, viruses, and fungi in a variety of beach
sands worldwide. The public health threat associated with these populations
through direct and indirect contact is unknown because so little research has
been conducted relating to health outcomes associated with sand quality. In this 
manuscript, we present the consensus findings of a workshop of experts convened
in Lisbon, Portugal to discuss the current state of knowledge on beach sand
microbiological quality and to develop suggestions for standardizing the
evaluation of sand at coastal beaches. The expert group at the "Microareias 2012"
workshop recommends that 1) beach sand should be screened for a variety of
pathogens harmful to human health, and sand monitoring should then be initiated
alongside regular water monitoring; 2) sampling and analysis protocols should be 
standardized to allow proper comparisons among beach locations; and 3) further
studies are needed to estimate human health risk with exposure to contaminated
beach sand. Much of the manuscript is focused on research specific to Portugal,
but similar results have been found elsewhere, and the findings have worldwide
implications.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24355396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jan 24;289(4):2361-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.523605. Epub 2013 
Dec 2.

cAMP responsive element modulator (CREM) a mediates chromatin remodeling of CD8
during the generation of CD3+ CD4- CD8- T cells.

Hedrich CM(1), Crispín JC, Rauen T, Ioannidis C, Koga T, Rodriguez Rodriguez N,
Apostolidis SA, Kyttaris VC, Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115.

TCR-aß(+)CD3(+)CD4(-)CD8(-) "double negative" T cells are expanded in the
peripheral blood of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and
lupus-prone mice. Double negative T cells have been claimed to derive from CD8(+)
cells that down-regulate CD8 co-receptors and acquire a distinct effector
phenotype that includes the expression of proinflammatory cytokines. This, along 
with the fact that double negative T cells have been documented in inflamed
organs, suggests that they may contribute to disease expression and tissue
damage. We recently linked the transcription factor cAMP responsive element
modulator (CREM) a, which is expressed at increased levels in T cells from SLE
patients and lupus prone MRL/lpr mice, with trans-repression of a region syntenic
to the murine CD8b promoter. However, the exact molecular mechanisms that result 
in a stable silencing of both CD8A and CD8B genes remain elusive. Here, we
demonstrate that CREMa orchestrates epigenetic remodeling of the CD8 cluster
through the recruitment of DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) 3a and histone
methyltransferase G9a. Thus, we propose that CREMa is essential for the expansion
of double negative T cells in SLE. CREMa blockade may have therapeutic value in
autoimmune disorders with DN T cell expansion.

PMCID: PMC3900979
PMID: 24297179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. DNA Repair (Amst). 2013 Dec;12(12):1152-8. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2013.10.002.
Epub 2013 Nov 9.

DNA modifications repaired by base excision repair are epigenetic.

Moore SP(1), Toomire KJ, Strauss PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, 02115, United
States.

CREB controls ~25% of the mammalian transcriptome. Small changes in binding to
its consensus (CRE) sequence are likely to be amplified many fold in initiating
transcription. Here we show that DNA lesions repaired by the base excision repair
(BER) pathway modulate CREB binding to CRE. We generated Kd values by
electrophoretic mobility shift assays using purified human CREB and a 39-mer
double-stranded oligonucleotide containing modified or wild-type CRE. CRE
contains two guanine residues per strand, one in a CpG islet. Alterations in CRE 
resulted in positive or negative changes in Kd over two orders of magnitude
depending on location and modification. Cytosine methylation or oxidation of both
guanines greatly diminished binding; a G/U mispair in the CpG context enhanced
binding. Intermediates in the BER pathway at one G residue or the other resulted 
in reduced binding, depending on the specific location, while there was no change
in binding when the single G residue outside of the CpG islet was oxidized. CREB 
recruits other partners after dimers form on DNA. Only UpG increased DNA.CREB
dimer formation. Since oxidation is ongoing and conversion of cytosine to uracil 
occurs spontaneously or at specific times during differentiation and development,
we propose that BER substrates are epigenetic and modulate transcription factor
recognition/binding.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 24216087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Mol Neurosci. 2014 Mar;52(3):331-8. doi: 10.1007/s12031-013-0153-y. Epub 2013
Oct 30.

Upregulation of CREM-1 relates to retinal ganglion cells apoptosis after
light-induced damage in vivo.

Xu Y(1), Yu S, Shu Q, Yang L, Yang C, Wang J, Xu F, Ji M, Liang X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, People's Republic of China.

Previous studies have shown activation of cyclic AMP response element-binding
protein (CREB) family is involved in the retinal ganglion cells (RGCs)
protection. However, the function of cyclic AMP response element modulator-1
(CREM-1), one member of the CREB family, is still with limited acquaintance. To
investigate whether CREM-1 is involved in RGCs death, we performed a
light-induced retinal damage model in adult rats. Upregulation of CREM-1 was
observed in retina after light-induced damage by performing western blot.
Immunofluorescent labeling indicated that upregulated CREM-1 was localized mainly
in the RGCs. We also investigated co-localization of CREM-1 with active-caspase-3
and TUNEL (apoptotic markers) in the retina after light-induced damage. In
addition, the expression patterns of B cell lymphoma/leukemia-2 and Bcl-2
associated X protein were parallel with that of CREM-1. Collectively, we
hypothesized upregulation of CREM-1 in the retina was associated with RGCs death 
after light-induced damage.

PMID: 24166353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Br J Hosp Med (Lond). 2013 Jul;74(7):C114-7.

Completing cremation forms: a practical guide.

Proctor I(1), Winstanley A.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Lecturer and Honorary Specialist Registrar in Histopathology,
University College London Hospital, London.

Before a body can be cremated doctors must complete a series of lengthy forms
better known as 'crem forms'. One doctor first completes a medical certificate
(Cremation Form 4, previously known as 'Part B') while a second must complete a
confirmatory medical certificate (Cremation Form 5, previously 'Part C').

PMID: 24145671  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


77. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Dec;45(12):2808-20. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.09.016. Epub 2013 Oct 9.

CD46: the 'multitasker' of complement proteins.

Yamamoto H(1), Fara AF, Dasgupta P, Kemper C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Transplant Immunology and Mucosal Biology, MRC Centre for
Transplantation, King's College London, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK; The
Urology Centre, Guy's and St. Thomas' NHS Foundations Trust, London SE1 9RT, UK.

Complement is undeniably quintessential for innate immunity by detecting and
eliminating infectious microorganisms. Recent work, however, highlights an
equally profound impact of complement on the induction and regulation of a wide
range of immune cells. In particular, the complement regulator CD46 emerges as a 
key sensor of immune activation and a vital modulator of adaptive immunity. In
this review, we summarize the current knowledge of CD46-mediated signalling
events and their functional consequences on immune-competent cells with a
specific focus on those in CD4(+) T cells. We will also discuss the promises and 
challenges that potential therapeutic modulation of CD46 may hold and pose.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24120647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Amino Acids. 2013 Dec;45(6):1373-83. doi: 10.1007/s00726-013-1601-2. Epub 2013
Oct 8.

Wide distribution of CREM immunoreactivity in adult and fetal human brain, with
an increased expression in dentate gyrus neurons of Alzheimer's as compared to
normal aging brains.

Bernstein HG(1), Kirches E, Bogerts B, Lendeckel U, Keilhoff G, Zempeltzi M,
Steiner J, Tenbrock K, Dobrowolny H, Kyttaris VC, Mawrin C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Otto-von-Guericke-University, Leipziger Strasse 44, 
39120, Magdeburg, Germany, Hans-Gert.Bernstein@med.ovgu.de.

Human cyclic AMP response modulator proteins (CREMs) are encoded by the CREM
gene, which generates 30 or more different CREM protein isoforms. They are
members of the leucine zipper protein superfamily of nuclear transcription
factors. CREM proteins are known to be implicated in a plethora of important
cellular processes within the CNS. Amazingly, little is known about their
cellular and regional distribution in the brain, however. Therefore, we studied
by means of immunohistochemistry and Western blotting the expression patterns of 
CREM in developing and adult human brain, as well as in brains of Alzheimer's
disease patients. CREM immunoreactivity was found to be widely but unevenly
distributed in the adult human brain. Its localization was confined to neurons.
In immature human brains, CREM multiple neuroblasts and radial glia cells
expressed CREM. In Alzheimer's brain, we found an increased cellular expression
of CREM in dentate gyrus neurons as compared to controls. We discuss our results 
with regard to the putative roles of CREM in brain development and in cognition.

PMID: 24100545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Math Biosci. 2013 Nov;246(1):38-46. doi: 10.1016/j.mbs.2013.09.006. Epub 2013 Oct
3.

A mathematical model of pulse-coded hormone signal responses in pituitary
gonadotroph cells.

Magill JC(1), Ciccone NA, Kaiser UB.

Author information: 
(1)Physical Sciences Inc., 20 New England Business Center, Andover, MA
01810-1077, USA. Electronic address: magill@psicorp.com.

Cells in the pituitary that synthesize luteinizing and follicle-stimulating
hormones regulate the relative production of these two key reproductive hormones 
in response to signals from the hypothalamus. These signals are encoded in the
frequency of gonadotrophin-releasing-hormone pulses. In vitro experiments with a 
murine-derived cell line have identified key elements of the processes that
decode the signal to regulate transcription of the subunits encoding these
hormones. The mathematical model described in this paper is based on the results 
of those experiments and advances quantitative understanding of the biochemical
decoder. The model consists of non-linear differential equations for each of six 
processes that lead to the synthesis of follicle-stimulating hormone. Simulations
of the model exhibit key characteristics found in the experiments, including a
preference for follicle-stimulating hormone synthesis at low pulse frequencies
and a loss of this characteristic when a mutation is introduced.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4096114
PMID: 24095971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 1;288(44):31880-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.508655. Epub 2013 
Sep 18.

cAMP-responsive element modulator a (CREMa) trans-represses the transmembrane
glycoprotein CD8 and contributes to the generation of CD3+CD4-CD8- T cells in
health and disease.

Hedrich CM(1), Rauen T, Crispin JC, Koga T, Ioannidis C, Zajdel M, Kyttaris VC,
Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115.

T cell receptor-aß(+) CD3(+)CD4(-)CD8(-) "double-negative" T cells are expanded
in the peripheral blood of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus and
autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome. In both disorders, double-negative T
cells infiltrate tissues, induce immunoglobulin production, and secrete
proinflammatory cytokines. Double-negative T cells derive from CD8(+) T cells
through down-regulation of CD8 surface co-receptors. However, the molecular
mechanisms orchestrating this process remain unclear. Here, we demonstrate that
the transcription factor cAMP-responsive element modulator a (CREMa), which is
expressed at increased levels in T cells from systemic lupus erythematosus
patients, contributes to transcriptional silencing of CD8A and CD8B. We provide
the first evidence that CREMa trans-represses a regulatory element 5' of the CD8B
gene. Therefore, CREMa represents a promising candidate in the search for
biomarkers and treatment options in diseases in which double-negative T cells
contribute to the pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3814780
PMID: 24047902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. FASEB J. 2014 Jan;28(1):143-52. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-231977. Epub 2013 Sep 10.

A novel intronic promoter of the Crem gene induces small ICER (smICER) isoforms.

Seidl MD(1), Nunes F, Fels B, Hildebrandt I, Schmitz W, Schulze-Osthoff K, Müller
FU.

Author information: 
(1)2Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Münster, Domagkstr.
12, 48149 Münster, Germany. seidl@uni-muenster.de.

The transcription factors cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) and
cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) regulate gene transcription in response 
to elevated cAMP levels. The Crem isoform inducible cAMP early repressor (Icer)
is transcribed by the internal promoter P2 as a critical regulator of multiple
cellular processes. Here, we describe a novel inducible Crem isoform, small Icer 
(smIcer), regulated by a newly identified promoter (P6). ChIP revealed binding of
CREB to P6 in human and mouse myocardium. P6 activity was induced by
constitutively active CREB or stimulation of adenylyl cyclase. In mice, smIcer
mRNA was ubiquitously expressed and transiently induced by ß-adrenoceptor
stimulation e.g., in heart and lung. SmICER repressed both basal and cAMP-induced
activities of P6 and P2 promoters. Stimulation of adenylyl cyclase induced P2 and
P6 in cell type-specific manner. Alternative translational start sites resulted
in three different smICER proteins, linked to increased apoptosis sensitivity. In
conclusion, the Crem gene provides two distinct and mutually controlled
mechanisms of a cAMP-dependent induction of transcriptional repressors. Our
results suggest not only that smICER is a novel regulator of cAMP-mediated gene
regulation, but also emphasize that biological effects that have been ascribed
solely to ICER, should be revised with regard to smICER.

PMID: 24022402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Biochem J. 2013 Dec 15;456(3):463-73. doi: 10.1042/BJ20130064.

Regulatory T-cells and cAMP suppress effector T-cells independently of
PKA-CREM/ICER: a potential role for Epac.

Vang AG(1), Housley W, Dong H, Basole C, Ben-Sasson SZ, Kream BE, Epstein PM,
Clark RB, Brocke S.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Immunology, University of Connecticut Health Center, 263
Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030-6125, U.S.A.

cAMP signalling is both a major pathway as well as a key therapeutic target for
inducing immune tolerance and is involved in Treg cell (regulatory T-cell)
function. To achieve potent immunoregulation, cAMP can act through several
downstream effectors. One proposed mechanism is that cAMP-mediated suppression,
including immunosuppression by Treg cells, results from activation of PKA
(protein kinase A) leading to the induction of the transcription factor ICER
(inducible cAMP early repressor). In the present study, we examined CD4(+)CD25(-)
Teff cell (effector T-cell) and CD4(+)CD25(+) Treg cell immune responses in Crem 
(cAMP-response-element modulator) gene-deficient mice which lack ICER
(Crem(-/-)/ICER-deficient mice). ICER deficiency did not significantly alter the 
frequency or number of Treg cells and Teff cells. Treg cells or a pharmacological
increase in cAMP suppressed Teff cells from Crem(+/+) and
Crem(-/-)/ICER-deficient mice to an equivalent degree, demonstrating that ICER is
dispensable in these functions. Additionally, activating the cAMP effector Epac
(exchange protein directly activated by cAMP) suppressed Teff cells. Treg cells
expressed low levels of all cyclic nucleotide Pde (phosphodiesterase) genes
tested, but high levels of Epac. These data identify ICER as a redundant mediator
of Treg cells and cAMP action on Teff cells and suggest that Epac may function as
an alternative effector to promote cAMP-dependent Teff cell suppression.

PMID: 24007532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Front Neuroendocrinol. 2014 Jan;35(1):31-41. doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2013.08.002.
Epub 2013 Aug 23.

Non-classical effects of estradiol on cAMP responsive element binding protein
phosphorylation in gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons: mechanisms and role.

Kwakowsky A(1), Cheong RY(1), Herbison AE(1), Ábrahám IM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Neuroendocrinology, Department of Physiology, Otago School of
Medical Sciences, University of Otago, Dunedin 9054, New Zealand. (2)Centre for
Neuroendocrinology, Department of Physiology, Otago School of Medical Sciences,
University of Otago, Dunedin 9054, New Zealand. Electronic address:
istvan.abraham@otago.ac.nz.

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) is produced by a heterogenous neuronal
population in the hypothalamus to control pituitary gonadotropin production and
reproductive function in all mammalian species. Estradiol is a critical component
for the communication between the gonads and the central nervous system.
Resolving the mechanisms by which estradiol modulates GnRH neurons is critical
for the understanding of how fertility is regulated. Extensive studies during the
past decades have provided compelling evidence that estradiol has the potential
to alter the intracellular signal transduction mechanisms. The common target of
many signaling pathways is the phosphorylation of a key transcription factor, the
cAMP response element binding protein (CREB). This review first addresses the
aspects of estradiol action on CREB phosphorylation (pCREB) in GnRH neurons.
Secondly, this review considers the receptors and signaling network that
regulates estradiol's action on pCREB within GnRH neurons and finally it
summarizes the physiological significance of CREB to estrogen feedback.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23978477  [PubMed - in process]


84. J Neurosci. 2013 Aug 21;33(34):13673-85. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1669-13.2013.

Increased hippocampal neurogenesis and accelerated response to antidepressants in
mice with specific deletion of CREB in the hippocampus: role of cAMP
response-element modulator t.

Gundersen BB(1), Briand LA, Onksen JL, Lelay J, Kaestner KH, Blendy JA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology and Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

The transcription factor cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) has been
implicated in the pathophysiology of depression as well as in the efficacy of
antidepressant treatment. However, altering CREB levels appears to have differing
effects on anxiety- and depression-related behaviors, depending on which brain
region is examined. Furthermore, many manipulations of CREB lead to corresponding
changes in other CREB family proteins, and the impact of these changes has been
largely ignored. To further investigate the region-specific importance of CREB in
depression-related behavior and antidepressant response, we used Creb(loxP/loxP) 
mice to localize CREB deletion to the hippocampus. In an assay sensitive to
chronic antidepressant response, the novelty-induced hypophagia procedure,
hippocampal CREB deletion, did not alter the response to chronic antidepressant
treatment. In contrast, mice with hippocampal CREB deletion responded to acute
antidepressant treatment in this task, and this accelerated response was
accompanied by an increase in hippocampal neurogenesis. Upregulation of the
CREB-family protein cAMP response-element modulator (CREM) was observed after
CREB deletion. Viral overexpression of the activator isoform of CREM, CREMt, in
the hippocampus also resulted in an accelerated response to antidepressants as
well as increased hippocampal neurogenesis. This is the first demonstration of
CREMt within the brain playing a role in behavior and specifically in behavioral 
outcomes following antidepressant treatment. The current results suggest that
activation of CREMt may provide a means to accelerate the therapeutic efficacy of
current antidepressant treatment.

PMCID: PMC3755714
PMID: 23966689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Nov;41(21):9858-69. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt746. Epub 2013
Aug 21.

DAZAP1 regulates the splicing of Crem, Crisp2 and Pot1a transcripts.

Chen HY(1), Yu YH, Yen PH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei
11490, Taiwan and Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei
11529, Taiwan.

Deleted in Azoospermia Associated Protein 1 (DAZAP1) is a ubiquitous
heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP) that is expressed abundantly in
the testis. DAZAP1 deficiency in mice results in growth retardation and
spermatogenic arrest. Previous reports on DAZAP1's binding to several naturally
occurring splicing mutations support a role for DAZAP1 in RNA splicing. To
elucidate the biological function(s) of DAZAP1 and to search for its natural RNA 
substrates, we used microarrays to compare the expression profiles and exon
usages of wild-type and Dazap1 mutant testes and identified three genes (Crem,
Crisp2 and Pot1a) with aberrant RNA splicing in the mutant testes. We further
demonstrated that DAZAP1, but not DAZAP1 mutant proteins, promoted the inclusion 
of Crem exon 4, Crisp2 exon 9 and Pot1a exon 4 in splicing reporter transcripts
in cultured cells. Additional studies on the binding of DAZAP1 to the exons and
their flanking intronic sequences and the effects of minigene deletions on exon
inclusion identified regulatory regions in Crem intron 3, Crisp2 intron 9 and
Pot1a intron 4 where DAZAP1 bound and regulated splicing. Aberrant splicing of
the Pot1a gene, which encodes an essential protein that protects telomere
integrity, may partially account for the growth retardation phenotype of
DAZAP1-deficient mice.

PMCID: PMC3834821
PMID: 23965306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 25;8(7):e69002. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069002. eCollection
2013.

Cytosolic phospholipase A(2)a and eicosanoids regulate expression of genes in
macrophages involved in host defense and inflammation.

Suram S(1), Silveira LJ, Mahaffey S, Brown GD, Bonventre JV, Williams DL, Gow NA,
Bratton DL, Murphy RC, Leslie CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA.

The role of Group IVA cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2a) activation in
regulating macrophage transcriptional responses to Candida albicans infection was
investigated. cPLA2a releases arachidonic acid for the production of eicosanoids.
In mouse resident peritoneal macrophages, prostacyclin, prostaglandin E2 and
leukotriene C4 were produced within minutes of C. albicans addition before
cyclooxygenase 2 expression. The production of TNFa was lower in C.
albicans-stimulated cPLA2a(+/+) than cPLA2a(-/-) macrophages due to an autocrine 
effect of prostaglandins that increased cAMP to a greater extent in cPLA2a(+/+)
than cPLA2a(-/-) macrophages. For global insight, differential gene expression in
C. albicans-stimulated cPLA2a(+/+) and cPLA2a(-/-) macrophages (3 h) was compared
by microarray. cPLA2a(+/+) macrophages expressed 86 genes at lower levels and 181
genes at higher levels than cPLA2a(-/-) macrophages (=2-fold, p<0.05). Several
pro-inflammatory genes were expressed at lower levels (Tnfa, Cx3cl1, Cd40, Ccl5, 
Csf1, Edn1, CxCr7, Irf1, Irf4, Akna, Ifn<U+03B3>, several IFN<U+03B3>-inducible GTPases). Genes
that dampen inflammation (Socs3, Il10, Crem, Stat3, Thbd, Thbs1, Abca1) and genes
involved in host defense (Gja1, Csf3, Trem1, Hdc) were expressed at higher levels
in cPLA2a(+/+) macrophages. Representative genes expressed lower in cPLA2a(+/+)
macrophages (Tnfa, Csf1) were increased by treatment with a prostacyclin receptor
antagonist and protein kinase A inhibitor, whereas genes expressed at higher
levels (Crem, Nr4a2, Il10, Csf3) were suppressed. The results suggest that C.
albicans stimulates an autocrine loop in macrophages involving cPLA2a,
cyclooxygenase 1-derived prostaglandins and increased cAMP that globally effects 
expression of genes involved in host defense and inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3742295
PMID: 23950842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Tumour Biol. 2013 Dec;34(6):3649-57. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-0946-1. Epub 2013
Aug 9.

Low expression of cyclic AMP response element modulator-1 can increase the
migration and invasion of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Wang Y(1), Zhou S, Yang X, Shi H, Li M, Xue Q, Huang X, Wang X, Wang H, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogen Biology, Medical College, Nantong University, Nantong, 
Jiangsu, 226001, People's Republic of China.

Cyclic AMP response element-binding protein (CREB) family can regulate biological
functions of various types of cells and has relation with esophageal cancer cell 
migration and invasion. Cyclic AMP response element modulator-1 (CREM-1) is one
member of the family with limited acquaintance. This study was conducted to
investigate the effect of CREM-1 on migration and invasion in human esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). The expression of CREM-1 protein in ESCC tissues 
with or without lymph nodes metastasis was determined by western blot.
Immunohistochemical analysis of CREM-1 expression were carried out in
paraffin-embedded sections of ESCC and correlated with clinical features. The
roles of CREM-1 in migration and invasion were studied in TE1 cells through
knocking CREM-1 down with siRNA or overexpression of CREM-1 in ECA109 cells. The 
regulations of CREM-1 on invasion and migration were determined by transwell and 
wounding healing assay. The effect of CREM-1 on chemotherapy drug was analyzed by
Cell counting kit-8 assay. We found that the expression of CREM-1 was
significantly downregulated in ESCC tissues with lymph nodes metastasis compared 
with the tissues without lymph nodes metastasis and was correlated with the
clinical features of pathological grade, tumor stage and lymph node metastasis.
Moreover, knocking CREM-1 down with siRNA increased cell migration and invasion
in human ESCC cell lines TE1 while upregulation of CREM-1 inhibited the motility.
Our data suggested that CREM-1 might play an important role in the regulation of 
tumor metastasis and invasion and serve as a tumor suppressor in human ESCC. We
proposed that CREM-1 might be used as a potential therapeutic agent for human
ESCC.

PMID: 23929392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Genes Brain Behav. 2013 Nov;12(8):771-9. doi: 10.1111/gbb.12065. Epub 2013 Aug
20.

Intracranial self stimulation upregulates the expression of synaptic plasticity
related genes and Arc protein expression in rat hippocampus.

Kádár E(1), Huguet G, Aldavert-Vera L, Morgado-Bernal I, Segura-Torres P.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Biologia, Universitat de Girona, Girona, Spain.

Post-training lateral hypothalamus (LH) intracranial self stimulation (ICSS) has 
a reliable enhancing effect on explicit memory formation evaluated in
hippocampus-dependent tasks such as the Morris water maze. In this study, the
effects of ICSS on gene expression in the hippocampus are examined 4.5 h post
treatment by using oligonucleotide microarray and real-time PCR, and by measuring
Arc protein levels in the different layers of hippocampal subfields through
immunofluorescence. The microarray data analysis resulted in 65 significantly
regulated genes in rat ICSS hippocampi compared to sham, including cAMP-mediated 
signaling as one of the most significantly enriched Database for Annotation,
Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) functional categories. In
particular, expression of CREB-dependent synaptic plasticity related genes
(c-Fos, Arc, Bdnf, Ptgs-2 and Crem and Icer) was regulated in a time-dependent
manner following treatment administration. Immunofluorescence results showed that
ICSS treatment induced a significant increase in Arc protein expression in CA1
and DG hippocampal subfields. This empirical evidence supports our hypothesis
that the effect of ICSS on improved or restored memory functions might be
mediated by increased hippocampal expression of activity-dependent synaptic
plasticity related genes, including Arc protein expression, as neural mechanisms 
related to memory consolidation.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and International Behavioural and Neural Genetics
Society.

PMID: 23898803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Eur J Endocrinol. 2013 Sep 12;169(4):391-400. doi: 10.1530/EJE-13-0134. Print
2013 Oct.

Molecular and functional properties of densely and sparsely granulated
GH-producing pituitary adenomas.

Mayr B(1), Buslei R, Theodoropoulou M, Stalla GK, Buchfelder M, Schöfl C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Medicine I.

OBJECTIVE: GH-producing pituitary adenomas display two distinct morphological
patterns of cytoplasmic GH-containing secretory granules, namely the densely and 
sparsely granulated somatotroph adenoma subtype. It is unknown whether these
morphological variants reflect distinct pathophysiological entities at the
molecular level.
METHODS: In 28 GH-producing adenoma tissues from a consecutive set of patients
undergoing pituitary surgery for acromegaly, we studied the GH granulation
pattern, the expression of somatostatin receptor subtypes (SSTR) as well as the
calcium, cAMP and ZAC1 pathways in primary adenoma cell cultures.
RESULTS: The expression of GSP oncogene was similar between densely and sparsely 
granulated somatotroph adenoma cells. There were no differences in the calcium,
cAMP and ZAC1 pathways as well as in their regulation by SSTR agonists. SSTR2 was
exclusively expressed in densely but not in sparsely granulated tumours (membrane
expression 86 vs 0%; cytoplasmic expression 67 vs 0%). By contrast, expression of
SSTR5 was only found in sparsely but not in densely granulated somatotroph
adenomas (membrane expression 29 vs 0%; cytoplasmic expression 57 vs 0%).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that different granulation patterns in
GH-producing adenomas do not reflect differences in pathways and factors pivotal 
for somatotroph differentiation and function. In vitro, the vast majority of both
densely and sparsely granulated tumour cells were responsive to SSTR activation
at the molecular level. Sparsely granulated adenomas lacking SSTR2, but
expressing SSTR5, might be responsive to novel SSTR agonists with increased
affinity to SSTR5.

PMID: 23847328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Immunol. 2013 Aug 1;191(3):1316-23. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203147. Epub 2013
Jun 19.

Overexpression of CREMa in T cells aggravates lipopolysaccharide-induced acute
lung injury.

Verjans E(1), Ohl K, Yu Y, Lippe R, Schippers A, Wiener A, Roth J, Wagner N,
Uhlig S, Tenbrock K, Martin C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical Faculty, Rheinisch-Westfaelische Technische 
Hochschule Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, Germany.

Transcription factor cAMP response element modulator (CREM)a contributes to
various cellular and molecular abnormalities in T cells, including increased
IL-17 and decreased IL-2 expression. For development of acute lung injury (ALI), 
the invasion and regulation of immune cells are highly important, but the role of
T cells remains unclear. In this study, we show that CREMa is upregulated in
LPS-induced ALI. During the early phase of ALI (day 1), T cell-specific CREMa
overexpression enhances the numbers of T cells and expression of TNF-a in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and deteriorates lung functions. On day 3 of ALI,
CREMa transgenic mice present a stronger inflammatory response with higher levels
of TNF-a, IL-6, and IL-17 correlating with increased numbers of T cells and
neutrophils in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, whereas expression of Foxp3 and IL-2
and numbers of regulatory T cells are decreased. These changes result in
restricted lung function in CREMa transgenic mice. Finally, an adoptive transfer 
of CREM(-/-) CD4(+) T cells, but not of wild-type T cells into RAG-1(-/-) mice
results in ameliorated disease levels. Thus, levels of CREM in T cells determine 
the outcome of ALI, and CREMa transgenic animals represent a model in which
proinflammatory T cells aggravate ALI in different phases of the disease. Given
the fact that patients with autoimmune diseases like systemic lupus erythematosus
show higher levels of CREMa and an increased susceptibility toward infectious
complications, our finding is of potential clinical significance and may enable
new therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 23785120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Cell Signal. 2013 Sep;25(9):1804-12. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.05.014. Epub
2013 May 21.

Inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) is a novel regulator of RIG-I mediated
IFN-ß production.

Johnsen IB(1), Bergstroem B, Stiberg KA, Thommesen L, Anthonsen MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Children's and Women's Health, Faculty of
Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
Ingvild.johnsen@ntnu.no

Antiviral responses can be triggered by the cytoplasmic RNA helicase RIG-I that
binds to viral RNA. RIG-I-mediated signaling stimulates the transcription factors
IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B and their activation mechanisms have been intensively studied.
Here we examined Sendai virus (SV)-mediated activation of the transcription
factor CREB and the role of its feedback repressor ICER in production of
endogenous antiviral proteins. We show that SV infection and the mitochondrial
adapter protein MAVS promote CREB phosphorylation that is dependent upon p38 MAPK
and MK2. ICER is induced by CREB and acts as a feedback repressor of
CRE-dependent transcription. We found that SV infection stimulated induction of
ICER mRNA and protein expression. Surprisingly, ectopic expression and
siRNA-mediated knockdown of ICER revealed that ICER is a positive regulator of
the production of antiviral IFN-ß and IP10 during SV infection. In contrast, ICER
did not affect SV-elicited phosphorylation of IRF3, NF-<U+03BA>B or ATF2/c-Jun,
transcription factors governing IFN-ß and IP10 synthesis. However, expression of 
ICER increased total IRF3 protein levels during SV infection. These results point
to a novel role of ICER in antiviral immune signaling acting to increase levels
of antiviral effectors.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23707530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2013 Oct;26(5):588-95. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2013.05.004. Epub
2013 May 21.

Safety and tolerability of the inhaled phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitor GSK256066
in moderate COPD.

Watz H(1), Mistry SJ, Lazaar AL; IPC101939 investigators.

Collaborators: Meyer T, Lode H, Wouters E, De Munck D, Stallaert R, Prikk K, Polo
O, Chuchalin A, Martynenko T, Trofimov V, Yakusevich V, Rozborilova E.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Research Institute at LungClinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research
Center North (ARCN), Member of the German Center for Lung Research, Woehrendamm
80, D-22927 Grosshansdorf, Germany. h.watz@pulmoresearch.de

BACKGROUND: Inhibition of phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE4) represents an approach to
anti-inflammatory therapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
GSK256066 is a potent and selective inhaled PDE4 inhibitor. The aim of this study
was to investigate the safety and tolerability of 28 days repeat inhaled dosing
with GSK256066 in moderate COPD.
METHODS: This was a Phase IIa, multicenter, parallel-group, double-blind,
three-arm, placebo-controlled, four-week, randomized study with two doses of
GSK256066 (25 µg, 87.5 µg). The primary endpoint was safety and tolerability.
Secondary endpoints included changes in inflammatory markers in induced sputum
and blood, lung function (spirometry, body plethysmography, impulse
oscillometry), and pharmacokinetics.
RESULTS: 104 patients were randomized and 94 patients completed the study. The
incidence and intensity of treatment-related adverse events were similar between 
treatment groups. The most frequent adverse event was nasopharyngitis and there
were no serious adverse events in patients receiving GSK256066. The overall
incidence of gastrointestinal adverse events was low in all treatment groups.
There were no statistically significant changes in inflammatory markers in
induced sputum and blood following treatment with GSK256066. Analysis of sputum
mRNA suggested engagement of pharmacology, based on increased expression of
cAMP-dependent genes including amphiregulin and CREM in subjects receiving
GSK256066. There was a trend for an increase in post-bronchodilator FEV1 for both
doses of GSK256066; in addition, for the 87.5 µg group, there was a mean
reduction in residual volume of 0.367 L (95% confidence interval: 0.112, 0.622 L)
relative to placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: Administration of inhaled GSK256066 was well-tolerated in patients
with moderate COPD. Further studies would be required to confirm the favorable
safety profile and to demonstrate clinical efficacy of this compound.
(ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT00549679).

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23701917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2013 Jun 12;5(11):5156-64. doi: 10.1021/am401010f.
Epub 2013 May 30.

Band alignment in partial and complete ZnO/ZnS/CdS/CuSCN extremely thin absorber 
cells: an X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy study.

Edri E(1), Cohen H, Hodes G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials and Interfaces, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

In all solar cells, and especially in extremely thin absorber (ETA) solar cells, 
proper energy band alignment is crucial for efficient photovoltaic conversion.
However, available tabulated data usually do not agree with actual results, and
in most cases, Voc values lower than expected are achieved. In fact, ETA cells
suffer from a very low Voc/Egap ratio, such as in ZnO/CdS/CuSCN cells. Here, we
investigate limiting factors of ZnO/CdS/CuSCN ETA cells, applying X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), chemically resolved electrical measurement
(CREM), Kelvin probe, and I-V characterization. We show that electric fields are 
gradually developed in the cell upon increased absorber thickness. Moreover, an
accumulation layer, unfavorable for the solar cell function, has been revealed at
the oxide-absorber interface An effective chemical treatment to prevent formation
of this accumulation layer is demonstrated.

PMID: 23675744  [PubMed]


94. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2013 Oct;31(6):359-69. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2013.04.003.
Epub 2013 May 9.

Shaping synaptic plasticity: the role of activity-mediated epigenetic regulation 
on gene transcription.

Cortés-Mendoza J(1), Díaz de León-Guerrero S, Pedraza-Alva G, Pérez-Martínez L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Neuroinmunobiología, Departamento de Medicina Molecular y
Bioprocesos, Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México 
UNAM, Cuernavaca, Morelos 62271, Mexico.

Learning and memory are basic functions of the brain that allowed human
evolution. It is well accepted that during learning and memory formation the
dynamic establishment of new active synaptic connections is crucial. Persistent
synaptic activation leads to molecular events that include increased release of
neurotransmitters, increased expression of receptors on the postsynaptic neuron, 
thus creating a positive feedback that results in the activation of distinct
signaling pathways that temporally and permanently alter specific patterns of
gene expression. However, the epigenetic changes that allow the establishment of 
long term genetic programs that control learning and memory are not completely
understood. Even less is known regarding the signaling events triggered by
synaptic activity that regulate these epigenetic marks. Here we review the
current understanding of the molecular mechanisms controlling activity-dependent 
gene transcription leading synaptic plasticity and memory formation. We describe 
how Ca(2+) entry through N-methyl-d-aspartate-type glutamate neurotransmitter
receptors result in the activation of specific signaling pathways leading to
changes in gene expression, giving special emphasis to the recent data pointing
out different epigenetic mechanisms (histone acetylation, methylation and
phosphorylation as well as DNA methylation and hydroxymethylation) underlying
learning and memory.

Copyright © 2013 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23665156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. PLoS Genet. 2013 Apr;9(4):e1003464. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003464. Epub 2013 
Apr 25.

Breakpoint analysis of transcriptional and genomic profiles uncovers novel gene
fusions spanning multiple human cancer types.

Giacomini CP(1), Sun S, Varma S, Shain AH, Giacomini MM, Balagtas J, Sweeney RT, 
Lai E, Del Vecchio CA, Forster AD, Clarke N, Montgomery KD, Zhu S, Wong AJ, van
de Rijn M, West RB, Pollack JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, United States of America.

Gene fusions, like BCR/ABL1 in chronic myelogenous leukemia, have long been
recognized in hematologic and mesenchymal malignancies. The recent finding of
gene fusions in prostate and lung cancers has motivated the search for pathogenic
gene fusions in other malignancies. Here, we developed a "breakpoint analysis"
pipeline to discover candidate gene fusions by tell-tale transcript level or
genomic DNA copy number transitions occurring within genes. Mining data from 974 
diverse cancer samples, we identified 198 candidate fusions involving annotated
cancer genes. From these, we validated and further characterized novel gene
fusions involving ROS1 tyrosine kinase in angiosarcoma (CEP85L/ROS1), SLC1A2
glutamate transporter in colon cancer (APIP/SLC1A2), RAF1 kinase in pancreatic
cancer (ATG7/RAF1) and anaplastic astrocytoma (BCL6/RAF1), EWSR1 in melanoma
(EWSR1/CREM), CDK6 kinase in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (FAM133B/CDK6), 
and CLTC in breast cancer (CLTC/VMP1). Notably, while these fusions involved
known cancer genes, all occurred with novel fusion partners and in previously
unreported cancer types. Moreover, several constituted druggable targets
(including kinases), with therapeutic implications for their respective
malignancies. Lastly, breakpoint analysis identified new cell line models for
known rearrangements, including EGFRvIII and FIP1L1/PDGFRA. Taken together, we
provide a robust approach for gene fusion discovery, and our results highlight a 
more widespread role of fusion genes in cancer pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3636093
PMID: 23637631  [PubMed - in process]


96. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Apr 25;4:e605. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.119.

The Myb-p300-CREB axis modulates intestine homeostasis, radiosensitivity and
tumorigenesis.

Sampurno S(1), Bijenhof A, Cheasley D, Xu H, Robine S, Hilton D, Alexander WS,
Pereira L, Mantamadiotis T, Malaterre J, Ramsay RG.

Author information: 
(1)Differentiation and Transcription Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer
Center,East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

The gastrointestinal (GI) epithelium is constantly renewing, depending upon the
intestinal stem cells (ISC) regulated by a spectrum of transcription factors
(TFs), including Myb. We noted previously in mice with a p300 mutation (plt6)
within the Myb-interaction-domain phenocopied Myb hypomorphic mutant mice with
regard to thrombopoiesis, and here, changes in GI homeostasis. p300 is a
transcriptional coactivator for many TFs, most prominently cyclic-AMP response
element-binding protein (CREB), and also Myb. Studies have highlighted the
importance of CREB in proliferation and radiosensitivity, but not in the GI. This
prompted us to directly investigate the p300-Myb-CREB axis in the GI. Here, the
role of CREB has been defined by generating GI-specific inducible creb knockout
(KO) mice. KO mice show efficient and specific deletion of CREB, with no evident 
compensation by CREM and ATF1. Despite complete KO, only modest effects on
proliferation, radiosensitivity and differentiation in the GI under homeostatic
or stress conditions were evident, even though CREB target gene pcna
(proliferating cell nuclear antigen) was downregulated. creb and p300 mutant
lines show increased goblet cells, whereas a reduction in enteroendocrine cells
was apparent only in the p300 line, further resembling the Myb hypomorphs. When
propagated in vitro, crebKO ISC were defective in organoid formation, suggesting 
that the GI stroma compensates for CREB loss in vivo, unlike in MybKO studies.
Thus, it appears that p300 regulates GI differentiation primarily through Myb,
rather than CREB. Finally, active pCREB is elevated in colorectal cancer (CRC)
cells and adenomas, and is required for the expression of drug transporter, MRP2,
associated with resistance to Oxaliplatin as well as several chromatin cohesion
protein that are relevant to CRC therapy. These data raise the prospect that CREB
may have a role in GI malignancy as it does in other cancer types, but unlike
Myb, is not critical for GI homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3641342
PMID: 23618903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013 Jul;57(7):3037-45. doi: 10.1128/AAC.02621-12.
Epub 2013 Apr 15.

Redefining the role of the ß-lactamase locus in methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus: ß-lactamase regulators disrupt the MecI-mediated strong
repression on mecA and optimize the phenotypic expression of resistance in
strains with constitutive mecA expression.

Arêde P(1), Ministro J, Oliveira DC.

Author information: 
(1)CREM, Department of Life Sciences, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal.

In response to ß-lactam chemotherapy, Staphylococcus aureus has acquired two
resistance determinants: blaZ, coding for ß-lactamase, which confers resistance
to penicillins only, and mecA, coding for an extra cell wall cross-linking enzyme
with reduced affinity for virtually all other ß-lactams. The transcriptional
control of both resistance determinants is regulated by homologous repressors
(BlaI and MecI, respectively) and sensor inducers (BlaR1 and MecR1,
respectively). There is a cross-talk between the two regulatory systems, and it
has been demonstrated that bla regulators stabilize the mecA acquisition. In a
recent study, we have unexpectedly observed that in most MRSA strains, there was 
no significant change in the resistance phenotype upon the overexpression in
trans of a MecI repressor, whereas in those few strains negative for the bla
locus, there was a massive decrease of resistance (D. C. Oliveira and H. de
Lencastre, PLoS One 6:e23287, 2011). Here, we demonstrate that, contrary to what 
is currently accepted, the bla regulatory system efficiently disrupts the strong 
MecI-mediated repression on mecA, enabling the optimal expression of resistance. 
This effect appears to be due to the formation of MecI::BlaI heterodimers that
might bind less efficiently to the mecA promoter and become nonfunctional due to 
the proteolytic inactivation of the BlaI monomer. In addition, we have also
observed that the presence of bla regulators may enhance dramatically the
expression of ß-lactam resistance in MRSA strains with constitutive mecA
expression, compensating for the fitness cost imposed by the large ß-lactamase
plasmid. These observations point to important unrecognized roles of the bla
locus for the expression of the methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3697340
PMID: 23587945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Open Microbiol J. 2013;7:59-71. doi: 10.2174/1874285801307010059. Epub 2013 Mar
22.

Multidrug Efflux Pumps in Staphylococcus aureus: an Update.

Costa SS(1), Viveiros M, Amaral L, Couto I.

Author information: 
(1)1Grupo de Micobactérias, Unidade de Microbiologia Médica, Instituto de Higiene
e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa (IHMT, UNL), Portugal ; 2Centro 
de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), UNL, Portugal.

The emergence of infections caused by multi- or pan-resistant bacteria in the
hospital or in the community settings is an increasing health concern. Albeit
there is no single resistance mechanism behind multiresistance, multidrug efflux 
pumps, proteins that cells use to detoxify from noxious compounds, seem to play a
key role in the emergence of these multidrug resistant (MDR) bacteria. During the
last decades, experimental data has established their contribution to low level
resistance to antimicrobials in bacteria and their potential role in the
appearance of MDR phenotypes, by the extrusion of multiple, unrelated compounds. 
Recent studies suggest that efflux pumps may be used by the cell as a first-line 
defense mechanism, avoiding the drug to reach lethal concentrations, until a
stable, more efficient alteration occurs, that allows survival in the presence of
that agent. In this paper we review the current knowledge on MDR efflux pumps and
their intricate regulatory network in Staphylococcus aureus, a major pathogen,
responsible from mild to life-threatening infections. Particular emphasis will be
given to the potential role that S. aureus MDR efflux pumps, either chromosomal
or plasmid-encoded, have on resistance towards different antimicrobial agents and
on the selection of drug - resistant strains. We will also discuss the many
questions that still remain on the role of each specific efflux pump and the need
to establish appropriate methodological approaches to address all these
questions.

PMCID: PMC3617543
PMID: 23569469  [PubMed]


99. Int J Mol Med. 2013 May;31(5):1057-65. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1304. Epub 2013 Mar
15.

Genetic analysis of genes causing hypertension and stroke in spontaneously
hypertensive rats.

Yamamoto H(1), Okuzaki D, Yamanishi K, Xu Y, Watanabe Y, Yoshida M, Yamashita A, 
Goto N, Nishiguchi S, Shimada K, Nojima H, Yasunaga T, Okamura H, Matsunaga H,
Yamanishi H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Advanced Medical Sciences, Hyogo College of Medicine,
Nishinomiya, Hyogo 663-8501, Japan.

Spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) and stroke-prone SHR (SHRSP) are frequently
used as model rats not only in studies of essential hypertension and stroke, but 
also in studies of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Normotensive 
Wistar-Kyoto rats (WKY) are normally used as controls in these studies. In this
study, using these rats, we aimed to identify the genes causing hypertension and 
stroke, as well as the genes involved in ADHD. Since adrenal gland products can
directly influence cardiovascular, endocrine and sympathetic nervous system
functions, gene expression profiles in the adrenal glands of the 3 rat strains
were examined using genome-wide microarray technology when the rats were 3 and 6 
weeks of age, a period in which the rats are considered to be in a
pre-hypertensive state. Gene expression profiles were compared between SHR and
WKY and between SHRSP and SHR. A total of 353 genes showing more than a 4-fold
increase or less than a 4-fold decrease in expression were isolated and candidate
genes were selected as significantly enriched genes. SHR-specific genes isolated 
when the rats were 3 weeks of age contained 12 enriched genes related to
transcriptional regulatory activity and those isolated when the rats were 6 weeks
of age contained 6 enriched genes related to the regulation of blood pressure.
SHRSP-specific genes isolated when the rats were 3 weeks of age contained 4
enriched genes related to the regulation of blood pressure and those isolated
when the rats were 6 weeks of age contained 4 enriched genes related to the
response to steroid hormone stimulus. Ingenuity pathway analysis of enriched
SHR-specific genes revealed that 2 transcriptional regulators, cAMP responsive
element modulator (Crem) and Fos-like antigen 1 (Fosl1), interact with blood
pressure-regulating genes, such as neurotensin (Nts), apelin (Apln) and epoxide
hydrolase 2, cytoplasmic (Ephx2). Similar analyses of SHRSP-specific genes
revealed that angiotensinogen (Agt), one of the blood pressure-regulating genes, 
plays pivotal roles among SHRSP-specific genes. Moreover, genes associated with
ADHD, such as low density lipoprotein receptor (Ldlr) and Crem, are discussed.

PMID: 23525202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Eukaryot Cell. 2013 May;12(5):746-60. doi: 10.1128/EC.00065-13. Epub 2013 Mar 22.

Molecular and genetic evidence for a tetrapolar mating system in the
basidiomycetous yeast Kwoniella mangrovensis and two novel sibling species.

Guerreiro MA(1), Springer DJ, Rodrigues JA, Rusche LN, Findley K, Heitman J,
Fonseca A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Departamento de Ciências da Vida,
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica,
Portugal.

Kwoniella mangrovensis has been described as a sexual species with a bipolar
mating system. Phylogenetic analysis of multiple genes places this species
together with Kwoniella heveanensis in the Kwoniella clade, a sister clade to
that containing two pathogenic species of global importance, Cryptococcus
neoformans and Cryptococcus gattii, within the Tremellales. Recent studies
defining the mating type loci (MAT) of species in these clades showed that, with 
the exception of C. neoformans and C. gattii, which are bipolar with a single
biallelic multigene MAT locus, several other species feature a tetrapolar mating 
system with two unlinked loci (homeodomain [HD] and pheromone/receptor [P/R]
loci). We characterized several strains from the original study describing K.
mangrovensis; two MAT regions were amplified and sequenced: the STE20 gene (P/R
locus) and the divergently transcribed SXI1 and SXI2 genes (HD locus). We
identified five different mating types with different STE20/SXI allele
combinations that together with results of mating experiments demonstrate that K.
mangrovensis is not bipolar but instead has a tetrapolar mating system. Sequence 
and gene analysis for a 43-kb segment of the K. mangrovensis type strain MAT
locus revealed remarkable synteny with the homologous K. heveanensis MAT P/R
region, providing new insights into slower evolution of MAT loci in the Kwoniella
compared to the Cryptococcus clade of the Tremellales. The study of additional
isolates from plant substrates in Europe and Botswana using a combination of
multilocus sequencing with MAT gene analysis revealed two novel sibling species
that we name Kwoniella europaea and Kwoniella botswanensis and which appear to
also have tetrapolar mating systems.

PMCID: PMC3647770
PMID: 23524993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. MBio. 2013 Mar 19;4(2):e00117-13. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00117-13.

Living and thriving on the skin: Malassezia genomes tell the story.

Coelho MA(1), Sampaio JP, Gonçalves P.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Departamento de Ciências da Vida,
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica,
Portugal. madc@fct.unl.pt

Comment on
    MBio. 2013;4(1):e00572-12.

Our understanding of the interactions between normal skin microbiota and the
human host has been greatly extended by recent investigations. In their recent
study in mBio, A. Gioti et al. (mBio 4[1]:e00572-12, 2013) sequenced the genome
of the atopic eczema-associated yeast, Malassezia sympodialis, and compared its
gene content and organization with that of Malassezia globosa, a species
implicated in dandruff. Their findings were also contrasted with those previously
obtained for Ustilago maydis, which is a close relative but ecologically distinct
plant parasite. Besides gaining additional insight into key host-specific
adaptations and the particular function and molecular evolution of allergens
related to atopic eczema, Gioti et al. also uncovered several lines of evidence
that elegantly suggest the presence of an extant sexual cycle, with important
implications in disease.

PMCID: PMC3604764
PMID: 23512963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Methods. 2013 Nov;64(1):79-87. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2013.02.017. Epub 2013 Mar
14.

In-line probing of RNA G-quadruplexes.

Beaudoin JD(1), Jodoin R, Perreault JP.

Author information: 
(1)RNA Group/Groupe ARN, Département de Biochimie, Faculté de Médecine et des
Sciences de la Santé, Pavillon de Recherche Appliquée au Cancer, Université de
Sherbrooke, QC, Canada J1E 4K8.

Although the majority of the initial G-quadruplex studies were performed on DNA
molecules, there currently exists a rapidly growing interest in the investigation
of those formed in RNA molecules that possess high potential of acting as gene
expression regulatory elements. Indeed, G-quadruplexes found in the
5'-untranslated regions of mRNAs have been reported to be widespread within the
human transcriptome and to act as general translational repressors. In addition
to translation regulation, several other mRNA maturation steps and events,
including mRNA splicing, polyadenylation and localization, have been shown to be 
influenced by the presence of these RNA G-quadruplexes. Bioinformatic approaches 
have identified thousands of potential RNA G-quadruplex sequences in the human
transcriptome. Clearly there is a need for the development of rapid, simple and
informative techniques and methodologies with which the ability of these
sequences, and of any potential new regulatory elements, to fold into
G-quadruplexes in vitro can be examined. This report describes an integrated
methodology for monitoring RNA G-quadruplexes formation that combines
bioinformatic algorithms, secondary structure prediction, in-line probing with
semi-quantification analysis and structural representation software. The power of
this approach is illustrated, step-by-step, with the determination of the
structure adopted by a potential G-quadruplex sequence found in the
5'-untranslated region of the cAMP responsive element modulator (CREM) mRNA. The 
results unambiguously show that the CREM sequence folds into a G-quadruplex
structure in the presence of a physiological concentration of potassium ions.
This in-line probing-based method is easy to use, robust, reproducible and
informative in the study of RNA G-quadruplex formation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23500045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Trends Mol Med. 2013 Apr;19(4):262-9. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2013.02.001. Epub
2013 Mar 13.

cAMP responsive element modulator: a critical regulator of cytokine production.

Rauen T(1), Hedrich CM, Tenbrock K, Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

T lymphocytes from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) display a
complex array of cellular, molecular, and signaling anomalies, many of which have
been attributed to increased expression of the transcriptional regulator cAMP
responsive element modulator a (CREMa). Recent evidence indicates that CREMa, in 
addition to its regulatory functions on gene promoters in T lymphocytes, alters
the epigenetic conformation of cytokine genes by interacting with enzymes that
control histone methylation and acetylation as well as
cytosine-phosphate-guanosine (CpG) DNA methylation. This review summarizes the
most recent findings on CREM protein expression in various cell types, in
particular its effects on T lymphocyte biology in the context of both health and 
SLE. We emphasize CREMa as a key molecule that drives autoimmunity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3891595
PMID: 23491535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 12;288(15):10318-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.445692. Epub
2013 Feb 25.

Inducible cAMP early repressor regulates the Period 1 gene of the hepatic and
adrenal clocks.

Zmrzljak UP(1), Korencic A, Koir R, Golicnik M, Sassone-Corsi P, Rozman D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Functional Genomics and Bio-Chips, Institute of Biochemistry,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Light, restricted feeding, and hormonal inputs may operate as time givers
(zeitgebers) for the circadian clock within peripheral organs through the
activation of tissue-specific signaling cascades. cAMP signaling through CREM
(cAMP-responsive element modulator) and its variant ICER (inducible cAMP early
repressor) is linked to the circadian regulation of pineal melatonin synthesis,
although little is known about its influence in other organs. We performed
experiments in the absence of light and feeding-time cues to test which core
clock genes are controlled by CREM/ICER in the liver and adrenal gland. In vivo, 
Crem loss-of-function mutation resulted in fine-tuning of all measured adrenal
clock genes (Per1/2/3, Cry1/2, Bmal1, and Rev-erba), whereas only Per1 and Cry1
were affected in the liver. Icer expression was circadian in the adrenal gland,
with peak gene expression at zeitgeber 12 and the highest protein levels at
zeitgeber ~20. The expression of both Icer and Per1 genes responded to cAMP
stimuli in an immediate-early fashion. In immortal cells, forskolin induced
expression of Per1 after 2 h, and de novo protein synthesis led to Per1
attenuation. We show that the de novo synthesized protein responsible for Per1
attenuation is ICER. Indeed, Per1 expression is up-regulated in cells ectopically
expressing antisense Icer, and mobility shift experiments identified ICER binding
to cAMP-responsive elements of the Per1 promoter. We propose that ICER acts as a 
noise filter for different signals that could affect transcription in the adrenal
gland. Because ICER is an immediate-early repressor, the circadian nature of
adrenal Icer expression could serve a role in a time-dependent gating mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3624415
PMID: 23443664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Toxicol In Vitro. 2013 Jun;27(4):1205-10. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2013.02.004. Epub
2013 Feb 14.

Screening for potential hazard effects from four nitramines on human eye and
skin.

Fjellsbø LM(1), Van Rompay AR, Hooyberghs J, Nelissen I, Dusinska M.

Author information: 
(1)Health Effects Laboratory, Department of Environmental Chemistry,
NILU-Norwegian Institute for Air Research, Instituttveien 18, Kjeller, Norway.

Amines have potential to be used in CO2 capture and storage (CCS) technology, but
as they can be released into the environment and be degraded into more toxic
compounds, such as nitrosamines and nitramines, there have been concerns about
their negative impact on human health. We investigated the potential toxic
effects from acute exposure to dimethylnitramine (DMA-NO2), methylnitramine
(MA-NO2), ethanolnitramine (MEA-NO2) and 2-methyl-2-(nitroamino)-1-propanol
(AMP-NO2). The eye irritation, and skin sensitization, irritation and corrosion
potential of these substances have been evaluated in vitro using the Bovine
Corneal Opacity and Permeability (BCOP) assay, VITOSENS® assay, Reconstructed
Human Epidermis (RHE) skin irritation test and Corrositex Skin corrosion test,
respectively. Exposure to DMA-NO2 induced a mild eye irritation response, while
MA-NO2, MEA-NO2 and AMP-NO2 were shown to be very severe eye irritants. MA-NO2
and MEA-NO2 were tested for skin sensitization and found to be non-sensitizers to
the skin. In addition, none of the four test substances was irritant or corrosive
to the skin.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23416265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013 Apr;57(4):2001-2. doi: 10.1128/AAC.02510-12.
Epub 2013 Feb 12.

Proteolysis of mecA repressor is essential for expression of methicillin
resistance by Staphylococcus aureus.

Arêde P(1), Oliveira DC.

Author information: 
(1)CREM, Department of Life Sciences, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal.

Recently, we have demonstrated that the cognate regulatory locus of the mecA gene
in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is in fact a
three-component system containing the novel mecR2 gene coding for an
antirepressor. MecR2 interacts with the repressor MecI, disturbing its binding to
the mecA promoter and fostering its proteolysis. Here, we engineered a point
mutation in the putative cleavage site of MecI and demonstrated that MecI
proteolysis is strictly required for the optimal expression of ß-lactam
resistance.

PMCID: PMC3623340
PMID: 23403422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2013 Mar;19(3):461-70. doi: 10.1097/MIB.0b013e3182802bac.

Gene signature distinguishes patients with chronic ulcerative colitis harboring
remote neoplastic lesions.

Pekow J(1), Dougherty U, Huang Y, Gometz E, Nathanson J, Cohen G, Levy S,
Kocherginsky M, Venu N, Westerhoff M, Hart J, Noffsinger AE, Hanauer SB, Hurst
RD, Fichera A, Joseph LJ, Liu Q, Bissonnette M.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois, USA. jpekow@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu

BACKGROUND: Individuals with ulcerative colitis (UC) are at increased risk for
colorectal cancer. The standard method of surveillance for neoplasia in UC by
colonoscopy is invasive and can miss flat lesions. We sought to identify a gene
expression signature in nondysplastic mucosa without active inflammation that
could serve as a marker for remote neoplastic lesions.
METHODS: Gene expression was analyzed by complementary DNA microarray in 5 normal
controls, 4 UC patients without dysplasia, and 11 UC patients harboring remote
neoplasia. Common gene ontology pathways of significantly differentially
expressed genes were identified. Expression of genes which were progressively and
significantly upregulated from controls to UC without neoplasia, to UC with
remote neoplasia were evaluated by real-time polymerase chain reaction. Several
gene products were also examined by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Four hundred and sixty-eight genes were significantly upregulated, and
541 genes were significantly downregulated in UC patients with neoplasia compared
with UC patients without neoplasia. Nine genes (ACSL1, BIRC3, CLC, CREM, ELTD1,
FGG, S100A9, THBD, and TPD52L1) were progressively and significantly upregulated 
from controls to nondysplastic UC to UC with neoplasia. Immunostaining of
proteins revealed increased expression of S100A9 and REG1a in UC-associated
cancer and in nondysplastic tissue from UC patients harboring remote neoplasia
compared with UC patients without neoplasia and controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Gene expression changes occurring as a field effect in the distal
colon of patients with chronic UC identify patients harboring remote neoplastic
lesions. These markers may lead to a more accurate and less invasive method of
detection of neoplasia in patients with inflammatory bowel disease.

PMCID: PMC3836269
PMID: 23388545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e55198. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055198. Epub 2013 Jan 30.

Reduction of connexin36 content by ICER-1 contributes to insulin-secreting cells 
apoptosis induced by oxidized LDL particles.

Haefliger JA(1), Martin D, Favre D, Petremand Y, Mazzolai L, Abderrahmani A, Meda
P, Waeber G, Allagnat F.

Author information: 
(1)Service of Internal Medicine, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois,
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Connexin36 (Cx36), a trans-membrane protein that forms gap junctions between
insulin-secreting beta-cells in the Langerhans islets, contributes to the proper 
control of insulin secretion and beta-cell survival. Hypercholesterolemia and
pro-atherogenic low density lipoproteins (LDL) contribute to beta-cell
dysfunction and apoptosis in the context of Type 2 diabetes. We investigated the 
impact of LDL-cholesterol on Cx36 levels in beta-cells. As compared to WT mice,
the Cx36 content was reduced in islets from hypercholesterolemic ApoE-/- mice.
Prolonged exposure to human native (nLDL) or oxidized LDL (oxLDL) particles
decreased the expression of Cx36 in insulin secreting cell-lines and isolated
rodent islets. Cx36 down-regulation was associated with overexpression of the
inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER-1) and the selective disruption of ICER-1
prevented the effects of oxLDL on Cx36 expression. Oil red O staining and Plin1
expression levels suggested that oxLDL were less stored as neutral lipid droplets
than nLDL in INS-1E cells. The lipid beta-oxidation inhibitor etomoxir enhanced
oxLDL-induced apoptosis whereas the ceramide synthesis inhibitor myriocin
partially protected INS-1E cells, suggesting that oxLDL toxicity was due to
impaired metabolism of the lipids. ICER-1 and Cx36 expressions were closely
correlated with oxLDL toxicity. Cx36 knock-down in INS-1E cells or knock-out in
primary islets sensitized beta-cells to oxLDL-induced apoptosis. In contrast,
overexpression of Cx36 partially protected INS-1E cells against apoptosis. These 
data demonstrate that the reduction of Cx36 content in beta-cells by oxLDL
particles is mediated by ICER-1 and contributes to oxLDL-induced beta-cell
apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3559396
PMID: 23383107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2012 Dec 1;186(11):1080-1. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201210-1857OE.

The 2012 Nobel Prize in physiology or medicine: democratizing pluripotency for
lung researchers.

Kotton DN(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Pulmonary Center and Center for Regenerative Medicine CReM, Boston
University and Boston Medical Center, 72 East Concord Street, R-304, Boston, MA
02118, USA. dkotton@bu.edu

PMID: 23204376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Comput Chem. 2013 Mar 30;34(8):622-39. doi: 10.1002/jcc.23167. Epub 2012 Nov
29.

Coulomb replica-exchange method: handling electrostatic attractive and repulsive 
forces for biomolecules.

Itoh SG(1), Okumura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Theoretical and Computational Molecular Science, Institute for
Molecular Science, Okazaki, Aichi, Japan. itoh@ims.ac.jp

We propose a new type of the Hamiltonian replica-exchange method (REM) for
molecular dynamics (MD) and Monte Carlo simulations, which we refer to as the
Coulomb REM (CREM). In this method, electrostatic charge parameters in the
Coulomb interactions are exchanged among replicas while temperatures are
exchanged in the usual REM. By varying the atom charges, the CREM overcomes
free-energy barriers and realizes more efficient sampling in the conformational
space than the REM. Furthermore, this method requires only a smaller number of
replicas because only the atom charges of solute molecules are used as exchanged 
parameters. We performed Coulomb replica-exchange MD simulations of an alanine
dipeptide in explicit water solvent and compared the results with those of the
conventional canonical, replica exchange, and van der Waals REMs. Two force
fields of AMBER parm99 and AMBER parm99SB were used. As a result, the CREM
sampled all local-minimum free-energy states more frequently than the other
methods for both force fields. Moreover, the Coulomb, van der Waals, and usual
REMs were applied to a fragment of an amyloid-ß peptide (Aß) in explicit water
solvent to compare the sampling efficiency of these methods for a larger system. 
The CREM sampled structures of the Aß fragment more efficiently than the other
methods. We obtained ß-helix, a-helix, 3(10)-helix, ß-hairpin, and ß-sheet
structures as stable structures and deduced pathways of conformational
transitions among these structures from a free-energy landscape.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23197415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Vis Exp. 2012 Oct 31;(68). pii: 4327. doi: 10.3791/4327.

Generation of human induced pluripotent stem cells from peripheral blood using
the STEMCCA lentiviral vector.

Sommer AG(1), Rozelle SS, Sullivan S, Mills JA, Park SM, Smith BW, Iyer AM,
French DL, Kotton DN, Gadue P, Murphy GJ, Mostoslavsky G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Regenerative Medicine (CReM), Boston University School of Medicine.

Through the ectopic expression of four transcription factors, Oct4, Klf4, Sox2
and cMyc, human somatic cells can be converted to a pluripotent state, generating
so-called induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs)(1-4). Patient-specific iPSCs
lack the ethical concerns that surround embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and would
bypass possible immune rejection. Thus, iPSCs have attracted considerable
attention for disease modeling studies, the screening of pharmacological
compounds, and regenerative therapies(5). We have shown the generation of
transgene-free human iPSCs from patients with different lung diseases using a
single excisable polycistronic lentiviral Stem Cell Cassette (STEMCCA) encoding
the Yamanaka factors(6). These iPSC lines were generated from skin fibroblasts,
the most common cell type used for reprogramming. Normally, obtaining fibroblasts
requires a skin punch biopsy followed by expansion of the cells in culture for a 
few passages. Importantly, a number of groups have reported the reprogramming of 
human peripheral blood cells into iPSCs(7-9). In one study, a Tet inducible
version of the STEMCCA vector was employed(9), which required the blood cells to 
be simultaneously infected with a constitutively active lentivirus encoding the
reverse tetracycline transactivator. In contrast to fibroblasts, peripheral blood
cells can be collected via minimally invasive procedures, greatly reducing the
discomfort and distress of the patient. A simple and effective protocol for
reprogramming blood cells using a constitutive single excisable vector may
accelerate the application of iPSC technology by making it accessible to a
broader research community. Furthermore, reprogramming of peripheral blood cells 
allows for the generation of iPSCs from individuals in which skin biopsies should
be avoided (i.e. aberrant scarring) or due to pre-existing disease conditions
preventing access to punch biopsies. Here we demonstrate a protocol for the
generation of human iPSCs from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) using a
single floxed-excisable lentiviral vector constitutively expressing the 4
factors. Freshly collected or thawed PBMCs are expanded for 9 days as
described(10,11) in medium containing ascorbic acid, SCF, IGF-1, IL-3 and EPO
before being transduced with the STEMCCA lentivirus. Cells are then plated onto
MEFs and ESC-like colonies can be visualized two weeks after infection. Finally, 
selected clones are expanded and tested for the expression of the pluripotency
markers SSEA-4, Tra-1-60 and Tra-1-81. This protocol is simple, robust and highly
consistent, providing a reliable methodology for the generation of human iPSCs
from readily accessible 4 ml of blood.

PMCID: PMC3499070
PMID: 23149977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Biol Chem. 2012 Dec 14;287(51):42525-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.425371. Epub
2012 Nov 2.

cAMP-responsive element modulator a (CREMa) contributes to decreased Notch-1
expression in T cells from patients with active systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE).

Rauen T(1), Grammatikos AP, Hedrich CM, Floege J, Tenbrock K, Ohl K, Kyttaris VC,
Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Notch signaling constitutes an evolutionarily conserved pathway that transduces
signals between neighboring cells and determines major decisions in cell
proliferation, survival, and differentiation. Notch signaling has been shown to
play a pivotal role during T cell lineage determination. T lymphocytes from
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) display a severely altered
phenotype with several molecular and functional aberrations, including defective 
capacities to up-regulate Notch-1 receptor expression upon T cell receptor
activation. Here, we demonstrate that basal Notch-1 expression is decreased in T 
cells from active SLE patients at the mRNA and protein levels in various T cell
subpopulations. Notch-1 transcript numbers inversely correlate with disease
activity in SLE patients. We provide evidence that both enhanced histone H3
methylation and CpG DNA methylation of the human Notch-1 promoter contribute to
decreased Notch-1 expression in SLE T cells. Previous data from our group
identified cAMP-responsive element modulator a (CREMa), which is up-regulated in 
SLE T cells, as a key regulator of epigenetic patterns and gene transcription,
e.g. that of IL2 and IL17 genes. In this study, we observed increased CREMa
binding to the Notch-1 promoter, which eventually resulted in significantly
reduced Notch-1 promoter activity and gene transcription. Notably, decreased
Notch-1 levels were associated with elevated IL-17A levels. Our data suggest a
role for Notch-1 in SLE immunopathogenesis, and for the first time, we present
molecular mechanisms that mediate dysregulated Notch-1 expression in SLE T cells.

PMCID: PMC3522254
PMID: 23124208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Oct 9;109(41):16606-11. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1210129109. Epub 2012 Sep 26.

cAMP response element modulator a controls IL2 and IL17A expression during CD4
lineage commitment and subset distribution in lupus.

Hedrich CM(1), Crispin JC, Rauen T, Ioannidis C, Apostolidis SA, Lo MS, Kyttaris 
VC, Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
chedrich@bidmc.harvard.edu

Appropriate expression of IL-2 plays a central role during the priming and
differentiation of T cells. A tight balance between IL-2 and the effector
cytokine IL-17A is essential for immune homeostasis. Epigenetic mechanisms have
been documented as a key component of cytokine regulation during lineage
commitment. The molecular mechanisms that induce chromatin remodeling are less
well understood. We investigated epigenetic regulators that mediate the diametric
expression of IL-2 and IL-17A in naive, central memory, and effector memory
CD4(+) T cells. We demonstrate that cAMP response modulator (CREM)a contributes
to epigenetic remodeling of IL2 in effector memory T cells through the
recruitment of DNMT3a. CREMa also reduces CpG-DNA methylation of the IL17A
promoter. CREMa expression is regulated at the epigenetic level by CpG-DNA
methylation, which allows increased CREMa expression in effector memory CD4(+) T 
cells. T cells from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) express
increased levels of CREMa and exhibit a phenotype that is similar to effector
memory CD4(+) T cells with epigenetically predetermined expression patterns of
IL-2 and IL-17A. We conclude that CREMa mediates epigenetic remodeling of the IL2
and IL17A gene during T-cell differentiation in favor of effector memory T cells 
in health and disease.

PMCID: PMC3478624
PMID: 23019580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 Jan 5;365(1):84-94. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2012.09.006.
Epub 2012 Sep 20.

Family members CREB and CREM control thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH)
expression in the hypothalamus.

Chiappini F(1), Ramadoss P, Vella KR, Cunha LL, Ye FD, Stuart RC, Nillni EA,
Hollenberg AN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Center of Life Science, Boston, MA
02215, United States. franck.chiappini@inserm.fr

Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of the
hypothalamus is regulated by thyroid hormone (TH). cAMP response element binding 
protein (CREB) has also been postulated to regulate TRH expression but its
interaction with TH signaling in vivo is not known. To evaluate the role of CREB 
in TRH regulation in vivo, we deleted CREB from PVN neurons to generate the
CREB1(<U+0394>SIM1) mouse. As previously shown, loss of CREB was compensated for by an
up-regulation of CREM in euthyroid CREB1(<U+0394>SIM1) mice but TSH, T4 and T3 levels
were normal, even though TRH mRNA levels were elevated. Interestingly, TRH mRNA
expression was also increased in the PVN of CREB1(<U+0394>SIM1) mice in the hypothyroid 
state but became normal when made hyperthyroid. Importantly, CREM levels were
similar in CREB1(<U+0394>SIM1) mice regardless of thyroid status, demonstrating that the
regulation of TRH by T3 in vivo likely occurs independently of the CREB/CREM
family.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3572472
PMID: 23000398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(7):e1002816. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002816. Epub 2012 Jul
26.

The anti-repressor MecR2 promotes the proteolysis of the mecA repressor and
enables optimal expression of ß-lactam resistance in MRSA.

Arêde P(1), Milheiriço C, de Lencastre H, Oliveira DC.

Author information: 
(1)CREM, Department of Life Sciences, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal.

Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is an important human
pathogen, which is cross-resistant to virtually all ß-lactam antibiotics. MRSA
strains are defined by the presence of mecA gene. The transcription of mecA can
be regulated by a sensor-inducer (MecR1) and a repressor (MecI), involving a
unique series of proteolytic steps. The induction of mecA by MecR1 has been
described as very inefficient and, as such, it is believed that optimal
expression of ß-lactam resistance by MRSA requires a non-functional MecR1-MecI
system. However, in a recent study, no correlation was found between the presence
of functional MecR1-MecI and the level of ß-lactam resistance in a representative
collection of epidemic MRSA strains. Here, we demonstrate that the mecA
regulatory locus consists, in fact, of an unusual three-component arrangement
containing, in addition to mecR1-mecI, the up to now unrecognized mecR2 gene
coding for an anti-repressor. The MecR2 function is essential for the full
induction of mecA expression, compensating for the inefficient induction of mecA 
by MecR1 and enabling optimal expression of ß-lactam resistance in MRSA strains
with functional mecR1-mecI regulatory genes. Our data shows that MecR2 interacts 
directly with MecI, destabilizing its binding to the mecA promoter, which results
in the repressor inactivation by proteolytic cleavage, presumably mediated by
native cytoplasmatic proteases. These observations point to a revision of the
current model for the transcriptional control of mecA and open new avenues for
the design of alternative therapeutic strategies for the treatment of MRSA
infections. Moreover, these findings also provide important insights into the
complex evolutionary pathways of antibiotic resistance and molecular mechanisms
of transcriptional regulation in bacteria.

PMCID: PMC3406092
PMID: 22911052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Neurosci. 2012 Aug 15;32(33):11309-17. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1333-12.2012.

The role of cAMP response element-binding protein in estrogen negative feedback
control of gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons.

Kwakowsky A(1), Herbison AE, Ábrahám IM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Neuroendocrinology and Department of Physiology, Otago School of
Medical Sciences, University of Otago, 9054 Dunedin, New Zealand.

The mechanisms through which estradiol (E2) regulates gonadotropin-releasing
hormone (GnRH) neurons to control fertility are unclear. Previous studies have
demonstrated that E2 rapidly phosphorylates cAMP response element-binding protein
(CREB) in GnRH neurons in vivo. In the present study, we used GnRH
neuron-specific CREB-deleted mutant mice [GnRH-CREB knock-outs (KOs)] with and
without global cAMP response element modulator (CREM) deletion (global-CREM KOs) 
to investigate the role of CREB in estrogen negative feedback on GnRH neurons.
Evaluation of GnRH-CREB KO mice with and without global CREM deletion revealed
normal puberty onset. Although estrus cycle length in adults was the same in
controls and knock-out mice, cycles in mutant mice consisted of significantly
longer periods of diestrus and less estrus. In GnRH-CREB KO mice, basal levels of
luteinizing hormone (LH) and the postovariectomy increment in LH were normal, but
the ability of E2 to rapidly suppress LH was significantly blunted. In contrast, 
basal and postovariectomy LH levels were abnormal in GnRH-CREB KO/global-CREM KO 
mice. Fecundity studies showed that GnRH-CREB KO with and without global CREM
deletion were normal up to ~9 months of age, at which time they became
prematurely reproductively senescent. Morphological analysis of GnRH neurons
revealed a significant reduction (p < 0.01) in GnRH somatic spine density of
GnRH-CREB KO mice compared to control females. These observations implicate CREB 
within the GnRH neuron as an important target for E2's negative feedback actions.
They also indicate that the rapid modulation of CREB by E2 is of physiological
significance in the CNS.

PMID: 22895714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Health Econ Rev. 2012 Apr 4;2(1):5. doi: 10.1186/2191-1991-2-5.

Community-based health insurance and social capital: a review.

Donfouet HP(1), Mahieu PA.

Author information: 
(1)CREM, UMR CNRS 6211, University of Rennes I, 7 Place Hoche, 35 065 Rennes
Cedex, France. donfouetz@yahoo.fr.

Community-Based Health Insurance (CBHI) is an emerging concept for providing
financial protection against the cost of illness and improving access to quality 
health services for low-income rural households who are excluded from formal
insurance. CBHI is currently being provided in some rural areas in developing
countries and there is ongoing research about its impact on the well-being of the
poor in these areas. However, the success of CBHI revolves around the existence
of social capital in the community. This has led researchers to explore the
impact of CBHI on the well-being of the poor in rural areas, especially as it
relates to social capital. The overall objective of this paper is to review
recent developments that address the link between CBHI and social capital. Policy
implications are also discussed.JEL CLASSIFICATION: C10, I15.

PMCID: PMC3402932
PMID: 22828204  [PubMed]


118. Hum Reprod Update. 2012 Nov-Dec;18(6):703-13. doi: 10.1093/humupd/dms027. Epub
2012 Jun 17.

Regulation of male fertility by CFTR and implications in male infertility.

Chen H(1), Ruan YC, Xu WM, Chen J, Chan HC.

Author information: 
(1)Sichuan University - The Chinese University of Hong Kong Joint Laboratory for 
Reproductive Medicine, Key Laboratory of Obstetric, Gynecologic and Pediatric
Diseases and Birth Defects of Ministry of Education, West China Second University
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, People's Republic of China.

Erratum in
    Hum Reprod Update. 2012 Nov-Dec;18(6):715.

BACKGROUND: The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) is a
cAMP-activated Cl(-) and HCO(3)(-) conducting channel, mutations of which are
known to be associated with male infertility. However, the underlying mechanisms 
remain elusive.
METHODS: Literature databases were searched for papers on the topics related to
CFTR and male fertility and infertility with relevant keywords. Unpublished data 
from authors' laboratory were also included for analysis.
RESULTS: Clinical evidence shows increased mutation frequency or reduced CFTR
expression in men with congenital bilateral absence of vas deferens (CBAVD) or
sperm abnormalities, such as azoospermia teratospermia and oligoasthenospermia.
Studies on primary rodent Sertoli cells and germ cells, as well as testes from
CFTR knockout mice or a cryptorchidism model, yield findings indicating the
involvement of CFTR in spermatogensis through the HCO(3)(-)/sAC/cAMP/CREB(CREM)
pathway and the NF-<U+03BA>B/COX-2/PGE(2) pathway. Evidence also reveals a critical role
of CFTR in sperm capacitation by directly or indirectly mediating HCO(3)(-) entry
that is essential for capacitation. CFTR is emerging as a versatile player with
roles in mediating different signaling pathways pertinent to various reproductive
processes, in addition to its long-recognized role in electrolyte and fluid
transport that regulates the luminal microenvironment of the male reproductive
tract.
CONCLUSIONS: CFTR is a key regulator of male fertility, a defect of which may
result in different forms of male infertility other than CBAVD. It would be
worthwhile to further investigate the potential of developing novel diagnostic
and contraceptive methods targeting CFTR.

PMID: 22709980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Jun;42(6):1375-84. doi: 10.1002/eji.201141578.

Cyclic AMP underpins suppression by regulatory T cells.

Bodor J(1), Bopp T, Vaeth M, Klein M, Serfling E, Hünig T, Becker C, Schild H,
Schmitt E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. bodor@uni-mainz.de

Elevated levels of intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) in
naturally occurring T regulatory (nTreg) cells play a key role in
nTreg-cell-mediated suppression. Upon contact with nTreg cells, cAMP is
transferred from nTreg cells into activated target CD4(+) T cells and/or
antigen-presenting cells (APCs) via gap junctions to suppress CD4(+) T-cell
function. cAMP facilitates the expression and nuclear function of a potent
transcriptional inhibitor, inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER), resulting in
ICER-mediated suppression of interleukin-2 (IL-2). Furthermore, ICER inhibits
transcription of nuclear factor of activated T cell c1/a (NFATc1/a) and forms
inhibitory complexes with preexisting NFATc1/c2, thereby inhibiting NFAT-driven
transcription, including that of IL-2. In addition to its suppressive effects
mediated via ICER, cAMP can also modulate the levels of surface-expressed
cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) and its cognate B7 ligands on
conventional CD4(+) T cells and/or APCs, fine-tuning suppression. These
cAMP-driven nTreg-cell suppression mechanisms are the focus of this review.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22678893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Phytother Res. 2012 Sep;26(9):1418-21. doi: 10.1002/ptr.4756. Epub 2012 Jun 2.

Astragalus membranaceus ameliorates reproductive toxicity induced by
cyclophosphamide in male mice.

Kim W(1), Kim SH, Park SK, Chang MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prescriptionology, College of Oriental Medicine, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul 130-701, South Korea.

The root of Astragalus membranaceus B(UNGE) (AM) is a medicinal herb that has
been capable of reducing the adverse effects of conventional chemotherapy. To
investigate the effects of AM on cyclophosphamide (CP)-induced reproductive
toxicity in mouse testes, 5-week-old male imprinting control region mice were
divided into five groups; CP was treated on the first day of each week for 5
weeks (100<U+2009>mg/kg, i.p.), and AM was treated for 5 days a week for 5 weeks. At the
end of the treatment period, the testes were taken out, cleared of the adhering
tissues, and weighed. Epididymis was taken out and used for sperm analysis.
Testis samples were frozen for real-time quantitative PCR and Western blot
analysis. AM treatment increased diminished relative testes weight, and sperm
count and motility in mice treated with CP. CP treatment has detrimental effects 
on the expression of cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM), a transcription
factor that is highly expressed in male germ cells and is crucial to post-meiotic
germ cell differentiation. AM restored CREM at both the mRNA and protein levels. 
AM has beneficial influences and appears able to ameliorate relative testes
weight, sperm parameters, and CREM expression against CP-induced reproductive
toxicity.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22674751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Aug;26(8):1455-63. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1308. Epub 2012 May 
25.

Research resource: A genome-wide study identifies potential new target genes for 
POU1F1.

Herman JP(1), Jullien N, Guillen S, Enjalbert A, Pellegrini I, Franc JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, CRN2M-Unité Mixte de Recherche
7286, F-13344 Marseille, France.

The pituitary transcription factor POU1F1 is required for the differentiation of 
lactotrope, thyrotrope, and somatotrope cells. Its expression is maintained in
the adult and is crucial for the expression of prolactin, GH, and TSHß-subunit.
Different studies indicated that POU1F1 could also have other functions in these 
cells. The identification of new targets of this factor could be useful to obtain
a better understanding of these functions. To address this question we combined
data obtained from expression microarrays and from chromatin immunoprecipitation 
(ChIP)-chips. Gene expression microarray assays were used to detect genes that
have their expression modified in somatolactotrope GH4C1 cells by the expression 
of a dominant-negative form of POU1F1, POU1F1(R271W), and led to the
identification of 1346 such genes. ChIP-chip experiments were performed from
mouse pituitaries and identified 1671 POU1F1-binding sites in gene-promoter
regions. Intersecting the gene expression and the ChIP-chip data yielded 121
potential new direct targets. The initial set of 1346 genes identified using the 
microarrays, as well as the 121 potential new direct targets, were analyzed with 
DAVID bioinformatics resource for gene ontology term enrichment and cluster. This
analysis revealed enrichment in different terms related to protein synthesis and 
transport, to apoptosis, and to cell division. The present study represents an
integrative genome-wide approach to identify new target genes of POU1F1 and
downstream networks controlled by this factor.

PMID: 22638072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Immunol. 2012 Jun 15;188(12):5833-7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200038. Epub 2012
May 14.

Cutting edge: Divergent cell-specific functions of MyD88 for inflammatory
responses and organ injury in septic peritonitis.

Gais P(1), Reim D, Jusek G, Rossmann-Bloeck T, Weighardt H, Pfeffer K, Altmayr F,
Janssen KP, Holzmann B.

Author information: 
(1)Chirurgische Klinik und Poliklinik, Technische Universität München, 81675
Munich, Germany.

Although global MyD88 deficiency attenuates lethal inflammation in sepsis,
cell-specific functions of MyD88 remain largely unknown. Using mice with
selective expression of MyD88 in myeloid cells (Myd88(MYEL)), we show that,
during polymicrobial septic peritonitis, both myeloid and nonmyeloid cells
contribute to systemic inflammation, whereas myeloid cell MyD88 was sufficient to
fully establish the peritoneal cytokine response. Importantly, Myd88(MYEL) mice
developed markedly aggravated liver injury that was linked to impaired
upregulation of cellular inhibitor of apoptosis protein 2 and an excessive
production of TNF-a. Upregulation of inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER), a
known transcriptional repressor of the Tnfa gene, was impaired in Myd88(MYEL)
mice. Moreover, Myd88(MYEL) mice showed enhanced transcription of the Tnfa gene
and an excessive production of CCL3, which is also negatively regulated by ICER, 
but they had normal levels of CXCL1, which is expressed in an ICER-independent
manner. Together, these findings suggest a novel protective role for nonmyeloid
cell MyD88 in attenuating liver injury during septic peritonitis.

PMID: 22586041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Trends Biotechnol. 2012 Aug;30(8):410-5. doi: 10.1016/j.tibtech.2012.04.002. Epub
2012 May 9.

Strategy and tactics of disarming GHG at the source: N2O reductase crops.

Wan S(1), Ward TL, Altosaar I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research on Environmental Microbiology (CREM), Department of
Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1H 8M5.

Nitrous oxide (N(2)O), the third most abundant greenhouse gas (GHG), is highly
stable and plays a significant role in stratospheric ozone destruction. The
primary anthropogenic source of N(2)O stems from use of nitrogen fertilizers in
soil. The bacterial enzyme nitrous oxide reductase (N(2)OR), naturally found in
some soils, is the only known enzyme capable of catalyzing the final step of the 
denitrification pathway, conversion of N(2)O to N(2). In this opinion, we discuss
potential biology-based strategies to reduce N(2)O by amplifying the amount of
available enzyme catalyst in agri-system environments during crop growth and in
post-harvest detritus. N(2)OR from Pseudomonas stutzeri has been tested in
transgenic plants with promising results. Such seed-borne phytoremediation
systems targeted towards GHGs merit field testing.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 22578770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Mol Neurosci. 2012 Jun;47(2):357-67. doi: 10.1007/s12031-012-9761-1. Epub 2012 
May 9.

Cyclic AMP response element modulator-1 (CREM-1) involves in neuronal apoptosis
after traumatic brain injury.

Wu X(1), Jin W, Liu X, Fu H, Gong P, Xu J, Cui G, Ni Y, Ke K, Gao Z, Gao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University, Nantong,
Jiangsu Province, People's Republic of China, 226001.

The cyclic AMP response element-binding protein (CREB) family can regulate
biological functions of various types of cells by forming homo- or heterodimers
to bind the target DNA sequences; it plays an essential role in individual
neuronal function and entire neuronal circuits. One attractive activity of the
CREB family is regulating the transcription of apoptosis-suppressor gene bcl-2.
Cyclic AMP response element modulator-1 (CREM-1) is one member of the family with
limited acquaintance. To investigate whether CREM-1 is involved in central
nervous system injury and repair, we performed an acute traumatic brain injury
(TBI) model in adult rats. Western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry showed 
a significant upregulation of CREM-1 in ipsilateral peritrauma cortex.
Immunofluorescent labeling indicated that CREM-1 was localized mainly in the
nuclei of neurons; co-localization of CREM-1 and active-caspase-3 in the
ipsilateral cortex suggested that CREM-1 might participate in neuronal apoptosis.
To further investigate the function of CREM-1, a neuronal cell line PC12 was
employed to establish an apoptosis model. We analyzed the association of CREM-1
with p-CREB on PC12 cells by Western blot, immunofluorescent labeling, and
co-immunoprecipitation. The result implied that the association of CREM-1 with
p-CREB was enhanced in apoptotic cells. Additionally, knocking CREM-1 down with
siRNA demonstrated the probable pro-apoptotic role played by CREM-1 in neuronal
apoptosis. Together with our data, we hypothesized that CREM-1 might play an
important role in regulating neuronal death after TBI by interacting with CREB.

PMID: 22569987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Cell Immunol. 2012 Mar-Apr;276(1-2):10-5. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2012.04.008.
Epub 2012 Apr 19.

Role of CREM in systemic lupus erythematosus.

Xu WD(1), Zhang YJ, Wang W, Li R, Pan HF, Ye DQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Anhui
Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui 230032, PR China.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex autoimmune disease. Immune
complex, autoantibodies and autoreactive lymphocytes are involved in
manifestations of SLE. Recently, investigations have indicated that expression of
the transcription factor cAMP responsive element modulator (CREM) is abnormal in 
T cells and might play an important role in the pathogenesis of SLE. CREM has
much influence on the promoters, such as IL-2, c-fos, TCR <U+03B6>, and SYK. Moreover,
activity of CREM itself has been demonstrated, particularly with an
auto-regulatory feedback mechanism. Therefore, we will discuss the association of
CREM and SLE based on current knowledge to unravel the mechanism of CREM
performance.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22560675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jul 15;21(14):3264-74. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds170. Epub 2012 Apr
27.

Discovery of novel protein partners of the transcription factor FOXL2 provides
insights into its physiopathological roles.

L'Hôte D(1), Georges A, Todeschini AL, Kim JH, Benayoun BA, Bae J, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, UMR 7592 CNRS-Université Paris Diderot, Paris 75205,
France.

FOXL2 transcription factor is responsible for the Blepharophimosis Ptosis
Epicantus inversus Syndrome (BPES), a genetic disease involving craniofacial
malformations often associated with ovarian failure. Recently, a somatic FOXL2
mutation (p.C134W) has been reported in >95% of adult-type granulosa cell tumors.
Here, we have identified 10 novel FOXL2 partners by yeast-two-hybrid screening
and co-immunoprecipitation. Most BPES-inducing mutated FOXL2 proteins display
aggregation in cultured cells. Here, we show that two of the partners (NR2C1 and 
GMEB1) can be sequestered in such aggregates. This co-aggregation can contribute 
to the pathogenesis of FOXL2 mutations. We have also measured the effects of
FOXL2 interactants on the transcriptional regulation of a series of target
promoters. Some of the partners (CXXC4, CXXC5, BANF1) were able to repress FOXL2 
activity indistinctively of the promoter. Interestingly, CREM-t2a, which acted as
a repressor on most promoters, increased wild-type (WT) FOXL2 activity on two
promoters (PTGS2 and CYP19A1), but was unable to increase the activity of the
oncogenic mutant p.C134W. Conversely, GMEB1, which also acted as a repressor on
most promoters and increased WT FOXL2 activity on the Per2 promoter, increased to
a greater extent the activity of the p.C134W variant. Interestingly, partners
with intrinsic pro-apoptotic effect were able to increase apoptosis induction by 
WT FOXL2, but not by the p.C134W mutant, whereas partners with an anti-apoptotic 
effect decreased apoptosis induction by both FOXL2 versions. Altogether, these
results suggest that the p.C134W mutated form fails to integrate signals through 
protein-protein interactions to regulate target promoter subsets and in
particular to induce cell death.

PMID: 22544055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Apr;42(4):912-23. doi: 10.1002/eji.201141965.

Prostaglandin E2 modulates IL-8 expression through formation of a multiprotein
enhanceosome in human colonic epithelial cells.

Srivastava V(1), Dey I, Leung P, Chadee K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Health
Sciences Centre, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

Gastrointestinal inflammation is mediated by the pro-inflammatory mediators
interleukin-8 (IL-8) and prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2) ). PGE(2) binding and
coupling through EP2/4 receptor subtypes on colonic epithelial cells stimulates
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and IL-8 production. Here we determined the
mechanisms whereby PGE(2) regu-lates IL-8 in Caco2 colonic epithelial cells and
in cells over-expressing the EP2/4 receptors (EP2S/EP4S). PGE(2) coupling through
EP2 activated the transcription factor inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER),
whereas coupling through EP4 receptors activated the cyclic AMP-responsive
element-binding protein (CREB). Activation of CREB in Caco2/EP2S was protein
kinase A (PKA) dependent, whereas in EP4S cells, activation of CREB occurred
through the PKA and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathways. Since ICER lacks the 
transactivation domain, it functions as a transcription repressor as opposed to
CREB. PGE(2) coupling through EP2/4 receptors can therefore acts in an opposing
manner to either decrease (EP2) or promote IL-8 expression by recruiting
CREB-binding protein (CBP) (EP4), which formed a multiprotein IL-8 enhanceosome. 
A novel half CRE (167CRE) and a composite NFAT1-AP1-like site in the IL-8
promoter participated in binding and complex formation as confirmed by
mutagenesis and expression studies. These data unravel the mechanisms by which
expression of IL-8 is controlled by different signalling pathways that are
activated by PGE(2) but acting through different EP receptors.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22531917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2012 Jun 15;185(12):1255-60. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201202-0228PP. Epub 2012 Apr 19.

Next-generation regeneration: the hope and hype of lung stem cell research.

Kotton DN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Center and Center for Regenerative Medicine (CReM), Boston
University and Boston Medical Center, 715 Albany St, R-304, Boston, MA 02118,
USA. dkotton@bu.edu

Research discoveries in the fields of stem cell biology and regenerative medicine
are beginning to advance and refine our understanding of lung injury and repair. 
Although these emerging studies offer unprecedented opportunities to develop
novel therapies for a variety of lung diseases, the quickening pace of work in
this nascent field also makes it difficult to discern hope from hype when
addressing the pleas of patients eager for clinical translation or when seeking
information on the risk versus reward of participation in clinical trials. This
perspective provides an overview of the latest advances in lung-related stem cell
research and places the new discoveries in a historical context. Established,
lineage-restricted epithelial progenitors of the conducting airways and
gas-exchanging alveoli are briefly reviewed, and controversial, newly proposed
tissue-specific candidate lung stem/progenitor cells with broader differentiation
repertoire are introduced. Exogenous derivation of lung epithelia from embryonic 
stem cells or induced pluripotent stem cells is also presented as an alternative 
method for engineering lung tissue de novo in culture.

PMID: 22517787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Thyroid. 2012 May;22(5):487-93. doi: 10.1089/thy.2011.0360. Epub 2012 Apr 17.

Cyclic AMP-response element modulator inhibits the promoter activity of the
sodium iodide symporter gene in thyroid cancer cells.

Passon N(1), Puppin C, Lavarone E, Bregant E, Franzoni A, Hershman JM, Fenton MS,
D'Agostino M, Durante C, Russo D, Filetti S, Damante G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Biological Science, University of Udine, Udine,
Italy .

BACKGROUND: Comprehension of the regulatory mechanism involved in the sodium
iodide symporter (NIS) expression is of great relevance for thyroid cancer. In
fact, restoration of NIS expression would be a strategy to treat undifferentiated
thyroid cancer. Previous in vitro findings suggest that the cyclic AMP-response
element (CRE) modulator (CREM) is involved in control of NIS expression. In this 
work, we examined the expression of CREM in a series of thyroid cancer tissues
and its action on NIS promoter in human thyroid cancer cells.
METHODS: Expression of mRNA levels for CREM, PAX8 and NIS was measured by
quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in 6 normal
thyroid tissues, 22 papillary, 12 follicular and 4 anaplastic thyroid cancers.
The effect of CREM on transcriptional activity of the NIS promoter was
investigated by transient transfection of human thyroid cell lines.
RESULTS: Compared to normal tissues, NIS and PAX8 mRNA levels were significantly 
reduced in all types of thyroid cancer. As expected, the maximal decrease was
detected in anaplastic thyroid cancer. Conversely, CREM mRNA levels were
increased in all types of thyroid cancer, reaching statistical significance for
follicular and anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (p=0.0157 and 0.0045, respectively). 
Transfection experiments showed an inhibitory effect of CREM on NIS promoter
activity in various thyroid cancer cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that CREM expression is increased in thyroid 
cancer tissue and may play a role in the downregulation of NIS expression in
thyroid cancer acting at the transcriptional level.

PMID: 22510021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Mol Carcinog. 2013 Sep;52(9):692-704. doi: 10.1002/mc.21908. Epub 2012 Apr 4.

Ras-induced melanoma transformation is associated with the proteasomal
degradation of the transcriptional repressor ICER.

Healey M(1), Crow MS, Molina CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, 
NJ, USA.

Activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway targets the
putative tumor suppressor protein inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) to
ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal degradation [Yehia et al. JBC 2001; 276:
35272-35279]. We demonstrate that ICER proteasomal degradation is implicated in
Ras/MAPK-mediated melanoma tumorigenesis. In a system using Tyr/Tet-Ras INK4a-/- 
transgenic mice and melanoma cells in culture termed R545 cells isolated from
Tyr/Tet-Ras INK4a-/- mice [Chin et al. Nature 1999; 400: 468-472], melanoma
genesis and melanoma maintenance is strictly dependent upon expression of
H-RasV12G. We found that ICER protein was not expressed during melanoma genesis
but was strongly expressed in regressing melanomas. Similarly in R545 cells, ICER
protein expression was negatively regulated by H-RasV12G. The expression of ICER 
mRNA was not affected by H-RasV12G expression, suggesting that ICER regulation
was post-translational. Indeed, pharmacological inhibition of Ras activity or the
proteasome abolished the degradation of ICER caused by H-RasV12G expression
indicating that RAS oncogene regulates the expression of ICER protein by
targeting ICER to proteasomal degradation. By engineering clones of R545 melanoma
cells stably transfected with ICER we were able to determine the prerequisite for
Ras-induced tumorigenesis. The reconstitution of physiological levels of ICER
showed a significant decrease in cell growth, as well as inhibition of
anchorage-independent cell growth and tumorigenicity in nude mice. ICER was found
to efficiently repress the expression of cyclin D1 in R545 cells due to the
binding of ICER to the CRE in the cyclin D1 promoter. Taken together, we
postulate that ICER protein might be targeted to degradation in human tumors
where Ras is mutated.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22488648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e34286. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034286. Epub 2012 Mar 27.

Population differences in transcript-regulator expression quantitative trait
loci.

Bushel PR(1), McGovern R, Liu L, Hofmann O, Huda A, Lu J, Hide W, Lin X.

Author information: 
(1)Biostatistics Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences,
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, United States of America.
bushel@niehs.nih.gov

Gene expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) are useful for identifying single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with diseases. At times, a genetic
variant may be associated with a master regulator involved in the manifestation
of a disease. The downstream target genes of the master regulator are typically
co-expressed and share biological function. Therefore, it is practical to screen 
for eQTLs by identifying SNPs associated with the targets of a
transcript-regulator (TR). We used a multivariate regression with the gene
expression of known targets of TRs and SNPs to identify TReQTLs in European (CEU)
and African (YRI) HapMap populations. A nominal p-value of <1×10(-6) revealed 234
SNPs in CEU and 154 in YRI as TReQTLs. These represent 36 independent (tag) SNPs 
in CEU and 39 in YRI affecting the downstream targets of 25 and 36 TRs
respectively. At a false discovery rate (FDR)<U+200A>=<U+200A>45%, one cis-acting tag SNP
(within 1 kb of a gene) in each population was identified as a TReQTL. In CEU,
the SNP (rs16858621) in Pcnxl2 was found to be associated with the genes
regulated by CREM whereas in YRI, the SNP (rs16909324) was linked to the targets 
of miRNA hsa-miR-125a. To infer the pathways that regulate expression, we ranked 
TReQTLs by connectivity within the structure of biological process subtrees. One 
TReQTL SNP (rs3790904) in CEU maps to Lphn2 and is associated (nominal
p-value<U+200A>=<U+200A>8.1×10(-7)) with the targets of the X-linked breast cancer suppressor
Foxp3. The structure of the biological process subtree and a gene interaction
network of the TReQTL revealed that tumor necrosis factor, NF-kappaB and variants
in G-protein coupled receptors signaling may play a central role as communicators
in Foxp3 functional regulation. The potential pleiotropic effect of the Foxp3
TReQTLs was gleaned from integrating mRNA-Seq data and SNP-set enrichment into
the analysis.

PMCID: PMC3313997
PMID: 22479588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Ecol Evol. 2012 Feb;2(2):286-97. doi: 10.1002/ece3.74.

Expression of nitrous oxide reductase from Pseudomonas stutzeri in transgenic
tobacco roots using the root-specific rolD promoter from Agrobacterium
rhizogenes.

Wan S(1), Johnson AM, Altosaar I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Research
on Environmental Microbiology - CREM, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa
451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, Ontario, K1H 8M5, Canada.

The nitrous oxide (N(2)O) reduction pathway from a soil bacterium, Pseudomonas
stutzeri, was engineered in plants to reduce N(2)O emissions. As a proof of
principle, transgenic plants expressing nitrous oxide reductase (N(2)OR) from P. 
stutzeri, encoded by the nosZ gene, and other transgenic plants expressing N(2)OR
along with the more complete operon from P. stutzeri, encoded by nosFLZDY, were
generated. Gene constructs were engineered under the control of a root-specific
promoter and with a secretion signal peptide. Expression and rhizosecretion of
the transgene protein were achieved, and N(2)OR from transgenic Nicotiana tabacum
proved functional using the methyl viologen assay. Transgenic plant line 1.10
showed the highest specific activity of 16.7 µmol N(2)O reduced min(-1) g(-1)
root protein. Another event, plant line 1.9, also demonstrated high specific
activity of N(2)OR, 13.2 µmol N(2)O reduced min(-1) g(-1) root protein. The
availability now of these transgenic seed stocks may enable canopy studies in
field test plots to monitor whole rhizosphere N flux. By incorporating one
bacterial gene into genetically modified organism (GMO) crops (e.g., cotton,
corn, and soybean) in this way, it may be possible to reduce the atmospheric
concentration of N(2)O that has continued to increase linearly (about 0.26%
year(-1)) over the past half-century.

PMCID: PMC3298943
PMID: 22423324  [PubMed]


133. Drug Dev Ind Pharm. 2013 Feb;39(2):186-96. doi: 10.3109/03639045.2012.665927.
Epub 2012 Mar 14.

Novel aqueous nano-scaled formulations of oleic acid stabilized hydrophobic
superparamagnetic iron oxide nanocrystals.

Belete A(1), Maeder K.

Author information: 
(1)Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Institute of Pharmacy, Department
of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmaceutics, D-06120 Halle (Saale),
Germany. antbeletes@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Novel aqueous nano-scaled formulations were developed for hydrophobic
oleic acid stabilized monodisperse superparamagnetic magnetite nanocrystals.
METHODS: In the study, single and mixed lipid amphiphiles based on Cremophor
RH-40 (Crem-RH-40), Solutol HS-15 (Sol-HS-15), Phospholipon-100H (PL-100H) and
sucrose ester M-1695 (SE-M-1695) were employed at varying concentrations.
Isotonicity and physiological pH adjustments were achieved by using 5% w/v
mannitol in 10 mM pH 7.4 phosphate buffer. Mannitol also served as lyoprotectant 
for the freeze drying of selected formulation. The developed formulations were
characterized by photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS) and asymmetric flow field 
flow fractionation methods for their size and size distributions and morphologies
were examined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Moreover, the potential 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast agent application of a selected
formulation was investigated by (1)H-NMR relaxometric measurements.
RESULTS: The results showed that stable formulations of the nanocrystals with
hydrodynamic diameters generally below 100 nm were obtained. Among the developed 
formulations, the one prepared with 0.75% Crem-RH-40, 0.5% PL-100H and 0.25%
SE-M-1695 had a mean hydrodynamic diameter of ~64 nm and zeta potential of -20
mV. This formulation exhibited low degree of aggregation, high level of
incorporation of magnetite nanocrystals and very good stability profile over a
period of 6 months. In addition, it showed transverse and longitudinal
relaxivities of 221.8 and 32.1 s(-1)·mM(-1), respectively with r(2)/r(1) ratio of
6.9.
CONCLUSION: This study revealed that mixed lipid-based amphiphiles allow stable
aqueous formulations of the normally challenging hydrophobic magnetite
nanocrystals with potential in vivo MRI contrast applications.

PMID: 22416888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Psychiatry Res. 2012 Jun 30;198(1):39-46. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2011.08.022.
Epub 2012 Mar 3.

Case-control association study of 14 variants of CREB1, CREBBP and CREM on
diagnosis and treatment outcome in major depressive disorder and bipolar
disorder.

Crisafulli C(1), Shim DS, Andrisano C, Pae CU, Chiesa A, Han C, Patkar AA, Lee
SJ, Serretti A, De Ronchi D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychiatry, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

Some evidence suggests an association between genetic variants within the cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) response element-binding protein (CREB), CREB
binding protein (CREBBP) and cAMP response element-modulator (CREM) and several
psychiatric disorders. The present study investigated whether some single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within these genes could be associated with major
depressive disorder (MDD) and bipolar disorder (BD) and whether they could
predict clinical outcomes in Korean in-patients treated with antidepressants and 
mood stabilizers, respectively. The sample comprised 145 patients with MDD, 132
patients with BD and 170 psychiatrically healthy controls. Participants were
genotyped for 14 SNPs within CREB1, CREBBP and CREM. Baseline and final clinical 
measures, including the Montgomery-Åsberg Depression Rating Scale and Young Mania
Rating Scale for patients with MDD and BD, respectively, were recorded. All
p-values were 2-tailed, and statistical significance was conservatively set at
the 0.006 level in order to reduce the likelihood of false positive results. We
failed to observe any association of the 14 SNPs genotypes or alleles with
clinical improvement, response and remission rates as well as final outcomes in
any of such disorders. Our findings suggest that the 14 SNP under investigation
in our study do not influence diagnosis and treatment response in patients with
MDD and BD. However, taking into account the several limitations of our study,
further research is needed to draw more definitive conclusions.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22386572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31798. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031798. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

Novel insights into the downstream pathways and targets controlled by
transcription factors CREM in the testis.

Kosir R(1), Juvan P, Perse M, Budefeld T, Majdic G, Fink M, Sassone-Corsi P,
Rozman D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Functional Genomics and Bio-Chips, Institute of Biochemistry,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

The essential role of the Crem gene in normal sperm development is widely
accepted and is confirmed by azoospermia in male mice lacking the Crem gene. The 
exact number of genes affected by Crem absence is not known, however a large
difference has been observed recently between the estimated number of
differentially expressed genes found in Crem knock-out (KO) mice compared to the 
number of gene loci bound by CREM. We therefore re-examined global gene
expression in male mice lacking the Crem gene using whole genome transcriptome
analysis with Affymetrix microarrays and compared the lists of differentially
expressed genes from Crem-/- mice to a dataset of genes where binding of CREM was
determined by Chip-seq. We determined the global effect of CREM on
spermatogenesis as well as distinguished between primary and secondary effects of
the CREM absence. We demonstrated that the absence of Crem deregulates over 4700 
genes in KO testis. Among them are 101 genes associated with spermatogenesis 41
of which are bound by CREM and are deregulated in Crem KO testis. Absence of
several of these genes in mouse models has proven their importance for normal
spermatogenesis and male fertility. Our study showed that the absence of Crem
plays a more important role on different aspects of spermatogenesis as estimated 
previously, with its impact ranging from apoptosis induction to deregulation of
major circadian clock genes, steroidogenesis and the cell-cell junction dynamics.
Several new genes important for normal spermatogenesis and fertility are
down-regulated in KO testis and are therefore possible novel targets of CREM.

PMCID: PMC3285179
PMID: 22384077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Theriogenology. 2012 Apr 15;77(7):1360-8. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2011.10.043. Epub 2012 Jan 26.

Detection of the activator cAMP responsive element modulator (CREM) isoform
ortholog proteins in porcine spermatids and sperm.

Noda T(1), Shidara O, Harayama H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Graduate School of Agricultural Science,
Kobe University, Kobe 657-8501, Japan. 089a214a@stu.kobe-u.ac.jp

It is necessary to obtain basic information on transcription factors expressed in
the spermatids of livestock to determine mechanisms of defective spermiogenesis. 
In this study, we characterized the activator cAMP responsive element modulator
(CREM) ortholog isoforms in porcine testicular germ cells and ejaculated sperm.
At least two kinds of porcine activator CREM t family ortholog mRNAs were more
strongly expressed in the testis than in kidney or liver. The activator CREM
isoform ortholog proteins were localized in nuclei of round spermatids and around
nuclei of elongated spermatids. Furthermore, approximately 34% of ejaculated
sperm had the activator CREM isoform ortholog proteins at their connecting piece.
This is apparently the first report demonstrating the expression and localization
of the activator CREM isoform ortholog proteins in spermatids and ejaculated
sperm of a livestock species.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22284218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Mol Med. 2012 May 9;18:370-8. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2011.00506.

Estrogen upregulates cyclic AMP response element modulator a expression and
downregulates interleukin-2 production by human T lymphocytes.

Moulton VR(1), Holcomb DR, Zajdel MC, Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease with a complex
multifactorial pathogenesis. T lymphocytes play a critical role in disease
pathogenesis and display abnormal gene expression and poor interleukin (IL)-2
production. We previously showed that the expression of the transcriptional
repressor cyclic AMP response element modulator a (CREMa) is increased in SLE T
cells and contributes to reduced IL-2 production. Although estrogen is implicated
in the onset and exacerbation of SLE, the precise nature of molecular events
regulated by estrogen in immune cell function is not well understood. Here, we
asked whether estrogen regulates the expression of CREMa in human T lymphocytes. 
We show that exposure of human T cells to 17-ß-estradiol leads to a
dose-dependent increase in CREMa mRNA expression, and this increase appears to be
mediated through the estrogen receptors a and ß. We show that the increased
expression of CREMa is due to increased transcriptional activity of the CREM
promoter and is mediated by increased expression and binding of the Sp1
transcriptional activator. We further show that estrogen treatment leads to a
dose-dependent decrease in IL-2 mRNA and cytokine production by T cells. Finally,
the effect of ß-estradiol on CREMa is observed more frequently in T cells from
women than from men. We conclude that estrogen can modulate the expression of
CREMa and lead to IL-2 suppression in human T lymphocytes, thus revealing a
molecular link between hormones and the immune system in SLE.

PMCID: PMC3356426
PMID: 22281835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Circ Res. 2012 Feb 17;110(4):536-50. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.254730. Epub
2012 Jan 19.

p90RSK targets the ERK5-CHIP ubiquitin E3 ligase activity in diabetic hearts and 
promotes cardiac apoptosis and dysfunction.

Le NT(1), Takei Y, Shishido T, Woo CH, Chang E, Heo KS, Lee H, Lu Y, Morrell C,
Oikawa M, McClain C, Wang X, Tournier C, Molina CA, Taunton J, Yan C, Fujiwara K,
Patterson C, Yang J, Abe J.

Author information: 
(1)University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Aab Cardiovascular
Research Institute, 601 Elmwood Avenue, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

RATIONALE: Cardiomyocyte apoptosis is one of the key events in the development
and progression of heart failure, and a crucial role for ICER (inducible cAMP
early repressor) in this process has been previously reported. ERK5 is known to
inhibit cardiac apoptosis after myocardial infarction (MI), especially in
hyperglycemic states, via association with CHIP ubiquitin (Ub) ligase and
subsequent upregulation of CHIP ligase activity, which induces ICER
ubiquitination and subsequent protein degradation. The regulatory mechanism
governing ERK5/CHIP interaction is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: We previously demonstrated increased p90RSK activation in the diabetic
heart. As a logical extension of this work, we now investigate whether p90RSK
activation inhibits ERK5-mediated CHIP activation, and subsequently increases
ICER levels and apoptosis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: p90RSK activation inhibits ERK5/CHIP association and CHIP Ub
ligase activity. p90RSK and CHIP share a common binding site in the ERK5
C-terminal domain (aa571-807). Overexpression of either p90RSK or an ERK5
fragment (aa571-807) inhibits ERK5/CHIP association, suggesting that p90RSK and
CHIP competes for ERK5 binding and that p90RSK activation is critical for
inhibiting ERK5/CHIP interaction. We also identified ERK5-S496 as being directly 
phosphorylated by p90RSK and demonstrated that an ERK5-S496A mutant significantly
impairs Angiotensin II-mediated inhibition of CHIP activity and subsequent
increase in ICER levels. In vivo, either cardiac-specific depletion of ERK5 or
overexpression of p90RSK inhibits CHIP activity and accelerates cardiac apoptosis
after MI-a phenomenon fully reversible by activating ERK5.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest a role for p90RSK in inhibiting CHIP activity and
promoting cardiac apoptosis through binding to and phosphorylation of ERK5-S496.

PMCID: PMC3306797
PMID: 22267842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Endocrinology. 2012 Mar;153(3):1256-68. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1744. Epub 2012 Jan 
17.

Angiotensin II-dependent transcriptional activation of human steroidogenic acute 
regulatory protein gene by a 25-kDa cAMP-responsive element modulator protein
isoform and Yin Yang 1.

Meier RK(1), Clark BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Louisville,
School of Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky 40292, USA.

Transcriptional activation of the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (STAR)
gene is a critical component in the angiotensin II (Ang II)-dependent increase in
aldosterone biosynthesis in the adrenal gland. The purpose of this study was to
define the molecular mechanisms that mediate the Ang II-dependent increase in
STARD1 gene (STAR) expression in H295R human adrenocortical cells. Mutational
analysis of the STAR proximal promoter revealed that a nonconsensus
cAMP-responsive element located at -78 bp relative to the transcription start
site (-78CRE) is required for the Ang II-stimulated STAR reporter gene activity. 
DNA immunoaffinity chromatography identified a 25-kDa cAMP-responsive element
modulator isoform and Yin Yang 1 (YY1) as -78CRE DNA-binding proteins, and Ang II
treatment of H295R cells increased expression of that 25-kDa CREM isoform. Small 
interfering RNA silencing of CREM and YY1 attenuated the Ang II-dependent
increases in STAR reporter gene activity and STAR mRNA levels. Conversely,
overexpression of CREM and YY1 in COS-1 cells resulted in transactivation of STAR
reporter gene activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated
recruitment of CREM and YY1 to the STAR promoter along with increased association
of the coactivator cAMP response element-binding protein-binding protein (CBP)
and increased phosphorylated RNA polymerase II after Ang II treatment. Together
our data reveal that the Ang II-stimulated increase in STAR expression in H295R
cells requires 25 kDa CREM and YY1. The recruitment of these transcription
factors to the STAR proximal promoter results in association of CBP and
activation of RNA polymerase II leading to increased STAR transcription.

PMCID: PMC3281547
PMID: 22253417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Neurosci Lett. 2012 Feb 2;508(1):37-41. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.12.013. Epub
2011 Dec 17.

Possible influence of CREB1, CREBBP and CREM variants on diagnosis and treatment 
outcome in patients with schizophrenia.

Crisafulli C(1), Chiesa A, Han C, Lee SJ, Shim DS, Balzarro B, Andrisano C,
Sidoti A, Patkar AA, Pae CU, Serretti A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomorphology and Biotechnologies, Division of Biology and
Genetics, University of Messina, Italy.

The present study explores whether some single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
within CREB1 (rs2709377 and rs6740584), CREBBP (rs2239317, rs2239316, rs3025702, 
rs130021, rs130005, rs129974 and rs9392) and CREM (rs1148247, rs4934735,
rs12775799, rs6481941 and rs16935888) could be associated with schizophrenia
(SKZ) and whether they could predict clinical outcomes in Korean in-patients
treated with antipsychotics. Two-hundred twenty one in-patients suffering from
SKZ and 170 psychiatrically healthy controls were genotyped for 10 SNPs within
CREB1, CREBBP and CREM. All patients were assessed for the severity of illness at
baseline and at discharge by means of the Positive and Negative Symptoms Scale
(PANSS). Our findings suggest the lack of influence of SNPs under investigation
in the present study on the susceptibility to SKZ and on the response to
antipsychotics. However, taking into account the several limitations of our
study, further research is needed to draw more definitive conclusions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22198373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 10;287(7):4715-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.323261. Epub 2011 
Dec 19.

cAMP-responsive element modulator a (CREMa) suppresses IL-17F protein expression 
in T lymphocytes from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).

Hedrich CM(1), Rauen T, Kis-Toth K, Kyttaris VC, Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
chedrich@bidmc.harvard.edu

The proinflammatory cytokines IL-17A and IL-17F are primarily produced by Th17
lymphocytes. Both are involved in host defense mechanisms against bacterial and
fungal pathogens and contribute to the development of various autoimmune
diseases. T lymphocytes from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
display increased expression of transcription factor cAMP-responsive element
modulator a (CREMa), which has been documented to account for aberrant T cell
function and contributes to the pathogenesis of SLE. Here, we provide evidence
that IL-17F expression is reduced in SLE T cells. We demonstrate that CREMa binds
to a yet unidentified CRE site within the proximal promoter. This results in
reduced IL-17F expression in SLE T lymphocytes and is independent of activating
epigenetic patterns (increased histone H3 Lys-18 acetylation, reduced histone H3 
Lys-27 trimethylation, and CpG-DNA demethylation). Forced CREMa expression in
human T lymphocytes results in reduced IL-17F expression. Our findings
demonstrate extended involvement of CREMa in cytokine dysregulation in SLE by
contributing to a disrupted balance between IL-17A and IL-17F. An increased
IL-17A/IL-17F ratio may aggravate the proinflammatory phenotype of SLE.

PMCID: PMC3281648
PMID: 22184122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Eur J Health Econ. 2013 Apr;14(2):277-85. doi: 10.1007/s10198-011-0369-0. Epub
2011 Dec 10.

Using respondents' uncertainty scores to mitigate hypothetical bias in
community-based health insurance studies.

Donfouet HP(1), Mahieu PA, Malin E.

Author information: 
(1)CREM, UMR CNRS 6211, University of Rennes I, Rennes, France.
donfouetz@yahoo.fr

Community-based health insurance has been implemented in several developing
countries to help the poor to gain access to adequate health-care services.
Assessing what the poor are willing to pay is of paramount importance for
policymaking. The contingent valuation method, which relies on a hypothetical
market, is commonly used for this purpose. But the presence of the hypothetical
bias that is most often inherent in this method tends to bias the estimates
upward and compromises policymaking. This paper uses respondents' uncertainty
scores in an attempt to mitigate hypothetical bias in community-based health
insurance in one rural setting in Cameroon. Uncertainty scores are often employed
in single dichotomous choice surveys. An originality of the paper is to use such 
an approach in a double-bounded dichotomous choice survey. The results suggest
that this instrument is effective at decreasing the mean WTP.

PMID: 22160944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Cell Death Dis. 2011 Dec 8;2:e237. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2011.124.

Cyclic AMP induces IPC leukemia cell apoptosis via CRE-and CDK-dependent Bim
transcription.

Huseby S(1), Gausdal G, Keen TJ, Kjærland E, Krakstad C, Myhren L, Brønstad K,
Kunick C, Schwede F, Genieser HG, Kleppe R, Døskeland SO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Jonas Lies vei 91, 5009
Bergen, Norway.

The IPC-81 cell line is derived from the transplantable BNML model of acute
myelogenic leukemia (AML), known to be a reliable predictor of the clinical
efficiency of antileukemic agents, like the first-line AML anthracycline drug
daunorubicin (DNR). We show here that cAMP acted synergistically with DNR to
induce IPC cell death. The DNR-induced death differed from that induced by cAMP
by (1) not involving Bim induction, (2) being abrogated by GSK3ß inhibitors, (3) 
by being promoted by the HSP90/p23 antagonist geldanamycin and truncated p23 and 
(4) by being insensitive to the CRE binding protein (CREB) antagonist ICER and to
cyclin-dependent protein kinase (CDK) inhibitors. In contrast, the apoptosis
induced by cAMP correlated tightly with Bim protein expression. It was abrogated 
by Bim (BCL2L11) downregulation, whether achieved by the CREB antagonist ICER, by
CDK inhibitors, by Bim-directed RNAi, or by protein synthesis inhibitor. The
forced expression of BimL killed IPC-81(WT) cells rapidly, Bcl2-overexpressing
cells being partially resistant. The pivotal role of CREB and CDK activity for
Bim transcription is unprecedented. It is also noteworthy that newly developed
cAMP analogs specifically activating PKA isozyme I (PKA-I) were able to induce
IPC cell apoptosis. Our findings support the notion that AML cells may possess
targetable death pathways not exploited by common anti-cancer agents.

PMCID: PMC3252733
PMID: 22158476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Amino Acids. 2013 Jul;45(1):1-7. doi: 10.1007/s00726-011-1161-2. Epub 2011 Nov
24.

Modulation of immune responses by the neuropeptide CGRP.

Holzmann B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, Ismaninger Str. 22, 81675 München, Germany.
holzmann@chir.med.tu-muenchen.de

The peripheral nervous system is connected with lymphoid organs through sensory
nerves that mediate pain reflexes and may influence immune responses through the 
release of neuropeptides such as calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP). Local
and systemic levels of CGRP increase rapidly during inflammatory responses. CGRP 
inhibits effector functions of various immune cells and dampens inflammation by
distinct pathways involving the amplification of IL-10 production and/or the
induction of the transcriptional repressor inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER).
Thus, available evidence suggests that, in neuro-immunological interactions, CGRP
mediates a potent peptidergic anti-inflammatory pathway.

PMID: 22113645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Enzyme Microb Technol. 2011 May 6;48(6-7):518-25. doi:
10.1016/j.enzmictec.2011.02.010. Epub 2011 Mar 9.

The glucose/xylose facilitator Gxf1 from Candida intermedia expressed in a
xylose-fermenting industrial strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae increases xylose 
uptake in SSCF of wheat straw.

Fonseca C(1), Olofsson K, Ferreira C, Runquist D, Fonseca LL, Hahn-Hägerdal B,
Lidén G.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Departamento de Ciências da Vida,
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 2829-516
Caparica, Portugal.

Ethanolic fermentation of lignocellulose raw materials requires industrial
xylose-fermenting strains capable of complete and efficient D-xylose consumption.
A central question in xylose fermentation by Saccharomyces cerevisiae engineered 
for xylose fermentation is to improve the xylose uptake. In the current study,
the glucose/xylose facilitator Gxf1 from Candida intermedia, was expressed in
three different xylose-fermenting S. cerevisiae strains of industrial origin. The
in vivo effect on aerobic xylose growth and the initial xylose uptake rate were
assessed. The expression of Gxf1 resulted in enhanced aerobic xylose growth only 
for the TMB3400 based strain. It displayed more than a 2-fold higher affinity for
D-xylose than the parental strain and approximately 2-fold higher initial
specific growth rate at 4 g/L D-xylose. Enhanced xylose consumption was
furthermore observed when the GXF1-strain was assessed in simultaneous
saccharification and co-fermentation (SSCF) of pretreated wheat straw. However,
the ethanol yield remained unchanged due to increased by-product formation.
Metabolic flux analysis suggested that the expression of the Gxf1 transporter had
shifted the control of xylose catabolism from transport to the NAD(+) dependent
oxidation of xylitol to xylulose.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22113025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Int J Cardiol. 2013 Jun 20;166(2):366-74. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2011.10.057. Epub
2011 Nov 16.

Overexpression of cAMP-response element modulator causes abnormal growth and
development of the atrial myocardium resulting in a substrate for sustained
atrial fibrillation in mice.

Kirchhof P(1), Marijon E, Fabritz L, Li N, Wang W, Wang T, Schulte K, Hanstein J,
Schulte JS, Vogel M, Mougenot N, Laakmann S, Fortmueller L, Eckstein J, Verheule 
S, Kaese S, Staab A, Grote-Wessels S, Schotten U, Moubarak G, Wehrens XH, Schmitz
W, Hatem S, Müller FU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology and Angiology, University Hospital Münster, Germany.

Erratum in
    Int J Cardiol. 2014 Apr 1;172(3):631.

BACKGROUND AND METHODS: Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common cardiac
arrhythmia in clinical practice. The substrate of AF is composed of a complex
interplay between structural and functional changes of the atrial myocardium
often preceding the occurrence of persistent AF. However, there are only few
animal models reproducing the slow progression of the AF substrate to the
spontaneous occurrence of the arrhythmia. Transgenic mice (TG) with
cardiomyocyte-directed expression of CREM-Ib<U+0394>C-X, an isoform of transcription
factor CREM, develop atrial dilatation and spontaneous-onset AF. Here we tested
the hypothesis that TG mice develop an arrhythmogenic substrate preceding AF
using physiological and biochemical techniques.
RESULTS: Overexpression of CREM-Ib<U+0394>C-X in young TG mice (<8weeks) led to atrial
dilatation combined with distension of myocardium, elongated myocytes, little
fibrosis, down-regulation of connexin 40, loss of excitability with a number of
depolarized myocytes, atrial ectopies and inducibility of AF. These abnormalities
continuously progressed with age resulting in interatrial conduction block,
increased atrial conduction heterogeneity, leaky sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium
stores and the spontaneous occurrence of paroxysmal and later persistent AF. This
distinct atrial remodelling was associated with a pattern of non-regulated and
up-regulated marker genes of myocardial hypertrophy and fibrosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of CREM-Ib<U+0394>C-X in TG hearts evokes abnormal growth and
development of the atria preceding conduction abnormalities and altered calcium
homeostasis and the development of spontaneous and persistent AF. We conclude
that transcription factor CREM is an important regulator of atrial growth
implicated in the development of an arrhythmogenic substrate in TG mice.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22093963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Toxins (Basel). 2010 Oct;2(10):2359-410. doi: 10.3390/toxins2102359. Epub 2010
Oct 18.

Diversity and impact of prokaryotic toxins on aquatic environments: a review.

Valério E(1), Chaves S, Tenreiro R.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Quinta da Torre, Caparica, Portugal.
evalerio@fct.unl.pt

Microorganisms are ubiquitous in all habitats and are recognized by their
metabolic versatility and ability to produce many bioactive compounds, including 
toxins. Some of the most common toxins present in water are produced by several
cyanobacterial species. As a result, their blooms create major threats to animal 
and human health, tourism, recreation and aquaculture. Quite a few cyanobacterial
toxins have been described, including hepatotoxins, neurotoxins, cytotoxins and
dermatotoxins. These toxins are secondary metabolites, presenting a vast
diversity of structures and variants. Most of cyanobacterial secondary
metabolites are peptides or have peptidic substructures and are assumed to be
synthesized by non-ribosomal peptide synthesis (NRPS), involving peptide
synthetases, or NRPS/PKS, involving peptide synthetases and polyketide synthases 
hybrid pathways. Besides cyanobacteria, other bacteria associated with aquatic
environments are recognized as significant toxin producers, representing
important issues in food safety, public health, and human and animal well being. 
Vibrio species are one of the most representative groups of aquatic toxin
producers, commonly associated with seafood-born infections. Some enterotoxins
and hemolysins have been identified as fundamental for V. cholerae and V.
vulnificus pathogenesis, but there is evidence for the existence of other
potential toxins. Campylobacter spp. and Escherichia coli are also water
contaminants and are able to produce important toxins after infecting their
hosts. Other bacteria associated with aquatic environments are emerging as toxin 
producers, namely Legionella pneumophila and Aeromonas hydrophila, described as
responsible for the synthesis of several exotoxins, enterotoxins and cytotoxins. 
Furthermore, several Clostridium species can produce potent neurotoxins. Although
not considered aquatic microorganisms, they are ubiquitous in the environment and
can easily contaminate drinking and irrigation water. Clostridium members are
also spore-forming bacteria and can persist in hostile environmental conditions
for long periods of time, contributing to their hazard grade. Similarly,
Pseudomonas species are widespread in the environment. Since P. aeruginosa is an 
emergent opportunistic pathogen, its toxins may represent new hazards for humans 
and animals. This review presents an overview of the diversity of toxins produced
by prokaryotic microorganisms associated with aquatic habitats and their impact
on environment, life and health of humans and other animals. Moreover, important 
issues like the availability of these toxins in the environment, contamination
sources and pathways, genes involved in their biosynthesis and molecular
mechanisms of some representative toxins are also discussed.

PMCID: PMC3153167
PMID: 22069558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Asian J Androl. 2012 Mar;14(2):285-93. doi: 10.1038/aja.2011.112. Epub 2011 Nov
7.

Differentiation of murine male germ cells to spermatozoa in a soft agar culture
system.

Abu Elhija M(1), Lunenfeld E, Schlatt S, Huleihel M.

Author information: 
(1)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva 84105, Israel.

Establishment of an in vitro system that allows the development of testicular
germ cells to sperm will be valuable for studies of spermatogenesis and future
treatments for male infertility. In the present study, we developed in vitro
culture conditions using three-dimensional agar culture system (SACS), which has 
the capacity to induce testicular germ cells to reach the final stages of
spermatogenesis, including spermatozoa generation. Seminiferous tubules from
testes of 7-day-old mice were enzymatically dissociated, and intratubular cells
were cultured in the upper layer of the SACS in RPMI medium supplemented with
fetal calf serum (FCS). The lower layer of the SACS contained only RPMI medium
supplemented with FCS. Colonies in the upper layer were isolated after 14 and 28 
days of culture and were classified according to their size. Immunofluorescence
and real-time PCR were used to analyse specific markers expressed in
undifferentiated and differentiated spermatogonia (Vasa, Dazl, OCT-4, C-Kit,
GFR-a-1, CD9 and a-6-integrin), meiotic cells (LDH, Crem-1 and Boule) and
post-meiotic cells (Protamine-1, Acrosin and SP-10). Our results reveal that it
is possible to induce mouse testicular pre-meiotic germ cell expansion and induce
their differentiation to spermatozoa in SACS. The spermatozoa showed normal
morphology and contained acrosomes. Thus, our results demonstrate that SACS could
be used as a novel in vitro system for the maturation of pre-meiotic mouse germ
cells to post-meiotic stages and morphologically-normal spermatozoa.

PMCID: PMC3735096
PMID: 22057383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Theriogenology. 2012 Mar 15;77(5):881-7. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2011.09.013. Epub 2011 Nov 4.

Differential expression of cyclic-AMP responsive element modulator (CREM) mRNA
isoforms during testicular development of boars.

Sartini BL(1), Eerhart M, Green S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fisheries, Animal and Veterinary Science, University of Rhode
Island, Kingston, Rhode Island 02881, USA. blsartini@uri.edu

The cyclic-AMP responsive element modulator (CREM) transcription factor, a key
regulator of spermatogenesis, can activate or repress gene expression by
differential expression of alternatively spliced mRNA isoforms. The objective of 
this study was to report the sequences of the predominant CREM mRNA isoforms with
leader exons B, <U+03B8>1, <U+03B8>2, in addition to the relative expression of these
transcripts, in immature and adult boar testes. Activator CREM isoforms t<U+03B3>
(containing the B exon), <U+03B8>1t<U+03B3> and <U+03B8>2t<U+03B3>, were expressed in the adult boar testes, 
but not in immature testes. The CREM <U+03B8>2t<U+03B3> isoform had the highest expression
levels in the adult boar testes compared to the t<U+03B3> and <U+03B8>1t<U+03B3> isoforms (<U+03B8>2t<U+03B3> = 4.94
± 1.49 in contrast to t<U+03B3> = 1.66 ± 0.79 and <U+03B8>1t<U+03B3> = 2.32 ± 0.72; mean ± SD; P <
0.01). Interestingly, the predominant CREM mRNA isoforms in adult boar testes
contained the C and <U+03B3> exons; these exons are not present in human and rodent CREM
mRNA, demonstrating species-specific expression. In contrast to the adult CREM
isoforms, only CREM mRNA isoforms with the B exon (t1 and a) were amplified in
the 21 d (immature) boar testes. Further understanding of CREM mRNA isoform
expression and regulation during boar spermatogenesis could contribute to our
knowledge of spermatogenic efficiency in this species.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22056015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Cell Mol Med. 2012 Aug;16(8):1866-77. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2011.01482.x.

Epigenetic control of CCR5 transcript levels in immune cells and modulation by
small molecules inhibitors.

Wierda RJ(1), Kuipers HF, van Eggermond MC, Benard A, van Leeuwen JC, Carluccio
S, Geutskens SB, Jukema JW, Marquez VE, Quax PH, van den Elsen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Previously, we have shown that CCR5 transcription is regulated by CREB-1.
However, the ubiquitous pattern of CREB-1 expression suggests the involvement of 
an additional level of transcriptional control in the cell type-specific
expression of CCR5. In this study, we show that epigenetic changes (i.e. DNA
methylation and histone modifications) within the context of the CCR5 P1 promoter
region correlate with transcript levels of CCR5 in healthy and in malignant
CD4(+) T lymphocytes as well as in CD14(+) monocytes. In normal naïve T cells and
CD14(+) monocytes the CCR5 P1 promoter resembles a bivalent chromatin state, with
both repressive and permissive histone methylation and acetylation marks. The
CCR5-expressing CD14(+) monocytes however show much higher levels of acetylated
histone H3 (AcH3) compared to the non-CCR5-expressing naïve T cells. Combined
with a highly methylated promoter in CD14(+) monocytes, this indicates a dominant
role for AcH3 in CCR5 transcription. We also show that pharmacological
interference in the epigenetic repressive mechanisms that account for the lack of
CCR5 transcription in T leukaemic cell lines results in an increase in CREB-1
association with CCR5 P1 chromatin. Furthermore, RNA polymerase II was also
recruited into CCR5 P1 chromatin resulting in CCR5 re-expression. Together, these
data indicate that epigenetic modifications of DNA, and of histones, contribute
to the control of CCR5 transcription in immune effector cells.

© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3309068
PMID: 22050776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Neurobiol Dis. 2012 Feb;45(2):701-10. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2011.10.015. Epub 2011
Oct 25.

Silencing of ICERs (Inducible cAMP Early Repressors) results in partial
protection of neurons from programmed cell death.

Bieganska K, Figiel I, Gierej D, Kaczmarek L, Klejman A.

ICERs proteins (Inducible cAMP Early Repressors) are the most effective
endogenous repressors of CREB/CREM/ATF transcription factors family (CREB-cAMP
Responsive Element Binding protein, CREM-cAMP Responsive Element Modulator,
ATF-Activating Transcription Factor) that have repeatedly been shown to have a
prosurvival function. It has been reported previously that neuronal death is
accompanied by increased expression of ICERs and, furthermore, their
overexpression provokes neuronal cell death in culture. However, it was not
explained whether endogenously activated by proapoptotic stimuli ICERs contribute
to the neuronal cell death. Herein, we have examined the involvement of
endogenous ICERs in the apoptosis by checking whether it is possible to protect
neurons from cell death by blocking the ICER gene. We applied two different in
vitro models of neuronal death of primary neuronal cultures: excitotoxic death of
neurons derived from dentate gyrus, and cortical cell loss provoked by trophic
deprivation. Using the lentiviral vector (LV) to deliver shRNA, specifically
silencing ICERs, but not other CREM proteins, we have found that silencing of
ICERs enhances the CRE-driven transcription and exerts a mild, although
significant, neuroprotective effect in both models. Since we demonstrated that
silencing of endogenous ICERs have protective effect on neurons exposed to
apoptosis-provoking conditions, targeting ICERs might be a novel strategy to
prevent neuronal loss during degenerative processes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22044735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 16;286(50):43437-46. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.299313. Epub
2011 Oct 24.

cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM)a protein induces interleukin 17A
expression and mediates epigenetic alterations at the interleukin-17A gene locus 
in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Rauen T(1), Hedrich CM, Juang YT, Tenbrock K, Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
trauen@bidmc.harvard.edu

IL-17A is a proinflammatory cytokine that is produced by specialized T helper
cells and contributes to the development of several autoimmune diseases such as
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Transcription factor cAMP-responsive element 
modulator (CREM)a displays increased expression levels in T cells from SLE
patients and has been described to account for aberrant T cell function in SLE
pathogenesis. In this report, we provide evidence that CREMa physically binds to 
a cAMP-responsive element, CRE (-111/-104), within the proximal human IL17A
promoter and increases its activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays reveal 
that activated naïve CD4(+) T cells as well as T cells from SLE patients display 
increased CREMa binding to this site compared with T cells from healthy controls.
The histone H3 modification pattern at the CRE site (-111/-104) and neighboring
conserved noncoding sequences within the human IL17A gene locus suggests an
accessible chromatin structure (H3K27 hypomethylation/H3K18 hyperacetylation) in 
activated naïve CD4(+) T cells and SLE T cells. H3K27 hypomethylation is
accompanied by decreased cytosine phosphate guanosine (CpG)-DNA methylation in
these regions in SLE T cells. Decreased recruitment of histone deacetylase
(HDAC)1 and DNA methyltransferase (DNMT)3a to the CRE site (-111/-104) probably
accounts for the observed epigenetic alterations. Reporter studies confirmed that
DNA methylation of the IL17A promoter indeed abrogates its inducibility. Our
findings demonstrate an extended role for CREMa in the immunopathogenesis of SLE 
because it contributes to increased expression of IL-17A.

PMCID: PMC3234851
PMID: 22025620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Hum Immunol. 2011 Dec;72(12):1204-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2011.10.002. Epub 2011
Oct 8.

The CREM gene is involved in genetic predisposition to inflammatory bowel disease
in the Tunisian population.

Bouzid D(1), Fourati H, Amouri A, Marques I, Abida O, Haddouk S, Ben Ayed M,
Tahri N, Penha-Gonçalves C, Masmoudi H.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Department, Medicine School and Habib Bourguiba Hospital, Sfax,
Tunisia. dorra-ing@voila.fr

The identification of susceptibility genes for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
is key to understanding pathogenic mechanisms. Recently, the results of genetic
association studies have highlighted many loci that are shared among several
autoimmune diseases. We aimed to study the genetic epidemiology of polymorphisms 
in specific genes previously associated with other autoimmune diseases, namely
the CREM, STAT4, STAT5a, Stat5b, and IRF5 genes. Twelve polymorphisms in the
CREM, STAT4, STAT5a, Stat5b, and IRF5 genes were genotyped in a cohort of 107 IBD
patients (39 Crohn's disease [CD] and 68 ulcerative colitis [UC]) and 162
controls from southern Tunisia. One CREM single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
displayed evidence for genetic association with IBD (p=8.7×10(-4), odds ratio
[OR]=2.84 [1.58; 5.09]). One STAT4 SNP (p=0.026; OR=1.65 [1.06; 2.58]) exhibited 
a marginal association with UC but not with CD. No significant association was
observed with the SNPs in STAT5a, IRF5, and STAT5b. These results suggest that
common variants of the CREM gene are involved in the genetic component conferring
general susceptibility to IBD, whereas STAT4 appears to be more specifically
associated with UC. This work provides motivation for studies aiming to replicate
these findings in larger populations.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 22019623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol. 2012 Jan;88(1):112-7. doi:
10.1007/s00128-011-0428-3. Epub 2011 Oct 15.

Cistanches herba induces testis cytotoxicity in male mice.

Kim SW(1), Yoo SH, Lee HJ, Kim K, Kim do R, Park SK, Chang MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prescriptionology, College of Oriental Medicine, Kyung Hee
University, 1 Hoegi-dong, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul, 130-701, Republic of Korea.

We investigated the effects of Cistanches herba (CH) on the male reproductive
system in mice, assessing CREM gene expression and spermatogenesis. Our results
demonstrate that CH treatment lead to a significant decrease in sperm count
dose-dependently, 298.3 ± 48.9 vs. 296.6 ± 102.4 (250 mg/kg), 236.7 ± 75.1
(500 mg/kg), 223.0 ± 48.7 × 10(6) (1000 mg/kg), respectively. Additionally, serum
testosterone levels decreased following CH treatment to as low as ~57% compared
with the vehicle-treated group. CREM gene expression was also down-regulated
following CH treatment and histological examination of the testicular
seminiferous tubules showed severe damage on CH treatment. These results suggest 
that CH induces cytotoxicity in the male reproductive system, through the
inhibition of spermatogenesis, testicular damage, and limited hormonal function.

PMID: 22002114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Diabetes. 2011 Dec;60(12):3169-74. doi: 10.2337/db10-1743. Epub 2011 Oct 12.

Impaired expression of the inducible cAMP early repressor accounts for sustained 
adipose CREB activity in obesity.

Favre D(1), Le Gouill E, Fahmi D, Verdumo C, Chinetti-Gbaguidi G, Staels B,
Caiazzo R, Pattou F, Lê KA, Tappy L, Regazzi R, Giusti V, Vollenweider P, Waeber 
G, Abderrahmani A.

Author information: 
(1)Service of Internal Medicine, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudoisand
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

OBJECTIVE: Increase in adipose cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB)
activity promotes adipocyte dysfunction and systemic insulin resistance in obese 
mice. This is achieved by increasing the expression of activating transcription
factor 3 (ATF3). In this study, we investigated whether impaired expression of
the inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER), a transcriptional antagonist of CREB, 
is responsible for the increased CREB activity in adipocytes of obese mice and
humans.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Total RNA and nuclear proteins were prepared from
visceral adipose tissue (VAT) of human nonobese or obese subjects and white
adipose tissue (WAT) of C57Bl6-Rj mice that were fed with normal or high-fat diet
for 16 weeks. The expression of genes was monitored by real-time PCR, Western
blotting, and electromobility shift assays. RNA interference was used to silence 
the expression of Icer.
RESULTS: The expression of Icer/ICER was reduced in VAT and WAT of obese humans
and mice, respectively. Diminution of Icer/ICER was restricted to adipocytes and 
was accompanied by a rise of Atf3/ATF3 and diminution of Adipoq/ADIPOQ and
Glut4/GLUT4. Silencing the expression of Icer in 3T3-L1 adipocytes mimicked the
results observed in human and mice cells and hampered glucose uptake, thus
confirming the requirement of Icer for appropriate adipocyte function.
CONCLUSIONS: Impaired expression of ICER contributes to elevation in CREB target 
genes and, therefore, to the development of insulin resistance in obesity.

PMCID: PMC3219947
PMID: 21998402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25088. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025088. Epub 2011 Sep 30.

New striatal neurons in a mouse model of progressive striatal degeneration are
generated in both the subventricular zone and the striatal parenchyma.

Luzzati F(1), De Marchis S, Parlato R, Gribaudo S, Schütz G, Fasolo A, Peretto P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Human Biology, University of Turin, Torino, Italy.

Acute striatal lesions increase proliferation in the subventricular zone (SVZ)
and induce migration of SVZ neuroblasts to the striatum. However, the potential
of these cells to replace acutely degenerated neurons is controversial. The
possible contribution of parenchymal progenitors to striatal lesion-induced
neurogenesis has been poorly explored. Here, we present a detailed investigation 
of neurogenesis in the striatum of a mouse model showing slow progressive
neurodegeneration of striatal neurons, the Creb1(Camkcre4)Crem<U+207B>/<U+207B> mutant mice
(CBCM). By using BrdU time course analyses, intraventricular injections of a cell
tracker and 3D reconstructions we showed that neurodegeneration in CBCM mice
stimulates the migration of SVZ neuroblasts to the striatum without altering SVZ 
proliferation. SVZ-neuroblasts migrate as chains through the callosal striatal
border and then enter within the striatal parenchyma as individual cells. In
addition, a population of clustered neuroblasts showing high turnover rates were 
observed in the mutant striatum that had not migrated from the SVZ. Clustered
neuroblasts might originate within the striatum itself because they are
specifically associated with parenchymal proliferating cells showing features of 
intermediate neuronal progenitors such as clustering, expression of EGF receptor 
and multiple glial (SOX2, SOX9, BLBP) and neuronal (Dlx, Sp8, and to some extent 
DCX) markers. Newborn striatal neurons had a short lifespan and did not replace
projection neurons nor expressed sets of transcription factors involved in their 
specification. The differentiation failure of endogenous neuroblasts likely
occurred cell autonomously because transplanted wild type embryonic precursors
correctly differentiated into striatal projection neurons. Thus, we propose that 
under progressive degeneration, neither SVZ derived nor intra-striatal generated 
neurons have the potential to differentiate into striatal projection neurons.

PMCID: PMC3184103
PMID: 21980380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 16;286(50):43429-36. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.299339. Epub
2011 Oct 5.

cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM)a protein signaling mediates epigenetic
remodeling of the human interleukin-2 gene: implications in systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Hedrich CM(1), Rauen T, Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
chedrich@bidmc.harvard.edu

IL-2 is a key cytokine during proliferation and activation of T lymphocytes and
functions as an auto- and paracrine growth factor. Regardless of activating
effects on T lymphocytes, the absence of IL-2 has been linked to the development 
of autoimmune pathology in mice and humans. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is
a multifactorial autoimmune disease and characterized by dysregulation of
lymphocyte function, transcription factor and cytokine expression, and antigen
presentation. Reduced IL-2 expression is a hallmark of SLE T lymphocytes and
results in decreased numbers of regulatory T lymphocytes which play an important 
role in preventing autoimmunity. Reduced IL-2 expression was linked to
overproduction of the transcription regulatory factor cAMP-responsive element
modulator (CREM)a in SLE T lymphocytes and subsequent CREMa binding to a CRE site
within the IL2 promoter (-180 CRE). In this study, we demonstrate the involvement
of CREMa-mediated IL2 silencing in T lymphocytes from SLE patients through a
gene-wide histone deacetylase 1-directed deacetylation of histone H3K18 and DNA
methyltransferase 3a-directed cytosine phosphate guanosine (CpG)-DNA
hypermethylation. For the first time, we provide direct evidence that CREMa
mediates silencing of the IL2 gene in SLE T cells though histone deacetylation
and CpG-DNA methylation.

PMCID: PMC3234875
PMID: 21976679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Stem Cells. 2012 Jan;30(1):28-32. doi: 10.1002/stem.742.

Concise review: The magic act of generating induced pluripotent stem cells: many 
rabbits in the hat.

Mostoslavsky G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine and Center for
Regenerative Medicine (CReM), Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA. gmostosl@bu.edu

Since the seminal discovery by Yamanaka et al. demonstrating that four
transcription factors were capable of inducing nuclear reprogramming to a
pluripotent state, a plethora of publications have followed aimed at improving
the efficiency, simplicity, and safety of the original methodology that was based
on the use of integrating retroviruses. A better understanding of the basic
mechanisms behind reprogramming as well as an improvement in tissue culture
conditions have allowed for the development of new tools based on different
molecular approaches, such as excisable and nonintegrating vectors, RNA,
proteins, and small compounds, among others. In most instances, a dynamic
interplay exists between each method's efficiency of reprogramming versus overall
safety, and these points need to be considered when choosing a particular
approach. Regardless, the fast pace at which this field has advanced in recent
years attracted many investigators to enter into the induced pluripotent stem
cell (iPSC) world and has made the process of nuclear reprogramming and iPSC
generation a routine lab technique.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21948613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. FEBS J. 2012 May;279(9):1584-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08317.x. Epub 2011
Sep 26.

Circadian expression of steroidogenic cytochromes P450 in the mouse adrenal
gland--involvement of cAMP-responsive element modulator in epigenetic regulation 
of Cyp17a1.

Koir R(1), Zmrzljak UP, Bele T, Acimovic J, Perse M, Majdic G, Prehn C, Adamski 
J, Rozman D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Functional Genomics and Bio-Chips, Institute of Biochemistry,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

The cytochrome P450 (CYP) genes Cyp51, Cyp11a1, Cyp17a1, Cyb11b1, Cyp11b2 and
Cyp21a1 are involved in the adrenal production of corticosteroids, whose
circulating levels are circadian. cAMP signaling plays an important role in
adrenal steroidogenesis. By using cAMP responsive element modulator (Crem)
knockout mice, we show that CREM isoforms contribute to circadian expression of
steroidogenic CYPs in the mouse adrenal gland. Most striking was the
CREM-dependent hypomethylation of the Cyp17a1 promoter at zeitgeber time 12,
which resulted in higher Cyp17a1 mRNA and protein expression in the knockout
adrenal glands. The data indicate that products of the Crem gene control the
epigenetic repression of Cyp17 in mouse adrenal glands.

© 2011 The Authors Journal compilation © 2011 FEBS.

PMID: 21883931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. BMC Evol Biol. 2011 Aug 31;11:249. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-11-249.

Evidence for maintenance of sex determinants but not of sexual stages in red
yeasts, a group of early diverged basidiomycetes.

Coelho MA(1), Gonçalves P, Sampaio JP.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Departamento de Ciências da Vida,
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 2829-516
Caparica, Portugal.

BACKGROUND: The red yeasts are an early diverged group of basidiomycetes
comprising sexual and asexual species. Sexuality is based on two compatible
mating types and sexual identity is determined by MAT loci that encode
homeodomain transcription factors, peptide pheromones and their receptors. The
objective of the present study was to investigate the presence and integrity of
MAT genes throughout the phylogenetic diversity of red yeasts belonging to the
order Sporidiobolales.
RESULTS: We surveyed 18 sexual heterothallic and self-fertile species and 16
asexual species. Functional pheromone receptor homologues (STE3.A1 and STE3.A2)
were found in multiple isolates of most of the sexual and asexual species. For
each of the two mating types, sequence comparisons with whole-genome data
indicated that synteny tended to be conserved along the pheromone receptor
region. For the homeodomain transcription factor, likelihood methods suggested
that diversifying selection acting on the self/non-self recognition region
promotes diversity in sexual species, while rapid evolution seems to be due to
relaxed selection in asexual strains.
CONCLUSIONS: The majority of both sexual and asexual species of red yeasts have
functional pheromone receptors and homeodomain homologues. This and the frequent 
existence of asexual strains within sexual species, makes the separation between 
sexual and asexual species imprecise. Events of loss of sexuality seem to be
recent and frequent, but not uniformly distributed within the Sporidiobolales.
Loss of sex could promote speciation by fostering the emergence of asexual
lineages from an ancestral sexual stock, but does not seem to contribute to the
generation of exclusively asexual lineages that persist for a long time.

PMCID: PMC3236058
PMID: 21880139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Front Neuroendocrinol. 2012 Jan;33(1):67-84. doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2011.08.002.
Epub 2011 Aug 18.

The molecular physiology of CRH neurons.

Aguilera G(1), Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Endocrine Physiology, Program on Developmental Endocrinology and
Genetics, Eunice Kennedy Shiver Institute of Child Health and Human Development, 
NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States. Greti_Aguilera@nih.gov

Corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH) is essential for stress adaptation by
mediating hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, behavioral and autonomic
responses to stress. Activation of CRH neurons depends on neural afferents from
the brain stem and limbic system, leading to sequential CRH release and
synthesis. CRH transcription is required to restore mRNA and peptide levels, but 
termination of the response is essential to prevent pathology associated with
chronic elevations of CRH and HPA axis activity. Inhibitory feedback mediated by 
glucocorticoids and intracellular production of the repressor, Inducible Cyclic
AMP Early Repressor (ICER), limit the magnitude and duration of CRH neuronal
activation. Induction of CRH transcription is mediated by the cyclic AMP/protein 
kinase A/cyclic AMP responsive element binding protein (CREB)-dependent pathways,
and requires cyclic AMP-dependent nuclear translocation of the CREB co-activator,
Transducer of Regulated CREB activity (TORC). This article reviews current
knowledge on the mechanisms regulating CRH neuron activity.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4341841
PMID: 21871477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Neurobiol Dis. 2012 Jan;45(1):253-63. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2011.08.009. Epub 2011
Aug 10.

Decreased CREB levels suppress epilepsy.

Zhu X(1), Han X, Blendy JA, Porter BE.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Division of Neurology, USA.

Epilepsy is a common neurologic disorder yet no treatments aimed at preventing
epilepsy have been developed. Several molecules including genes containing cAMP
response elements (CREs) in their promoters have been identified that contribute 
to the development of epilepsy, a process called epileptogenesis. When
phosphorylated cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) increases
transcription from CRE regulated promoters. CREB phosphorylation is increased in 
rodent epilepsy models, and in the seizure onset region of humans with medically 
intractable epilepsy (Rakhade et al., 2005; Lee et al., 2007; Lund et al., 2008).
Here we show that mice with decreased CREB levels (CREB(a<U+2206>) mutants) have a ~50% 
reduction in spontaneous seizures following pilocarpine induced status
epilepticus (SE) and require more stimulation to electrically kindle. Following
SE, brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and inducible cAMP early repressor
(ICER) mRNAs are differentially up-regulated in the hippocampus and cortex of the
CREB(a<U+2206>) mutants compared to wild-type mice, which may be contributing to
differences in the severity of epilepsy. In contrast, we found no difference in
KCC2 mRNA levels between the CREB(a<U+2206>) and wild-type mice after SE. The mechanism 
by which BDNF and ICER mRNAs increase specifically in the CREB(a<U+2206>) compared to
wild-type mice following SE is not known. We did, however, find an increase in
specific cAMP response element modulator (CREM) mRNA transcripts in the CREB(a<U+2206>) 
mutants that might be responsible for the differential regulation of BDNF and
ICER after SE. Altering CREB activity following a neurologic insult provides a
therapeutic strategy for modifying epileptogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4011562
PMID: 21867753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Exp Cell Res. 2011 Oct 15;317(17):2490-502. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.07.001.
Epub 2011 Jul 13.

Evidence that phosphorylation by the mitotic kinase Cdk1 promotes ICER
monoubiquitination and nuclear delocalization.

Mémin E(1), Genzale M, Crow M, Molina CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

In contrast to normal prostatic cells, the transcriptional repressor Inducible
cAMP Early Repressor (ICER) is undetected in the nuclei of prostate cancer cells.
The molecular mechanisms for ICER abnormal expression in prostate cancer cells
remained largely unknown. In this report data is presented demonstrating that
ICER is phosphorylated by the mitotic kinase cdk1. Phosphorylation of ICER on a
discrete residue targeted ICER to be monoubiquitinated. Different from
unphosphorylated, phosphorylated and polyubiquitinated ICER, monoubiquitinated
ICER was found to be cytosolic. Taken together, these results hinted on a
mechanism for the observed abnormal subcellular localization of ICER in human
prostate tumors.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 21767532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2012 Feb;219(3):699-713. doi:
10.1007/s00213-011-2406-1. Epub 2011 Jul 16.

CREB1 and CREB-binding protein in striatal medium spiny neurons regulate
behavioural responses to psychostimulants.

Madsen HB(1), Navaratnarajah S, Farrugia J, Djouma E, Ehrlich M, Mantamadiotis T,
Van Deursen J, Lawrence AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Florey Neuroscience Institutes, Parkville, VIC, Australia.

RATIONALE: The transcription factor cAMP responsive element-binding protein 1
(CREB1) has a complex influence on behavioural responses to drugs of abuse which 
varies depending on the brain region in which it is expressed. In response to
drug exposure, CREB1 is phosphorylated in the striatum, a structure that is
critically involved in reward-related learning.
OBJECTIVE: The present study assessed the role of striatal CREB1 and its
coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP) in behavioural responses to
psychostimulants.
METHODS: Using the 'cre/lox' recombination system, we generated mice with a
postnatal deletion of CREB1 or CBP directed to medium spiny neurons of the
striatum. qRT-PCR and immunohistochemistry were used to confirm the deletion, and
mice were assessed with respect to their locomotor response to acute cocaine (20 
mg/kg), cocaine sensitization (10 mg/kg), amphetamine-induced stereotypies (10
mg/kg) and ethanol-induced hypnosis (3.5 g/kg).
RESULTS: Here we show that CREB1 mutant mice have increased sensitivity to
psychostimulants, an effect that does not generalise to ethanol-induced hypnosis.
Furthermore, in the absence of CREB1, there is rapid postnatal upregulation of
the related transcription factor CREM, indicating possible redundancy amongst
this family of transcription factors. Finally striatal deletion of CBP, a
coactivator for the CREB1/CREM signalling pathway, results in an even more
increased sensitivity to psychostimulants.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that striatal CREB1 regulates sensitivity to
psychostimulants and that CREM acting via CBP is able to partially compensate in 
the absence of CREB1 signalling.

PMID: 21766169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 16;286(37):32366-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.245811. Epub
2011 Jul 13.

A novel intronic cAMP response element modulator (CREM) promoter is regulated by 
activator protein-1 (AP-1) and accounts for altered activation-induced CREM
expression in T cells from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Rauen T(1), Benedyk K, Juang YT, Kerkhoff C, Kyttaris VC, Roth J, Tsokos GC,
Tenbrock K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The transcriptional repressor cAMP response element modulator (CREM) a has
important roles in normal T cell physiology and contributes to aberrant T cell
function in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Recently, we
characterized a specificity protein-1-dependent promoter located upstream of the 
CREM gene that accounts for increased basal CREM expression in SLE T cells and
reflects disease activity. Here, we identify a novel intronic CREM promoter
(denoted P2) in front of the second exon of the CREM gene that harbors putative
binding sites for TATA-binding proteins and the transcriptional activator AP-1.
DNA binding studies, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and reporter assays confirmed
the functional relevance of these sites, and T cell activation through CD3/CD28
stimulation or phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate/ionomycin treatment enhances P2
promoter activity. Although the basal CREM levels are increased in T cells from
SLE patients compared with healthy controls, there are remarkable differences in 
the regulation of CREM expression in response to T cell activation. Whereas T
cells from healthy individuals display increased CREM expression after T cell
activation, most likely through AP-1-dependent up-regulation of the P2 promoter, 
SLE T cells fail to further increase their basal CREM levels upon T cell
activation due to a decreased content of the AP-1 family member c-Fos. Because
CREM trans-represses c-fos transcription in SLE T cells, we propose an
autoregulatory feedback mechanism between CREM and AP-1. Our findings extend the 
understanding of CREM gene regulation in the context of T cell activation and
disclose another difference in the transcriptional machinery in SLE T cells.

PMCID: PMC3173235
PMID: 21757709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e21637. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021637. Epub 2011 Jun 28.

Inhibitory role of inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) in
methamphetamine-induced locomotor sensitization.

Han W(1), Takamatsu Y, Yamamoto H, Kasai S, Endo S, Shirao T, Kojima N, Ikeda K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Project for Addictive Substances, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of
Medical Science, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The inducible cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) early repressor
(ICER) is highly expressed in the central nervous system and functions as a
repressor of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) transcription. The
present study sought to clarify the role of ICER in the effects of
methamphetamine (METH).
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We tested METH-induced locomotor sensitization in wildtype 
mice, ICER knockout mice, and ICER I-overexpressing mice. Both ICER wildtype mice
and knockout mice displayed increased locomotor activity after continuous
injections of METH. However, ICER knockout mice displayed a tendency toward
higher locomotor activity compared with wildtype mice, although no significant
difference was observed between the two genotypes. Moreover, compared with
wildtype mice, ICER I-overexpressing mice displayed a significant decrease in
METH-induced locomotor sensitization. Furthermore, Western blot analysis and
quantitative real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
demonstrated that ICER overexpression abolished the METH-induced increase in CREB
expression and repressed cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART) and
prodynorphin (Pdyn) expression in mice. The decreased CART and Pdyn mRNA
expression levels in vivo may underlie the inhibitory role of ICER in
METH-induced locomotor sensitization.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that ICER plays an inhibitory role in METH-induced 
locomotor sensitization.

PMCID: PMC3125264
PMID: 21738744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Biomed Pharmacother. 2011 Jul;65(4):293-7. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2011.03.009.
Epub 2011 May 30.

Transcriptional regulation of the chemokine co-receptor CCR5 by the cAMP/PKA/CREB
pathway.

Banerjee A(1), Pirrone V, Wigdahl B, Nonnemacher MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Molecular Virology and
Translational Neuroscience, Institute for Molecular Medicine and Infectious
Disease, Drexel University College of Medicine, 245 N. 15th Street, MS# 1013A,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102, USA.

The cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-dependent signaling pathway directs the
expression of several genes involved in diverse neuroendocrine, immune,
metabolic, and developmental pathways. The primary effectors of this pathway are 
members of the cAMP response element binding (CREB) family of transcription
factors, in particular the CREB-1 and cAMP response element modulator (CREM).
Both these genes encode alternative splice variants that serve as activators or
repressors in a context- and position-specific manner. Although the ß-chemokine
receptor CC chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5) has been identified on progenitor cells
in the bone marrow, the regulatory mechanisms orchestrating its expression are
not fully understood. Previous reports have identified putative cAMP response
elements in the CCR5 promoter and have described a suppressive role of cAMP in
CCR5 expression. In this study, the CD34+CD4+CCR5+ human bone marrow progenitor
cell line TF-1 was used to investigate the detailed kinetics of CCR5
transcription in response to the elevation of intracellular cAMP levels and the
underlying molecular events. We hypothesize that CCR5 transcription follows an
asymmetrical sinusoidal pattern in TF-1 cells that parallels a protein kinase
A-dependent alternating change in the ratio of activator pCREB-1-a,<U+0394> to repressor
pCREM-a,ß isoforms. However, elevated CCR5 mRNA levels do not correlate with
enhancement in infectivity with respect to the R5 human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV-1) strain. Our results lend critical insight into the precise
mechanism governing the cAMP-CCR5 axis in progenitor cells and pose interesting
questions regarding its functional role in HIV-1 infection.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3150495
PMID: 21719243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Sep 1;137(1):568-74. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.06.010. Epub 
2011 Jun 16.

Psoralea corylifolia protects against testicular torsion/detorsion-induced
ischemia/reperfusion injury.

Wei SM(1), Yan ZZ, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Zhejiang Medical College, Hangzhou City, Zhejiang
Province 310053, China. wsm1971@hotmail.com

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The pathophysiology of testicular
torsion-detorsion is ischemia-reperfusion injury of the testis. In the course of 
testicular ischemia and reperfusion, overgeneration of reactive oxygen species is
a major initiating component of the testicular spermatogenic injury. Reactive
oxygen species regulate many genes whose expression affects cell-cycle
regulation, cell proliferation, and apoptosis. The transcription factor
cAMP-responsive element modulator-t (CREMt) plays an essential role in
spermatogenesis. Psoralea corylifolia, a medicinal herb with anti-oxidative
activity, has been used to treat male reproductive dysfunction in traditional
Chinese medicine. In this study, we investigated the effect of Psoralea
corylifolia on testicular torsion/detorsion-induced injury.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sixty adult male Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly divided
into 3 groups, each containing 20 rats. Rats in the control group underwent a
sham operation of the left testis. In the torsion-detorsion group, the left
testis was rotated 720° for 2h. Rats in the treatment group received the same
surgical procedure as the torsion-detorsion group, but Psoralea corylifolia was
administered orally. Bilateral orchiectomy was performed on half of the rats in
each experimental group at 4h after detorsion for measurement of malondialdehyde 
which is an indicator of intratesticular reactive oxygen species content.
Orchiectomy was performed on the remaining rats at 3 months after detorsion for
analysis of testicular CREMt expression and spermatogenesis.
RESULTS: Unilateral testicular torsion-detorsion caused a significant increase in
malondialdehyde level and caused significant decreases in CREMt expression and
spermatogenesis in ipsilateral testes. Psoralea corylifolia treatment
significantly decreased malondialdehyde level and significantly increased CREMt
expression and spermatogenesis in ipsilateral testes, compared with
torsion-detorsion group.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that Psoralea corylifolia may protect
testicular spermatogenesis by enhancing CREMt expression by scavenging reactive
oxygen species.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21704691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20739. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020739. Epub 2011 Jun 2.

Evidence for divergent evolution of growth temperature preference in sympatric
Saccharomyces species.

Gonçalves P(1), Valério E, Correia C, de Almeida JM, Sampaio JP.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciências da Vida, Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM),
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica,
Portugal. pmz@fct.unl.pt

The genus Saccharomyces currently includes eight species in addition to the model
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, most of which can be consistently isolated from
tree bark and soil. We recently found sympatric pairs of Saccharomyces species,
composed of one cryotolerant and one thermotolerant species in oak bark samples
of various geographic origins. In order to contribute to explain the occurrence
in sympatry of Saccharomyces species, we screened Saccharomyces genomic data for 
protein divergence that might be correlated to distinct growth temperature
preferences of the species, using the dN/dS ratio as a measure of protein
evolution rates and pair-wise species comparisons. In addition to proteins
previously implicated in growth at suboptimal temperatures, we found that
glycolytic enzymes were among the proteins exhibiting higher than expected
divergence when one cryotolerant and one thermotolerant species are compared. By 
measuring glycolytic fluxes and glycolytic enzymatic activities in different
species and at different temperatures, we subsequently show that the unusual
divergence of glycolytic genes may be related to divergent evolution of the
glycolytic pathway aligning its performance to the growth temperature profiles of
the different species. In general, our results support the view that growth
temperature preference is a trait that may have undergone divergent selection in 
the course of ecological speciation in Saccharomyces.

PMCID: PMC3107239
PMID: 21674061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Aug;25(8):1387-403. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-0032. Epub 2011 Jun
9.

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone pulse sensitivity of follicle-stimulating
hormone-beta gene is mediated by differential expression of positive regulatory
activator protein 1 factors and corepressors SKIL and TGIF1.

Mistry DS(1), Tsutsumi R, Fernandez M, Sharma S, Cardenas SA, Lawson MA, Webster 
NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Service, Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System, San
Diego, California 92161, USA.

Gonadotropin synthesis and release is dependent on pulsatile stimulation by the
hypothalamic neuropeptide GnRH. Generally, slow GnRH pulses promote FSH
production, whereas rapid pulses favor LH, but the molecular mechanism underlying
this pulse sensitivity is poorly understood. In this study, we developed and
tested a model for FSHß regulation in mouse LßT2 gonadotropes. By mining a
previous microarray data set, we found that mRNA for positive regulators of Fshb 
expression, such as Fos and Jun, were up-regulated at slower pulse frequencies
than a number of potential negative regulators, such as the corepressors Skil,
Crem, and Tgif1. These latter corepressors reduced Fshb promoter activity whether
driven by transfection of individual transcription factors or by treatment with
GnRH and activin. Overexpression of binding or phosphorylation-defective
ski-oncogene-like protein (SKIL) and TG interacting factor (TGIF1) mutants,
however, failed to repress Fshb promoter activity. Knockdown of the endogenous
repressors SKIL and TGIF1, but not cAMP response element-modulator, increased
Fshb promoter activity driven by constant GnRH or activin. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis showed that FOS, SKIL, and TGIF1 occupy the FSHß
promoter in a cyclical manner after GnRH stimulation. Overexpression of
corepressors SKIL or TGIF1 repressed induction of the Fshb promoter at the slow
GnRH pulse frequency but had little effect at the fast pulse frequency. In
contrast, knockdown of endogenous SKIL or TGIF1 selectively increased Fshb mRNA
at the fast GnRH pulse frequency. Therefore, we propose a potential mechanism by 
which production of gonadotropin Fshb is modulated by positive transcription
factors and negative corepressors with different pulse sensitivities.

PMCID: PMC3146254
PMID: 21659477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Nitric Oxide. 2011 Oct 30;25(3):294-302. doi: 10.1016/j.niox.2011.05.006. Epub
2011 May 27.

Nitric oxide regulates pulmonary vascular smooth muscle cell expression of the
inducible cAMP early repressor gene.

Steinbicker AU(1), Liu H, Jiramongkolchai K, Malhotra R, Choe EY, Busch CJ,
Graveline AR, Kao SM, Nagasaka Y, Ichinose F, Buys ES, Brouckaert P, Zapol WM,
Bloch KD.

Author information: 
(1)Anesthesia Center for Critical Care Research, Department of Anesthesia,
Critical Care and Pain Medicine, 55 Fruit Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
andrea.steinbicker@ukmuenster.de

Nitric oxide (NO) regulates vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) structure and
function, in part by activating soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC) to synthesize
cGMP. The objective of this study was to further characterize the signaling
mechanisms by which NO regulates VSMC gene expression using transcription
profiling. DNA microarrays were hybridized with RNA extracted from rat pulmonary 
artery smooth muscle cells (RPaSMC) exposed to the NO donor compound,
S-nitroso-glutathione (GSNO). Many of the genes, whose expression was induced by 
GSNO, contain a cAMP-response element (CRE), of which one encoded the inducible
cAMP early repressor (ICER). sGC and cAMP-dependent protein kinase, but not
cGMP-dependent protein kinase, were required for NO-mediated phosphorylation of
CRE-binding protein (CREB) and induction of ICER gene expression. Expression of a
dominant-negative CREB in RPaSMC prevented the NO-mediated induction of
CRE-dependent gene transcription and ICER gene expression. Pre-treatment of
RPaSMC with the intracellular calcium (Ca(2+)) chelator, BAPTA-AM, blocked the
induction of ICER gene expression by GSNO. The store-operated Ca(2+) channel
inhibitors, 2-ABP, and SKF-96365, reduced the GSNO-mediated increase in ICER mRNA
levels, while 2-ABP did not inhibit GSNO-induced CREB phosphorylation. Our
results suggest that induction of ICER gene expression by NO requires both CREB
phosphorylation and Ca(2+) signaling. Transcription profiling of RPaSMC exposed
to GSNO revealed important roles for sGC, PKA, CREB, and Ca(2+) in the regulation
of gene expression by NO. The induction of ICER in GSNO-treated RPaSMC highlights
a novel cross-talk mechanism between cGMP and cAMP signaling pathways.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3466086
PMID: 21642009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e20277. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020277. Epub 2011 May 26.

Oxidized LDL receptor 1 (OLR1) as a possible link between obesity, dyslipidemia
and cancer.

Khaidakov M(1), Mitra S, Kang BY, Wang X, Kadlubar S, Novelli G, Raj V, Winters
M, Carter WC, Mehta JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, and the Central Arkansas
Veterans Healthcare System, Little Rock, Arkansas, United States of America.
mkhaidakov@uams.edu

Recent studies have linked expression of lectin-like ox-LDL receptor 1 (OLR1) to 
tumorigenesis. We analyzed microarray data from Olr1 knockout (KO) and wild type 
(WT) mice for genes involved in cellular transformation and evaluated effects of 
OLR1 over-expression in normal mammary epithelial cells (MCF10A) and breast
cancer cells (HCC1143) in terms of gene expression, migration, adhesion and
transendothelial migration. Twenty-six out of 238 genes were inhibited in tissues
of OLR1 KO mice; the vast majority of OLR1 sensitive genes contained NF-<U+03BA>B
binding sites in their promoters. Further studies revealed broad inhibition of
NF-kB target genes outside of the transformation-associated gene pool, with
enrichment themes of defense response, immune response, apoptosis, proliferation,
and wound healing. Transcriptome of Olr1 KO mice also revealed inhibition of de
novo lipogenesis, rate-limiting enzymes fatty acid synthase (Fasn), stearoyl-CoA 
desaturase (Scd1) and ELOVL family member 6 (Elovl6), as well as lipolytic
phospholipase A2 group IVB (Pla2g4b). In studies comparing MCF10A and HCC1143,
the latter displayed 60% higher OLR1 expression. Forced over-expression of OLR1
resulted in upregulation of NF-<U+03BA>B (p65) and its target pro-oncogenes involved in 
inhibition of apoptosis (BCL2, BCL2A1, TNFAIP3) and regulation of cell cycle
(CCND2) in both cell lines. Basal expression of FASN, SCD1 and PLA2G4B, as well
as lipogenesis transcription factors PPARA, SREBF2 and CREM, was higher in
HCC1143 cells. Over-expression of OLR1 in HCC1143 cells also enhanced cell
migration, without affecting their adherence to TNFa-activated endothelium or
transendothelial migration. On the other hand, OLR1 neutralizing antibody
inhibited both adhesion and transmigration of untreated HCC1143 cells. We
conclude that OLR1 may act as an oncogene by activation of NF-kB target genes
responsible for proliferation, migration and inhibition of apoptosis and de novo 
lipogenesis genes.

PMCID: PMC3102697
PMID: 21637860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Drug Dev Ind Pharm. 2011 Oct;37(10):1225-30. doi: 10.3109/03639045.2011.565774.
Epub 2011 May 26.

Enhanced oral bioavailability of tacrolimus in rats by self-microemulsifying drug
delivery systems.

Wang Y(1), Sun J, Zhang T, Liu H, He F, He Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopharmaceutics, School of Pharmacy, Shenyang Pharmaceutical
University, China.

A new self-microemulsifying drug delivery system (SMEDDS) has been developed to
increase the solubility, dissolution rate and oral bioavailability of tacrolimus 
(TAC). The formulations of TAC-SMEDDS were optimized by solubility assay,
compatibility tests, and pseudo-ternary phase diagrams analysis. In order to
inhibit the efflux of P-glycoprotein (P-gp) for tacrolimus, which is the
substrate of P-gp, the excipients which show the inhibition effect to P-gp, such 
as tocopheryl polyethylene glycol succinate (TPGS) and Cremophor EL40, were
chosen in the SMEDDS formulations. According to particle size and the rate of
self-emulsification, two optimized formulations were selected: Miglyol 840 as oil
phase, Transcutol P as cosurfactant, TPGS as surfactant (TPGS-SMEDDS) or
Cremophor EL40 as surfactant (Crem-SMEDDS), respectively. The ratio of oil phase,
surfactant and cosurfactant is 1:7.2:1.8. The mean droplet size distribution of
the optimized SMEDDS was less than 20<U+2009>nm. The in vitro dissolution test indicated
a significant improvement in release characteristics of TAC. The prepared SMEDDS 
was compared with the homemade solution by administering the hard capsule to
fasted rats. The absorption of TAC from TPGS-SMEDDS and Crem-SMEDDS form resulted
in about sevenfold and eightfold increase in bioavailability compared with the
homemade solution. Our study illustrated the potential use of SMEDDS for the
delivery of hydrophobic compounds, such as TAC by the oral route.

PMID: 21615281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J AOAC Int. 2011 Mar-Apr;94(2):618-26.

Clospore: a liquid medium for producing high titers of semi-purified spores of
Clostridium difficile.

Perez J(1), Springthorpe VS, Sattar SA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Ottawa, Centre for Research on Environmental Microbiology
(CREM), Faculty of Medicine, 451 Smyth Rd, ON, Canada K1H 8M5.

Clostridium difficile continues to cause infections in healthcare and other
settings. Its spores survive well indoors and require sporicidal chemicals for
infection control. However, proper testing of disinfectants is impeded due to
difficulties in obtaining viable spores of high enough quality and titers to meet
current regulations for sporicidal claims. A new liquid medium (Clospore) has
been developed, based on a systematic review of the compositions of 20 other
available media. C. difficile spores grown in the new medium and treated with a
mixture of lysozyme and trypsin yielded final suspensions with > 10(9) CFU/mL of 
viable spores, with a purity of > 91% as tested by spore-staining and
phase-contrast microscopy. The spores showed a biological decay rate of about 0.1
log10/month when dried on metal disks and stored indoors (air temperature 23 +/- 
2 degrees C; relative humidity 52.76 +/- 15.08%). Heating the purified spore
suspensions to 70 degrees C for 10 min to inactivate any vegetative cells showed 
no spore activation or inactivation. The spores could be stored for at least 14
months either refrigerated (4 degrees C) or frozen (-20 or -80 degrees C) in 50% 
(v/v) ethanol with virtually no loss in viability. The resistance of the
enzyme-treated spores to three levels of sodium hypochlorite (1000, 3000, and
5000 ppm), using a standardized quantitative carrier test, was almost identical
to that of the spores concentrated by centrifugation alone. The described
procedure has been successfully applied to four standard (ATCC) and six clinical 
strains of C. difficile.

PMID: 21563698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2011 Jul 1;3(7). pii: a002626. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a002626.

Unique aspects of transcription regulation in male germ cells.

White-Cooper H(1), Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3AX, United Kingdom.

Spermatogenesis is a complex and ordered differentiation process in which the
spermatogonial stem cell population gives rise to primary spermatocytes that
undergo two successive meiotic divisions followed by a major biochemical and
structural reorganization of the haploid cells to generate mature elongate
spermatids. The transcriptional regulatory programs that orchestrate this process
have been intensively studied in model organisms such as Drosophila melanogaster 
and mouse. Genetic and biochemical approaches have identified the factors
involved and revealed mechanisms of action that are unique to male germ cells. In
a well-studied example, cofactors and pathways distinct from those used in
somatic tissues mediate the action of CREM in male germ cells. But perhaps the
most striking feature concerns the paralogs of somatically expressed
transcription factors and of components of the general transcription machinery
that act in distinct regulatory mechanisms in both Drosophila and murine
spermatogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3119912
PMID: 21555408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Diabetologia. 2011 Sep;54(9):2337-46. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2165-x. Epub 2011
May 6.

Role for inducible cAMP early repressor in promoting pancreatic beta cell
dysfunction evoked by oxidative stress in human and rat islets.

Favre D(1), Niederhauser G, Fahmi D, Plaisance V, Brajkovic S, Beeler N, Allagnat
F, Haefliger JA, Regazzi R, Waeber G, Abderrahmani A.

Author information: 
(1)Service of Internal Medicine, CHUV-Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Pro-atherogenic and pro-oxidant, oxidised LDL trigger adverse
effects on pancreatic beta cells, possibly contributing to diabetes progression. 
Because oxidised LDL diminish the expression of genes regulated by the inducible 
cAMP early repressor (ICER), we investigated the involvement of this
transcription factor and of oxidative stress in beta cell failure elicited by
oxidised LDL.
METHODS: Isolated human and rat islets, and insulin-secreting cells were cultured
with human native or oxidised LDL or with hydrogen peroxide. The expression of
genes was determined by quantitative real-time PCR and western blotting. Insulin 
secretion was monitored by EIA kit. Cell apoptosis was determined by scoring
cells displaying pycnotic nuclei.
RESULTS: Exposure of beta cell lines and islets to oxidised LDL, but not to
native LDL raised the abundance of ICER. Induction of this repressor by the
modified LDL compromised the expression of important beta cell genes, including
insulin and anti-apoptotic islet brain 1, as well as of genes coding for key
components of the secretory machinery. This led to hampering of insulin
production and secretion, and of cell survival. Silencing of this transcription
factor by RNA interference restored the expression of its target genes and
alleviated beta cell dysfunction and death triggered by oxidised LDL. Induction
of ICER was stimulated by oxidative stress, whereas antioxidant treatment with
N-acetylcysteine or HDL prevented the rise of ICER elicited by oxidised LDL and
restored beta cell functions.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Induction of ICER links oxidative stress to beta cell
failure caused by oxidised LDL and can be effectively abrogated by antioxidant
treatment.

PMCID: PMC3149674
PMID: 21547497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 May 20;408(4):635-41. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.04.076. Epub 2011 Apr 21.

Circadian rhythm of cholesterol synthesis in mouse liver: a statistical analysis 
of the post-squalene metabolites in wild-type and Crem-knock-out mice.

Acimovic J(1), Koir R, Kastelec D, Pere M, Majdic G, Rozman D, Komelj K,
Golicnik M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,
Vrazov trg 2, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Circadian rhythms affect the total cholesterol levels in humans and animals,
although their effect on cholesterol synthesis remain poorly understood. Here, we
show for the first time that intermediates of the post-squalene portion of
cholesterol synthesis also follow a circadian rhythm in the mouse liver. We used 
Crem-knock-out mice to investigate the effects of cAMP response element modulator
(CREM) isoforms on cholesterol synthesis over time, as compared to wild-type
mice. Multiple linear regression and cosinor statistical analysis were carried
out on data obtained from 166 liver samples of mice, and the 24-h profiles were
modelled across genotype, gender and zeitgeber time for lanosterol,
24,25-dihydrolanosterol, testis meiosis-activating sterol, and
7-dehydrocholesterol, along with cholesterol. The levels of these sterols were
higher in female mice compared to males, although the genotype/gender factors
showed no effects on the circadian oscillation of these sterols, except for
24,25-dihydrolanosterol. This study also highlights the importance of the
statistical methods, where time, genotype and gender are the studied variables.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21531203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Fertil Steril. 2011 Jun;95(7):2310-4. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2011.03.096. Epub
2011 Apr 20.

Abnormal methylation of the promoter of CREM is broadly associated with male
factor infertility and poor sperm quality but is improved in sperm selected
by density gradient centrifugation.

Nanassy L(1), Carrell DT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Andrology and IVF Laboratories, University of Utah
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84108, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the methylation status of the promoter of CREM in patients
with an abnormal protamine 1/protamine 2 (P1/P2) ratio or oligozoospermia. The
effects of density gradient centrifugation and aging of males on CREM promoter
methylation were also investigated.
DESIGN: Experimental research study.
SETTING: University andrology and research laboratory.
PATIENT(S): Patients with abnormally low (n=24) and high (n=36) P1/P2 ratio;
patients with oligozoospermia (n=32); and normozoospermic, fertile controls with 
normal P1/P2 ratio (n=40).
INTERVENTION(S): The CpG methyaltion pattern of the promoter of CREM was examined
using pyrosequencing.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): The percentage of methylation of 12 CpGs in the CREM
promoter was compared between patients and fertile controls.
RESULT(S): There was a significantly higher rate of methylation of CREM in
patients with abnormal protamination and oligozoospermia compared with the
control group. Sperm concentration, sperm motility, and normal head morphology
were negatively correlated with the amount of CpG methylation. Sperm selected
from the 90% gradient fraction exhibited less methylation than sperm from the 35%
fraction.
CONCLUSION(S): Patients with two types of male factor infertility display an
increased abnormal methylation of CREM compared with control subjects. Increased 
methylation is associated with decreased semen quality, and sperm selected by
density gradient centrifugation have less methylation. Further research is
necessary to investigate whether epimutations can be found on other nonimprinted 
gene promoters as well.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21507395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Andrologia. 2011 Jun;43(3):167-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1439-0272.2009.01038.x. Epub
2011 Feb 25.

Protamine-1 represents a sperm specific gene transcript: a study in Callithrix
jacchus and Bos taurus.

Hecht N(1), Cavalcanti MC, Nayudu P, Behr R, Reichenbach M, Weidner W, Steger K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Pediatric Urology and Andrology, Justus Liebig
University, Giessen, Germany. klaus.steger@chiru.med.uni-giessen.de 

Spermatozoa are transcriptionally inactive cells, but contain acetylated
histones, normally a characteristic of transcriptionally active cells.
Acetylgroups are thought to represent epigenetic marks that are transmitted to
the oocyte and are involved in starting gene expression in the zygote and in
regulating gene expression during early embryogenesis. We performed reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in the common marmoset monkey
(Callithrix jacchus) and in bovine spermatozoa, oocytes, zygotes, two- and
four-cell embryos to evaluate the presence of specific transcripts known to play 
a role during fertilisation and early embryo development, namely protamine-1
(PRM1), protamine-2 (PRM2), histone H1 (H1), histone H3 (H3), histone H4 (H4),
cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM), DNA methyltransferase-1 (DNMT1), TATA
box-binding protein (TBP). All transcripts tested were present in spermatozoa of 
the common marmoset, while bull spermatozoa lack PRM2. Marmoset oocytes exhibited
transcripts for H1, H3, H4 and TBP, whereas bovine oocytes revealed H1, H3, H4,
CREM, DNMT and TBP mRNAs. In zygotes, we amplified H1, H4, TBP (marmoset) and
PRM1, H1, H3, H4, CREM, DNMT1 and TBP (bovine). Two-cell embryos showed PCR
products for H1, H3 and TBP in the marmoset. In the bovine, all transcripts could
be observed except PRM2. In four-cell embryos, PCR signals were obtained for
PRM1, H1, H3, H4 and TBP in the marmoset. In the bovine, all transcripts were
detected except PRM2. Our data suggest that, in both C. jacchus and Bos taurus,
PRM1 transcripts are delivered by the spermatozoon to the oocyte.

© 2011 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 21486395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Exp Med. 2011 Apr 11;208(4):761-73. doi: 10.1084/jem.20101967. Epub 2011 Mar
28.

Prostaglandin E2 suppresses the differentiation of retinoic acid-producing
dendritic cells in mice and humans.

Stock A(1), Booth S, Cerundolo V.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Human Immunology Unit, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford,
OX3 9DS Oxford, England, UK.

The production of retinoic acid (RA) by dendritic cells (DCs) is critical for the
induction of gut-tropic immune responses by driving the expression of
intestinal-specific homing receptors, such as a4ß7 and CCR9, upon T and B cell
activation. However, how RA production is regulated during DC development remains
unclear. We describe an unexpected role for prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) as a negative
regulator of retinal dehydrogenases (RALDH), the enzymes responsible for RA
synthesis. The presence of PGE2 during DC differentiation inhibited RALDH
expression in mouse and human DCs, abrogating their ability to induce CCR9
expression upon T cell priming. Furthermore, blocking PGE2 signaling increased
the frequency of RALDH(+) DCs in vitro, and reducing PGE2 synthesis in vivo
promoted the systemic emergence of RA-producing DCs and the priming of CCR9(+) T 
cells in nonintestinal sites such as the spleen. Finally, we found that PGE2
stimulated the expression of the inducible cyclic AMP early repressor, which
appears to directly inhibit RALDH expression in DCs, thus providing mechanistic
insight into how PGE2 signaling down-modulates RALDH. Given the role of PGE2 in
regulating the development of RA-producing DCs, modulating this pathway may prove
a novel means to control the development of gut-tropic immune responses.

PMCID: PMC3135350
PMID: 21444662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Dig Liver Dis. 2011 Aug;43(8):623-31. doi: 10.1016/j.dld.2011.02.010. Epub 2011
Mar 15.

Discovering genetic variants in Crohn's disease by exploring genomic regions
enriched of weak association signals.

D'Addabbo A(1), Palmieri O, Maglietta R, Latiano A, Mukherjee S, Annese V, Ancona
N.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Studi sui Sistemi Intelligenti per l'Automazione - C.N.R., Bari,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: A meta-analysis has re-analysed previous genome-wide association
scanning definitively confirming eleven genes and further identifying 21 new
loci. However, the identified genes/loci still explain only the minority of
genetic predisposition of Crohn's disease.
AIMS: To identify genes weakly involved in disease predisposition by analysing
chromosomal regions enriched of single nucleotide polymorphisms with modest
statistical association.
METHODS: We utilized the WTCCC data set evaluating 1748 CD and 2938 controls. The
identification of candidate genes/loci was performed by a two-step procedure:
first of all chromosomal regions enriched of weak association signals were
localized; subsequently, weak signals clustered in gene regions were identified. 
The statistical significance was assessed by non parametric permutation tests.
RESULTS: The cytoband enrichment analysis highlighted 44 regions (P=0.05)
enriched with single nucleotide polymorphisms significantly associated with the
trait including 23 out of 31 previously confirmed and replicated genes.
Importantly, we highlight further 20 novel chromosomal regions carrying
approximately one hundred genes/loci with modest association. Amongst these we
find compelling functional candidate genes such as MAPT, GRB2 and CREM, LCT, and 
IL12RB2.
CONCLUSION: Our study suggests a different statistical perspective to discover
genes weakly associated with a given trait, although further confirmatory
functional studies are needed.

Copyright © 2011 Editrice Gastroenterologica Italiana S.r.l. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21411385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 8;6(3):e17843. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017843.

cAMP response element binding protein is required for differentiation of
respiratory epithelium during murine development.

Bird AD(1), Flecknoe SJ, Tan KH, Olsson PF, Antony N, Mantamadiotis T, Mollard R,
Hooper SB, Cole TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia. daniel.bird@monash.edu

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(1). doi:10.1371/annotation/ec04ad74-63cc-4fbe-9ad8-074a1d62fdf4.
Mollard, Richard [added].

The cAMP response element binding protein 1 (Creb1) transcription factor
regulates cellular gene expression in response to elevated levels of
intracellular cAMP. Creb1(-/-) fetal mice are phenotypically smaller than
wildtype littermates, predominantly die in utero and do not survive after birth
due to respiratory failure. We have further investigated the respiratory defect
of Creb1(-/-) fetal mice during development. Lungs of Creb1(-/-) fetal mice were 
pale in colour and smaller than wildtype controls in proportion to their reduced 
body size. Creb1(-/-) lungs also did not mature morphologically beyond E16.5 with
little or no expansion of airway luminal spaces, a phenotype also observed with
the Creb1(-/-) lung on a Crem(-/-) genetic background. Creb1 was highly expressed
throughout the lung at all stages examined, however activation of Creb1 was
detected primarily in distal lung epithelium. Cell differentiation of E17.5
Creb1(-/-) lung distal epithelium was analysed by electron microscopy and showed 
markedly reduced numbers of type-I and type-II alveolar epithelial cells.
Furthermore, immunomarkers for specific lineages of proximal epithelium including
ciliated, non-ciliated (Clara), and neuroendocrine cells showed delayed onset of 
expression in the Creb1(-/-) lung. Finally, gene expression analyses of the E17.5
Creb1(-/-) lung using whole genome microarray and qPCR collectively identified
respiratory marker gene profiles and provide potential novel Creb1-regulated
genes. Together, these results demonstrate a crucial role for Creb1 activity for 
the development and differentiation of the conducting and distal lung epithelium.

PMCID: PMC3050929
PMID: 21408140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 24;6(2):e17340. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017340.

In vivo comparison of two human norovirus surrogates for testing ethanol-based
handrubs: the mouse chasing the cat!

Sattar SA(1), Ali M, Tetro JA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Environmental Microbiology (CREM), University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. ssattar@uottawa.ca

Human noroviruses (HuNoV), a major cause of acute gastroenteritis worldwide,
cannot be readily cultured in the lab. Therefore, a feline calicivirus (FCV) is
often used as its surrogate to, among other things, test alcohol-based handrubs
(ABHR). The more recent laboratory culture of a mouse norovirus (MNV) provides an
alternative. While MNV is closer to HuNoV in several respects, to date, no
comparative testing of FCV and MNV survival and inactivation on human hands has
been performed. This study was designed to address the knowledge gap. The rates
of loss in viability during drying on hands were -1.91 and -1.65% per minute for 
FCV and MNV, respectively. When the contaminated skin was exposed for 20 s to
either a commercial ABHR with 62% (v/v) ethanol or to 75% (v/v) ethanol in water,
FCV infectivity was reduced by <1 log10 while that of MNV by nearly 2.8 log10.
Extending the contact time to 30 s reduced the FCV titer by almost 2 log10 by
both test substances and that of MNV by >3.5 log10 by the commercial ABHR while
75% ethanol did not show any noticeable improvement in activity as compared to
the 20 s contact. An 80% (v/v) aqueous solution of ethanol gave only a 1.75 log10
reduction in MNV activity after 20 s. The results show significant differences in
the ethanol susceptibility of FCV and MNV in contact times relevant to field use 
of ABHR and also that 62% ethanol was a more effective virucide than either 75%
or 80% ethanol. These findings indicate the need for a review of the continuing
use of FCV as a surrogate for HuNoV.

PMCID: PMC3044752
PMID: 21390325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Cell Biol. 2011 Mar 7;192(5):781-95. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201009043.

TDRD5 is required for retrotransposon silencing, chromatoid body assembly, and
spermiogenesis in mice.

Yabuta Y(1), Ohta H, Abe T, Kurimoto K, Chuma S, Saitou M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

The Tudor domain-containing proteins (TDRDs) are an evolutionarily conserved
family of proteins involved in germ cell development. We show here that in mice, 
TDRD5 is a novel component of the intermitochondrial cements (IMCs) and the
chromatoid bodies (CBs), which are cytoplasmic ribonucleoprotein granules
involved in RNA processing for spermatogenesis. Tdrd5-deficient males are sterile
because of spermiogenic arrest at the round spermatid stage, with occasional
failure in meiotic prophase. Without TDRD5, IMCs and CBs are disorganized, with
mislocalization of their key components, including TDRD1/6/7/9 and
MIWI/MILI/MIWI2. In addition, Tdrd5-deficient germ cells fail to repress LINE-1
retrotransposons with DNA-demethylated promoters. Cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
response element modulator (CREM) and TRF2, key transcription factors for
spermiogenesis, are expressed in Tdrd5-deficient round spermatids, but their
targets, including Prm1/Prm2/Tnp1, are severely down-regulated, which indicates
the importance of IMC/CB-mediated regulation for postmeiotic gene expression.
Strikingly, Tdrd5-deficient round spermatids injected into oocytes contribute to 
fertile offspring, demonstrating that acquisition of a functional haploid genome 
may be uncoupled from TDRD5 function.

PMCID: PMC3051809
PMID: 21383078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Toxicol Lett. 2011 Jun 10;203(2):106-10. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2011.02.015. Epub 
2011 Feb 26.

Functionality and specificity of gene markers for skin sensitization in dendritic
cells.

Lambrechts N(1), Nelissen I, Van Tendeloo V, Witters H, Van Den Heuvel R,
Hooyberghs J, Schoeters G.

Author information: 
(1)Flemish Institute for Technological Research (VITO N.V.), Environmental Risk
and Health Unit, Toxicology, Belgium. nathalie.lambrechts@vito.be

Transcriptomic analyses revealed a discriminating gene expression profile in
human CD34+ progenitor-derived dendritic cells (DC) after exposure to skin
sensitizers versus non-sensitizers. Starting from the differential expression in 
a small set of genes, a preliminary classification model (VITOSENS®) has been
developed to identify chemicals as (non-)sensitizing. The objective of the
current study is to gain knowledge on the role of the VITOSENS® markers in the DC
maturation process, as well as to investigate their activation by a skin
sensitizer versus a non-sensitizing danger molecule. To evaluate the functional
relevance of VITOSENS® biomarkers in DC maturation, their response induced by the
sensitizer dinitrofluorobenzene (DNFB) was pharmacologically counteracted. Flow
cytometry analyses revealed that CD86 was down-regulated after COX2 inhibition,
whereas expression of HLA-DR was reduced by stimulating CCR2. When exposing DC to
DNFB versus lipopolysaccharide S (LPS), expression of most discriminating genes
CREM and CCR2 was not altered by LPS as opposed to DNFB. To summarize, the
observations in this research indicate that a selection of the VITOSENS® genes
may be functionally involved in sensitizer-induced DC activation. By comparing
their responsiveness towards a non-sensitizing danger signal and a sensitizer,
VITOSENS® gene markers CREM and CCR2 appear to display a specific response.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21362464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2011 May;52(5):506-13. doi:
10.1111/j.1472-765X.2011.03032.x. Epub 2011 Mar 14.

Enhanced activity of antifungal drugs using natural phenolics against yeast
strains of Candida and Cryptococcus.

Faria NC(1), Kim JH, Gonçalves LA, Martins Mde L, Chan KL, Campbell BC.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical/CREM, Universidade Nova de Lisboa,
Portugal.

AIMS: Determine whether certain, natural phenolic compounds enhance activity of
commercial antifungal drugs against yeast strains of Candida and Cryptococcus
neoformans.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Twelve natural phenolics were examined for fungicidal
activity against nine reference strains of Candida and one of C. neoformans. Six 
compounds were selected for synergistic enhancement of antifungal drugs,
amphotericin B (AMB), fluconazole (FLU) and itraconazole (ITR). Matrix assays of 
phenolic and drug combinations conducted against one reference strain, each, of
Candida albicans and C. neoformans showed cinnamic and benzoic acids, thymol, and
2,3- and 2,5-dihydroxybenzaldehydes (-DBA) had synergistic interactions depending
upon drug and yeast strain. 2,5-DBA was synergistic with almost all drug and
strain combinations. Thymol was synergistic with all drugs against Ca. albicans
and with AMB in C. neoformans. Combinations of benzoic acid or thymol with ITR
showed highest synergistic activity. Of 36 combinations of natural product and
drug tested, none were antagonistic.
CONCLUSIONS: Relatively nontoxic natural products can synergistically enhance
antifungal drug activity, in vitro.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: This is a proof-of-concept, having clinical
implications. Natural chemosensitizing agents could lower dosages needed for
effective chemotherapy of invasive mycoses. Further studies against clinical
yeast strains and use of animal models are warranted.

No claim to US Government works. Letters in Applied Microbiology © 2011 The
Society for Applied Microbiology.

PMID: 21332761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Feb 15;17(4):742-52. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-0886.

ICER evokes Dusp1-p38 pathway enhancing chemotherapy sensitivity in myeloid
leukemia.

Pigazzi M(1), Manara E, Beghin A, Baron E, Tregnago C, Basso G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Laboratory of Hematology-Oncology, University of
Padova, Padova, Italy. martina.pigazzi@unipd.it

PURPOSE: The inducible cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) early repressor
(ICER) is found downregulated in acute myeloid leukemia (AML), failing to control
cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) transcriptional activity, recently
demonstrated to mediate AML progression. We aimed to characterize ICER's role in 
drug sensitivity by treating myeloid cell lines and primary AML with
chemotherapics.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The effects on CREB target genes induced by ICER restoration
and drug treatment were studied by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) and
western blot. Cell cycle and apoptosis analysis were performed. Possible
ICER-evoked pathways were investigated in vitro. The mechanism involved in
enhanced drug sensitivity was described in primary AML cultures by silencing ICER
main target genes.
RESULTS: AML cell lines reduced cell growth and enhanced apoptotic behavior after
chemotherapy treatment if ICER was expressed. A significantly lowered expression 
of CREB target genes involved in cell cycle control (CyA1, B1, D1), and in the
mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway (ERK, AKT, DUSP1/4), was found
after Etoposide treatment. The dual-specificity phosphatases DUSP1 and DUSP4,
directly repressed by ICER, activated the p38 pathway, which triggered enhanced
caspase-dependent apoptosis. The silencing of DUSP1/4 in HL60 confirmed the same 
enhanced drug sensitivity induced by ICER. Primary AML cultures, silenced for
DUSP1 as well as restored of ICER expression, showed DUSP1 downregulation and p38
activation.
CONCLUSION: ICER mediates chemotherapy anticancer activity through DUSP1-p38
pathway activation and drives the cell program from survival to apoptosis. ICER
restoration or DUSP1 inhibition might be possible strategies to sensitize AML
cancer cells to conventional chemotherapy and to inhibit tumor growth.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21325296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Eur J Health Econ. 2012 Jun;13(3):237-50. doi: 10.1007/s10198-011-0300-8. Epub
2011 Feb 9.

Incremental net benefit and acceptability of alternative health policies: a case 
study of mass screening for colorectal cancer.

Chauvin P(1), Josselin JM, Heresbach D.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Economics, University of Rennes 1-CREM CNRS UMR6211, 7 place Hoche 
CS 86514, 35065 Rennes Cedex, France. pauline.chauvin@univ-rennes1.fr

The incremental net benefit (INB) and the related acceptability curves for public
health programs provide valuable tools for decision making. We proposed to apply 
them to the assessment of mass screening of colorectal cancer. The now standard
guaiac fecal occult blood test (FOBT) is already implemented in several
countries. We considered the innovative immunological FOBT and computed
tomography colonography (CTC) as competing screening technologies. Using biennial
guaiac FOBT as the reference strategy, we estimated the cost-effectiveness of the
following alternatives: biennial immunological FOBT, CTC every 5 years (strategy 
CTC5), and CTC every 10 years (strategy CTC10). Over a 30-year horizon and from
the perspective of a third-party payer, we developed a Markov model on a
hypothetical cohort of 100,000 subjects at average risk of colorectal cancer.
Close expected net benefits between immunological FOBT and CTC5 induced
uncertainty in the choice of the optimal strategy. Probabilistic sensibility
analysis then suggested that below a willingness to pay (WTP) per life-years
gained (LYG) of 8,587 /LYG, CTC10 was optimal, while CTC5 would be preferred
beyond a WTP of 8,587 /LYG.

PMID: 21305335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Feb 8;108(6):2480-5. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1009463108.
Epub 2011 Jan 24.

Regulatory T cells facilitate the nuclear accumulation of inducible cAMP early
repressor (ICER) and suppress nuclear factor of activated T cell c1 (NFATc1).

Vaeth M(1), Gogishvili T, Bopp T, Klein M, Berberich-Siebelt F, Gattenloehner S, 
Avots A, Sparwasser T, Grebe N, Schmitt E, Hünig T, Serfling E, Bodor J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Wurzburg, D-97080 Wurzburg, Germany.

Inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) is a transcriptional repressor, which,
because of alternate promoter use, is generated from the 3' region of the cAMP
response modulator (Crem) gene. Its expression and nuclear occurrence are
elevated by high cAMP levels in naturally occurring regulatory T cells (nTregs). 
Using two mouse models, we demonstrate that nTregs control the cellular
localization of ICER/CREM, and thereby inhibit IL-2 synthesis in conventional
CD4(+) T cells. Ablation of nTregs in depletion of regulatory T-cell (DEREG) mice
resulted in cytosolic localization of ICER/CREM and increased IL-2 synthesis upon
stimulation. Direct contacts between nTregs and conventional CD4(+) T cells led
to nuclear accumulation of ICER/CREM and suppression of IL-2 synthesis on
administration of CD28 superagonistic (CD28SA) Ab. In a similar way, nTregs
communicated with B cells and induced the cAMP-driven nuclear localization of
ICER/CREM. High levels of ICER suppressed the induction of nuclear factor of
activated T cell c1 (Nfatc1) gene in T cells whose inducible Nfatc1 P1 promoter
bears two highly conserved cAMP-responsive elements to which ICER/CREM can bind. 
These findings suggest that nTregs suppress T-cell responses by the
cAMP-dependent nuclear accumulation of ICER/CREM and inhibition of NFATc1 and
IL-2 induction.

PMCID: PMC3038697
PMID: 21262800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Asian J Androl. 2011 Mar;13(2):342-6. doi: 10.1038/aja.2010.160. Epub 2011 Jan 3.

Analysis of the methylation pattern of six gene promoters in sperm of men with
abnormal protamination.

Nanassy L(1), Carrell DT.

Author information: 
(1)Andrology and IVF Laboratories, Department of Surgery, University of Utah
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84108, USA.

It has recently been shown that alteration of the methylation pattern of
imprinted genes is associated with different types of male infertility. The
objective of our study was to investigate the methylation pattern of selected
gene promoters in sperm of patients with abnormal protamine replacement. The
promoters of OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, HOXC11, miR-17 and CREM were analyzed using
bisulfite sequencing and the percentage of DNA methylation was compared between
patients with an abnormal protamine 1/protamine 2 (P1/P2) ratio and
normozoospermic controls. No significant quantitative differences were found
between groups of patients with either an abnormally high or low P1/P2 ratio
compared to normal controls. However, two individual samples from infertile
subjects (2/20, 10%) showed an altered methylation pattern for the CREM gene
promoter that was not found in control samples. These two samples had a
significantly higher (P<0.05) promoter methylation (5.58 and 4.23%, respectively)
compared to the control group (0.46%). In conclusion, in our pilot study, extreme
methylations defects were not seen broadly in severely infertile men. However,
two patients exhibited altered methylation of the CREM gene, which may be either 
causative or a result of abnormal protmaine replacement.

PMCID: PMC3739198
PMID: 21196940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 21;286(3):1795-801. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.166785. Epub 2010
Nov 19.

Transcriptional activation of the cAMP-responsive modulator promoter in human T
cells is regulated by protein phosphatase 2A-mediated dephosphorylation of SP-1
and reflects disease activity in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Juang YT(1), Rauen T, Wang Y, Ichinose K, Benedyk K, Tenbrock K, Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex autoimmune disease with numerous 
abnormalities recorded at the cellular, molecular, and genetic level. Expression 
of the basic leucine zipper transcription factor cAMP-responsive element
modulator (CREM)a was reported to be abnormally increased in T cells from SLE
patients. CREMa suppresses IL-2 and T cell receptor <U+03B6> chain gene transcription by
direct binding to the respective promoters. Here, we show that increased CREM
expression is the result of enhanced promoter activity. DNA binding analyses
reveal direct binding of transcription factor specificity protein-1 (SP-1) to the
CREM promoter resulting in enhanced transcriptional activity and increased CREM
expression. Protein phosphatase 2A is known to activate SP-1 through
dephosphorylation at its serine residue 59. Our results show that nuclei from SLE
T cells contain lower levels of Ser(59)-phosphorylated SP-1 protein and a
stronger SP-1 binding to the CREM promoter. We conclude that protein phosphatase 
2A accounts for enhanced SP-1 dephosphorylation at Ser(59) in SLE T cells. More
importantly, CREM promoter activity mirrors reliably disease activity in SLE
patients, underscoring its potential role as a biomarker for the prediction of
flares in SLE patients.

PMCID: PMC3023474
PMID: 21097497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Appl Microbiol. 2011 Jan;110(1):364-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2010.04895.x. 
Epub 2010 Nov 19.

Derepression of a baker's yeast strain for maltose utilization is associated with
severe deregulation of HXT gene expression.

Salema-Oom M(1), De Sousa HR, Assunção M, Gonçalves P, Spencer-Martins I.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Departamento de Ciências da Vida,
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica,
Portugal. moom@egasmoniz.edu.pt

AIMS: We undertook to improve an industrial Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain by
derepressing it for maltose utilization in the presence of high glucose
concentrations.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A mutant was obtained from an industrial S. cerevisiae
strain following random UV mutagenesis and selection on maltose/5-thioglucose
medium. The mutant acquired the ability to utilize glucose simultaneously with
maltose and possibly also sucrose and galactose. Aerobic sugar metabolism was
still largely fermentative, but an enhanced respirative metabolism resulted in a 
31% higher biomass yield on glucose. Kinetic characterization of glucose
transport in the mutant revealed the predominance of the high-affinity component.
Northern blot analysis showed that the mutant strain expresses only the HXT6/7
gene irrespective of the glucose concentration in the medium, indicating a severe
deregulation in the induction/repression pathways modulating HXT gene expression.
Interestingly, maltose-grown cells of the mutant display inverse diauxy in a
glucose/maltose mixture, preferring maltose to glucose.
CONCLUSION: In the mutant here reported, the glucose transport step seems to be
uncoupled from downstream regulation, because it seems to be unable to sense
abundant glucose, via both repression and induction pathways.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: We report here the isolation of a S.
cerevisiae mutant with a novel derepressed phenotype, potentially interesting for
the industrial fermentation of mixed sugar substrates.

© 2010 The Authors. Journal of Applied Microbiology © 2010 The Society for
Applied Microbiology.

PMID: 21091593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Genes Brain Behav. 2011 Feb;10(1):69-77. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2010.00609.x.
Epub 2010 Oct 29.

Intracranial self-stimulation induces expression of learning and memory-related
genes in rat amygdala.

Kadar E(1), Aldavert-Vera L, Huguet G, Costa-Miserachs D, Morgado-Bernal I,
Segura-Torres P.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Biologia, Universitat de Girona, Girona, Spain.
elisabet.kadar@udg.edu

Intracranial self-stimulation (ICSS) in the lateral hypothalamus improves memory 
when administered immediately after a training session. In our laboratory, ICSS
has been shown as a very reliable way to increase two-way active avoidance (TWAA)
conditioning, an amygdala-dependent task. The aim of this work was to study, in
the rat amygdala, anatomical and molecular aspects of ICSS, using the same
parameters facilitating TWAA. First, we examined the activation of ipsilateral
and contralateral lateral (LA) and basolateral (BLA) amygdala, the main amygdalar
regions involved in the TWAA, by the immunohistochemical determination of c-Fos
protein expression. Second, we tested the effects of the ICSS treatment on the
expression of 14 genes related to learning and memory processes using real-time
polymerase chain reaction. Results showed a bilateral increase in c-Fos protein
expression in LA and BLA nuclei after ICSS treatment. We also found that Fos,
brain-derived nerve growth factor (BDNF), Arc, inducible cAMP early repressor
(ICER), COX-2, Dnajb1, FKpb5 and Ret genes were upregulated in the amygdala 90
min and 4.5 h post ICSS. From this set of genes, BDNF, Arc and ICER are
functionally associated with the cAMP-responsive element-mediated gene
transcription molecular pathway that plays a pivotal role in memory, whereas
Dnajb1 and Ret are associated with protein folding required for plasticity or
neuroprotection. Our results suggest that ICSS induces expression of genes
related with synaptic plasticity and protein folding functions in the rat
amygdaloid area, which may be involved in the molecular mechanisms by which ICSS 
may improve or restore memory functions related to this brain structure.

© 2010 The Authors. Genes, Brain and Behavior © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd and
International Behavioural and Neural Genetics Society.

PMID: 20969727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. BMC Genomics. 2010 Sep 29;11:530. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-530.

Cell-specific occupancy of an extended repertoire of CREM and CREB binding loci
in male germ cells.

Martianov I(1), Choukrallah MA, Krebs A, Ye T, Legras S, Rijkers E, Van Ijcken W,
Jost B, Sassone-Corsi P, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/UDS, Illkirch, France.

BACKGROUND: CREB and CREM are closely related factors that regulate transcription
in response to various stress, metabolic and developmental signals. The CREMt
activator isoform is selectively expressed in haploid spermatids and plays an
essential role in murine spermiogenesis.
RESULTS: We have used chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled to sequencing
(ChIP-seq) to map CREM and CREB target loci in round spermatids from adult mouse 
testis and spermatogonia derived GC1-spg cells respectively. We identify more
than 9000 genomic loci most of which are cell-specifically occupied. Despite the 
fact that round spermatids correspond to a highly specialised differentiated
state, our results show that they have a remarkably accessible chromatin
environment as CREM occupies more than 6700 target loci corresponding not only to
the promoters of genes selectively expressed in spermiogenesis, but also of genes
involved in functions specific to other cell types. The expression of only a
small subset of these target genes are affected in the round spermatids of CREM
knockout animals. We also identify a set of intergenic binding loci some of which
are associated with H3K4 trimethylation and elongating RNA polymerase II
suggesting the existence of novel CREB and CREM regulated transcripts.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that CREM and CREB occupy a large number of promoters
in highly cell specific manner. This is the first study of CREM target promoters 
directly in a physiologically relevant tissue in vivo and represents the most
comprehensive experimental analysis of CREB/CREM regulatory potential to date.

PMCID: PMC3091680
PMID: 20920259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Arch Med Sci. 2010 Oct;6(5):713-8. doi: 10.5114/aoms.2010.17086. Epub 2010 Oct
26.

Assessment of a single monomorphic ventricular ectopy from the right ventricular 
outflow tract in standard and high resolution electrocardiogram.

Kozlowski D(1), Kosinski A, Dabrowska-Kugacka A, Lewicka-Nowak E, Dudziak M,
Grzybiak M, Raczak G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology and Electrotherapy, Medical University of Gdansk,
Poland.

INTRODUCTION: High-resolution electrocardiography (ECG-CREM) is a method based on
digital electrocardiography. In order to facilitate the interpretation of the
Crem records the technique of vectorcardiography was used. In comparison the
origin of the ventricular premature complexes (VPCs) could be estimated based on 
a standard 12-lead electrocardiogram. The aim of the study was to assess the
point of origin of the VPCs in ECG-CREM and correlate it with standard
electrocardiography (ECG-Stand).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Our study included 26 patients (16 females, 10 males), aged
51-83 years (avg. 58.1 ±12.3), who presented with recurrent, during at least 6
months' observation, VPCs. The point of origin of VPCs was compared in both
methods.
RESULTS: The performed analysis of collected ECG-Stand records revealed the
presence of arrhythmogenic focal points in six different locations (1, 3, 5, 7,
8, 9). However, we did not affirm their presence in points 2,4,6. They were most 
commonly located in RVOT zones 8 (30.7%), 9 (23.0%), 5 (23.0%), and most seldom
in zones 1, 3, 7 (7.6% each). In the simultaneous record of ECG-CREM with a
single VPC it was confirmed that the FPb zone was activated the most frequently
(40.0%); the next in relation to frequency were SD and ST (20.0%). Less frequent 
VPCs have their origin in Crem zones SP, FPa and SB (6.6%).
CONCLUSIONS: Electrocardiogram of high signal resolution (ECG-CREM) might be
useful in recognition of the origin of ventricular premature complexes from RVOT.

PMCID: PMC3298340
PMID: 22419930  [PubMed]


196. Neuroscience. 2010 Dec 1;171(2):398-406. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.09.009.
Epub 2010 Sep 16.

Pineal melatonin synthesis is altered in Period1 deficient mice.

Christ E(1), Pfeffer M, Korf HW, von Gall C.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Senckenbergische Anatomie, Institut für Anatomie II, Goethe-Universität,
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, D-60590 Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

Melatonin is an important endocrine signal for darkness in mammals.
Transcriptional activation of the arylalkylamine-N-acetyltransferase gene
encoding for the penultimate enzyme in melatonin synthesis drives the daily
rhythm of the hormone in the pineal gland of rodents. Rhythmic
arylalkylamine-N-acetyltransferase expression is controlled by the cAMP-signal
transduction pathway and involves the activation of ß-adrenergic receptors and
the inducible cAMP early repressor. In addition, the rat
arylalkylamine-N-acetyltransferase promoter contains an E-box element which can
interact with clock proteins. Moreover, the pineal gland of mice shows a
circadian rhythm in clock proteins such as the transcriptional repressor Period1,
which has been shown to control rhythmic gene expression in a variety of tissues.
However, the role of Period1 in the regulation of pineal melatonin synthesis is
still unknown. Therefore, circadian rhythms in
arylalkylamine-N-acetyltransferase, ß-adrenergic receptor, and inducible cAMP
early repressor mRNA levels (real time PCR), arylalkylamine-N-acetyltransferase
enzyme activity (radiometric assay) and melatonin concentration radio immuno
assay (RIA) were analyzed in the pineal gland of mice with a targeted deletion of
the Period1 gene (Per1-/-) and the corresponding wildtype. In Per1-/- the
amplitude in arylalkylamine-N-acetyltransferase expression was significantly
elevated as compared to wildtype. In contrast, ß-adrenergic receptor and
inducible cAMP early repressor mRNA levels were not affected by the
Period1-deficiency. This indicates that the molecular clockwork alters the
amplitude of arylalkylamine-N-acetyltransferase expression. In vitro, pineal
glands of Per1-/- mice showed a day night difference in
arylalkylamine-N-acetyltransferase expression with high levels at night. This
suggests that a deficient in Period1 elicits similar effects as the activation of
the cAMP-signal transduction pathway in wildtype mice.

Copyright © 2010 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20849936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 13;5(8):e12173. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012173.

Conserved and distinct modes of CREB/ATF transcription factor regulation by
PP2A/B56gamma and genotoxic stress.

Shanware NP(1), Zhan L, Hutchinson JA, Kim SH, Williams LM, Tibbetts RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Program in Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology and
Molecular and Environmental and Toxicology Center, University of Wisconsin School
of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

Activating transcription factor 1 (ATF1) and the closely related proteins CREB
(cyclic AMP resonse element binding protein) and CREM (cyclic AMP response
element modulator) constitute a subfamily of bZIP transcription factors that play
critical roles in the regulation of cellular growth, metabolism, and survival.
Previous studies demonstrated that CREB is phosphorylated on a cluster of
conserved Ser residues, including Ser-111 and Ser-121, in response to DNA damage 
through the coordinated actions of the ataxia-telangiectasia-mutated (ATM)
protein kinase and casein kinases 1 and 2 (CK1/2). Here, we show that DNA
damage-induced phosphorylation by ATM is a general feature of CREB and ATF1. ATF1
harbors a conserved ATM/CK cluster that is constitutively and stoichiometrically 
phosphorylated by CK1 and CK2 in asynchronously growing cells. Exposure to DNA
damage further induced ATF1 phosphorylation on Ser-51 by ATM in a manner that
required prior phosphorylation of the upstream CK residues. Hyperphosphorylated
ATF1 showed a 4-fold reduced affinity for CREB-binding protein. We further show
that PP2A, in conjunction with its targeting subunit B56gamma, antagonized ATM
and CK1/2-dependent phosphorylation of CREB and ATF1 in cellulo. Finally, we show
that CK sites in CREB are phosphorylated during cellular growth and that
phosphorylation of these residues reduces the threshold of DNA damage required
for ATM-dependent phosphorylation of the inhibitory Ser-121 residue. These
studies define overlapping and distinct modes of CREB and ATF1 regulation by
phosphorylation that may ensure concerted changes in gene expression mediated by 
these factors.

PMCID: PMC2921338
PMID: 20730097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. FASEB J. 2010 Dec;24(12):4917-28. doi: 10.1096/fj.10-162636. Epub 2010 Aug 19.

Novel role of C terminus of Hsc70-interacting protein (CHIP) ubiquitin ligase on 
inhibiting cardiac apoptosis and dysfunction via regulating ERK5-mediated
degradation of inducible cAMP early repressor.

Woo CH(1), Le NT, Shishido T, Chang E, Lee H, Heo KS, Mickelsen DM, Lu Y, McClain
C, Spangenberg T, Yan C, Molina CA, Yang J, Patterson C, Abe J.

Author information: 
(1)Aab Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of Rochester, Rochester, New
York 14642, USA.

Growing evidence indicates a critical role of ubiquitin-proteosome system in
apoptosis regulation. A cardioprotective effect of ubiquitin (Ub) ligase of the C
terminus of Hsc70-interacting protein (CHIP) on myocytes has been reported. In
the current study, we found that the cardioprotective effect of insulin growth
factor-1 (IGF-1) was mediated by ERK5-CHIP signal module via inducible cAMP early
repressor (ICER) destabilization. In vitro runoff assay and Ub assay showed ICER 
as a substrate of CHIP Ub ligase. Both disruption of ERK5-CHIP binding with
inhibitory helical linker domain fragment (aa 101-200) of CHIP and the depletion 
of ERK5 by siRNA inhibited CHIP Ub ligase activity, which suggests an obligatory 
role of ERK5 on CHIP activation. Depletion of CHIP, using siRNA, inhibited
IGF-1-mediated reduction of isoproterenol-mediated ICER induction and apoptosis. 
In diabetic mice subjected to myocardial infarction, the CHIP Ub ligase activity 
was decreased, with an increase in ICER expression. These changes were attenuated
significantly in a cardiac-specific constitutively active form of MEK5a
transgenic mice (CA-MEK5a-Tg) previously shown to have greater functional
recovery. Furthermore, pressure overload-mediated ICER induction was enhanced in 
heterozygous CHIP(+/-) mice. We identified ICER as a novel CHIP substrate and
that the ERK5-CHIP complex plays an obligatory role in inhibition of ICER
expression, cardiomyocyte apoptosis, and cardiac dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC2992371
PMID: 20724525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. BMC Mol Biol. 2010 Aug 16;11:60. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-60.

Determination of reference genes for circadian studies in different tissues and
mouse strains.

Kosir R(1), Acimovic J, Golicnik M, Perse M, Majdic G, Fink M, Rozman D.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Center for Functional Genomics and Bio-Chips, Institute
of Biochemistry, University of Ljubljana, Zaloska 4, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.

BACKGROUND: Circadian rhythms have a profound effect on human health. Their
disruption can lead to serious pathologies, such as cancer and obesity. Gene
expression studies in these pathologies are often studied in different mouse
strains by quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Selection of 
reference genes is a crucial step of qPCR experiments. Recent studies show that
reference gene stability can vary between species and tissues, but none has taken
circadian experiments into consideration.
RESULTS: In the present study the expression of ten candidate reference genes
(Actb, Eif2a, Gapdh, Hmbs, Hprt1, Ppib, Rn18s, Rplp0, Tbcc and Utp6c) was
measured in 131 liver and 97 adrenal gland samples taken from three mouse strains
(C57BL/6JOlaHsd, 129Pas plus C57BL/6J and Crem KO on 129Pas plus C57BL/6J
background) every 4 h in a 24 h period. Expression stability was evaluated by
geNorm and NormFinder programs. Differences in ranking of the most stable
reference genes were observed both between individual mouse strains as well as
between tissues within each mouse strain. We show that selection of reference
gene (Actb) that is often used for analyses in individual mouse strains leads to 
errors if used for normalization when different mouse strains are compared. We
identified alternative reference genes that are stable in these comparisons.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic background and circadian time influence the expression
stability of reference genes. Differences between mouse strains and tissues
should be taken into consideration to avoid false interpretations. We show that
the use of a single reference gene can lead to false biological conclusions. This
manuscript provides a useful reference point for researchers that search for
stable reference genes in the field of circadian biology.

PMCID: PMC2928770
PMID: 20712867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 9;5(8):e12011. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012011.

PDE8 regulates rapid Teff cell adhesion and proliferation independent of ICER.

Vang AG(1), Ben-Sasson SZ, Dong H, Kream B, DeNinno MP, Claffey MM, Housley W,
Clark RB, Epstein PM, Brocke S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
Connecticut, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Abolishing the inhibitory signal of intracellular cAMP by
phosphodiesterases (PDEs) is a prerequisite for effector T (Teff) cell function. 
While PDE4 plays a prominent role, its control of cAMP levels in Teff cells is
not exclusive. T cell activation has been shown to induce PDE8, a PDE isoform
with 40- to 100-fold greater affinity for cAMP than PDE4. Thus, we postulated
that PDE8 is an important regulator of Teff cell functions.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We found that Teff cells express PDE8 in vivo.
Inhibition of PDE8 by the PDE inhibitor dipyridamole (DP) activates cAMP
signaling and suppresses two major integrins involved in Teff cell adhesion.
Accordingly, DP as well as the novel PDE8-selective inhibitor PF-4957325-00
suppress firm attachment of Teff cells to endothelial cells. Analysis of
downstream signaling shows that DP suppresses proliferation and cytokine
expression of Teff cells from Crem-/- mice lacking the inducible cAMP early
repressor (ICER). Importantly, endothelial cells also express PDE8. DP treatment 
decreases vascular adhesion molecule and chemokine expression, while upregulating
the tight junction molecule claudin-5. In vivo, DP reduces CXCL12 gene expression
as determined by in situ probing of the mouse microvasculature by cell-selective 
laser-capture microdissection.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Collectively, our data identify PDE8 as a novel target
for suppression of Teff cell functions, including adhesion to endothelial cells.

PMCID: PMC2918507
PMID: 20711499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2010 Aug 10;1(3):26. doi: 10.1186/scrt26.

Experimental approaches for the generation of induced pluripotent stem cells.

Sommer CA(1), Mostoslavsky G.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine and Center for
Regenerative Medicine (CReM), Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
02118, USA. sommer@bu.edu

Derivation of autologous induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) through direct
reprogramming of easily accessible somatic cells holds the potential to transform
the field of regenerative medicine. Since Takahashi and Yamanaka's groundbreaking
study describing the generation of iPSCs by retroviral-mediated delivery of
defined transcription factors, substantial progress has been made to improve both
the efficiency and safety of the method. These advances have provided new
insights into the molecular mechanisms of reprogramming and promise to accelerate
the clinical translation of iPSC technology. Here, we summarize current
reprogramming methodologies with a focus on the production of transgene-free or
genetically unmanipulated iPSCs and highlight important technical details that
ultimately may influence the biological properties of pluripotent stem cells.

PMCID: PMC2941118
PMID: 20699015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Nat Immunol. 2010 Sep;11(9):862-71. doi: 10.1038/ni.1917. Epub 2010 Aug 8.

Complement regulator CD46 temporally regulates cytokine production by
conventional and unconventional T cells.

Cardone J(1), Le Friec G, Vantourout P, Roberts A, Fuchs A, Jackson I, Suddason
T, Lord G, Atkinson JP, Cope A, Hayday A, Kemper C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Infection and Inflammatory Diseases, King's College
London, Medical Research Council Centre for Transplantation, Guy's Hospital,
London, UK.

In this study we demonstrate a new form of immunoregulation: engagement on CD4(+)
T cells of the complement regulator CD46 promoted the effector potential of T
helper type 1 cells (T(H)1 cells), but as interleukin 2 (IL-2) accumulated, it
switched cells toward a regulatory phenotype, attenuating IL-2 production via the
transcriptional regulator ICER/CREM and upregulating IL-10 after interaction of
the CD46 tail with the serine-threonine kinase SPAK. Activated CD4(+) T cells
produced CD46 ligands, and blocking CD46 inhibited IL-10 production. Furthermore,
CD4(+) T cells in rheumatoid arthritis failed to switch, consequently producing
excessive interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma). Finally, gammadelta T cells, which rarely
produce IL-10, expressed an alternative CD46 isoform and were unable to switch.
Nonetheless, coengagement of T cell antigen receptor (TCR) gammadelta and CD46
suppressed effector cytokine production, establishing that CD46 uses distinct
mechanisms to regulate different T cell subsets during an immune response.

PMCID: PMC4011020
PMID: 20694009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics. 2010 Jun;8(2):135-8. doi:
10.1016/S1672-0229(10)60015-0.

BiDiBlast: comparative genomics pipeline for the PC.

de Almeida JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Departamento de Ciências da Vida,
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Quinta da Torre,
Caparica, Portugal. jmfa@fct.unl.pt

Bi-directional BLAST is a simple approach to detect, annotate, and analyze
candidate orthologous or paralogous sequences in a single go. This procedure is
usually confined to the realm of customized Perl scripts, usually tuned for
UNIX-like environments. Porting those scripts to other operating systems involves
refactoring them, and also the installation of the Perl programming environment
with the required libraries. To overcome these limitations, a data pipeline was
implemented in Java. This application submits two batches of sequences to local
versions of the NCBI BLAST tool, manages result lists, and refines both
bi-directional and simple hits. GO Slim terms are attached to hits, several
statistics are derived, and molecular evolution rates are estimated through PAML.
The results are written to a set of delimited text tables intended for further
analysis. The provided graphic user interface allows a friendly interaction with 
this application, which is documented and available to download at
http://moodle.fct.unl.pt/course/view.php?id=2079 or
https://sourceforge.net/projects/bidiblast/ under the GNU GPL license.

Copyright 2010 Beijing Genomics Institute. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20691399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Eur J Public Health. 2011 Jun;21(3):373-5. doi: 10.1093/eurpub/ckq087. Epub 2010 
Jul 2.

Consumer understanding of cigarette emission labelling.

Gallopel-Morvan K(1), Moodie C, Hammond D, Eker F, Beguinot E, Martinet Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Gestion de Rennes, University of Rennes 1, CREM (UMR CNRS), Rennes
and French National Committee Against Tobacco (CNCT), Paris, France.
karine.gallopel@univ-rennes1.fr

The optimal way to display constituent levels (e.g. tar) on tobacco packaging has
not received adequate attention but has important policy implications. Adult
smokers and non-smokers (n = 836) were surveyed in France using Computer Assisted
Personal Interviewing to assess perceptions of constituent levels displayed
numerically (brand-specific tar and nicotine numbers from smoking machines and
the current format in European Union), descriptively (a short sentence describing
chemicals and their health effects but without any brand-specific numbers) or as 
a pack insert (a card placed on the inside of the pack describing the presence of
chemicals and their health effects in more detail, as well as information on
cessation). We also assessed perceptions of identically packaged cigarettes
differing only on nicotine levels. Displaying information regarding ingredients
either descriptively or on pack inserts was perceived as more comprehensible and 
informative than displaying them numerically. Numeric yields were associated with
false beliefs: almost half the sample perceived packs with lower nicotine levels 
(0.8 mg vs. 0.9 mg) to be safer.

PMCID: PMC3098895
PMID: 20601380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Am J Infect Control. 2010 Jun;38(5 Suppl 1):S34-40. doi:
10.1016/j.ajic.2010.04.207.

Promises and pitfalls of recent advances in chemical means of preventing the
spread of nosocomial infections by environmental surfaces.

Sattar SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research on Environmental Microbiology (CREM), Faculty of Medicine,
University of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. ssattar@uottawa.ca

Hard, nonporous environmental surfaces in health care settings are now receiving 
due recognition for their role in the spread of several types of nosocomial
pathogens. The corresponding increase in the means to decontaminate such surfaces
to interrupt the spread of infections is leading to the marketing of a plethora
of products and procedures, including the "green" variety, with varying claims of
microbicidal activity, human and environmental safety, and materials
compatibility. Limitations of the existing methods to assess environmental
surface disinfectants and the regulations that govern their premarket
registration make objective evaluations difficult. Label claims of many such
products also do not reflect the realities of field use along with a strong
tendency to focus on the "bug de jour." Furthermore, whereas wiping is often an
integral part of environmental surface decontamination, products meant for the
purpose are rarely assessed with the physical effect of wiping incorporated. Many
"green" products possess neither the spectrum of microbicidal activity nor the
speed of action essential for use in health care settings. In general,
"self-sanitizing" surfaces being marketed actively these days require greater
scrutiny for field-relevant microbicidal activity as well as the potential to
enhance microbicide resistance. The widening use of environmental surface
disinfectants is also raising concerns on their human and environmental safety at
many levels along with the realization that routine surface disinfection
procedures in health care settings are frequently inadequate and possibly
counterproductive. All this points to an urgent review of the basic procedures
for assessing existing and new environmental surface disinfectants for their
microbicidal activity, label claims, registration requirements, overall safety,
and routine practices of environmental surface decontamination.

(c) 2010 Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology,
Inc. Published by Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20569854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Blood. 2010 Nov 4;116(18):3564-71. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-09-240978. Epub 2010
May 24.

Profiling of histone H3 lysine 9 trimethylation levels predicts transcription
factor activity and survival in acute myeloid leukemia.

Müller-Tidow C(1), Klein HU, Hascher A, Isken F, Tickenbrock L, Thoennissen N,
Agrawal-Singh S, Tschanter P, Disselhoff C, Wang Y, Becker A, Thiede C, Ehninger 
G, zur Stadt U, Koschmieder S, Seidl M, Müller FU, Schmitz W, Schlenke P,
McClelland M, Berdel WE, Dugas M, Serve H; Study Alliance Leukemia.

Collaborators: Schulz-Abelius A, Repp R, Klein S, Thiel E, Possinger K, Dörken B,
Görner M, Pflüger KH, Mayer J, Hänel M, Pielken HJ, Ehninger G, Aul C, Mackensen 
A, Dührsen U, Geissler M, Serve H, Kiehl M, Höffkes HG, Schmoll HJ, Schmitz N,
Schmidt H, Dürk HA, Ho A, Kaiser U, Pfreundschuh M, Lanska M, Fauser AA, Link H, 
Bentz M, Wolf M, Dürfeld BM, Löffler LM, Neuhaus T, Fetscher S, Wagner T,
Neubauer A, Schleyer E, Griesshammer M, Lutz L, Berdel W, Wandt H, Jakob A, Gaska
T, Cetkovsky P, Kozák T, Reichle A, Freund M, Heits F, Geer T, Koch W, Heidemann 
E, Aulitzky WE, Clemens MR, Frickhofen N, Sandmann M, Einsele H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine A, Hematology, Oncology and Pneumology,
Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Research, University of Münster, Münster,
Germany.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is commonly associated with alterations in
transcription factors because of altered expression or gene mutations. These
changes might induce leukemia-specific patterns of histone modifications. We used
chromatin-immunoprecipitation on microarray to analyze histone 3 lysine 9
trimethylation (H3K9me3) patterns in primary AML (n = 108), acute lymphoid
leukemia (n = 28), CD34(+) cells (n = 21) and white blood cells (n = 15)
specimens. Hundreds of promoter regions in AML showed significant alterations in 
H3K9me3 levels. H3K9me3 deregulation in AML occurred preferentially as a decrease
in H3K9me3 levels at core promoter regions. The altered genomic regions showed an
overrepresentation of cis-binding sites for ETS and cyclic adenosine
monophosphate response elements (CREs) for transcription factors of the
CREB/CREM/ATF1 family. The decrease in H3K9me3 levels at CREs was associated with
increased CRE-driven promoter activity in AML blasts in vivo. AML-specific
H3K9me3 patterns were not associated with known cytogenetic abnormalities. But a 
signature derived from H3K9me3 patterns predicted event-free survival in AML
patients. When the H3K9me3 signature was combined with established clinical
prognostic markers, it outperformed prognosis prediction based on clinical
parameters alone. These findings demonstrate widespread changes of H3K9me3 levels
at gene promoters in AML. Signatures of histone modification patterns are
associated with patient prognosis in AML.

PMCID: PMC2981478
PMID: 20498303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. FEBS Lett. 2010 Jul 2;584(13):2807-15. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.05.016. Epub
2010 May 17.

Sperm associated antigen 8 (SPAG8), a novel regulator of activator of CREM in
testis during spermatogenesis.

Wu H(1), Chen Y, Miao S, Zhang C, Zong S, Koide SS, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

cAMP response element modulator (CREM)-mediated gene expression is an essential
regulatory mechanism for germ cell differentiation. CREM and its coactivator in
testis, ACT, activate the transcription of many essential genes for
spermatogenesis. Sperm associated antigen 8 (SPAG8) is a testis-specific
component that is expressed during germ cell differentiation. In this study, we
found the pattern of SPAG8 expression largely overlapped with that of ACT during 
spermatogenesis and verified the association of SPAG8 with ACT. Furthermore, we
showed that SPAG8 enhanced the transcriptional activation of ACT-mediated CREMtau
by strengthening the binding of ACT to CREMtau. These results indicate that SPAG8
acts as a regulator of ACT and plays an important role in CREM-ACT-mediated gene 
transcription during spermatogenesis.

Copyright 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20488182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 23;285(30):23285-95. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.124545. Epub
2010 May 18.

Imaging CREB activation in living cells.

Friedrich MW(1), Aramuni G, Mank M, Mackinnon JA, Griesbeck O.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute of Neurobiology, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried,
Germany.

The Ca(2+)- and cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB) and the related
ATF-1 and CREM are stimulus-inducible transcription factors that link certain
forms of cellular activity to changes in gene expression. They are attributed to 
complex integrative activation characteristics, but current biochemical
technology does not allow dynamic imaging of CREB activation in single cells.
Using fluorescence resonance energy transfer between mutants of green fluorescent
protein we here develop a signal-optimized genetically encoded indicator that
enables imaging activation of CREB due to phosphorylation of the critical serine 
133. The indicator of CREB activation due to phosphorylation (ICAP) was used to
investigate the role of the scaffold and anchoring protein AKAP79/150 in
regulating signal pathways converging on CREB. We show that disruption of
AKAP79/150-mediated protein kinase A anchoring or knock-down of AKAP150
dramatically reduces the ability of protein kinase A to activate CREB. In
contrast, AKAP79/150 regulation of CREB via L-type channels may only have minor
importance. ICAP allows dynamic and reversible imaging in living cells and may
become useful in studying molecular components and cell-type specificity of
activity-dependent gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2906321
PMID: 20484048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jun 18;285(25):19434-49. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.107607. Epub
2010 Apr 22.

DNA cytosine methylation in the bovine leukemia virus promoter is associated with
latency in a lymphoma-derived B-cell line: potential involvement of direct
inhibition of cAMP-responsive element (CRE)-binding protein/CRE
modulator/activation transcription factor binding.

Pierard V(1), Guiguen A, Colin L, Wijmeersch G, Vanhulle C, Van Driessche B,
Dekoninck A, Blazkova J, Cardona C, Merimi M, Vierendeel V, Calomme C, Nguyên TL,
Nuttinck M, Twizere JC, Kettmann R, Portetelle D, Burny A, Hirsch I, Rohr O, Van 
Lint C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie Moléculaire, Institut de Biologie et de Médecine
Moléculaires, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Rue des Profs Jeener et Brachet 12, 
6041 Gosselies, Belgium.

Bovine leukemia virus (BLV) proviral latency represents a viral strategy to
escape the host immune system and allow tumor development. Besides the previously
demonstrated role of histone deacetylation in the epigenetic repression of BLV
expression, we showed here that BLV promoter activity was induced by several DNA 
methylation inhibitors (such as 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine) and that overexpressed
DNMT1 and DNMT3A, but not DNMT3B, down-regulated BLV promoter activity.
Importantly, cytosine hypermethylation in the 5'-long terminal repeat (LTR) U3
and R regions was associated with true latency in the lymphoma-derived B-cell
line L267 but not with defective latency in YR2 cells. Moreover, the
virus-encoded transactivator Tax(BLV) decreased DNA methyltransferase expression 
levels, which could explain the lower level of cytosine methylation observed in
the L267(LTaxSN) 5'-LTR compared with the L267 5'-LTR. Interestingly, DNA
methylation inhibitors and Tax(BLV) synergistically activated BLV promoter
transcriptional activity in a cAMP-responsive element (CRE)-dependent manner.
Mechanistically, methylation at the -154 or -129 CpG position (relative to the
transcription start site) impaired in vitro binding of CRE-binding protein (CREB)
transcription factors to their respective CRE sites. Methylation at -129 CpG
alone was sufficient to decrease BLV promoter-driven reporter gene expression by 
2-fold. We demonstrated in vivo the recruitment of CREB/CRE modulator (CREM) and 
to a lesser extent activating transcription factor-1 (ATF-1) to the
hypomethylated CRE region of the YR2 5'-LTR, whereas we detected no CREB/CREM/ATF
recruitment to the hypermethylated corresponding region in the L267 cells.
Altogether, these findings suggest that site-specific DNA methylation of the BLV 
promoter represses viral transcription by directly inhibiting transcription
factor binding, thereby contributing to true proviral latency.

PMCID: PMC2885223
PMID: 20413592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Toxicol Lett. 2010 Jul 1;196(2):95-103. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2010.04.003. Epub
2010 Apr 10.

Gene markers in dendritic cells unravel pieces of the skin sensitization puzzle.

Lambrechts N(1), Vanheel H, Hooyberghs J, De Boever P, Witters H, Van Den Heuvel 
R, Van Tendeloo V, Nelissen I, Schoeters G.

Author information: 
(1)Flemish Institute for Technological Research (VITO N.V.), Environmental Risk
and Health Unit, Toxicology, Belgium. nathalie.lambrechts@vito.be
<nathalie.lambrechts@vito.be>

The underlying events of how dendritic cells (DC) are capable of evoking an
antigen-specific skin sensitization response are not yet understood. Recently, we
revealed a set of genes in human cord blood CD34(+) DC (CD34-DC) that show a
discriminating behaviour after skin sensitizing exposure. Based on their
differential expression, an in vitro assay was developed to identify chemicals as
sensitizing or not. This study was designed to investigate the genes' involvement
in the DC response to skin sensitizers and as such gain insights in the
sensitization cascade. Functional connection of the marker genes was inquired by 
constructing a molecular network using Ingenuity software. By real-time RT-qPCR, 
we established the effective expression of 3 additional gene transcripts in the
generated network in CD34-DC, of which CREB1 and TNF-alpha were significantly
altered in expression by sensitizing versus non-sensitizing exposure. Next, it
was tested whether the discriminating response of CCR2 and COX2 marker genes was 
translated at the protein level in CD34-DC exposed to 3 sensitizers versus 3
non-sensitizers. Significantly differential protein expression of CCR2 and COX2
was confirmed using flow cytometry. Our results indicate that the marker genes
may be functionally relevant in DC mediated skin sensitization.

PMID: 20385217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Toxicol Sci. 2010 Jul;116(1):122-9. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfq108. Epub 2010 Apr 7.

Assessment of chemical skin-sensitizing potency by an in vitro assay based on
human dendritic cells.

Lambrechts N(1), Vanheel H, Nelissen I, Witters H, Van Den Heuvel R, Van Tendeloo
V, Schoeters G, Hooyberghs J.

Author information: 
(1)Unit Environmental Risk and Health, Toxicology, Flemish Institute for
Technological Research (VITO NV), Mol, Belgium. nathalie.lambrechts@vito.be

The skin-sensitizing potential of chemicals is an important concern for public
health and thus a significant end point in the hazard identification process. To 
determine skin-sensitizing capacity, large research efforts focus on the
development of assays, which do not require animals. As such, an in vitro test
has previously been developed based on the differential expression of CREM and
CCR2 transcripts in CD34(+) progenitor-derived dendritic cells (CD34-DC), which
allows to classify chemicals as skin (non-)sensitizing. However, skin
sensitization is not an all-or-none phenomenon, and up to now, the assessment of 
relative potency can only be derived using the in vivo local lymph node assay
(LLNA). In our study, we analyzed the feasibility to predict the sensitizing
potency, i.e., the LLNA EC3 values, of 15 skin sensitizers using in vitro data
from the CD34-DC-based assay. Hereto, we extended the in vitro-generated gene
expression data set by an additional source of information, the concentration of 
the compound that causes 20% cell damage (IC20) in CD34-DC. We statistically
confirmed that this IC20 is linearly independent from the gene expression changes
but that it does correlate with LLNA EC3 values. In a further analysis, we
applied a robust linear regression with both IC20 and expression changes of CREM 
and CCR2 as explanatory variables. For 13 out of 15 compounds, a high linear
correlation was established between the in vitro model and the LLNA EC3 values
over a range of four orders of magnitude, i.e., from weak to extreme sensitizers.

PMID: 20375081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Neurochem. 2010 Nov;115(3):563-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06709.x. Epub 
2010 Aug 19.

Effects of the cell type-specific ablation of the cAMP-responsive transcription
factor in noradrenergic neurons on locus coeruleus firing and withdrawal behavior
after chronic exposure to morphine.

Parlato R(1), Cruz H, Otto C, Murtra P, Parkitna JR, Martin M, Bura SA,
Begus-Nahrmann Y, von Bohlen und Halbach O, Maldonado R, Schütz G, Lüscher C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology of the Cell I, German Cancer Research Center, 
Heidelberg, Germany. r.parlato@dkfz.de

Repeated exposure to opiates leads to cellular and molecular changes and
behavioral alterations reflecting a state of dependence. In noradrenergic
neurons, cyclic AMP (cAMP)-dependent pathways are activated during opiate
withdrawal, but their contribution to the activity of locus coeruleus
noradrenergic neurons and behavioral manifestations remains controversial. Here, 
we test whether the cAMP-dependent transcription factors cAMP responsive element 
binding protein (CREB) and cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) in
noradrenergic neurons control the cellular markers and the physical signs of
morphine withdrawal in mice. Using the Cre/loxP system we ablated the Creb1 gene 
in noradrenergic neurons. To avoid adaptive effects because of compensatory
up-regulation of CREM, we crossed the conditional Creb1 mutant mice with a
Crem-/- line. We found that the enhanced expression of tyrosine hydroxylase
normally observed during withdrawal was attenuated in CREB/CREM mutants.
Moreover, the withdrawal-associated cellular hyperactivity and c-fos expression
was blunted. In contrast, naloxone-precipitated withdrawal signs, such as
jumping, paw tremor, tremor and mastication were preserved. We conclude by a
specific genetic approach that the withdrawal-associated hyperexcitability of
noradrenergic neurons depends on CREB/CREM activity in these neurons, but does
not mediate several behavioral signs of morphine withdrawal.

© 2010 The Authors. Journal Compilation © 2010 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMID: 20367754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2010 Jun;42(6):1039-45. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2010.03.014. Epub 2010 Mar 27.

Aldose reductase inhibition prevents lipopolysaccharide-induced glucose uptake
and glucose transporter 3 expression in RAW264.7 macrophages.

Reddy AB(1), Srivastava SK, Ramana KV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, United States.

Macrophages which play a central role in the injury, infection and sepsis, use
glucose as their primary source of metabolic energy. Increased glucose uptake in 
inflammatory cells is well known to be one of the responsible processes that
cause inflammatory response and cytotoxicity. We have shown recently that the
inhibition of aldose reductase (AR) prevents bacterial endotoxin,
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced cytotoxicity and inflammatory response in
macrophages. However, it is not known how AR inhibition prevents LPS-induced
inflammation. Here in, we examined the effect of AR inhibition on LPS-induced
glucose uptake and the expression of glucose transporter 3 (GLUT-3) in RAW264.7
murine macrophages. Stimulation of macrophages with LPS-increased glucose uptake 
as measured by using C(14) labeled methyl-d-glucose and inhibition of AR
prevented it. Similarly, ablation of AR by using AR-siRNA also prevented the
LPS-induced glucose uptake in macrophages. Further, AR inhibition also prevented 
the LPS-induced up-regulation of GLUT-3 expression, cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) accumulation and protein kinase A (PKA) activation in
RAW264.7 cells. Moreover, LPS-induced down-regulation of cAMP response element
modulator (CREM), phosphorylation of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB)
and DNA-binding of CREB were also prevented by AR inhibition. Further, inhibition
of AR or PKA also prevented the LPS-induced levels of GLUT-3 protein as well as
mRNA in macrophages. These results indicate that AR mediates LPS-induced glucose 
uptake and expression of glucose transporter-3 via cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway and thus
represents a novel mechanism by which AR regulates LPS-induced inflammation.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2862760
PMID: 20348015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. BMC Dermatol. 2010 Feb 12;10:1. doi: 10.1186/1471-5945-10-1.

Personalized medicine in psoriasis: developing a genomic classifier to predict
histological response to Alefacept.

Suárez-Fariñas M(1), Shah KR, Haider AS, Krueger JG, Lowes MA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Investigative Dermatology, The Rockefeller University 1230 York
Ave, New York, NY 10065, USA.

BACKGROUND: Alefacept treatment is highly effective in a select group patients
with moderate-to-severe psoriasis, and is an ideal candidate to develop systems
to predict who will respond to therapy. A clinical trial of 22 patients with
moderate to severe psoriasis treated with alefacept was conducted in 2002-2003,
as a mechanism of action study. Patients were classified as responders or
non-responders to alefacept based on histological criteria. Results of the
original mechanism of action study have been published. Peripheral blood was
collected at the start of this clinical trial, and a prior analysis demonstrated 
that gene expression in PBMCs differed between responders and non-responders,
however, the analysis performed could not be used to predict response.
METHODS: Microarray data from PBMCs of 16 of these patients was analyzed to
generate a treatment response classifier. We used a discriminant analysis method 
that performs sample classification from gene expression data, via "nearest
shrunken centroid method". Centroids are the average gene expression for each
gene in each class divided by the within-class standard deviation for that gene.
RESULTS: A disease response classifier using 23 genes was created to accurately
predict response to alefacept (12.3% error rate). While the genes in this
classifier should be considered as a group, some of the individual genes are of
great interest, for example, cAMP response element modulator (CREM), v-MAF avian 
musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene family (MAFF), chloride intracellular
channel protein 1 (CLIC1, also called NCC27), NLR family, pyrin domain-containing
1 (NLRP1), and CCL5 (chemokine, cc motif, ligand 5, also called regulated upon
activation, normally T expressed, and presumably secreted/RANTES).
CONCLUSIONS: Although this study is small, and based on analysis of existing
microarray data, we demonstrate that a treatment response classifier for
alefacept can be created using gene expression of PBMCs in psoriasis. This
preliminary study may provide a useful tool to predict response of psoriatic
patients to alefacept.

PMCID: PMC2831811
PMID: 20152045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mol Immunol. 2010 Mar;47(6):1181-94. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2010.01.003. Epub 2010
Feb 1.

Identification of the early VIP-regulated transcriptome and its associated,
interactome in resting and activated murine CD4 T cells.

Dorsam ST(1), Vomhof-Dekrey E, Hermann RJ, Haring JS, Van der Steen T, Wilkerson 
E, Boskovic G, Denvir J, Dementieva Y, Primerano D, Dorsam GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Molecular Biology, North Dakota State University, 
Fargo, ND 58108-6050, USA.

More than 40 years after the discovery of vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP),
its transcriptome in the immune system has still not been completely elucidated. 
In an attempt to understand the biological role of this neuropeptide in immunity,
we chose CD4 T cells as a cellular system. Agilent Mouse Whole Genome microarrays
were hybridized with fluorescently labeled total RNA isolated from resting CD4 T 
cells cultured +/-10(-7)M VIP for 5h or PMA/ionomycin activated CD4 T cells
cultured +/-10(-7)M VIP for 5h. These VIP-regulated transcriptomes were analyzed 
by Significance Analysis of Microarrays (SAM) and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
(IPA) software to identify relevant signaling pathways modulated by VIP in the
absence and presence of T cell activation. In resting CD4 T cells, VIP-modulated 
368 genes, ranging from 3.49 to -4.78-fold. In the PMA/ionomycin activated CD4 T 
cells, 326 gene expression levels were changed by VIP, ranging from 2.94 to
-1.66-fold. IPA analysis revealed that VIP exposure alters cellular function
through EGFR signaling in resting CD4 T cells, and modulates immediate early
genes, Fos and CREM/ICER, in activated CD4 T cells. These gene expression changes
are suggested to explain at a molecular level how VIP can regulate T cell homing 
to the gut and induce regulatory T cell generation.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2834953
PMID: 20117839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. FASEB J. 2010 Jun;24(6):2010-9. doi: 10.1096/fj.09-146985. Epub 2010 Jan 26.

Mineralocorticoid receptor inhibits CREB signaling by calcineurin activation.

Grossmann C(1), Wuttke M, Ruhs S, Seiferth A, Mildenberger S, Rabe S, Schwerdt G,
Gekle M.

Author information: 
(1)Julius-Bernstein-Institut für Physiologie, Universität Halle-Wittenberg,
Halle, Germany.

We investigated the interaction of MR with cAMP-response element binding protein 
(CREB) and provide a mechanistic explanation and insights into the cellular
relevance. MR --> CREB crosstalk was assessed in vascular smooth muscle cells and
heterologous expression systems. Experiments were designed in a way that only one
variable changed at a time and the respective vehicles served as controls. MR,
but not GR, activation (aldosterone or hydrocortisone, IC(50), approximately 0.3 
nM) inhibits CREB transcriptional activity induced by stimulation of
beta1/2-adrenoceptors and adenylyl cyclase or addition of membrane-permeable cAMP
up to 70% within 2 h after addition. The MR DNA-binding domain is not required
for this inhibition. cAMP formation is virtually unchanged, whereas MR exerts a
robust inhibition of CREB(S133) phosphorylation via calcineurin/PP2B activation
without changes in PP2B-Aalpha or beta expression. In parallel, the
PP2B-sensitive NFaT-pathway is activated. The inhibitory crosstalk attenuates
CREB-induced glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase expression. Overall,
transcriptional relevant MR --> CREB crosstalk occurs at the level of CREB
phosphorylation by enhanced calcineurin activity, enables GRE-independent genomic
signaling of MR, and is of potential pathophysiological relevance.

PMID: 20103717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Apr;38(7):2268-78. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp1220. Epub 2010
Jan 13.

Functional cooperation between CREM and GCNF directs gene expression in haploid
male germ cells.

Rajkovic M(1), Iwen KA, Hofmann PJ, Harneit A, Weitzel JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Immunologie und Transfusionsmedizin, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt
Universität, Greifswald, Germany.

Cellular differentiation and development of germ cells critically depend on a
coordinated activation and repression of specific genes. The underlying
regulation mechanisms, however, still lack a lot of understanding. Here, we
describe that both the testis-specific transcriptional activator CREMtau (cAMP
response element modulator tau) and the repressor GCNF (germ cell nuclear factor)
have an overlapping binding site which alone is sufficient to direct cell
type-specific expression in vivo in a heterologous promoter context. Expression
of the transgene driven by the CREM/GCNF site is detectable in spermatids, but
not in any somatic tissue or at any other stages during germ cell
differentiation. CREMtau acts as an activator of gene transcription whereas GCNF 
suppresses this activity. Both factors compete for binding to the same DNA
response element. Effective binding of CREM and GCNF highly depends on
composition and epigenetic modification of the binding site. We also discovered
that CREM and GCNF bind to each other via their DNA binding domains, indicating a
complex interaction between the two factors. There are several testis-specific
target genes that are regulated by CREM and GCNF in a reciprocal manner, showing 
a similar activation pattern as during spermatogenesis. Our data indicate that a 
single common binding site for CREM and GCNF is sufficient to specifically direct
gene transcription in a tissue-, cell type- and differentiation-specific manner.

PMCID: PMC2853129
PMID: 20071744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Agric Food Chem. 2010 Feb 10;58(3):1993-2000. doi: 10.1021/jf902221j.

Activation of the cAMP/CREB/inducible cAMP early repressor pathway suppresses
andrographolide-induced gene expression of the pi class of glutathione
S-transferase in rat primary hepatocytes.

Yang AJ(1), Li CC, Lu CY, Liu KL, Tsai CW, Lii CK, Chen HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.

Andrographolide (Ap) is a bioactive compound in Andrographis paniculata that is a
Chinese herb. The pi class of glutathione S-transferase (GSTP) is one kind of
phase II detoxification enzyme. Here we show that induction of GSTP protein and
mRNA expression in rat primary hepatocytes by Ap was inhibited by forskolin and a
variety of cAMP analogues. The inhibitory effect of the cAMP analogues was
partially blocked by pretreatment with H89. In the presence of Ap, forskolin, or 
both, the expression of phospho-cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) was 
increased. Ap alone had no effect on inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) mRNA
expression; however, Ap played a potentiating role in forskolin-induced ICER mRNA
expression. An EMSA and immunoprecipitation assay showed that ICER binding to
cAMP-response element (CRE) was increased in cells cotreated with Ap and
forskolin for 3 and 8 h. Taken together, these results suggest that ICER is
likely to be involved in the suppression of Ap-induced GSTP expression caused by 
the increase of cAMP in rat primary hepatocytes.

PMID: 20063885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Brain Res. 2010 Mar 8;1318:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.12.083. Epub 2010
Jan 6.

Differential effects of methamphetamine and SCH23390 on the expression of members
of IEG families of transcription factors in the rat striatum.

Beauvais G(1), Jayanthi S, McCoy MT, Ladenheim B, Cadet JL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, NIH/NIDA Intramural Research
Program, 251 Bayview Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Methamphetamine (METH) is a psychostimulant that can cause long-lasting
neurodegenerative effects in humans and animals. These toxic effects appear to
occur, in part, via activation of dopamine (DA) D1 receptors. This paper assessed
the possibility that the DA D1 receptor antagonist, SCH23390, might inhibit
METH-induced changes in the expression of several members of immediate early
genes (IEGs) which are known to control more delayed expression of other genes.
We found that injections of METH (4x10 mg/kg, given at 2 h intervals) caused
significant increases in c-fos and fra-2 expression which lasted from 30 min to 4
h. Pre-treatment with SCH23390, given 30 min before each METH injection,
completely blocked METH-induced expression of c-fos, but only partially inhibited
fra-2 mRNA expression. These results were confirmed by Western blot analysis
which showed METH-induced changes in c-Fos protein expression that were blocked
by pretreatment with SCH23390. There were also delayed METH-induced DA D1
receptor-dependent effects on fosB mRNA expression. Even though fra-1 expression 
was not affected by pretreatment with METH alone, the repeated injections of
SCH23390 caused substantial decreases in fra-1 mRNA expression in both the
presence and absence of METH. The repeated injections of METH caused no changes
in the mRNAs for c-jun, junB or junD. However, there were significant increases
in the phosphorylation of c-Jun protein (ser63). Phosphorylation of c-Jun
occurred in a delayed fashion (16 and 24 h after the last METH injections) and
was attenuated by SCH23390 pretreatment. Interestingly, SCH23390 given alone
caused significant decreases in phospho-c-Jun at all time-points. The METH
injections also caused delayed induction in the expression of members of the Egr 
family of transcription factors in a DA D1 receptor-dependent fashion. Repeated
injections of SCH23390 caused substantial suppression of basal striatal egr-1 and
egr-2 mRNA expression but not of that of egr-3. Both crem and arc mRNA levels
were induced by METH in a SCH23390-sensitive fashion. Moreover, multiple
injections of SCH23390 given alone caused marked inhibition of basal arc
expression. These results show that multiple injections of METH can
differentially affect the expression of several IEGs, some of which occurred in a
DA D1 receptor dependent fashion. The SCH23390-mediated suppression of basal
fra-1, egr-1, and egr-2 mRNA levels suggests that their basal expression in the
striatum might be dependent on tonic stimulation of the DA D1 receptor.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC2826565
PMID: 20059987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 5;285(6):3525-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.066787. Epub 2009
Dec 14.

The neuropeptide calcitonin gene-related peptide causes repression of tumor
necrosis factor-alpha transcription and suppression of ATF-2 promoter recruitment
in Toll-like receptor-stimulated dendritic cells.

Altmayr F(1), Jusek G, Holzmann B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Technical University Munich, 81675 Munich, Germany.

Sensory nerves may dampen inflammatory processes through the release of the
neuropeptide calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP). CGRP mediates
immunosuppressive activities through up-regulation of interleukin-10 or,
alternatively, through an interleukin-10-independent pathway that is associated
with rapid induction of the transcriptional inducible cAMP early repressor
(ICER). In this work, we further investigated the molecular mechanisms of immune 
modulation by CGRP. Using TLR2-stimulated dendritic cells, we show that
inhibition of tumor necrosis factor-alpha production by CGRP is dependent on
up-regulation of endogenous ICER. Dendritic cell expression of ICER was
selectively induced by CGRP and elevation of cellular cAMP levels but not by
numerous pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines. Treatment of dendritic cells with 
CGRP did not interfere with the induction of Tnfa gene expression but caused
premature repression of TLR2-induced transcriptional activity. ATF-2 was rapidly 
phosphorylated and recruited to the Tnfa promoter following ligation of TLR2.
Concomitant administration of CGRP completely prevented binding of ATF-2 to the
Tnfa promoter, whereas recruitment of ICER was markedly elevated. In contrast,
CGRP did not influence TLR2-stimulated binding of NF-kappaB p65. Together, these 
results are consistent with a model suggesting that CGRP causes rapid
up-regulation of ICER, which in turn competes with ATF-2 for binding to the Tnfa 
promoter, leading to repression of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2823491
PMID: 20018859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Feb;30(4):1028-40. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00848-09. Epub 2009 Dec
14.

Frequency-dependent regulation of follicle-stimulating hormone beta by pulsatile 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone is mediated by functional antagonism of bZIP
transcription factors.

Ciccone NA(1), Xu S, Lacza CT, Carroll RS, Kaiser UB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Hypertension, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, 221 Longwood Ave., Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Oscillatory synthesis and secretion of the gonadotropins, follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH), under the control of pulsatile
hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), is essential for normal
reproductive development and fertility. The molecular mechanisms by which various
patterns of pulsatile GnRH regulate gonadotrope responsiveness remain poorly
understood. In contrast to the alpha and LH beta subunit genes, FSH beta subunit 
transcription is preferentially stimulated at low rather than high frequencies of
pulsatile GnRH. In this study, mutation of a cyclic AMP response element (CRE)
within the FSH beta promoter resulted in the loss of preferential GnRH
stimulation at low pulse frequencies. We hypothesized that high GnRH pulse
frequencies might stimulate a transcriptional repressor(s) to attenuate the
action of CRE binding protein (CREB) and show that inducible cAMP early repressor
(ICER) fulfills such a role. ICER was not detected under basal conditions, but
pulsatile GnRH stimulated ICER to a greater extent at high than at low pulse
frequencies. ICER binds to the FSH beta CRE site to reduce CREB occupation and
abrogates both maximal GnRH stimulation and GnRH pulse frequency-dependent
effects on FSH beta transcription. These data suggest that ICER production
antagonizes the stimulatory action of CREB to attenuate FSH beta transcription at
high GnRH pulse frequencies, thereby playing a critical role in regulating cyclic
reproductive function.

PMCID: PMC2815570
PMID: 20008557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Liver Int. 2010 Mar;30(3):388-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2009.02174.x. Epub
2009 Nov 24.

Identification and characterization of a novel peptide interacting with
cAMP-responsive elements binding and cAMP-responsive elements modulator in mouse 
liver.

Brunacci C(1), Piobbico D, Bartoli D, Castelli M, Pieroni S, Bellet MM,
Viola-Magni M, Della Fazia MA, Servillo G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Sperimentale, Facoltà di Medicina e
Chirurgia, Università degli Studi di Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Transcription factors coupled to cyclic adenosine mono phosphate
(cAMP) signalling in the cAMP-responsive elements binding (CREB)/ATF family
constitute a family of activators or repressors that bind to cAMP-responsive
promoter elements (CREs) in the regulatory regions of cAMP-inducible genes. A
role for CREB/ATF family has been advocated in the control of hepatocellular
carcinoma progression. CREB appears to be activated by the X protein of hepatitis
B virus, which links to the unphosphorylated form of CREB and activates
transcription, thus obviating an otherwise indispensable Ser-133 phosphorylation.
Identification of factors capable of triggering transcription via cAMP-responsive
elements modulator (CREM)/CREB signalling in the absence of Ser phosphorylation
will improve our knowledge of the molecular mechanism of liver cell
proliferation.
METHODS: To isolate and study proteins binding and activating CREB and/or CREM in
the liver, we performed the screening of a mouse liver cDNA library using the
Two-Hybrid System.
RESULTS: We report the identification and characterization of a novel peptide,
VTIP-peptide (VTIP-P), which binds and enhances the activation of CREM/CREB,
obviating the need for transcription factor phosphorylation. We demonstrated that
VTIP-P physically interacts with the activation domain (AD) of the transcription 
factors CREB/CREM and activates transcription by modifying their phosphorylation 
pattern in hepatoma cells. The data allowed the conclusion that VTIP-P binds the 
AD of CREB and CREM by stabilizing their phosphorylation.
CONCLUSION: The characterization of molecules capable of interfering in the liver
with an important pathway such as CREB could be significant in designing and/or
developing new therapeutic approaches to the control of liver cell proliferation.

PMID: 19968777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2009 Nov 24;7:133. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-7-133.

Fhl5/Act, a CREM-binding transcriptional activator required for normal sperm
maturation and morphology, is not essential for testicular gene expression.

Lardenois A(1), Chalmel F, Demougin P, Kotaja N, Sassone-Corsi P, Primig M.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U625, Université Rennes 1, IFR140, Rennes, F-35042, France.
aurelie.lardenois@univ-rennes1.fr

BACKGROUND: The LIM domain protein Fhl5 was previously found to interact with
CREM, a DNA binding transcriptional regulator necessary for spermiogenesis in
mammals. Co-transfection experiments using heterologous promoter constructs
indicated a role for Fhl5 in transcriptional up-regulation of CREM-dependent
testicular genes. Male mice lacking Fhl5 were reported to be fertile but
displayed partially abnormal sperm maturation and morphology.
METHODS: To identify Fhl5 testicular target genes we carried out two whole-genome
expression profiling experiments using high-density oligonucleotide microarrays
and total testis samples from Fhl5 wild-type versus homozygous mutant mice first 
in different and then in isogenic strain backgrounds.
RESULTS: Weak signal differences were detected in non-isogenic samples but no
statistically significant expression changes were observed when isogenic Fhl5
mutant and wild-type samples were compared.
CONCLUSION: The outcome of these experiments suggests that testicular expression 
profiling is extremely sensitive to the genetic background and that Fhl5 is not
essential for testicular gene expression to a level detected by microarray-based 
measurements. This might be due to redundant function of the related and
similarly expressed protein Fhl4.

PMCID: PMC2788571
PMID: 19930692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Kidney Int. 2010 Jan;77(2):129-40. doi: 10.1038/ki.2009.438. Epub 2009 Nov 18.

Cyclic nucleotide signaling in polycystic kidney disease.

Wang X(1), Ward CJ, Harris PC, Torres VE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic
College of Medicine, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Increased levels of 3'-5'-cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) stimulate cell
proliferation and fluid secretion in polycystic kidney disease. Levels of this
molecule are more sensitive to inhibition of phosphodiesterases (PDEs), whose
activity far exceeds the rate of cAMP synthesis by adenylyl cyclase. Several PDEs
exist, and here we measured the activity and expression of PDE families, their
isoforms, and the expression of downstream effectors of cAMP signaling in the
kidneys of rodents with polycystic kidney disease. We found a higher overall PDE 
activity in kidneys from mice as compared with rats, as well as a higher
contribution of PDE1, relative to PDE4 and PDE3, to total PDE activity of kidney 
lysates and lower PDE1, PDE3, and PDE4 activities in the kidneys of cystic as
compared with wild-type mice. There were reduced amounts of several PDE1, PDE3,
and PDE4 proteins, possibly due to increased protein degradation despite an
upregulation of their mRNA. Increased levels of cGMP were found in the kidneys of
cystic animals, suggesting in vivo downregulation of PDE1 activity. We found an
additive stimulatory effect of cAMP and cGMP on cystogenesis in vitro. Cyclic
AMP-dependent protein kinase subunits Ialpha and IIbeta, PKare, the transcription
factor CREB-1 mRNA, and CREM, ATF-1, and ICER proteins were upregulated in the
kidneys of cystic as compared with wild-type animals. Our study suggests that
alterations in cyclic nucleotide catabolism may render cystic epithelium
particularly susceptible to factors acting on Gs-coupled receptors. This may
account, in part, for increased cyclic nucleotide signaling in polycystic kidney 
disease and contribute substantially to disease progression.

PMCID: PMC3725619
PMID: 19924104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jan 22;285(4):2758-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.066845. Epub 2009 
Nov 12.

Jmjd1a demethylase-regulated histone modification is essential for cAMP-response 
element modulator-regulated gene expression and spermatogenesis.

Liu Z(1), Zhou S, Liao L, Chen X, Meistrich M, Xu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Texas A&M University Health Science Center, Texas 77030, USA.

Spermatogenesis, a fundamental process in the male reproductive system, requires 
a series of tightly controlled epigenetic and genetic events in germ cells
ranging from spermatogonia to spermatozoa. Jmjd1a is a key epigenetic regulator
expressed in the testis. It specifically demethylates mono- and di-methylated
histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9me1 and H3K9me2) but not tri-methylated H3K9 (H3K9me3). 
In this study, we generated a Jmjd1a antibody for immunohistochemistry and found 
Jmjd1a was specifically produced in pachytene and secondary spermatocytes.
Disruption of the Jmjd1a gene in mice significantly increased H3K9me1 and H3K9me2
levels in pachytene spermatocytes and early elongating spermatids without
affecting H3K9me3 levels. Concurrently, the levels of histone acetylation were
decreased in Jmjd1a knock-out germ cells. This suggests Jmjd1a promotes
transcriptional activation by lowering histone methylation and increasing histone
acetylation. Interestingly, the altered histone modifications in Jmjd1a-deficient
germ cells caused diminished cAMP-response element modulator (Crem) recruitment
to chromatin and decreased expression of the Crem coactivator Act and their
target genes Tnp1 (transition protein 1), Tnp2, Prm1 (protamine 1), and Prm2, all
of which are essential for chromatin condensation in spermatids. In agreement
with these findings, Jmjd1a deficiency caused extensive germ cell apoptosis and
blocked spermatid elongation, resulting in severe oligozoospermia, small testes, 
and infertility in male mice. These results indicate that the Jmjd1a-controlled
epigenetic histone modifications are crucial for Crem-regulated gene expression
and spermatogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2807331
PMID: 19910458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2010 Jan;71(1):61-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6941.2009.00784.x.

Assessment of phylloplane yeasts on selected Mediterranean plants by FISH with
group- and species-specific oligonucleotide probes.

Inácio J(1), Ludwig W, Spencer-Martins I, Fonseca A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Departamento de Ciências da Vida,
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica,
Portugal. joao.inacio@lniv.min-agricultura.pt

A previous culture-dependent survey of phylloplane yeasts from selected
Mediterranean plants showed that a few species were present in high densities in 
almost all leaf samples, regardless of the plant type, location or sampling
season. However, a few species appeared to be restricted to Cistus albidus
leaves, namely Cryptococcus cistialbidi. Here, we describe a culture-independent 
FISH assay to detect and quantify whole yeast cells in leaf washings. After
optimization, the technique was used to check the apparent association between C.
albidus leaves and C. cistialbidi and the abundance and ubiquity of other
basidiomycetous yeast species such as Erythrobasidium hasegawianum and
Sporobolomyces spp. in leaf samples from this and other neighboring plants (Acer 
monspessulanum and Quercus faginea). No yeast cells were detected in Pistacia
lentiscus leaf samples. We were also able to demonstrate that three phylloplane
yeasts (C. cistialbidi, E. hasegawianum and Sporobolomyces spp.) appeared to be
log-normally distributed among individual C. albidus leaves. The log-normal
distribution has important implications for the quantification of phylloplane
yeasts based on the washing and plating of bulk leaf samples, which will tend to 
overestimate the size of the respective populations and become an error source in
yeast surveys or related biocontrol studies.

PMID: 19817863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. BMC Genomics. 2009 Sep 14;10:430. doi: 10.3201/eid1508.080772.

Gene array analysis of adrenal glands in broiler chickens following ACTH
treatment.

Bureau C(1), Hennequet-Antier C, Couty M, Guémené D.

Author information: 
(1)UR83-Unité de Recherches Avicoles, Institut National de Recherche Agronomique,
Centre de Tours-Nouzilly, 37380 Nouzilly, France. wdbureau@yahoo.ca

BACKGROUND: Difference in adaptability responses to stress has been observed
amongst bird species, strains, and individuals. Components of the HPA axis, one
of the internal systems involved in homeostasis re-establishment following
stress, could play a role in this variability of responses. The aim of the
present study was 1) to identify genes involved in the regulation of adrenal
activity following ACTH stimulation and 2) to examine adrenal genes
differentially expressed in individuals with high and low plasma corticosterone
response following ACTH treatment.
RESULTS: Analysis with 21 K poultry oligo microarrays indicated that ACTH
treatment affected the expression of 134 genes. Several transcripts assigned to
genes involved in the adrenal ACTH signaling pathway and steroidogenic enzymes
were identified as differentially expressed by ACTH treatment. Real-time PCR on
18 selected genes confirmed changes in transcript levels of 11 genes, including
MC2R, CREM, Cry, Bmal1, Sqle, Prax1, and StAR. Only 4 genes revealed to be
differentially expressed between higher and lower adrenal responders to ACTH
treatment.
CONCLUSION: The results from the present study reveal putative candidate genes;
their role in regulation of adrenal functions and adaptability to stress should
be further investigated.

PMCID: PMC2751787
PMID: 19751509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2009;21(7):909-22. doi: 10.1071/RD09027.

Involvement of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma in gonadal
steroidogenesis and steroidogenic acute regulatory protein expression.

Kowalewski MP(1), Dyson MT, Manna PR, Stocco DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX, USA.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) gamma belongs to the PPAR
family of nuclear transcription factors whose ligands, such as eicosanoids, fatty
acids and prostaglandins, are known to affect gonadal function. Although several 
of these enhance the expression of the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein
(STAR) and steroid production, the role of PPARgamma in regulating STAR-mediated 
steroidogenesis remains unclear. In the present study, we used ciglitazone to
selectively activate PPARgamma and examine its role in STAR-mediated
steroidogenesis in immortalised KK1 mouse granulosa cells and MA-10 mouse Leydig 
tumour cells. Cotreatment with both dibutyryl-cAMP and ciglitazone revealed a
dose-dependent, significant increase in progesterone synthesis, Star promoter
activity, Star mRNA and STAR protein relative to either compound alone. The
overexpression of PPARgamma further increased Star-promoter activity. The
ciglitazone-induced activity of the Star-promoter appears to be mediated through 
the cAMP-response element half-sites located within its proximal 151 bp. Combined
treatment with ciglitazone and dibutyryl-cAMP significantly increased the
expression and activity of transcriptional pathways impacted by the activator
protein-1 family member c-JUN. The present study demonstrates that ciglitazone
and dibutyryl-cAMP synergistically enhance STAR expression in MA-10 and KK1
cells. Ciglitazone-activated PPARgamma appears to increase the sensitivity of
Leydig and granulosa cells to cAMP stimulation, possibly via upregulation of
c-JUN expression.

PMID: 19698295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Biol Reprod. 2010 Jan;82(1):96-104. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.078915. Epub 2009
Aug 19.

Diet-induced obesity in male mice is associated with reduced fertility and
potentiation of acrylamide-induced reproductive toxicity.

Ghanayem BI(1), Bai R, Kissling GE, Travlos G, Hoffler U.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology, Biostatistics Branch, and Cellular and Molecular
Pathology Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National
Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.
ghanayem@niehs.nih.gov

Comment in
    Biol Reprod. 2010 Jan;82(1):1-3.

The prevalence of human obesity and related chronic disorders such as diabetes,
cardiovascular diseases, and cancer is rapidly increasing. Human studies have
shown a direct relationship between obesity and infertility. The objective of the
current work was to examine the effect of diet-induced obesity on male fertility 
and the effect of obesity on susceptibility to chemical-induced reproductive
toxicity. From 5 to 30 wk of age, genetically intact male C57Bl/6J mice were fed 
a normal diet or one in which 60% of the kilocalories were from lard. Obese mice 
exhibited significant differences in the mRNA of several genes within the testes 
in comparison to lean males. Pparg was increased 2.2-fold, whereas Crem, Sh2b1,
Dhh, Igf1, and Lepr were decreased 6.7, 1.4, 3.2, 1.6, and 7.2-fold,
respectively. The fertility of male mice was compared through mating with control
females. Acrylamide (AA)-induced reproductive toxicity was assessed in obese or
lean males treated with water or 25 mg AA kg(-1) day(-1) via gavage for 5 days
and then mated to control females. Percent body fat and weight were significantly
increased in mice fed a high-fat vs. a normal diet. Obesity resulted in
significant reduction in plugs and pregnancies of control females partnered with 
obese vs. lean males. Serum leptin and insulin levels were each approximately
5-fold higher in obese vs. age-matched lean mice. Sperm from obese males
exhibited decreased motility and reduced hyperactivated progression vs. lean
mice. Treatment with AA exacerbated male infertility of obese and lean mice;
however, this effect was more pronounced in obese mice. Further, females
partnered with AA-treated obese mice exhibited a further decrease in the
percentage of live fetuses, whereas the percentage of resorptions increased. This
work demonstrated that diet-induced obesity in mice caused a significant
reduction in male fertility and exacerbated AA-induced reproductive toxicity and 
germ cell mutagenicity.

PMCID: PMC2802115
PMID: 19696015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Mol Cancer. 2009 Jul 30;8:52. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-8-52.

The tumor suppressor gene TRC8/RNF139 is disrupted by a constitutional balanced
translocation t(8;22)(q24.13;q11.21) in a young girl with dysgerminoma.

Gimelli S(1), Beri S, Drabkin HA, Gambini C, Gregorio A, Fiorio P, Zuffardi O,
Gemmill RM, Giorda R, Gimelli G.

Author information: 
(1)Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
stefania.gimelli@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: RNF139/TRC8 is a potential tumor suppressor gene with similarity to
PTCH, a tumor suppressor implicated in basal cell carcinomas and glioblastomas.
TRC8 has the potential to act in a novel regulatory relationship linking the
cholesterol/lipid biosynthetic pathway with cellular growth control and has been 
identified in families with hereditary renal (RCC) and thyroid cancers.
Haploinsufficiency of TRC8 may facilitate development of clear cell-RCC in
association with VHL mutations, and may increase risk for other tumor types. We
report a paternally inherited balanced translocation t(8;22) in a proposita with 
dysgerminoma.
METHODS: The translocation was characterized by FISH and the breakpoints cloned, 
sequenced, and compared. DNA isolated from normal and tumor cells was checked for
abnormalities by array-CGH. Expression of genes TRC8 and TSN was tested both on
dysgerminoma and in the proposita and her father.
RESULTS: The breakpoints of the translocation are located within the LCR-B low
copy repeat on chromosome 22q11.21, containing the palindromic AT-rich repeat
(PATRR) involved in recurrent and non-recurrent translocations, and in an AT-rich
sequence inside intron 1 of the TRC8 tumor-suppressor gene at 8q24.13. TRC8 was
strongly underexpressed in the dysgerminoma. Translin is underexpressed in the
dysgerminoma compared to normal ovary.TRC8 is a target of Translin (TSN), a
posttranscriptional regulator of genes transcribed by the transcription factor
CREM-tau in postmeiotic male germ cells.
CONCLUSION: A role for TRC8 in dysgerminoma may relate to its interaction with
Translin. We propose a model in which one copy of TRC8 is disrupted by a
palindrome-mediated translocation followed by complete loss of expression through
suppression, possibly mediated by miRNA.

PMCID: PMC2727492
PMID: 19642973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Clin Invest. 2009 Jul;119(7):1940-51.

Calmodulin kinase II-mediated sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ leak promotes atrial
fibrillation in mice.

Chelu MG(1), Sarma S, Sood S, Wang S, van Oort RJ, Skapura DG, Li N, Santonastasi
M, Müller FU, Schmitz W, Schotten U, Anderson ME, Valderrábano M, Dobrev D,
Wehrens XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA.

A trial fibrillation (AF), the most common human cardiac arrhythmia, is
associated with abnormal intracellular Ca2+ handling. Diastolic Ca2+ release from
the sarcoplasmic reticulum via "leaky" ryanodine receptors (RyR2s) is
hypothesized to contribute to arrhythmogenesis in AF, but the molecular
mechanisms are incompletely understood. Here, we have shown that mice with a
genetic gain-of-function defect in Ryr2 (which we termed Ryr2R176Q/+ mice) did
not exhibit spontaneous AF but that rapid atrial pacing unmasked an increased
vulnerability to AF in these mice compared with wild-type mice. Rapid atrial
pacing resulted in increased Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII)
phosphorylation of RyR2, while both pharmacologic and genetic inhibition of
CaMKII prevented AF inducibility in Ryr2R176Q/+ mice. This result suggests that
AF requires both an arrhythmogenic substrate (e.g., RyR2 mutation) and enhanced
CaMKII activity. Increased CaMKII phosphorylation of RyR2 was observed in atrial 
biopsies from mice with atrial enlargement and spontaneous AF, goats with lone
AF, and patients with chronic AF. Genetic inhibition of CaMKII phosphorylation of
RyR2 in Ryr2S2814A knockin mice reduced AF inducibility in a vagotonic AF model. 
Together, these findings suggest that increased RyR2-dependent Ca2+ leakage due
to enhanced CaMKII activity is an important downstream effect of CaMKII in
individuals susceptible to AF induction.

PMCID: PMC2701862
PMID: 19603549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2009 Dec;29(8):1275-81. doi: 10.1007/s10571-009-9423-1.

Cyclic AMP inducible early repressor mediates the termination of corticotropin
releasing hormone transcription in hypothalamic neurons.

Liu Y(1), Aguilera G.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Endocrine Physiology, Program of Developmental Endocrinology and
Genetics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Elevations of inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER), the repressor isoform of the
cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM), are associated with protein binding to 
the corticotrophin releasing hormone (CRH) promoter and termination of CRH
transcriptional responses to stress. To determine whether endogenous ICER
production represses CRH transcription, we examined the effect of CREM siRNA on
forskolin-stimulated ICER formation and CRH transcription in the hypothalamic
cell line, 4B, and in primary cultures of hypothalamic neurons. Cotransfection of
4B cells with CREM siRNA and a CRH promoter-driven luciferase reporter gene
markedly reduced the induction of ICER by forskolin and potentiated the
stimulatory effect of forskolin on CRH promoter activity, compared with cells
cotransfected with a nonspecific oligonucleotide. The role of ICER on endogenous 
CRH expression was studied in primary cultures of hypothalamic neurons by
examining the effect of CREM siRNA on forskolin-induced primary transcript (CRH
hnRNA) using intronic real-time PCR. As observed during stress in vivo,
forskolin-stimulated CRH hnRNA was transient, increasing up to 60 min and
declining to near basal values by 3 h. Transfection of CREM siRNA reduced
forskolin-induced ICER by about 45% 48-h later and partially reversed the
declining phase of CRH hnRNA production at 3 h. The data provide evidence that
endogenous ICER formation is required for termination of CRH transcription and
support the hypothesis that ICER is part of an intracellular feedback mechanism
limiting the activation of CRH transcription during stress.

PMCID: PMC2795060
PMID: 19543827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Biol Chem. 2009 Aug 14;284(33):21810-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.001180. Epub
2009 Jun 16.

cAMP stringently regulates human cathelicidin antimicrobial peptide expression in
the mucosal epithelial cells by activating cAMP-response element-binding protein,
AP-1, and inducible cAMP early repressor.

Chakraborty K(1), Maity PC, Sil AK, Takeda Y, Das S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, National Institute of Cholera and Enteric
Diseases, P-33 C.I.T. Road, Scheme XM, Beliaghata, Kolkata 700010, India.

Little is known about the regulation of the innate host defense peptide
cathelicidin at the mucosal surfaces. Expression is believed to be
transcriptionally regulated, and several cis-acting elements have been identified
in the cathelicidin putative promoter. However, the trans-acting factors have not
been clearly defined. We have recently reported that bacterial exotoxins suppress
cathelicidin expression in sodium butyrate-differentiated intestinal epithelial
cells (ECs), and this may be mediated through inducible cAMP early repressor.
Here we have shown that cAMP-signaling pathways transcriptionally regulate
cathelicidin expression in various ECs. cAMP-response element-binding protein
(CREB) and AP-1 (activator protein-1) bind to the cathelicidin putative promoter 
in vitro. Additionally, transcriptional complexes containing CREB, AP-1, and
cathelicidin upstream regulatory sequences are formed within ECs. We have also
shown that these complexes may activate cathelicidin promoter and are required
for its inducible expression in ECs. This is underscored by the fact that
silencing of CREB and AP-1 results in failure of ECs to up-regulate cathelicidin,
and hepatitis B virus X protein may use CREB to induce cathelicidin. On the other
hand, inducible cAMP early repressor competes with CREB and AP-1 for binding to
the cathelicidin promoter and represses transcription, thus functioning as a
counter-regulatory mechanism. Finally, both CREB and AP-1 were shown to play
major roles in the regulation of cathelicidin in sodium butyrate-differentiated
HT-29 cells. This is the first report of a detailed mechanistic study of
inducible cathelicidin expression in the mucosal ECs. At the same time, it
describes a novel immunomodulatory function of cAMP.

PMCID: PMC2755907
PMID: 19531482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. FEMS Yeast Res. 2009 Jun;9(4):511-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1567-1364.2009.00509.x. Epub
2009 May 1.

Hexose and pentose transport in ascomycetous yeasts: an overview.

Leandro MJ(1), Fonseca C, Gonçalves P.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciências da Vida, CREM (Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos),
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica,
Portugal.

The biochemical characterization of sugar uptake in yeasts started five decades
ago and led to the early production of abundant kinetic and mechanistic data.
However, the first accurate overview of the underlying sugar transporter genes
was obtained relatively late, due mainly to the genetic complexity of hexose
uptake in the model yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The genomic era generated in 
turn a massive amount of information, allowing the identification of a multitude 
of putative sugar transporter and sensor-encoding genes in yeast genomes, many of
which are phylogenetically related. This review aims to briefly summarize our
current knowledge on the biochemical and molecular features of the transporters
of hexoses and pentoses in yeasts, when possible establishing links between
previous kinetic studies and genomic data currently available. Emphasis is given 
to recent developments concerning the identification of d-xylose and l-arabinose 
transporter genes, which are thought to be key players in the optimization of S. 
cerevisiae strains for bioethanol production from lignocellulose hydrolysates.

PMID: 19459982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Mol Neurobiol. 2009 Aug;40(1):73-86. doi: 10.1007/s12035-009-8072-1. Epub 2009
May 13.

Inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) and brain functions.

Borlikova G(1), Endo S.

Author information: 
(1)Unit for Molecular Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, Okinawa Institute of
Science and Technology, Uruma, Okinawa 904-2234, Japan.

The inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) is an endogenous repressor of
cAMP-responsive element (CRE)-mediated gene transcription and belongs to the
CRE-binding protein (CREB)/CRE modulator (CREM)/activating transcription factor 1
(ATF-1) gene family. ICER plays an important role in regulating the
neuroendocrine system and the circadian rhythm. Other aspects of ICER function
have recently attracted heightened attention. Being a natural inducible CREB
antagonist, and more broadly, an inducible repressor of CRE-mediated gene
transcription, ICER regulates long-lasting plastic changes that occur in the
brain in response to incoming stimulation. This review will bring together data
on ICER and its functions in the brain, with a special emphasis on recent
findings highlighting the involvement of ICER in the regulation of long-term
plasticity underlying learning and memory.

PMCID: PMC2699388
PMID: 19434522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Actas Esp Psiquiatr. 2009 Mar-Apr;37(2):94-100.

Psychometric validation of the Spanish version of the Patient-Doctor Relationship
Questionnaire (PDRQ).

Mingote Adán J(1), Moreno Jiménez B, Rodríguez Carvajal R, Gálvez Herrer M, Ruiz 
López P.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Universitario, 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: The main aim of this study was to make a Spanish adaption of the
international Patient-Doctor Relationship Questionnaire (PDRQ) that assesses the 
quality of patient-doctor relationship in Spanish patients admitted to an
Internal Medicine Service under conditions of regular clinical practice.
METHOD: A total of 188 adult patients of 6 Internal Medicine physicians from a
University Hospital in downtown Madrid were analyzed. Sociodemographic and
clinical variables were collected and the PDRQ Spanish version questionnaire was 
administered.
RESULTS: Results showed excellent psychometric data on reliability, factorial,
and construct validity. Furthermore, based on scientific literature, criteria
validity was determined, considering continuity of care as external criteria.
Results ratify previous data related to positive relation between quality of
doctor-patient relation and continuity of care.
CONCLUSIONS: The Spanish 13 item version of the PDRQ (CREM-P in Spanish) proved
to be a valid instrument for assessing the quality of patient-doctor relation in 
adult patients, with clinical and research value.

PMID: 19401857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl). 2009 Apr;93(2):181-91. doi:
10.1111/j.1439-0396.2007.00804.x.

Comparison of total tract digestibility, development of visceral organs and
digestive tract of Mong cai and Yorkshire x Landrace piglets fed diets with
different fibre sources.

Len NT(1), Hong TT, Ogle B, Lindberg JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Nutrition, National Institute of Animal Husbandry, Thuy
Phuong - Tu Liem, Hanoi, Vietnam.

The aim of the study was to evaluate the effects of piglet age and dietary fibre 
source on the development of visceral organs and the gastrointestinal tract
(GIT), and on growth performance and total tract apparent digestibility (TTAD) in
local [pure-breed Mong cai (MC)] and exotic [Landrace x Yorkshire (LY)] piglets. 
The experimental diets contained different fibre sources: C (basal diet), RB
(basal diet + rice bran), SPVM (basal diet + sweet potato vine meal) and CReM
(basal diet + cassava residue meal). The neutral detergent fibre (NDF) content in
diet C and the fibrous diets was 8.8% and 17.1%-17.7% respectively (dry matter
basis). Collection of faecal samples to determine TTAD was carried out for five
consecutive days before the experiment was finished (63 days). The piglets were
killed at the age of 10 days (before being given the same solid feed), 30 days
(weaning, 20 days after solid feed introduced) and 63 days (33 days after being
given the different fibrous diets) when the length of intestinal segments, weight
of organs (liver, heart, kidneys) and empty weight of the GIT (stomach, small
intestine, caecum and colon + rectum) were measured. As the age of animals
increased, the relative weight of organs and the length of intestines (expressed 
on a mass-specific basis) decreased (p < 0.05), and the weight of GIT increased
(p < 0.001). The piglets fed fibrous diets had heavier GIT than those fed diet C 
with the highest values in CReM (p < 0.05). The colon + rectum length was not
significantly different among C, RB and SPVM, but was shorter than in CReM (p <
0.05). Coefficient of total tract apparent digestibility (CTTAD) of nutrients in 
the fibrous diets was lower than in C (p < 0.01). Average daily gain (ADG) and
feed conversion ratio (FCR) in C, RB and CReM were not different and were better 
than in SPVM (p < 0.01). There were no significant differences in the weights of 
organs between the two breeds at day 10, 30 and 63 (p > 0.05). The weight and
length of GIT were not significantly different between the two breeds at day 10
and day 30, but were greater for MC at day 63. The caecum and colon + rectum at
10 and 30 days were longer in MC than in LY (p < 0.001). The relative development
of GIT post-weaning was higher than pre-weaning, the difference being most
apparent in MC. As a result at 63 days, MC had heavier visceral organs and GIT,
and longer intestines on fibrous diets than LY (p < 0.05). The MC at 63 days had 
higher CTTAD of organic matter, gross energy, crude fibre and NDF (p < 0.001) and
ether extract and crude protein (p < 0.05), but lower ADG and poorer FCR than LY 
(p < 0.001). It can be concluded that the GIT of the MC piglets developed more
rapidly than LY when they were introduced to solid feed, and that the difference 
was more marked on the fibrous diets and after weaning, which resulted in higher 
total tract digestibility of nutrients in MC compared with LY. Cassava residue
meal was better digested than RB and SPVM, and supported higher live weight
gains.

PMID: 19320931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Toxicon. 2009 Jul;54(1):62-6. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2009.03.013. Epub 2009 Mar
19.

Rapid extraction combined with LC-tandem mass spectrometry (CREM-LC/MS/MS) for
the determination of ciguatoxins in ciguateric fish flesh.

Lewis RJ(1), Yang A, Jones A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Qld 4072,
Australia. r.lewis@imb.uq.edu.au

Erratum in
    Toxicon. 2009 Nov;54(6):897.

Ciguatera is a significant food borne disease caused by potent polyether toxins
known as ciguatoxins, which accumulate in the flesh of ciguateric fish at risk
levels above 0.1 ppb. The management of ciguatera has been hindered by the lack
of analytical methods to detect and quantify clinically relevant levels of
ciguatoxin in easily prepared crude extracts of fish. Here we report a ciguatoxin
rapid extraction method (CREM) that allows the rapid preparation of fish flesh
extracts for the detection and quantification of ciguatoxin by gradient
reversed-phase liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS).
CREM-LC/MS/MS delivers a linear response to P-CTX-1 spiked into fish prior to
extraction. A similar response was obtained for P-CTX-1 spiked after extraction, 
indicating >95% extraction efficiency was achieved overall and 85% at the limit
of quantification (0.1 ppb). Using this approach, levels >or=0.1 ppb P-CTX-1
could be detected and quantified from an extract of 2g fish flesh, making it
suitable as a confirmatory assay for suspect ciguateric carnivorous fish in the
Pacific Ocean. The approach is designed to simplify the extraction and analysis
of multiple samples per day.

PMID: 19303895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Immunol. 2009 Apr 1;182(7):4167-74. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802976.

The cyclic AMP response element modulator {alpha} suppresses CD86 expression and 
APC function.

Ahlmann M(1), Varga G, Sturm K, Lippe R, Benedyk K, Viemann D, Scholzen T,
Ehrchen J, Müller FU, Seidl M, Matus M, Tsokos GC, Roth J, Tenbrock K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, University of Münster, Germany.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2009 Jul 1;183(1):770.

The cAMP response element modulator (CREM)alpha is a widely expressed
transcriptional repressor that is important for the termination of the T cell
immune response and contributes to the abnormal T cell function in patients with 
systemic lupus erythematosus. We present evidence that APCs of Crem(-/-) mice
express increased amounts of the costimulatory molecule CD86 and induce enhanced 
Ag-dependent and Ag-independent T cell proliferation. Similarly, human APCs in
which CREMalpha was selectively suppressed expressed more CD86 on the surface
membrane. CREMalpha was found to bind to the CD86 promoter and suppressed its
activity. Transfer of APCs from Crem(-/-) mice into naive mice facilitated a
significantly stronger contact dermatitis response compared with mice into which 
APCs from Crem(+/+) mice had been transferred. We conclude that CREMalpha is an
important negative regulator of costimulation and APC-dependent T cell function
both in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2786066
PMID: 19299714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Autoimmun Rev. 2009 Sep;9(1):34-9. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2009.02.035. Epub 2009
Mar 6.

Interleukin 2 and systemic lupus erythematosus: beyond the transcriptional
regulatory net abnormalities.

Gómez-Martín D(1), Díaz-Zamudio M, Crispín JC, Alcocer-Varela J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Rheumatology, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias
Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Vasco de Quiroga 15, Tlalpan 14000, Mexico 
City, Mexico.

IL-2 plays a key role in setting the balance between immunity and tolerance. This
cytokine has a dual role as the regulator of the two main phases of the immune
response (proliferative and suppressive). Likewise, activation induced cell death
and the induction and maintenance of regulatory T cells are the tolerance
mechanisms regulated by IL-2, which convey the link between IL-2 abnormalities
and the development of autoimmune disorders, such as systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE). Particularly, in SLE murine models and in humans, deficiency in IL-2
synthesis and activity has been proven. Diverse signaling pathways abnormalities 
(TCR, NF-kappaBeta, NF-AT) have been involved in the IL-2 transcriptional
dysregulation displayed by T cells from SLE patients, and its functional
relevance as part of the physiopathogenic scheme has been shown. Aberrant
expression and activity of multiple IL-2 transcriptional factors, such as c-fos, 
and predominantly, CREM and CREB have been involved in this immune dysregulation.
Diverse alterations in signaling kinases and phosphatases (PKA, PP2A, CAMKIV) and
the modulation by epigenetic mechanisms have been related to the altered
CREM/pCREB index. The synergic effect of multiple abnormalities in the
transcriptional factors previously mentioned has been shown to be of functional
relevance in lupus.

PMID: 19269352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Med Hypotheses. 2009 May;72(5):544-5. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2008.11.040. Epub 2009 
Feb 6.

CREM mutations and ADHD symptoms.

Lahti TA(1), Partonen T.

Author information: 
(1)National Public Health Institute, Department of Mental Health and Alcohol
Research, Mannerheimintie 166, FI-00300 Helsinki, Finland.

CREM mutant mice have behaviors similar to symptoms seen in ADHD such as the
increased level of physical activity as well as altered emotional and stress
responses. Our results demonstrate that all the four participants with ADHD had
elevated levels of nocturnal melatonin in urine samples before starting the
methylphenidate treatment. We hypothesize that abnormalities in CREM protein
functions or mutations in the CREM gene may be underlying at least some of the
symptoms in patients with ADHD.

PMID: 19201103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2009 Apr 10;302(1):1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2008.12.009.
Epub 2008 Dec 25.

Role of basic leucine zipper proteins in transcriptional regulation of the
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein gene.

Manna PR(1), Dyson MT, Stocco DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX 79430, USA.

The regulation of steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) gene
transcription by cAMP-dependent mechanisms occurs in the absence of a consensus
cAMP response element (CRE, TGACGTGA). This regulation is coordinated by multiple
transcription factors that bind to sequence-specific elements located
approximately 150 bp upstream of the transcription start site. Among the proteins
that bind within this region, the basic leucine zipper (bZIP) family of
transcription factors, i.e. CRE binding protein (CREB)/CRE modulator
(CREM)/activating transcription factor (ATF), activator protein 1 (AP-1;
Fos/Jun), and CCAAT enhancer binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta), interact with an
overlapping region (-81/-72 bp) in the StAR promoter, mediate
stimulus-transcription coupling of cAMP signaling and play integral roles in
regulating StAR gene expression. These bZIP proteins are structurally similar and
bind to DNA sequences as dimers; however, they exhibit discrete transcriptional
activities, interact with several transcription factors and other properties that
contribute in their regulatory functions. The 5'-flanking -81/-72 bp region of
the StAR gene appears to function as a key element within a complex cAMP response
unit by binding to different bZIP members, and the StAR promoter displays
variable states of cAMP responsivity contingent upon the occupancy of these
cis-elements with these transcription factors. The expression and activities of
CREB/CREM/ATF, Fos/Jun and C/EBPbeta have been demonstrated to be mediated by a
plethora of extracellular signals, and the phosphorylation of these proteins at
several Ser and Thr residues allows recruitment of the transcriptional
coactivator CREB binding protein (CBP) or its functional homolog p300 to the StAR
promoter. This review will focus on the current level of understanding of the
roles of selective bZIP family proteins within the complex series of processes
involved in regulating StAR gene transcription.

PMID: 19150388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Neurosci. 2009 Jan 14;29(2):328-33. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5252-08.2009.

The CREB/CREM transcription factors negatively regulate early synaptogenesis and 
spontaneous network activity.

Aguado F(1), Díaz-Ruiz C, Parlato R, Martínez A, Carmona MA, Bleckmann S, Ureña
JM, Burgaya F, del Río JA, Schütz G, Soriano E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red para
Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas, Institute for Research in Biomedicine,
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    J Neurosci. 2009 May 20;29(20):6389-91.

The family of CREB (cAMP response element-binding protein) transcription factors 
are involved in a variety of biological processes including the development and
plasticity of the nervous system. In the maturing and adult brain, CREB genes are
required for activity-dependent processes, including synaptogenesis, refinement
of connections and long-term potentiation. Here, we use CREB1(Nescre)CREM(-/-)
(cAMP-responsive element modulator) mutants to investigate the role of these
genes in stimulus-independent patterns of neural activity at early stages. We
show that lack of CREB/CREM genes specifically in neural tissue leads to
increased synaptogenesis and to a dramatic increase in the levels of spontaneous 
network activity at embryonic stages. Thus, the functions of CREB/CREM genes in
neural activity differ in distinct periods of neural development.

PMID: 19144833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Circulation. 2009 Jan 6;119(1):79-88. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.786533.
Epub 2008 Dec 22.

Critical role of transcription factor cyclic AMP response element modulator in
beta1-adrenoceptor-mediated cardiac dysfunction.

Lewin G(1), Matus M, Basu A, Frebel K, Rohsbach SP, Safronenko A, Seidl MD,
Stümpel F, Buchwalow I, König S, Engelhardt S, Lohse MJ, Schmitz W, Müller FU.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Münster, Münster,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Chronic stimulation of the beta(1)-adrenoceptor (beta(1)AR) plays a
crucial role in the pathogenesis of heart failure; however, underlying mechanisms
remain to be elucidated. The regulation by transcription factors cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB) and cyclic AMP response element modulator (CREM)
represents a fundamental mechanism of cyclic AMP-dependent gene control possibly 
implicated in beta(1)AR-mediated cardiac deterioration.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied the role of CREM in beta(1)AR-mediated cardiac
effects, comparing transgenic mice with heart-directed expression of beta(1)AR in
the absence and presence of functional CREM. CREM inactivation protected from
cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, fibrosis, and left ventricular dysfunction in
beta(1)AR-overexpressing mice. Transcriptome and proteome analysis revealed a set
of predicted CREB/CREM target genes including the cardiac ryanodine receptor,
tropomyosin 1alpha, and cardiac alpha-actin as altered on the mRNA or protein
level along with the improved phenotype in CREM-deficient beta(1)AR-transgenic
hearts.
CONCLUSIONS: The results imply the regulation of genes by CREM as an important
mechanism of beta(1)AR-induced cardiac damage in mice.

PMID: 19103994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Dairy Sci. 2008 Dec;91(12):4542-51. doi: 10.3168/jds.2007-0907.

Molecular epidemiology and population structure of bovine Streptococcus uberis.

Rato MG(1), Bexiga R, Nunes SF, Cavaco LM, Vilela CL, Santos-Sanches I.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal.

The molecular epidemiology and population structure of 30 bovine subclinical
mastitis field isolates of Streptococcus uberis, collected from 6 Portuguese
herds (among 12 farms screened) during 2002 and 2003, were examined by using
pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) for clustering of the isolates and
multilocus sequence typing (MLST) to assess the relationship between PFGE
patterns and to identify genetic lineages. The 30 isolates were clustered into 18
PFGE types, using a similarity cutoff of 80%, and 3 PFGE types accounted for
almost half of the isolates (46.6%). These major types were herd specific,
suggesting either cow-to-cow transmission or infection with isolates from the
same environmental reservoirs. The remaining unrelated PFGE types of isolates
were from different herds strongly suggesting environmental sources of Strep.
uberis infection. All 30 isolates were analyzed by MLST and clustered into 14
sequence types (ST). These ST were found to be novel, either with 10 new alleles 
of 6 housekeeping genes or with different combinations of previously assigned
alleles. Five of these ST were clustered into 3 clonal complexes (lineages),
ST-143, ST-86, and ST-5, known to include bovine isolates from several geographic
locations (Australia, New Zealand, United Kingdom, Sweden, and Denmark) and 9
singletons. To our knowledge, this is the first report that documents molecular
typing studies of bovine isolates of Strep. uberis from Portugal, which were
shown to represent novel genomic backgrounds of this pathogen.

PMID: 19038929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Eur J Pharmacol. 2009 Jan 14;602(2-3):348-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2008.11.002. 
Epub 2008 Nov 9.

Interventional effect of valsartan on expression of inducible cAMP early
repressor and phosphodiesterase 3A in rats after myocardial infarction.

Ma D(1), Fu L, Shen J, Zhou P, Gao Y, Xie R, Li Y, Han Y, Wang Y, Wang F.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Department, First Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, China.

To investigate the changes of inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) and
phosphodiesterase 3A in rats after myocardial infarction and to evaluate the
beneficial effects of valsartan on cardiac function and ventricular remodeling.
Rats were split into four groups: sham-operation group, pre-myocardial infarction
group (valsartan administration 2 weeks before myocardial infarction),
post-myocardial infarction group (valsartan administration after myocardial
infarction) and myocardial infarction group (vehicle after myocardial
infarction). Echocardiograph and hemodynamic data were measured and cardiocyte
apoptosis was estimated by TUNEL staining. ICER, cAMP response element binding
protein (CREB), phosphodiesterase 3A and Bcl-2 mRNA expression levels were
assayed by real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and protein 
expression was measured using immunoblot analysis. ICER and CREB mRNA expression 
in the myocardial infarction group were higher and phosphodiesterase 3A and Bcl-2
mRNA expression were lower than the sham-operation group (Ps<0.01). Following the
improvement of cardiac function and ventricular remodeling, ICER and CREB mRNA in
pre- and post- myocardial-infarction groups were down-regulated, and
phosphodiesterase 3A and Bcl-2 mRNA were up-regulated (P<0.05). The changes
brought on by valsartan pre-myocardial infarction were stronger than
post-myocardial infarction (P<0.05). These data suggest that there is a
phosphodiesterase 3A-ICER positive-feedback loop leading to myocyte apoptosis and
ongoing development of heart failure after myocardial infarction. Maintaining the
function of phosphodiesterase 3A or reducing ICER may be an effective way to
prevent myocardium apoptosis and heart dysfunction. Valsartan can ameliorate
ventricular remodeling and heart failure by inhibiting the expression of ICER and
increasing the expression of phosphodiesterase 3A.

PMID: 19027736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2009 Mar;70(3):429-34. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2008.03477.x. Epub 2008 Nov 8.

A pilot study to evaluate gene expression profiles in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from children with GH deficiency and Turner syndrome in
response to GH treatment.

Whatmore AJ(1), Patel L, Clayton PE.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Sciences Research Group, University of Manchester, Oxford Road,
Manchester, UK. andrew.whatmore@manchester.ac.uk

Response to GH treatment is variable and dependent on diagnosis and dose. We used
a pharmacogenomic approach to assess whether this variability is reflected in
patterns of GH-induced gene expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) taken from three children with GH deficiency (GHD) and three girls with
Turner syndrome (TS). Analysis of the response to GH treatment revealed that in
GHD, 15 probe sets (11 genes) showed a fold change > +/- 1.4 at a P-value <
0.0005 (and a false detection rate <or= 15%). These genes included a suppressor
of cytokine signalling (SOCS1) and a modulator of cAMP response elements (CREM). 
In marked contrast, in TS no genes fulfilled these criteria. ANOVA identified a
subset of genes significantly affected by diagnosis, GH treatment or an
interaction between diagnosis and treatment (P < 0.05, n = 2266). Cluster
analysis indicated that genes up-regulated in both GHD and TS were related to DNA
metabolism and transcription. Genes up-regulated in GHD but down-regulated in TS 
were involved in RNA processing and metabolism, whereas those down-regulated in
GHD and up-regulated in TS were related to immune function. This pilot study has 
shown that major changes in gene expression in PBMCs can only be seen with
confidence in GHD inferring that the pattern of gene expression in response to GH
in GHD vs. TS is distinct and disease-specific. Further studies in larger cohorts
will be required to evaluate whether GH-induced PBMCs gene expression patterns
can predict responses to GH in a clinical setting.

PMID: 19018778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Endocrine. 2008 Jun;33(3):245-53. doi: 10.1007/s12020-008-9092-8.

Calcitonin induces expression of the inducible cAMP early repressor in
osteoclasts.

Yang M(1), Kream BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, MC-1850, University of Connecticut Health Center, 263 
Farmington Avenue, Farmington 06030, CT, USA. myang@student.uchc.edu

The cAMP response element modulator gene (Crem) encodes a variety of
transcriptional regulators including the inducible cAMP early repressor, ICER. We
previously showed that Crem knockout mice, which are deficient in CREM and ICER
factors, display slightly increased long bone mass and decreased osteoclast
number. These data are consistent with the notion that Crem regulates bone mass
in part through an effect on osteoclast formation and/or function. Since ICER is 
strongly induced by cAMP, we asked whether the calcium-regulating hormone
calcitonin, which stimulates cAMP production and inhibits osteoclastic bone
resorption, could induce ICER in osteoclasts. The monocytic cell line RAW264.7
was treated with receptor activator of NF-kappaB ligand (RANKL) to induce
osteoclast formation. Calcitonin caused a time- and dose-dependent induction of
ICER mRNA and an increase in ICER protein abundance in RANKL-treated RAW264.7
cells. Calcitonin also induced ICER mRNA and protein in osteoclasts derived from 
primary mouse bone marrow cell cultures. Calcitonin-treated osteoclasts showed
immunoreactivity with an anti-CREM antibody. Calcitonin decreased the activity of
wild-type and Crem knockout osteoclasts in vitro, and this inhibitory effect was 
greater in Crem knockout osteoclasts. Furthermore, calcitonin decreased
calcitonin receptor mRNA expression in wildtype osteoclasts, but not in Crem
knockout osteoclasts. These data suggest that calcitonin induction of ICER in
osteoclasts might regulate osteoclast activity.

PMCID: PMC2858383
PMID: 19016003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Gynecol Obstet Fertil. 2008 Dec;36(12):1224-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gyobfe.2008.10.005.
Epub 2008 Nov 12.

[Knockout mice in the service of reproduction].

[Article in French]

Escalier D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'andrologie, CHU de Kremlin-Bicêtre, AP-HP, 78, avenue du
Général-Leclerc, 94275 Le Kremlin-Bicêtre cedex, France. denise.escalier@noos.fr

At least 600 infertile knockout mice have been produced and this review is
limited to recent models involving unexpected genes in reproduction or genes
involved in recently identified molecular biology pathways. They concern the
female meiosis (Brca1), primordial follicles (Lhx8), granulosa cells (Lrh1), and,
for both sexes, mitochondria (Immp2l) and meiosis (Ubb). Germ cells can be
altered differently following the sex, as it is the case for Dicer, known to be
involved in the formation of miRNA. Knockout mice can support data obtained in
human, such as for HNRNPGT, whose role in the human spermatogenesis remained
questionable. However, due to numerous factors involved, positive results
obtained by the "candidate gene approach" remain limited (for example, SCP3 and
CREM). Nevertheless, knockout mouse models bring considerable knowledge on genes 
possibly involved in men and women infertilities.

PMID: 19008143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Sci Signal. 2008 Oct 14;1(41):ra9. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.1162396.

BDNF selectively regulates GABAA receptor transcription by activation of the
JAK/STAT pathway.

Lund IV(1), Hu Y, Raol YH, Benham RS, Faris R, Russek SJ, Brooks-Kayal AR.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Group and Department of Neurology, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) type A receptor (GABA(A)R) is the major
inhibitory neurotransmitter receptor in the brain. Its multiple subunits show
regional, developmental, and disease-related plasticity of expression; however,
the regulatory networks controlling GABA(A)R subunit expression remain poorly
understood. We report that the seizure-induced decrease in GABA(A)R alpha1
subunit expression associated with epilepsy is mediated by the Janus kinase
(JAK)/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) pathway regulated
by brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). BDNF- and seizure-dependent
phosphorylation of STAT3 cause the adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP) response 
element-binding protein (CREB) family member ICER (inducible cAMP early
repressor) to bind with phosphorylated CREB at the Gabra1:CRE site. JAK/STAT
pathway inhibition prevents the seizure-induced decrease in GABA(A)R alpha1
abundance in vivo and, given that BDNF is known to increase the abundance of
GABA(A)R alpha4 in a JAK/STAT-independent manner, indicates that BDNF acts
through at least two distinct pathways to influence GABA(A)R-dependent synaptic
inhibition.

PMCID: PMC2651003
PMID: 18922788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Dev Biol (Basel). 2008;132:153-9.

Unique co-expression of immune cell-related genes in IBDV resistant chickens
indicates the activation of specific cellular host-response mechanisms.

Koren E(1), Zhou H, Cahaner A, Heller ED, Pitcovski J, Lamont SJ.

Author information: 
(1)MIGAL, Kiryat Shmona, Israel.

Infectious bursal disease virus (IBDV) causes highly contagious,
immunosuppressive disease that leads to high mortality in young chickens. The
purpose of this study was to look for the genetic regulation of the immune acute 
immune response to IBDV in our selected lines. Chicks of a F2 generation of two
lines divergently selected for early high (HH) or low (LL) antibody (Ab) response
to Escherichia coLi vaccination were challenged with virulent IBDV. Viral load in
infected bursae was used to determine resistant (R) and susceptible (S) birds. By
using a 13K chicken cDNA microarray, and pooled spleen mRNA of R, S and
non-challenged, control (C) chicks, several genes were identified with
differential expression associated with host resistance to IBDV. These genes were
also subjected to RT-PCR on individual samples to verify the results obtained
from microarrays. The major finding was the co-upregulation of seven genes--ETS2,
H963, RGS1, ABIN-2, CREM/ICER, DUSP1 and CXCR4- in several R, but not S or C
individuals, and characterized by a high correlation of expression levels.
Resistance also generally coincided with reduced transcript levels of acute-phase
serum amyloid A (A-SAA) and increased levels of IL-8. Based on reported functions
of these genes, these findings suggest that resistance was mediated by the
activation of specific cellular mechanisms, indicated by increased activity of
splenic macrophages and T-lymphocytes 3 days post-challenge.

PMID: 18817297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2008 Dec;39(4):519-28. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2008.07.019. Epub
2008 Aug 5.

Regulation of neural migration by the CREB/CREM transcription factors and altered
Dab1 levels in CREB/CREM mutants.

Díaz-Ruiz C(1), Parlato R, Aguado F, Ureña JM, Burgaya F, Martínez A, Carmona MA,
Kreiner G, Bleckmann S, Del Río JA, Schütz G, Soriano E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine-Barcelona (IRB), Department of Cell
Biology and CIBERNED (ISCIII), University of Barcelona, Barcelona Science Park,
Lab A1-S1, Josep Samitier 1-5, Barcelona 08028, Spain.

The family of CREB transcription factors is involved in a variety of biological
processes including the development and plasticity of the nervous system. To gain
further insight into the roles of CREB family members in the development of the
embryonic brain, we examined the migratory phenotype of CREB1(Nescre)CREM(-/-)
mutants. We found that the lack of CREB/CREM genes is accompanied by anatomical
defects in specific layers of the olfactory bulb, hippocampus and cerebral
cortex. These changes are associated with decreased Dab1 expression in
CREB1(Nescre)CREM(-/-) mutants. Our results indicate that the lack of CREB/CREM
genes, specifically in neural and glial progenitors, leads to migration
abnormalities during brain development, suggesting that unidentified
age-dependent factors modulate the role of CREB/CREM genes in neural development.

PMID: 18786638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Leukemia. 2008 Dec;22(12):2217-25. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.244. Epub 2008 Sep 11.

ICER expression inhibits leukemia phenotype and controls tumor progression.

Pigazzi M(1), Manara E, Baron E, Basso G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Laboratory of Oncohematology, University of Padova, 
Padova, Italy. martina.pigazzi@unipd.it

The inducible cyclic AMP (cAMP) early repressor (ICER) and cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB) are transcriptional regulators of the
cAMP-mediated signaling pathway. CREB has been demonstrated to be upregulated in 
the majority of childhood leukemias contributing to disease progression, whereas 
ICER, its endogenous repressor, was found to be downregulated. Our research focus
has been the function of restored ICER expression. ICER exogenously expressed in 
cell lines decreases CREB protein level and induces a lowered clonogenic
potential in vitro. It decreases the ability of HL60 to invade the extramedullary
sites and to promote bone marrow angiogenesis in nonobese diabetic-severe
combined immunodeficient mice, demonstrating its potential effects on tumor
progression. ICER represses the majority of 96 target genes upregulated by CREB. 
It binds CRE promoters and controls gene expression restoring the normal
regulation of major cellular pathways. ICER is subjected to degradation through a
constitutively active form of the extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase, 
which drives it to the proteasome. We propose that ICER is downregulated in HL60 
to preserve CREB overexpression, which disrupts normal myelopoiesis and promotes 
blast proliferation. These findings define the function of ICER as a tumor
suppressor in leukemia. Unbalanced CREB/ICER expression needs to be considered a 
pathogenetic feature in leukemogenesis. The molecular characterization of this
pathway could be useful for novel therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 18784739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Nov 7;376(1):206-10. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.08.126. Epub 2008 Sep 4.

CREM modulates the circadian expression of CYP51, HMGCR and cholesterogenesis in 
the liver.

Acimovic J(1), Fink M, Pompon D, Bjorkhem I, Hirayama J, Sassone-Corsi P,
Golicnik M, Rozman D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Bio-Chips, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Ljubljana, Vrazov trg 2, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

We show for the first time that isoforms of the cAMP response element modulator
Crem, regulate the circadian expression of Cyp51 and other cholesterogenic genes 
in the mouse liver. In the wild type mice the expression of Cyp51, Hmgs, Fpps,
and Sqs is minimal between CT12 and CT16 and peaks between CT20 and CT24. Cyp51, 
Fpps, and Sqs lost the circadian behavior in Crem-/- livers while Hmgcr is phase 
advanced from CT20 to CT12. This coincides with a phase advance of
lathosterol/cholesterol ratio, as detected by GC-MS. Overexpression of CREMtau
and ICER has little effect on the Hmgcr proximal promoter while they influence
expression from the CYP51 promoter. Our data indicate that Crem-dependent
regulation of Cyp51 in the liver results in circadian expression of this gene. We
propose that cAMP signaling might generally be involved in the circadian
regulation of cholesterol synthesis on the periphery.

PMID: 18775413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Cell Signal. 2008 Nov;20(11):2071-83. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2008.07.017. Epub
2008 Aug 5.

In cardiac myocytes, cAMP elevation triggers the down-regulation of transcripts
and promoter activity for cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase-4A10 (PDE4A10).

McCahill A(1), Campbell L, McSorley T, Sood A, Lynch MJ, Li X, Yan C, Baillie GS,
Houslay MD.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience and Molecular Pharmacology, Wolfson Link and Davidson Buildings, 
Faculty of Biomedical & Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, University Avenue, 
Glasgow G12 8QQ, Scotland, UK.

Transcripts for the PDE4A10 cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase isoform are present in a
wide variety of rat tissues including the heart. Sequence comparisons between the
putative human and mouse promoters revealed a number of conserved regions
including both an Sp1 and a CREB-binding site. The putative mouse PDE4A10
promoter was amplified from genomic DNA and sub-cloned into a luciferase reporter
vector for investigation of activity in neonatal cardiac myocytes. Transfection
with this construct identified a high level of luciferase expression in neonatal 
cardiac myocytes. Surprisingly, this activity was down-regulated by elevation of 
intracellular cAMP through a process involving PKA, but not EPAC, signalling.
Such inhibition of the rodent PDE4A10 promoter activity in response to elevated
cAMP levels is in contrast to the PDE4 promoters so far described. Site-directed 
mutagenesis revealed that the Sp1 binding site at promoter position -348 to -336 
is responsible for the basal constitutive expression of murine PDE4A10. The
conserved CREB-binding motif at position -370 to -363 also contributes to basal
promoter activity but does not in itself confer cAMP inhibition upon the PDE4A10 
promoter. EMSA analysis confirmed the authenticity of CREB and Sp1 binding sites.
The transcriptional start site was identified to be an adenine residue at
position -55 in the mouse PDE4A10 promoter. We present evidence that this novel
down-regulation of PDE4A10 is mediated by the transcription factor ICER in a PKA 
dependent manner. The pool of cAMP in cardiac myocytes that down-regulates
PDE4A10 is regulated by beta-adrenoceptor coupled adenylyl cyclase activity and
via hydrolysis determined predominantly by the action of PDE4 (cAMP
phosphodiesterase-4) and not PDE3 (cAMP phosphodiesterase-3). We suggest that
increased cAMP may remodel cAMP-mediated signalling events by not only increasing
the expression of specific PDE4 cAMP phosphodiesterases but also by
down-regulating specific isoforms, such as is shown here for PDE4A10 in cardiac
myocytes.

PMID: 18721873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2008 Oct 1;478(1):26-35. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2008.07.021.
Epub 2008 Jul 31.

Involvement of CREM in CYP1A1 induction through ligand-independent activation
pathway of aryl hydrocarbon receptor in HepG2 cells.

Sasamori E(1), Shimoyama S, Fukushige S, Kikuchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Technology, Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology,
Faculty of Agriculture and Life Science, Hirosaki University, 3 Bunkyo-cho,
Aomori Prefecture, Hirosaki 036-8561, Japan.

Using a radiation-hybrid cell, E11, produced by the fusion of Hepa-1c1c7 and
X-ray irradiated HepG2 cells, we located the omeprazole (OP) responsive region on
chromosome 10p. The cDNA of 12 genes expressed in E11 cells were cloned from
HepG2 mRNA by RT-PCR. The cDNA was transfected into Hepa-1c1c7 cells to check the
increased expression of Cyp1a1 by reporter gene (luciferase) assay. Finally, one 
gene (tauCREM: cAMP responsive element modulator, tau-isoform) was identified as 
a candidate gene for the gene responsive to OP. The regulatory sequence of Cyp1a1
in response to tauCREM transfection was identified in one region (-60 to -52bp
relative to the transcription start site), which was the basic transcription
element (BTE). Electromobility shift assay with the BTE sequence showed an
increase in the band intensity when the cells were treated with OP. Decreased
level of endogenous CREM by siRNA transfection inhibited the induction of
CYP1A1-mRNA in HepG2 cells by OP.

PMID: 18700132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2008 May;14(5):431-5.

[Proteomic identification of necrozoospermia-related proteins].

[Article in Chinese]

Luo KL(1), Fan LQ, Lu GX.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Reproduction and ES Cells Engineering, Xiangya Medical
School, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410078, China.
luokeliviv@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To compare the proteomic differences between normal and
necrozoospermic human spermatozoa.
METHODS: We isolated proteins from 30 ejaculates of 10 healthy donors and 3
specimens of a necrozoospermia patient by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis
(2-DE), analyzed their 2-DE maps and identified some differentially expressed
proteins by mass spectrometry.
RESULTS: A total of (905 +/- 57) and (792 +/- 28) proteins were isolated from the
spermatozoal maps of the normal and necrozoospermic men, respectively, and 178
found to be differentially expressed in that of the necrozoospermia patient. The 
6 missing protein spots in the necrozoospermic map were identified as sperm
protein (human, accession No. 060904), zinc finger protein 174 (AW-1), F-actin
capping protein alpha-3 subunit, testis-specific inhibitor of apoptosis, death
domain receptor 3 soluble form (fragment) and peptide similar to the activator of
CREM in the testis.
CONCLUSION: Six missing protein spots were identified in the necrozoospermic
spermatozoal map which may be associated with the development of necrozoospermia.

PMID: 18572863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Androl. 2008 Sep-Oct;29(5):572-9. doi: 10.2164/jandrol.108.005090. Epub 2008
Jun 20.

The DNA/RNA-binding protein, translin, binds microRNA122a and increases its in
vivo stability.

Yu Z(1), Hecht NB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Reproduction and Women's Health, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 1310 Biomedical Research Building, 421 Curie
Blvd, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6080, USA.

Translin (TSN), also known as testis-brain RNA-binding protein, is proposed to
bind to breakpoint junctions at chromosomal translocations in the nucleus and to 
specific RNAs in the cytoplasm. In germ cells of the mouse testis, it recognizes 
target mRNAs transcribed by the transcription factor CREM-tau in spermatids,
specific meiotically expressed mRNAs, and a noncoding RNA that encodes piRNAs.
Here we show that TSN also binds to the microRNA miR-122a. MiR-122a is expressed 
in late-stage germ cells and is complementary to a sequence in the 3'
untranslated region of the transition protein 2 mRNA. The binding of TSN to
miR-122a increases its in vivo stability, suggesting an additional
posttranscriptional function for TSN.

PMID: 18567644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2008;20(4):513-8.

Analysis of selected transcript levels in porcine spermatozoa, oocytes, zygotes
and two-cell stage embryos.

Kempisty B(1), Antosik P, Bukowska D, Jackowska M, Lianeri M, Jaskowski JM,
Jagodzinski PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Medical
Sciences, Swiecickiego 6 St. 60-781, Poznan, Poland.

It has been suggested that spermatozoa can deliver mRNAs to the oocyte during
fertilisation. Using reverse transcription and real-time quantitative polymerase 
chain reaction analysis (RQ-PCR), we evaluated the presence of clusterin (CLU),
protamine 2 (PRM2), calmegin (CLGN), cAMP-response element modulator protein
(CREM), methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1), linker histone 1 (H1), protamine 1 (PRM1),
TATA box-binding protein associated factor 1 (TAF1) and TATA box-binding protein 
(TBP) in porcine mature oocytes, zygotes and two-cell stage embryos. Spermatozoa 
isolated from semen samples of boars contained all transcripts investigated,
whereas oocytes contained only CREM, H1, TAF1, and TBP mRNAs. The zygote and
two-cell stage embryos contained CLU, CREM, H1, PRM1, PRM2, TAF1 and TBP
transcripts. Our observations suggest that porcine spermatozoa may delivery CLU, 
PRM1 and PRM2 mRNAs to the oocyte, which may contribute to zygotic and early
embryonic development.

PMID: 18462614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Bone. 2008 Jul;43(1):101-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2008.03.012. Epub 2008 Mar 29.

Osteopenia in transgenic mice with osteoblast-targeted expression of the
inducible cAMP early repressor.

Chandhoke TK(1), Huang YF, Liu F, Gronowicz GA, Adams DJ, Harrison JR, Kream BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
CT 06030, USA. Chandhoke@student.uchc.edu

ICER is a member of the CREM family of basic leucine zipper transcription factors
that acts as a dominant negative regulator of gene transcription. Four different 
isoforms of ICER (I, Igamma, II and IIgamma) are transcribed from the P2 promoter
of the Crem gene. We previously found that each of the ICER isoforms is induced
by parathyroid hormone in osteoblasts. The goal of the present study was to
assess the function of ICER in bone by overexpressing ICER in osteoblasts of
transgenic mice. ICER I and ICER II cDNAs, each containing an N-terminal FLAG
epitope tag, were cloned downstream of a fragment containing 3.6 kb of the rat
Col1a1 promoter and most of the rat Col1a1 first intron to produce pOBCol3.6-ICER
I and pOBCol3.6-ICER II transgenes, respectively. Multiple lines of mice were
generated bearing the ICER I and ICER II transgenes. At 8 weeks of age, ICER I
and ICER II transgenic mice had lower body weights and decreased bone mineral
density of femurs and vertebrae. Further studies were done with ICER I transgenic
mice, which had greatly reduced trabecular bone volume and a markedly decreased
bone formation rate in femurs. Osteoblast differentiation and osteocalcin
expression were reduced in ex vivo bone marrow cultures from ICER I transgenic
mice. ICER I antagonized the activity of ATF4 at its consensus DNA binding site
in the osteocalcin promoter in vitro. Thus, transgenic mice with
osteoblast-targeted overexpression of ICER exhibited osteopenia caused primarily 
by reduced bone formation. We speculate that ICER regulates the activity and/or
expression of ATF/CREB factors required for normal bone formation.

PMCID: PMC2474743
PMID: 18460422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Clin Invest. 2008 May;118(5):1750-64. doi: 10.1172/JCI34149.

Identification of kinetin riboside as a repressor of CCND1 and CCND2 with
preclinical antimyeloma activity.

Tiedemann RE(1), Mao X, Shi CX, Zhu YX, Palmer SE, Sebag M, Marler R, Chesi M,
Fonseca R, Bergsagel PL, Schimmer AD, Stewart AK.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Division of Hematology and Oncology,
Scottsdale, Arizona, USA.

Knockout and transgenic studies in mice demonstrate that normal somatic tissues
redundantly express 3 cyclin D proteins, whereas tumor cells seem dependent on a 
single overexpressed cyclin D. Thus, selective suppression of the individual
cyclin D deregulated in a tumor represents a biologically valid approach to
targeted cancer therapy. In multiple myeloma, overexpression of 1 of the cyclin D
proteins is a ubiquitous feature, unifying at least 7 different initiating
genetic events. We demonstrate here that RNAi of genes encoding cyclin D1 and
cyclin D2 (CCND1 and CCND2, respectively) inhibits proliferation and is
progressively cytotoxic in human myeloma cells. By screening a chemical library
using a cell-based assay for inhibition of CCND2 trans-activation, we identified 
the plant cytokinin kinetin riboside as an inhibitor of CCND2 trans-activation.
Kinetin riboside induced marked suppression of CCND2 transcription and rapidly
suppressed cyclin D1 and D2 protein expression in primary myeloma cells and tumor
lines, causing cell-cycle arrest, tumor cell-selective apoptosis, and inhibition 
of myeloma growth in xenografted mice. Mechanistically, kinetin riboside
upregulated expression of transcription repressor isoforms of cAMP-response
element modulator (CREM) and blocked both trans-activation of CCND2 by various
myeloma oncogenes and cis-activation of translocated CCND1, suggesting induction 
of an overriding repressor activity that blocks multiple oncogenic pathways
targeting cyclin D genes. These data support targeted repression of cyclin D
genes as a therapeutic strategy for human malignancies.

PMCID: PMC2323188
PMID: 18431519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. FASEB J. 2008 Aug;22(8):2872-9. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-107888. Epub 2008 Apr 18.

CREB has a context-dependent role in activity-regulated transcription and
maintains neuronal cholesterol homeostasis.

Lemberger T(1), Parkitna JR, Chai M, Schütz G, Engblom D.

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Induction of specific gene expression patterns in response to activity confers
functional plasticity to neurons. A principal role in the regulation of these
processes has been ascribed to the cAMP responsive element binding protein
(CREB). Using genome-wide expression profiling in mice lacking CREB in the
forebrain, accompanied by deletion of the cAMP responsive element modulator gene 
(CREM), we here show that the role of these proteins in activity-induced gene
expression is surprisingly selective and highly context dependent. Thus, only a
very restricted subset of activity-induced genes (i.e., Gadd45b or Nr4a2)
requires these proteins for their induction in the hippocampus after kainic acid 
administration, while they are required for most of the cocaine-induced
expression changes in the striatum. Interestingly, in the absence of CREB, CREM
is able to rescue activity-regulated transcription, which strengthens the notion 
of overlapping functions of the two proteins. In addition, we show that
cholesterol metabolism is dysregulated in the brains of mutant mice, as reflected
coordinated expression changes in genes involved in cholesterol synthesis and
neuronal accumulation of cholesterol. These findings provide novel insights into 
the role of CREB and CREM in stimulus-dependent transcription and neuronal
homeostasis.

PMID: 18424767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. FEMS Yeast Res. 2008 May;8(3):499-508. doi: 10.1111/j.1567-1364.2008.00377.x.
Epub 2008 Apr 1.

Farysizyma gen. nov., an anamorphic genus in the Ustilaginales to accommodate
three novel epiphytic basidiomycetous yeast species from America, Europe and
Asia.

Inácio J(1), Landell MF, Valente P, Wang PH, Wang YT, Yang SH, Manson JS,
Lachance MA, Rosa CA, Fonseca A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal.

Among many isolates that resulted from four independent surveys of yeasts
associated with plants in Brazil, the USA, Portugal and Taiwan, we have
characterized eighteen basidiomycetous strains, two of which were conspecific
with the type strain of Rhodotorula acheniorum, whereas the remaining sixteen
isolates appeared not to correspond to any previously described species.
Microsatellite-PCR fingerprinting with primers M13 and (GTG)5 confirmed that the 
latter strains formed three genetically distinct groups. Each group was
considered to represent a distinct species based on nucleotide sequences of the
D1/D2 domains of the 26S rRNA gene and the internal transcribed spacer (ITS)
region. Phylogenetic analyses of sequence data placed the putative novel species 
in a clade with R. acheniorum and the dimorphic smut fungus Farysia chardoniana. 
A novel anamorphic genus, Farysizyma, is created to accommodate the three
undescribed species, which were named Farysizyma itapuensis, Farysizyma
setubalensis and Farysizyma taiwaniana. A new combination, Farysizyma acheniorum,
is proposed for R. acheniorum, which may represent the yeast-phase anamorph of
Farysia thuemenii.

PMID: 18384364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Ethnopharmacol. 2008 May 22;117(3):503-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2008.02.016. Epub 
2008 Feb 19.

Effects of Psoralea corylifolia on the cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM)
expression and spermatogenesis in rats.

Yang WM(1), Chang MS, Park SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prescriptionology, College of Oriental Medicine, Kyung Hee
University, 1 Hoegi-dong, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea.

AIM OF THE STUDY: Psoralea corylifolia (PC) is a medicinal herb used to improve
male reproductive function in Korean traditional medicine. It has been used for
treatment of male infertility including sexual dysfunction by improving kidney
function.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To investigate the effect of PC on spermatogenesis, the
cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) in rat testes was evaluated using sperm 
analysis, the reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction, and Western blot
analysis. PC was administered to 10-week-old male Wistar rats for 56 consecutive 
days, the sperm formation period of the rat.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The PC-treated rats had increased sperm counts with
enhanced levels of CREM messenger RNA and protein, suggesting that PC induces
spermatogenesis via CREM activation in rat testes.

PMID: 18374528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Mar;40(3):113-23. doi: 10.1677/JME-07-0111.

Stromal-derived factor-1alpha induces a non-canonical pathway to activate the
endocrine-linked Tac1 gene in non-tumorigenic breast cells.

Corcoran KE(1), Malhotra A, Molina CA, Rameshwar P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine-Hematology-Oncology, New Jersey Medical School,
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey 07103,
USA.

The chemokine Stromal-derived factor-1alpha (SDF-1alpha) interacts with seven
transmembrane (TM) G-protein-coupled receptor (GPR), CXCR4. SDF-1alpha is linked 
to inflammation, chemoattraction, cancer metastasis, and hematopoiesis.
Tachykinin (Tac1) peptides bind seven transmembrane (TM), GPR and are involved in
tumor promotion. SDF-1alpha regulates Tac1 expression in non-tumorigenic breast
cells through a bimodal pattern with repression at high levels through nuclear
factor-kappa B (NFkappaB) activation. This study focuses on the mechanism of
activation at low SDF-1alpha in MCF12A non-tumorigenic breast cells. Reporter
gene assays with the 5' flanking region of Tac1 (exon 1 omitted) and
co-transfection with the repressor of cAMP response element (CREB) (ICER), and
transfection with the CRE sites mutated, verified critical roles for CRE sites in
SDF-1alpha-mediated Tac1 activation. Western blots and functional assays with
specific inhibitors indicated that SDF-1alpha phosphorylated CREB (P-CREB) via
Galpha(i)2-PI3K-protein kinase C (PKC)zeta-p38-extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK) and no evidence of cAMP-PKA pathway. This observation is different
from previous studies that reported CREB-phosphorylated PKA pathway in the
activation of Tac1 in bone marrow stromal cells. This suggests cell specificity
in Tac1 expression. In conclusion, this study reports on a non-canonical pathway 
in Tac1 activation by SDF-1alpha. This finding is significant, since Tac1 is
relevant to breast cancer metastasis, to bone marrow where stromal cells have a
significant facilitating function.

PMID: 18316470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Neurochem. 2008 Jun 1;105(6):2315-29. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2008.05314.x.

Modulation of adenosine A1 and A2A receptors in C6 glioma cells during hypoxia:
involvement of endogenous adenosine.

Castillo CA(1), León D, Ruiz MA, Albasanz JL, Martín M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Inorgánica, Orgánica y Bioquímica, Facultad de
Químicas, Centro Regional de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad de
Castilla-La Mancha, Ciudad Real, Spain.

During hypoxia, extracellular adenosine levels are increased to prevent cell
damage, playing a neuroprotective role mainly through adenosine A(1) receptors.
The aim of the present study was to analyze the effect of hypoxia in both
adenosine A(1) and A(2A) receptors endogenously expressed in C6 glioma cells. Two
hours of hypoxia (5% O(2)) caused a significant decrease in adenosine A(1)
receptors. The same effect was observed at 6 h and 24 h of hypoxia. However,
adenosine A(2A) receptors were significantly increased at the same times. These
effects were not due to hypoxia-induced alterations in cells number or viability.
Changes in receptor density were not associated with variations in the rate of
gene expression. Furthermore, hypoxia did not alter HIF-1alpha expression in C6
cells. However, HIF-3alpha, CREB and CREM were decreased. Adenosine A(1) and
A(2A) receptor density in normoxic C6 cells treated with adenosine for 2, 6 and
24 h was similar to that observed in cells after oxygen deprivation. When C6
cells were subjected to hypoxia in the presence of adenosine deaminase, the
density of receptors was not significantly modulated. Moreover, DPCPX, an A(1)
receptor antagonist, blocked the effects of hypoxia on these receptors, while
ZM241385, an A(2A) receptor antagonist, was unable to prevent these changes.
These results suggest that moderate hypoxia modulates adenosine receptors and
cAMP response elements in glial cells, through a mechanism in which endogenous
adenosine and tonic A(1) receptor activation is involved.

PMID: 18315561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Arch Androl. 2007 Sep-Oct;53(5):257-65.

Crem activator isoforms in normal and impaired human spermatogenesis analyzed by 
real time RT-PCR.

Fiszer D(1), Bialas M, Rozwadowska N, Kosicki W, Jedrzejczak P, Kurpisz M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland.

cAMP responsive element modulator (CREM) activator isoforms are involved in
mammalian spermatogenesis and spermiogenesis. CREM proteins are highly expressed 
in postmeiotic germ cells of rodents and primates. Homozygous CREM inactivated
mice exhibit round spermatid maturation arrest. The lack of CREM expression at
both the mRNA and protein levels is associated with spermatid maturation arrest
in infertile patients. Using real-time RT-PCR, we have examined the levels of
CREM activator isoform mRNAs: CREMtheta1, CREMtheta2 and CREMt2 + Ex-gamma in
gametogenic and interstitial cell fractions from normal human testis, in
homogenized tissue samples from spermatogenic arrest and from testicular tumors. 
We have shown for the first time the presence of CREM activator isoform
containing exon gamma (CREMtau2 + Exgamma) in normal human spermatogenesis. Among
the three CREM isoforms, CREMtheta1 was expressed in its highest level in the
male gonads. In comparison, CREMtheta2 mRNA was significantly less suggesting
that the P3 promoter is much more active in human testis than the P4 promoter.
Minimal-nill levels of mRNA for either of the CREM activator isoforms were
detected in lymphocytes or in gonadal tissues from patients with SCOS (Sertoli
Cell Only Syndrome). This data underlines the significance of CREMtheta1 isoform 
in the regulation of transcription during post-meiotic germ cell differentiation.

PMID: 18309898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Neurosci. 2008 Feb 27;28(9):2025-32. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5273-07.2008.

Induction of activating transcription factors (ATFs) ATF2, ATF3, and ATF4 in the 
nucleus accumbens and their regulation of emotional behavior.

Green TA(1), Alibhai IN, Unterberg S, Neve RL, Ghose S, Tamminga CA, Nestler EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390-9070, USA.

Previous research has shown that cAMP response element (CRE) binding protein
(CREB) in the nucleus accumbens gates behavioral responses to emotional stimuli. 
For example, overexpression of CREB decreases anxiety, sucrose preference, and
sensitivity to drugs of abuse and increases depression-like behavior, whereas
blocking CREB via overexpression of inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) or
other dominant-negative inhibitors of CRE-mediated transcription has the opposite
effects. However, CREB and ICER are but two members of a larger family of leucine
zipper-containing transcription factors composed of multiple products of the
creb, crem (cAMP response element modulator), and atf (activating transcription
factor) genes. We demonstrate here that ATF2, ATF3, and ATF4 are each robustly
induced in the nucleus accumbens and dorsal striatum by restraint stress or by
amphetamine administration. In contrast, little induction is seen for ATF1 or
CREM. Using viral-mediated gene transfer, we show that ATF2 overexpression in
nucleus accumbens produces increases in emotional reactivity and
antidepressant-like responses, a behavioral phenotype similar to that caused by
dominant-negative antagonists of CREB. In contrast, ATF3 or ATF4 overexpression
in nucleus accumbens decreases emotional reactivity and increases depression-like
behavior, consistent with the behavioral phenotype induced by CREB. Because
amphetamine and stress induce ATF2, ATF3, and ATF4 in nucleus accumbens, and
overexpression of these transcription factors in this brain region in turn alters
behavioral responsiveness to amphetamine and stress, our findings support novel
roles for these ATF family members in regulating emotional behavior.

PMID: 18305237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Neuroscience. 2008 Mar 27;152(3):829-36. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2007.10.064.
Epub 2008 Jan 17.

The role of transcription factors cyclic-AMP responsive element modulator (CREM) 
and inducible cyclic-AMP early repressor (ICER) in epileptogenesis.

Porter BE(1), Lund IV, Varodayan FP, Wallace RW, Blendy JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Children' Hospital of Philadelphia at the
University of Pennsylvania, 502C Abramson, 3516 Civic Center Boulevard,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Porterb@email.chop.edu

Alterations in the brain that contribute to the development of epilepsy, also
called epileptogenesis, are not well understood, which makes it difficult to
develop strategies for preventing epilepsy. Here we have studied the role of the 
CRE binding transcription factors, cyclic-AMP responsive element modulator (CREM)
and inducible cyclic-AMP early repressor (ICER), in the development of epilepsy
following pilocarpine induced status epilepticus (SE) in mice. Following SE, ICER
mRNA and protein are increased in neurons. The increase in ICER, however, is not 
necessary for neuronal injury following SE as pilocarpine treatment induces
equivalent neuronal injury in pyramidal neurons of wild type and CREM/ICER null
mice. Following SE, the CREM/ICER null mice develop a more severe epileptic
phenotype experiencing approximately threefold more frequent spontaneous
seizures. Together these data suggest that the increase in ICER mRNA following SE
may have a role in suppressing the severity of epilepsy.

PMCID: PMC2372160
PMID: 18295410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Cardiovasc Res. 2008 Apr 1;78(1):98-107. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvn016. Epub 2008 Jan
24.

Cardiac remodelling hinders activation of cyclooxygenase-2, diminishing
protection by delayed pharmacological preconditioning: role of HIF1 alpha and
CREB.

Feng J(1), Lucchinetti E, Fischer G, Zhu M, Zaugg K, Schaub MC, Zaugg M.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Anesthesia Research Laboratory, Center of Clinical Research,
Institute of Anesthesiology, E-HOF, University Hospital Zurich, Rämistrasse 100, 
Zurich CH-8091, Switzerland.

AIMS: We tested whether delayed pharmacologic preconditioning elicited by
isoflurane is protective in infarct-remodelled hearts.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Male Wistar rats were treated with the preconditioning drug 
isoflurane 6 weeks after permanent ligation of the left anterior descending
coronary artery. Twenty-four and 48 h later, hearts were perfused on the
Langendorff system and treated with cyclooxygenase-2 or 12-lipoxygenase
inhibitors before exposure to 40 min of ischaemia followed by 90 min of
reperfusion. Infarct size was determined by triphenyltetrazolium chloride
staining and lactate dehydrogenase release. Cyclooxygenase-2 expression and
activity were measured by Western blotting and colorimetric assay. Nuclear
translocation of cyclooxygenase-2-inducing transcription factors HIF1alpha, CREB,
STAT3, and NFkappaB was determined. Post-infarct, remodelled hearts exhibit
alterations in cellular signalling, time course and extent of isoflurane-induced 
late protection. While remodelled, preconditioned hearts exhibited protection
exclusively at 24 h, healthy hearts showed sustained protection for up to 48 h,
which correlated with cyclooxygenase-2 protein expression and enzymatic activity.
The cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors celecoxib and NS-398, but not the 12-lipoxygenase
inhibitor cinnamyl-3,4-dihydroxycyanocinnamate, abolished delayed protection in
both healthy and remodelled hearts, identifying cyclooxygenase-2 as a key
mediator of late protection in both models. Isoflurane induced nuclear
translocation of HIF1alpha in all hearts, but CREB was exclusively activated in
healthy but not remodelled myocardium, which expressed higher levels of the CREB 
antagonist ICER. Delayed protection by isoflurane in remodelled hearts was more
vulnerable to inhibition by celecoxib.
CONCLUSION: Isoflurane failed to mobilize cyclooxygenase-2-inducing CREB in
ICER-overexpressing, remodelled hearts, which was associated with a shortening of
the second window of protection.

PMID: 18218685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Endocrinology. 2008 May;149(5):2592-606. doi: 10.1210/en.2007-1390. Epub 2008 Jan
17.

Identification of cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate response element modulator
as an activator of the human sodium/iodide symporter upstream enhancer.

Fenton MS(1), Marion KM, Hershman JM.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology Division, Veterans Affairs Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System
and Department of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90073, USA. fenton@ucla.edu

The lack of Na(+)/I(-) symporter (NIS) gene expression in some thyroid cancer
patients has been a major hurdle that limits the efficacy of standard radioactive
iodide therapy. The molecular mechanism that contributes to low NIS expression is
not well understood. Activated NIS gene expression is stimulated by
thyroid-stimulating hormone-mediated cAMP/protein kinase A signaling through a
NIS upstream enhancer (NUE). The cAMP pathway is also stimulated by forskolin. In
the current work, we studied the mechanism of transcriptional activation of NIS
in normal thyroid cells and thyroid cancer cells. We identified the cAMP response
element modulator (CREM) activator as a new component of the transcription
complex that is important for NIS gene expression. The CREM complex is seen in
the normal thyroid cells and BRAF (V600E) thyroid cancer cells (BHP 17-10) but is
missing in rearranged in transformation/papillary thyroid carcinoma-1
rearrangement thyroid cancer cells (BHP 2-7). This complex is believed to be
responsible for the loss of NUE activity and reduced NIS expression in the BHP
2-7 cell line. In BHP 2-7 cells, forskolin stimulated the thyroid-specific
transcription factor Pax 8, but CREM activator mRNA did not increase, and this
produced a small increase in NUE activity. Ectopic expression of CREM activator
enhanced activity of the NUE, indicating that CREM is an essential regulator of
NIS gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2329265
PMID: 18202121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 4;283(14):9328-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M705110200. Epub 2008
Jan 7.

Surface expression of GABAA receptors is transcriptionally controlled by the
interplay of cAMP-response element-binding protein and its binding partner
inducible cAMP early repressor.

Hu Y(1), Lund IV, Gravielle MC, Farb DH, Brooks-Kayal AR, Russek SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Translational Epilepsy, Department of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
02118, USA.

The regulated expression of type A gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor
(GABA(A)R) subunit genes plays a critical role in neuronal maturation and
synaptogenesis. It is also associated with a variety of neurological diseases.
Changes in GABA(A) receptor alpha1 subunit gene (GABRA1) expression have been
reported in animal models of epilepsy, alcohol abuse, withdrawal, and stress.
Understanding the genetic mechanism behind such changes in alpha subunit
expression will lead to a better understanding of the role that signal
transduction plays in control over GABA(A)R function and brings with it the
promise of providing new therapeutic tools for the prevention or cure of a
variety of neurological disorders. Here we show that activation of protein kinase
C increases alpha1 subunit levels via phosphorylation of CREB (pCREB) that is
bound to the GABRA1 promoter (GABRA1p). In contrast, activation of protein kinase
A decreases levels of alpha1 even in the presence of pCREB. Decrease of alpha1 is
dependent upon the inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) as directly demonstrated
by ICER-induced down-regulation of endogenous alpha1-containing GABA(A)Rs at the 
cell surface of cortical neurons. Taken together with the fact that there are
less alpha1gamma2-containing GABA(A)Rs in neurons after protein kinase A
stimulation and that activation of endogenous dopamine receptors down-regulates
alpha1 subunit mRNA levels subsequent to induction of ICER, our studies identify 
a transcriptional mechanism for regulating the cell surface expression of
alpha1-containing GABA(A)Rs that is dependent upon the formation of CREB
heterodimers.

PMCID: PMC2431045
PMID: 18180303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2008 Mar 15;227(3):357-69. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2007.10.030. Epub 2007 Nov 28.

Transcriptional responses in thyroid tissues from rats treated with a tumorigenic
and a non-tumorigenic triazole conazole fungicide.

Hester SD(1), Nesnow S.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Carcinogenesis Division, National Health and Environmental
Effects Research Laboratory, Office of Research and Development, US Environmental
Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC 27711, USA. hester.susan@epa.gov

Conazoles are azole-containing fungicides that are used in agriculture and
medicine. Conazoles can induce follicular cell adenomas of the thyroid in rats
after chronic bioassay. The goal of this study was to identify pathways and
networks of genes that were associated with thyroid tumorigenesis through
transcriptional analyses. To this end, we compared transcriptional profiles from 
tissues of rats treated with a tumorigenic and a non-tumorigenic conazole.
Triadimefon, a rat thyroid tumorigen, and myclobutanil, which was not tumorigenic
in rats after a 2-year bioassay, were administered in the feed to male Wistar/Han
rats for 30 or 90 days similar to the treatment conditions previously used in
their chronic bioassays. Thyroid gene expression was determined using high
density Affymetrix GeneChips (Rat 230_2). Gene expression was analyzed by the
Gene Set Expression Analyses method which clearly separated the tumorigenic
treatments (tumorigenic response group (TRG)) from the non-tumorigenic treatments
(non-tumorigenic response group (NRG)). Core genes from these gene sets were
mapped to canonical, metabolic, and GeneGo processes and these processes compared
across group and treatment time. Extensive analyses were performed on the 30-day 
gene sets as they represented the major perturbations. Gene sets in the 30-day
TRG group had over representation of fatty acid metabolism, oxidation, and
degradation processes (including PPARgamma and CYP involvement), and of cell
proliferation responses. Core genes from these gene sets were combined into
networks and found to possess signaling interactions. In addition, the core genes
in each gene set were compared with genes known to be associated with human
thyroid cancer. Among the genes that appeared in both rat and human data sets
were: Acaca, Asns, Cebpg, Crem, Ddit3, Gja1, Grn, Jun, Junb, and Vegf. These
genes were major contributors in the previously developed network from
triadimefon-treated rat thyroids. It is postulated that triadimefon induces
oxidative response genes and activates the nuclear receptor, Ppargamma,
initiating transcription of gene products and signaling to a series of genes
involved in cell proliferation.

PMID: 18164361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2008 Feb;104(2):429-38. Epub 2007 Dec 6.

AMP-activated protein kinase phosphorylates transcription factors of the CREB
family.

Thomson DM(1), Herway ST, Fillmore N, Kim H, Brown JD, Barrow JR, Winder WW.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Physiology and Developmental Biology, 545 WIDB, Brigham Young Univ., 
Provo, UT 84602, USA.

AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) has been identified as a regulator of gene
transcription, increasing mitochondrial proteins of oxidative metabolism as well 
as hexokinase expression in skeletal muscle. In mice, muscle-specific knockout of
LKB1, a component of the upstream kinase of AMPK, prevents contraction- and
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-beta-D-ribofuranoside (AICAR)-induced activation
of AMPK in skeletal muscle, and the increase in hexokinase II protein that is
normally observed with chronic AICAR activation of AMPK. Since previous reports
show a cAMP response element in the promoter region of the hexokinase II gene, we
hypothesized that the cAMP-response element (CRE) binding protein (CREB) family
of transcription factors could be targets of AMPK. Using radioisotopic kinase
assays, we found that recombinant and rat liver and muscle AMPK phosphorylated
CREB1 at the same site as cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). AMPK was also
found to phosphorylate activating transcription factor 1 (ATF1), CRE modulator
(CREM), and CREB-like 2 (CREBL2), but not ATF2. Treatment of HEK-293 cells stably
transfected with a CREB-driven luciferase reporter with AICAR increased
luciferase activity approximately threefold over a 24-h time course. This
increase was blocked with compound C, an AMPK inhibitor. In addition,
AICAR-induced activation of AMPK in incubated rat epitrochlearis muscles resulted
in an increase in both phospho-acetyl-CoA carboxylase and phospho-CREB. We
conclude that CREB and related proteins are direct downstream targets for AMPK
and are therefore likely involved in mediating some effects of AMPK on expression
of genes having a CRE in their promoters.

PMID: 18063805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2007;67(8):885-91.

RNA and protein clean-up from the same specimen. Comparison between the Qiagen
and Ambion protocols.

Prestvik WS(1), Hjertø AL, Steigedal TS, Thommesen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Medical Technology, Sør-Trøndelag University
College, Trondheim, Norway.

Study of gene and protein expression patterns is considered desirable for gaining
new insight into cellular molecular mechanisms. The purpose of the present study 
was to compare the RNeasy (Qiagen) and PARIS (Ambion) protocols for protein and
RNA clean-up. We found that the RNeasy protocol resulted in a significantly
higher yield of both RNA and protein compared to the PARIS protocol. Western blot
analysis of proteins isolated with these two methods, and with use of three
different antibodies (PKB/Akt, c-fos and CREM), indicated that these methods were
equal in regard to protein patterns, despite the protein precipitation step that 
is included in the RNeasy protocol. In some cases, Western blot performed on
unprecipitated flow-through (Qiagen) may be satisfactory for Western blot
analysis, but the amount of protein is probably decisive for detection.

PMID: 18034392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Diabetes. 2008 Mar;57(3):584-93. Epub 2007 Nov 19.

Increasing GLP-1-induced beta-cell proliferation by silencing the negative
regulators of signaling cAMP response element modulator-alpha and DUSP14.

Klinger S(1), Poussin C, Debril MB, Dolci W, Halban PA, Thorens B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

OBJECTIVE: Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) is a growth and differentiation factor
for mature beta-cells and their precursors. However, the overall effect of GLP-1 
on increasing beta-cell mass in both in vivo and in vitro conditions is
relatively small, and augmenting this effect would be beneficial for the
treatment or prevention of type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Here, we searched for
cellular mechanisms that may limit the proliferative effect of GLP-1 and tested
whether blocking them could increase beta-cell proliferation.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We examined GLP-1-regulated genes in beta TC-Tet
cells by cDNA microarrays. To assess the effect of some of these gene on cell
proliferation, we reduced their expression using small heterogenous RNA in
beta-cell lines and primary mouse islets and measured [(3)H]thymidine or
5'-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine incorporation.
RESULTS: We identified four negative regulators of intracellular signaling that
were rapidly and strongly activated by GLP-1: the regulator of
G-protein-signaling RGS2; the cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB)
antagonists cAMP response element modulator (CREM)-alpha and ICERI; and the dual 
specificity phosphatase DUSP14, a negative regulator of the mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) pathway.
We show that knockdown of CREMalpha or DUSP14 or expression of a
dominant-negative form of DUSP14 increased beta-cell line proliferation and
enhanced the GLP-1-induced proliferation of primary beta-cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, our data show that 1) the cAMP/protein kinase A/CREB and
MAPK/ERK1/2 pathways can additively control beta-cell proliferation, 2)
beta-cells have evolved several mechanisms limiting GLP-1-induced cellular
proliferation, and 3) blocking these mechanisms increases the positive effect of 
GLP-1 on beta-cell mass.

PMID: 18025410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Stem Cells. 2008 Jan;26(1):266-78. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

Gdnf upregulates c-Fos transcription via the Ras/Erk1/2 pathway to promote mouse 
spermatogonial stem cell proliferation.

He Z(1), Jiang J, Kokkinaki M, Golestaneh N, Hofmann MC, Dym M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular & Cellular Biology, Georgetown
University Medical Center, 3900 Reservoir Road NW, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) plays a crucial role in
regulating the proliferation of spermatogonial stem cells (SSC). The signaling
pathways mediating the function of GDNF in SSC remain unclear. This study was
designed to determine whether GDNF signals via the Ras/ERK1/2 pathway in the
C18-4 cells, a mouse SSC line. The identity of this cell line was confirmed by
the expression of various markers for germ cells, proliferating spermatogonia,
and SSC, including GCNA1, Vasa, Dazl, PCNA, Oct-4, GFRalpha1, Ret, and Plzf.
Western blot analysis revealed that GDNF activated Ret tyrosine phosphorylation. 
All 3 isoforms of Shc were phosphorylated upon GDNF stimulation, and GDNF induced
the binding of the phosphorylated Ret to Shc and Grb2 as indicated by
immunoprecipitation and Western blotting. The active Ras was induced by GDNF,
which further activated ERK1/2 phosphorylation. GDNF stimulated the
phosphorylation of CREB-1, ATF-1, and CREM-1, and c-fos transcription. Notably,
the increase in ERK1/2 phosphorylation, c-fos transcription, bromodeoxyuridine
incorporation, and metaphase counts induced by GDNF, was completely blocked by
pretreatment with PD98059, a specific inhibitor for MEK1, the upstream regulator 
of ERK1/2. GDNF stimulation eventually upregulated cyclin A and CDK2 expression. 
Together, these data suggest that GDNF induces CREB/ATF-1 family member
phosphorylation and c-fos transcription via the Ras/ERK1/2 pathway to promote the
proliferation of SSC. Unveiling GDNF signaling cascades in SSC has important
implications in providing attractive targets for male contraception as well as
for the regulation of stem cell renewal vs. differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2905627
PMID: 17962702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Neurosci Res. 2008 Feb 15;86(3):593-602.

The MAPK pathway is required for depolarization-induced "promiscuous"
immediate-early gene expression but not for depolarization-restricted
immediate-early gene expression in neurons.

Machado HB(1), Vician LJ, Herschman HR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California, USA.

Depolarization, growth factors, neurotrophins, and other stimuli induce
expression of immediate early genes (IEGs) in neurons. We identified a subset of 
IEGs, IPD-IEGs, which are induced preferentially by depolarization, but not by
neurotrophins or growth factors, in PC12 cells. The "promiscuous" IEGs Egr1 and
c-fos, induced by growth factors and neurotrophins, in addition to
depolarization, require activation of the MAP kinase signaling pathway for
induction in response to KCl depolarization in PC12 cells; MEK1/2 inhibitors
block KCl-induced Egr1 and c-fos expression. In contrast, MEK1/2 inhibition has
no effect on KCl-induced expression of the known IPD-IEGs in PC12 cells.
Additional "candidate" IDP-IEGs were identified by a microarray comparison of
genes induced by KCl in the presence vs. the absence of an MEK1/2 inhibitor in
PC12 cells. Northern blot analyses demonstrated that representative newly
identified candidate IPD-IEGs, as with the known IPD-IEGs, are also induced by a 
MAP kinase- independent pathway in response to depolarization, both in PC12 cells
and in rat primary cortical neurons. Nerve growth factor and epidermal growth
factor are unable to induce the expression of the Crem/Icer, Nur77, Nor1, Rgs2,
Dusp1 (Mkp1), and Dscr1 genes in PC12 cells, validating their identification as
IPD-IEGs. Inhibiting calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMKII),
calcineurin, or protein kinase A (PKA) activity prevents KCl-induced IPD-IEG mRNA
accumulation, suggesting that the IPD-IEG genes are induced by depolarization in 
neurons via a combination of calcineurin/PKA- and CaMKII-dependent pathways.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17941051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Ethnopharmacol. 2007 Dec 3;114(3):463-7. Epub 2007 Aug 19.

Effects of Rubus coreanus on sperm parameters and cAMP-responsive element
modulator (CREM) expression in rat testes.

Oh MS(1), Yang WM, Chang MS, Park W, Kim do R, Lee HK, Kim WN, Park SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Herbology, College of Pharmacy, Kyung Hee University, 
1 Hoegi-dong, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea.

Rubi Fructus (RF), the dried, unripe fruit of Rubus coreanus M IQ. (Rosaceae),
has been used to improve male reproductive function in traditional Korean
medicine. In this study, we investigated the effects of RF on sperm parameters
and expression of cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM), which has a crucial
role in spermatogenesis. RF was administered to 8-week-old male Wistar rats for
56 consecutive days (1.0 g/kg, daily, p.o.). Sperm analysis, RT-PCR, and Western 
blot assays were then carried out. The RF-treated animals showed significant
increases in the weight of the testes, epididymal sperm count, and sperm motility
compared to the control group. RF also increased the expression of CREM at both
the mRNA and protein levels. These results suggest that RF may improve male
fertility by enhancing spermatogenesis.

PMID: 17889470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 Oct 17;129(41):12549-62. Epub 2007 Sep 21.

Fullerene-like (IF) Nb(x)Mo(1-x)S2 nanoparticles.

Deepak FL(1), Cohen H, Cohen S, Feldman Y, Popovitz-Biro R, Azulay D, Millo O,
Tenne R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials and Interfaces, Chemical Services Unit, Electron
Microscopy Unit, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel.

IF-Mo1-xNbxS2 nanoparticles have been synthesized by a vapor-phase reaction
involving the respective metal halides with H2S. The IF-Mo1-xNbxS2 nanoparticles,
containing up to 25% Nb, were characterized by a variety of experimental
techniques. Analysis of the powder X-ray powder diffraction, X-ray photoelectron 
spectroscopy, and different electron microscopy techniques shows that the
majority of the Nb atoms are organized as nanosheets of NbS2 within the MoS2 host
lattice. Most of the remaining Nb atoms (3%) are interspersed individually and
randomly in the MoS2 host lattice. Very few Nb atoms, if any, are intercalated
between the MoS2 layers. A sub-nanometer film of niobium oxide seems to encoat
the majority of the nanoparticles. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy in the
chemically resolved electrical measurement mode (CREM) and scanning probe
microscopy measurements of individual nanoparticles show that the mixed IF
nanoparticles are metallic independent of the substitution pattern of the Nb
atoms in the lattice of MoS2 (whereas unsubstituted IF-MoS2 nanoparticles are
semiconducting). Furthermore the IF-Mo1-xNbxS2 nanoparticles are found to exhibit
interesting single electron tunneling effects at low temperatures.

PMID: 17887674  [PubMed]


281. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Nov;27(22):7871-85. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

In vivo analysis of developmentally and evolutionarily dynamic protein-DNA
interactions regulating transcription of the Pgk2 gene during mammalian
spermatogenesis.

Yoshioka H(1), Geyer CB, Hornecker JL, Patel KT, McCarrey JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 
78249, USA.

Transcription of the testis-specific Pgk2 gene is selectively activated in
primary spermatocytes to provide a source of phosphoglycerate kinase that is
critical to normal motility and fertility of mammalian spermatozoa. We examined
dynamic changes in protein-DNA interactions at the Pgk2 gene promoter during
murine spermatogenesis in vivo by performing genomic footprinting and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays with enriched populations of murine spermatogenic
cells at stages prior to, during, and following transcription of this gene. We
found that genes encoding the testis-specific homeodomain factor PBX4 and its
coactivator, PREP1, are expressed in patterns that mirror expression of the Pgk2 
gene and that these factors become bound to the Pgk2 enhancer in cells in which
this gene is actively expressed. We therefore suggest that these factors, along
with CREM and SP3, direct stage- and cell type-specific transcription of the Pgk2
gene during spermatogenesis. We propose that binding of PBX4, plus its
coactivator PREP1, is a rate-limiting step leading to the initiation of
tissue-specific transcription of the Pgk2 gene. This study provides insight into 
the developmentally dynamic establishment of tissue-specific protein-DNA
interactions in vivo. It also allows us to speculate about the events that led to
tissue-specific regulation of the Pgk2 gene during mammalian evolution.

PMCID: PMC2169153
PMID: 17875925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Horm Metab Res. 2007 Aug;39(8):560-6.

Regulation of human MC2-R gene expression by CREB, CREM, and ICER in the
adrenocortical cell line Y1.

Zwermann O(1), Braun AC, Lalli E, Sassone-Corsi P, Beuschlein F, Reincke M.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik - Innenstadt, Ludwig-Maximilian-University, Munich,
Germany. oliver.zwermann@med.uni-muenchen.de

The MC2-Receptor (melanocortin 2 receptor, MC2-R) is a Gs-protein coupled
receptor that is upregulated by its own ligand ACTH and by forskolin. The
mechanisms regulating MC2-R expression are still unclear. We therefore
investigated the role of the stimulatory transcription factors CREB and CREM and 
the inhibitory factor ICER for regulation of human MC2-R expression. We
cotransfected mouse adrenocortical Y1 cells with luciferase reporter gene vectors
containing full length and deleted human MC2-R promoter constructs with
expression plasmids for CREB, CREBS133A, CREMtau, CREMtauS117A, or ICER. Direct
protein-DNA interaction was investigated by EMSA. Wild type CREB did not
significantly affect promoter activity due to high endogenous CREB activity.
However, CREBS133A decreased forskolin stimulated MC2-R promoter activity by
48+/-5% (mean+/-SEM) while unstimulated values remained unchanged. CREMtau
moderately increased basal and forskolin stimulated luciferase activity in a
dose-dependent manner (maximum effect 252+/-24% and 186+/-13% VS. control vector,
respectively). While this effect required the full length promoter, cAMP
stimulation was retained in shorter constructs. ICER reduced basal luciferase
activity in Y1 cells by 17+/-28%, but completely abolished forskolin stimulation.
Although 5'-deletion constructs mapped the minimum promoter region required for
ICER effect to the shortest -64/+40 construct, direct protein DNA interaction in 
this promoter region could not be identified by EMSA. Moreover, mutation of the
SF-1 binding sites, which retained ICER dependent inhibition, excluded SF-1 to be
required for this effect. We conclude from these data that transcription factors 
of the CREB/CREM/ATF family have a moderate effect on human MC2-R promoter
activity, but seem to play a minor role in transmitting stimulation of the cAMP
pathway to increased MC2-R expression.

PMID: 17712720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Mol Genet Metab. 2007 Nov;92(3):274-7. Epub 2007 Aug 14.

A homozygous tyrosine hydroxylase gene promoter mutation in a patient with
dopa-responsive encephalopathy: clinical, biochemical and genetic analysis.

Ribasés M(1), Serrano M, Fernández-Alvarez E, Pahisa S, Ormazabal A,
García-Cazorla A, Pérez-Dueñas B, Campistol J, Artuch R, Cormand B.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Psiquiatria, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona,
Spain.

We report a recessive mutation in the tyrosine hydroxylase gene (TH) promoter
(c.1-71C>T), present at homozygosity in a patient with dopa-responsive
encephalopathy. The change lies in a cAMP response element (CRE) and alters a
binding site for the CREM transcription factor. Previous studies support that the
CRE in the TH gene is essential for its transcription, suggesting that mutations 
within this consensus motif may cause an impairment of catecholamine biosynthesis
and lead to a pathogenic phenotype.

PMID: 17698383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Endocrinology. 2007 Oct;148(10):4592-600. Epub 2007 Jul 12.

Acetylation of histone H3 and adrenergic-regulated gene transcription in rat
pinealocytes.

Ho AK(1), Price DM, Dukewich WG, Steinberg N, Arnason TG, Chik CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, 7-26 Medical Sciences Building, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada. anho@ualberta.ca

In this study we investigated the effect of histone acetylation on the
transcription of adrenergic-induced genes in rat pinealocytes. We found that
treatment of pinealocytes with trichostatin A (TSA), a histone deacetylase
inhibitor, caused hyperacetylation of histone H3 (H3) Lys14 at nanomolar
concentrations. Hyperacetylation of H3 was also observed after treatment with
scriptaid, a structurally unrelated histone deacetylase inhibitor. The effects of
TSA and scriptaid were inhibitory on the adrenergic induction of
arylalkylamine-n-acetyltransferase (aa-nat) mRNA, protein, and enzyme activity,
and on melatonin production. TSA at higher concentrations also inhibited the
adrenergic induction of mapk phosphatase-1 (mkp-1) and inducible cAMP early
repressor mRNAs. In contrast, the effect of TSA on the norepinephrine induction
of the c-fos mRNA was stimulatory. Moreover, the effect of TSA on
adrenergic-induced gene transcription was dependent on the time of its addition; 
its effect was only observed during the active phase of transcription. Chromatin 
immunoprecipitation with antibodies against acetylated Lys14 of H3 showed an
increase in DNA recovery of the promoter regions of aa-nat, mkp-1, and c-fos
after treatment with TSA. Together, our results demonstrate that histone
acetylation differentially influences the transcription of adrenergic-induced
genes, an enhancing effect for c-fos but inhibitory for aa-nat, mkp-1, and
inducible cAMP early repressor. Moreover, both inhibitory and enhancing effects
appear to be mediated through specific modification of promoter-bound histones
during gene transcription.

PMID: 17628002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. FEBS J. 2007 Jul;274(14):3589-600.

L-Arabinose transport and catabolism in yeast.

Fonseca C(1), Romão R, Rodrigues de Sousa H, Hahn-Hägerdal B, Spencer-Martins I.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Biotechnology Unit, Faculty of
Sciences and Technology, New University of Lisbon, Caparica, Portugal.

Two yeasts, Candida arabinofermentans PYCC 5603(T) and Pichia guilliermondii PYCC
3012, which show rapid growth on L-arabinose and very high rates of L-arabinose
uptake on screening, were selected for characterization of L-arabinose transport 
and the first steps of intracellular L-arabinose metabolism. The kinetics of
L-arabinose uptake revealed at least two transport systems with distinct
substrate affinities, specificities, functional mechanisms and regulatory
properties. The L-arabinose catabolic pathway proposed for filamentous fungi also
seems to operate in the yeasts studied. The kinetic parameters of the initial
L-arabinose-metabolizing enzymes were determined. Reductases were found to be
mostly NADPH-dependent, whereas NAD was the preferred cofactor of dehydrogenases.
The differences found between the two yeasts agree with the higher efficiency of 
L-arabinose metabolism in C. arabinofermentans. This is the first full account of
the initial steps of L-arabinose catabolism in yeast including the biochemical
characterization of a specific L-arabinose transporter.

PMID: 17627668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Reprod Toxicol. 2007 Nov-Dec;24(3-4):365-70. Epub 2007 May 18.

Yukmijihwang-tang protects against cyclophosphamide-induced reproductive
toxicity.

Oh MS(1), Chang MS, Park W, Kim do R, Bae H, Huh Y, Park SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prescriptionology, College of Oriental Medicine, Kyung Hee
University, 1 Hoegi-Dong, Dongdaemun-Gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

A side effect of cyclophosphamide (CP), an alkylating agent widely used to treat 
tumors and autoimmune disorders, is the alteration of male reproductive function.
Yukmijihwang-tang (YJT) is a multi-herbal medicinal formula that has been used in
traditional Asian medicine to treat male reproductive problems. In this study, we
investigated the effects of YJT on CP-induced reproductive toxicities in rat
testes. Eight-week-old male Wistar rats were divided into three groups:
vehicle-treated (control), CP-treated and CP+YJT-treated groups. CP was
administered for the first 7 days (20 mg/kg/day, p.o.), and YJT was administered 
for 56 days consecutively (1.0 g/kg/day, p.o.). The CP-treated group showed
significant decreases in the weight of the testes, epididymal sperm count and
sperm motility compared to the control group, while the CP+YJT-treated group had 
significant increases for these variables compared to the CP-treated group. The
enhancement of lipid peroxidation by CP in the rat testes was reduced by YJT
treatment. CP diminished the expression of cAMP-responsive element modulator
(CREM), a transcription factor that is highly expressed in male germ cells and is
crucial to post-meiotic germ cell differentiation. YJT restored CREM at both the 
mRNA and protein levels. These results suggest that YJT has a protective effect
against CP-induced reproductive toxicities by inhibiting the increases in lipid
peroxidation and enhancing CREM expression.

PMID: 17624719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J AOAC Int. 2007 May-Jun;90(3):817-24.

Application of a quantitative carrier test to evaluate microbicides against
mycobacteria.

Springthorpe VS(1), Sattar SA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Ottawa, Faculty of Medicine, Centre for Research on
Environmental Microbiology (CREM), 451 Smyth Rd, Ottawa, ON, KlH 8M5, Canada.

Microbicides for reprocessing heat-sensitive medical devices, such as flexible
endoscopes, must be mycobactericidal to reduce the risk of nosocomial infections.
Suspension test methods currently used for efficacy evaluation lack the
stringency required for assessing inactivation of mycobacteria on surfaces. The
quantitative carrier test method reported here is based on
mycobacteria-contaminated reference carrier disks of brushed stainless steel.
Each disk was contaminated with 10 microL of a suspension of Mycobacterium terrae
containing a soil load. Each disk with a dried inoculum was placed in a glass or 
Teflon vial, and then overlaid with 50 microL of the test formulation or 50
microL saline for the control carriers. Five test and 3 control disks were used
in each run. At the end of the contact time, each vial received 9.95 mL
neutralizer solution with 0.1% Tween-80 to stop the reaction and perform the
initial microbicide dilution. The inoculum was eluted by mixing on a Vortex mixer
for 60 s, and the eluates and saline used to subsequently wash the vials and the 
funnels were membrane-filtered. Filters were placed on plates of Middlebrook 7H11
agar and incubated at 37 degrees C for at least 30 days before colonies were
counted and log10 reductions were calculated in colony-forming units. Tests with 
a range of commercially available products, having claims against mycobacteria,
or believed to be broad-spectrum microbicides, showed that the method gave
reproducible results. Products used included oxidizing agents (sodium
hypochlorite and an iodophore), a phenolic, a quaternary ammonium compound, and
ortho-phthalaldehyde. This method represents a much more realistic evaluation
than the currently used quantitative suspension test method for the evaluation of
mycobactericidal formulations for registration and, when performed at different
product concentrations, allows an assessment of any safety margin or risks in
using the test formulation in the field.

PMID: 17580635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Immunol. 2007 Jul 1;179(1):607-15.

Negative regulation of TLR responses by the neuropeptide CGRP is mediated by the 
transcriptional repressor ICER.

Harzenetter MD(1), Novotny AR, Gais P, Molina CA, Altmayr F, Holzmann B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, Ismaningerstrasse 22, Munich, Germany.

Communication between the nervous and immune systems involves the release of
neuropeptides, such as calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), from sensory
nerves during inflammation. CGRP may inhibit the activities of both innate and
adaptive immune cells, but the molecular pathways underlying this function are
largely unknown. In this study, we identify CGRP as a potent inhibitor of
TLR-stimulated production of inflammatory mediators, such as TNF-alpha and CCL4, 
by murine dendritic cells. Inhibition of TLR responses was independent of IL-10
and did not involve perturbation of canonical TLR signaling, including activation
of MAPK and NF-kappaB. Instead, the inhibitory activity of CGRP was mediated by
the cAMP/protein kinase A pathway leading to rapid up-regulation of the
transcriptional repressor, inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER). Ectopically
expressed ICER directly repressed the LPS-stimulated activity of a synthetic Tnf 
promoter, as well as TNF-alpha protein production driven by the endogenous
promoter. Inhibition of dendritic cell gene expression by CGRP was associated
with the presence of a composite cAMP response element/kappaB promoter element.
In a murine model of endotoxemia, CGRP markedly attenuated serum TNF-alpha
levels, and this effect was associated with the up-regulation of ICER. Together, 
these results establish a novel pathway for the negative regulation of TLR
responses through the nervous system that critically involves induction of the
transcriptional repressor ICER by the neuropeptide CGRP.

PMID: 17579082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jul 20;282(29):20854-67. Epub 2007 May 25.

Transcriptional regulation of the bovine leukemia virus promoter by the cyclic
AMP-response element modulator tau isoform.

Nguyên TL(1), de Walque S, Veithen E, Dekoninck A, Martinelli V, de Launoit Y,
Burny A, Harrod R, Van Lint C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie et de Médecine Moléculaires, Laboratoire de Virologie
Moléculaire, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Rue des Profs Jeener et Brachet 12,
6041 Gosselies, Belgium.

Bovine leukemia virus (BLV) expression is controlled at the transcriptional level
through three Tax(BLV)-responsive elements (TxREs) responsive to the viral
transactivator Tax(BLV). The cAMP-responsive element (CRE)-binding protein (CREB)
has been shown to interact with CRE-like sequences present in the middle of each 
of these TxREs and to play critical transcriptional roles in both basal and
Tax(BLV)-transactivated BLV promoter activity. In this study, we have
investigated the potential involvement of the cAMP-response element modulator
(CREM) in BLV transcriptional regulation, and we have demonstrated that CREM
proteins were expressed in BLV-infected cells and bound to the three BLV TxREs in
vitro. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays using BLV-infected cell lines
demonstrated in the context of chromatin that CREM proteins were recruited to the
BLV promoter TxRE region in vivo. Functional studies, in the absence of Tax(BLV),
indicated that ectopic CREMtau protein had a CRE-dependent stimulatory effect on 
BLV promoter transcriptional activity. Cross-link of the B-cell receptor
potentiated CREMtau transactivation of the viral promoter. Further experiments
supported the notion that this potentiation involved CREMtau Ser-117
phosphorylation and recruitment of CBP/p300 to the BLV promoter. Although CREB
and Tax(BLV) synergistically transactivated the BLV promoter, CREMtau repressed
this Tax(BLV)/CREB synergism, suggesting that a modulation of the level of
Tax(BLV) transactivation through opposite actions of CREB and CREMtau could
facilitate immune escape and allow tumor development.

PMID: 17526487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Stress. 2007 Jun;10(2):153-61.

Negative regulation of corticotropin releasing factor expression and limitation
of stress response.

Aguilera G(1), Kiss A, Liu Y, Kamitakahara A.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Endocrine Physiology, Developmental Endocrinology Branch, National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892-1103,
USA. greti_aguilera@nih.gov

Corticotropin releasing factor (CRF) coordinates behavioral, autonomic and
hormonal responses to stress. Activation of the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal
(HPA) axis with stimulation of CRF and vasopressin (VP) release from hypothalamic
parvocellular neurons, and consequent secretion of ACTH from the anterior
pituitary and glucocorticoid from the adrenal cortex, is the major endocrine
response to stress. Current evidence indicates that the main regulator of ACTH
secretion in acute and chronic conditions is CRF, in spite of the fact that the
selective increases in expression of parvocellular VP and pituitary VP V1b
receptors observed during prolonged activation of the HPA axis have suggested
that VP becomes the predominant regulator. Following CRF release, activation of
CRF transcription is required to restore mRNA and peptide levels, but termination
of the response is essential to prevent pathology associated with chronic
elevation of CRF and glucocorticoid production. While glucocorticoid feedback
plays an important role in regulating CRF expression, the relative importance of 
direct transcriptional repression of the CRF gene by glucocorticoids in the
overall feedback mechanism is not clear. In addition to glucocorticoids,
intracellular feedback mechanisms in the CRF neuron, involving induction of
repressor forms of cAMP response element modulator (CREM) limit CRF
transcriptional responses by competing with the positive regulator, phospho-CREB.
Rapid repression of CRF transcription following stress-induced activation is
likely to contribute to limiting the stress response and to preventing disorders 
associated with excessive CRF production.

PMID: 17514584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. BMC Genet. 2007 May 17;8:24.

Sequencing and association analysis of the type 1 diabetes-linked region on
chromosome 10p12-q11.

Nejentsev S(1), Smink LJ, Smyth D, Bailey R, Lowe CE, Payne F, Masters J, Godfrey
L, Lam A, Burren O, Stevens H, Nutland S, Walker NM, Smith A, Twells R, Barratt
BJ, Wright C, French L, Chen Y, Deloukas P, Rogers J, Dunham I, Todd JA.

Author information: 
(1)Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation/Wellcome Trust Diabetes and Inflammation
Laboratory, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK. sergey.nejentsev@cimr.cam.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: In an effort to locate susceptibility genes for type 1 diabetes (T1D)
several genome-wide linkage scans have been undertaken. A chromosomal region
designated IDDM10 retained genome-wide significance in a combined analysis of the
main linkage scans. Here, we studied sequence polymorphisms in 23 Mb on
chromosome 10p12-q11, including the putative IDDM10 region, to identify genes
associated with T1D.
RESULTS: Initially, we resequenced the functional candidate genes, CREM and SDF1,
located in this region, genotyped 13 tag single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
and found no association with T1D. We then undertook analysis of the whole 23 Mb 
region. We constructed and sequenced a contig tile path from two bacterial
artificial clone libraries. By comparison with a clone library from an unrelated 
person used in the Human Genome Project, we identified 12,058 SNPs. We genotyped 
303 SNPs and 25 polymorphic microsatellite markers in 765 multiplex T1D families 
and followed up 22 associated polymorphisms in up to 2,857 families. We found
nominal evidence of association in six loci (P = 0.05 - 0.0026), located near the
PAPD1 gene. Therefore, we resequenced 38.8 kb in this region, found 147 SNPs and 
genotyped 84 of them in the T1D families. We also tested 13 polymorphisms in the 
PAPD1 gene and in five other loci in 1,612 T1D patients and 1,828 controls from
the UK. Overall, only the D10S193 microsatellite marker located 28 kb downstream 
of PAPD1 showed nominal evidence of association in both T1D families and in the
case-control sample (P = 0.037 and 0.03, respectively).
CONCLUSION: We conclude that polymorphisms in the CREM and SDF1 genes have no
major effect on T1D. The weak T1D association that we detected in the association
scan near the PAPD1 gene may be either false or due to a small genuine effect,
and cannot explain linkage at the IDDM10 region.

PMCID: PMC1885446
PMID: 17509149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Mol Reprod Dev. 2007 Nov;74(11):1363-72.

NSSR1 is regulated in testes development and cryptorchidism and promotes the exon
5-included splicing of CREB transcripts.

Xiao PJ(1), Hu L, Li J, Lin W, Chen X, Xu P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genomic Physiology and State Key Laboratory of Medical
Neurobiology, School of Life Sciences and Shanghai Medical College, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China.

Neural salient serine/arginine rich protein 1 (NSSR1, alternatively SRp38) is a
newly identified splicing factor that is highly expressed in neural and
reproductive tissues. We showed that the expression of testicular NSSR1 increased
significantly during mouse testes development. NSSR1 was mainly expressed in germ
cells, but barely detected in Sertoli cells. Testicular NSSR1 was mostly
phosphorylated and cytosolic in germ cells. In comparison, pituitary NSSR1 was
mostly dephosphorylated and nuclear. In the cryptorchid testes, the
dephosphorylated NSSR1 was significantly increased. RT-PCR analysis demonstrated 
that the alternative splicing of CREB and CREM genes was altered in the
cryptorchid testes. In addition, CREB transcripts were associated with NSSR1
either in testes tissues or cultured GC-1 cells. Moreover, the studies with NSSR1
over-expression or silence demonstrated that NSSR1 promoted the exon 5 inclusion 
of CREB, indicating that NSSR1 is a new factor that regulates the alternative
exon 5 inclusion of CREB transcripts. The findings for the first time provide the
evidence indicating the potential importance of NSSR1 in testes development,
spermatogenesis and cryptorchidism.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17427975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Fertil Steril. 2007 Oct;88(4):1000-2. Epub 2007 Apr 6.

Korean ginseng induces spermatogenesis in rats through the activation of
cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM).

Park WS(1), Shin DY, Kim do R, Yang WM, Chang MS, Park SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Oriental Medicine, Kyungwon University,
Seongnam, Korea.

The effect of Korean ginseng (ginseng) on spermatogenesis and cAMP-responsive
element modulator (CREM) in rat testes was evaluated using sperm analysis,
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, and Western blot analysis. The
ginseng-treated rats exhibited significantly increased sperm count and motility
with enhanced levels of CREM messenger RNA and protein. Ginseng appears to induce
spermatogenesis via CREM activation in rat testes.

PMID: 17418830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 18;282(20):14777-87. Epub 2007 Mar 27.

Protein kinase D induces transcription through direct phosphorylation of the
cAMP-response element-binding protein.

Johannessen M(1), Delghandi MP, Rykx A, Dragset M, Vandenheede JR, Van Lint J,
Moens U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Virology, Institute of Medical Biology,
University of Tromsø, N-9037 Tromsø, Norway.

Protein kinase D (PKD), a family of serine/threonine kinases, can be activated by
a multitude of stimuli in a protein kinase C-dependent or -independent manner.
PKD is involved in signal transduction pathways controlling cell proliferation,
apoptosis, motility, and protein trafficking. Despite its versatile functions,
few genuine in vivo substrates for PKD have been identified. In this study we
demonstrate that the transcription factor cAMP-response element-binding protein
(CREB) is a direct substrate for PKD. PKD1 and CREB interact in cells, and
activated PKD1 provokes CREB phosphorylation at Ser-133 both in vitro and in
vivo. A constitutive active mutant of PKD1 stimulates GAL4-CREB-mediated
transcription in a Ser-133-dependent manner, activates CRE-responsive promoters, 
and increases the expression of CREB target genes. PKD1 also enhances
transcription mediated by two other members of the CREB family, ATF-1 and CREM.
Our results describe a novel mechanism for PKD-induced signaling through
activation of the transcription factor CREB and suggest that stimulus-induced
phosphorylation of CREB, reported to be mediated by protein kinase C, may involve
downstream activated PKD.

PMID: 17389598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Apr;37(4):884-95.

ICER/CREM-mediated transcriptional attenuation of IL-2 and its role in
suppression by regulatory T cells.

Bodor J(1), Fehervari Z, Diamond B, Sakaguchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Columbia University, College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA. jb2562@columbia.edu

Here, we report that inducible cAMP early repressor/cAMP response element
modulator (ICER/CREM) is induced early in CD25(+)CD4(+) regulatory T cell (T(R)) 
assays mainly in activated Foxp3(-) effector T cells and this induction
correlates with sharp decrease in number of IL-2-expressing T cells. Importantly,
RNAi targeting of ICER/CREM in responder CD25(-)CD4(+) T cells antagonizes
T(R)-mediated suppression. Moreover, forced expression of Foxp3 in naive CD25(-) 
T cells induces constitutive expression of ICER/CREM in T cells with a regulatory
phenotype. Foxp3 facilitates expression of ICER/CREM both in Foxp3 transductants 
as well as CD25(-) responder T cells suggesting that induction of T(R) function
in suppression assays may utilize contact-dependent interaction. Indeed, CTLA-4
blockade or use of B7-deficient CD25(-) responder T cells prevents ICER/CREM
accumulation and leads to the rescue of IL-2 expression. Therefore, we propose
that CTLA-4 binding to B7 ligands expressed on activated ligand-bearing Foxp3(-) 
effector T cells results in ICER/CREM-mediated transcriptional attenuation of
IL-2. Collectively, these data suggest that Foxp3 expression in T(R) cells
imposes suppression in contact-dependent fashion by induction of constitutive
ICER/CREM expression in activated CD25(+) Foxp3(-) T cell effectors thus
preventing them from producing IL-2.

PMID: 17372992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Aug 15;101(6):1532-44.

Inducible cAMP early repressor splice variants ICER I and IIgamma both repress
transcription of c-fos and chromogranin A.

Misund K(1), Steigedal TS, Laegreid A, Thommesen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology, N-7489 Trondheim, Norway.

Inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) splice variants are generated upon
activation of an alternative, intronic promoter within the CREM gene. ICER is
proposed to downregulate both its own expression, and the expression of other
genes, containing cAMP-responsive promoter elements. To examine the biological
function of the two ICER splice variants, I and IIgamma, in comparable cellular
systems, we generated HEK 293 cell variants with controllable overexpression of
either ICER I or IIgamma. These two splice variants contain two different
variants of DNA binding domains. Overexpression of either ICER I or IIgamma
strongly represses CRE-driven reportergene transcription but not AP1- or
NFkappaB-driven transcription. Thus, high specificity is maintained even at ICER 
overexpression. We here show that both ICER I and IIgamma repress Pituitary
adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP)-mediated c-fos mRNA induction
with similar efficiency, indicating that both splice variants play an important
role in modulating PACAP-mediated transcriptional activation of the c-fos gene.
ICER I and IIgamma also repress cAMP-mediated activation of chromogranin A (CgA),
indicating that these splice variants may function as negative feedback
regulators in CgA synthesis. The proliferation rate was not altered in cells
overexpressing ICER I or IIgamma. Thus, in the epithelial cells HEK 293, ICER I
and IIgamma splice variants seem to exert similar biological function.

PMID: 17340624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Bone. 2007 Apr;40(4):1135-43. Epub 2007 Feb 1.

CREM deficiency in mice alters the response of bone to intermittent parathyroid
hormone treatment.

Liu F(1), Lee SK, Adams DJ, Gronowicz GA, Kream BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, MC-1850, University of Connecticut Health Center, 263 
Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030, USA. feiliu@umich.edu

CREM belongs to the ATF/CREB family of basic leucine zipper transcription
factors. We previously showed that PTH induces ICER (inducible cAMP early
repressor) in osteoblasts. ICER proteins, which are transcribed from the P2
promoter of the Crem gene, act as transcriptional attenuators. The objective of
this study was to determine whether the Crem gene plays a role in the response of
bone to intermittent PTH. Adult Crem knockout (KO) and wild type (WT) male mice
were given daily subcutaneous injections of vehicle or hPTH(1-34) (160 mug/kg)
for 10 days. Bone mineral content and density (BMC and BMD, respectively) were
measured in femur and tibia by dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA). Bone
morphometry was analyzed by X-ray computed microtomography (microCT) and
histomorphometry. Serum bone turnover markers were measured. In vitro osteoclast 
formation assays were performed in bone marrow cultures treated with PTH or the
combination of RANKL and M-CSF. KO mice had slightly higher basal bone mass than 
wild type mice. PTH treatment increased tibial BMC and BMD to a greater extent in
WT mice compared to KO mice. PTH increased both cortical area and trabecular bone
area in WT but not in KO femurs. PTH increased the bone formation rate and
percent osteoblast surface to the same extent in femurs of WT and KO mice but
increased osteoclast parameters and calvarial porosity to a greater extent in KO 
mice. PTH increased serum osteocalcin levels to the same extent in WT and KO
mice. PTH-induced osteoclast formation was 2-fold greater in bone marrow cultures
from KO mice. Collectively, our data suggest that the CREM deficiency in mice
alters the response of bone to intermittent PTH treatment such that
osteoclastogenesis is increased. Crem gene may specify the anabolic response to
intermittent PTH treatment by restraining PTH-induced osteoclastogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1995436
PMID: 17275432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Nat Med. 2007 Feb;13(2):189-97. Epub 2007 Feb 4.

Aldosterone impairs vascular reactivity by decreasing glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase activity.

Leopold JA(1), Dam A, Maron BA, Scribner AW, Liao R, Handy DE, Stanton RC, Pitt
B, Loscalzo J.

Author information: 
(1)Whitaker Cardiovascular Institute, 700 Albany Street, Boston University School
of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA. jleopold@partners.org

Erratum in
    Nat Med. 2009 Sep;15(9):1093.

Hyperaldosteronism is associated with impaired vascular reactivity; however, the 
mechanisms by which aldosterone promotes endothelial dysfunction remain unknown. 
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) modulates vascular function by limiting 
oxidant stress to preserve bioavailable nitric oxide (NO(*)). Here we show that
aldosterone (10(-9)-;10(-7) mol/l) decreased endothelial G6PD expression and
activity in vitro, resulting in increased oxidant stress and decreased NO(*)
levels-similar to what is observed in G6PD-deficient endothelial cells.
Aldosterone decreased G6PD expression by increasing expression of the cyclic
AMP-response element modulator (CREM) to inhibit cyclic AMP-response element
binding protein (CREB)-mediated G6PD transcription. In vivo, infusion of
aldosterone decreased vascular G6PD expression and impaired vascular reactivity. 
These effects were abrogated by spironolactone or vascular gene transfer of G6pd.
These findings demonstrate that aldosterone induces a G6PD-deficient phenotype to
impair endothelial function; aldosterone antagonism or gene transfer of G6pd
improves vascular reactivity by restoring G6PD activity.

PMCID: PMC3648863
PMID: 17273168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Acta Neurobiol Exp (Wars). 2006;66(4):267-72.

Inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) isoforms and neuronal apoptosis in cortical
in vitro culture.

Klejman A(1), Kaczmarek L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Nencki Institute of
Experimental Biology, Pasteura 3, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland.

CREB activation and CREB-dependent signaling pathways are crucial for neuronal
survival. The term ICER (inducible cAMP early repressor) refers to four protein
isoforms that are all endogenous, inducible antagonists of CREB. Jaworski and
others (2003) have previously shown that one of those isoforms, ICER IIgamma, is 
highly expressed in apoptotic neurons in vitro and its overexpression evokes
neuronal death. In this study we investigated the role of all four ICER isoforms 
in cortical neuronal culture, comparing their expression level in
serum-deprived/MK-801-treated neurons and their pro-apoptotic properties towards 
transfected cortical neurons. We have found that all four isoforms are induced
upon pro-apoptotic treatment, and also that each of them separately evokes
neuronal cell death following cortical culture transfection with the genes. The
most efficiently induced, as well as the most effective in evoking neuronal cell 
death, were both ICER Igamma and IIgamma isoforms.

PMID: 17265688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2007 May;75(2):303-10. Epub 2007 Jan 30.

L-Arabinose metabolism in Candida arabinofermentans PYCC 5603T and Pichia
guilliermondii PYCC 3012: influence of sugar and oxygen on product formation.

Fonseca C(1), Spencer-Martins I, Hahn-Hägerdal B.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Faculty of Sciences and Technology,
New University of Lisbon, 2829-516, Caparica, Portugal.

L-Arabinose utilization by the yeasts Candida arabinofermentans PYCC 5603(T) and 
Pichia guilliermondii PYCC 3012 was investigated in aerobic batch cultures and
compared, under similar conditions, to D-glucose and D-xylose metabolism. At high
aeration levels, only biomass was formed from all the three sugars. When oxygen
became limited, ethanol was produced from D-glucose, demonstrating a fermentative
pathway in these yeasts. However, pentoses were essentially respired and, under
oxygen limitation, the respective polyols accumulated--arabitol from L-arabinose 
and xylitol from D-xylose. Different L-arabinose concentrations and oxygen
conditions were tested to better understand L-arabinose metabolism. P.
guilliermondii PYCC 3012 excreted considerably more arabitol from L-arabinose
(and also xylitol from D-xylose) than C. arabinofermentans PYCC 5603(T). In
contrast to the latter, P. guilliermondii PYCC 3012 did not produce any traces of
ethanol in complex L-arabinose (80 g/l) medium under oxygen-limited conditions.
Neither sustained growth nor active metabolism was observed under anaerobiosis.
This study demonstrates, for the first time, the oxygen dependence of metabolite 
and product formation in L-arabinose-assimilating yeasts.

PMID: 17262211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 9;282(10):7164-71. Epub 2007 Jan 16.

Transcriptional and epigenetic regulation of interleukin-2 gene in activated T
cells by morphine.

Wang J(1), Barke RA, Roy S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota
55455, USA.

Chronic morphine inhibits interleukin-2 (IL-2) at both the transcriptional and
protein synthesis levels. The molecular mechanisms by which morphine decreases
IL-2 are not fully understood. The production of IL-2 is tightly regulated by
several transcription factors that bind to the IL-2 promoter. Herein, we show
that chronic morphine treatment results in an increase in cAMP levels with a
concurrent up-regulation of the cAMP inducible repressor inducible cAMP early
repressor (ICER)/cAMP response element modulator (CREM) and down-regulation of
p-cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) in activated T cells. Furthermore,
ICER competes for p-CREB binding to the cAMP-responsive elements (CREs) site.
This leads to the uncoupling of CBP/p300 thereby abrogating IL-2 transcription.
Overexpression of either antisense CREM or CREB plasmid rescued morphine-induced 
inhibition of IL-2 promoter activity and protein production. In addition, we also
found that chronic morphine treatment inhibited the acetylation and
trimethylation of histones and decreased both DNA demethylation and accessibility
of the IL-2 promoter. These findings suggest that chronic morphine treatment may 
function through both transcriptional and epigenetic mechanisms to inhibit IL-2
production.

PMID: 17227776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets. 2006 Dec;6(4):305-11.

Signaling abnormalities in systemic lupus erythematosus as potential drug
targets.

Fernandez D(1), Bonilla E, Phillips P, Perl A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, State University of New York, College of Medicine,
Syracuse, New York 13210, USA.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune inflammatory disease
characterized by T-cell, B-cell, and dendritic cell dysfunction and antinuclear
autoantibody production. Much of the knowledge that has been gained about SLE in 
recent years is related to molecular signaling abnormalities present in the
disease. Signaling through the T-cell receptor (TCR) is affected in SLE by
alterations in the localization, amount, and activity of numerous protein
kinases. TCR stimulation releases calcium from intracellular stores, which
triggers an influx of extracellular calcium and activates the transcription of
many genes, including interleukin-2. Short-term calcium fluxing is exaggerated in
SLE, but long-term calcium fluxing is diminished and may account for sub-optimal 
interleukin-2 production. SLE T-cells have persistently hyperpolarized
mitochondria associated with increased mitochondrial mass, high levels of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and low levels of ATP, which decrease
activation-induced apoptosis and instead predispose T cells for necrosis, thus
stimulating inflammation in SLE. The pentose phosphate pathway impacts the
mitochondrial potential and represents a target for possible intervention. Nitric
oxide (NO) is a potential link to tie together the signaling and mitochondrial
abnormalities in SLE. NO-induced mitochondrial biogenesis recapitulates the
TCR-stimulated calcium fluxing abnormalities of SLE T-cells. Since mitochondria
can store calcium, the increase in mitochondrial mass may be implicated in the
aberrant calcium fluxing in SLE T cells. The mammalian target of rapamycin senses
the mitochondrial potential and regulates calcium release, serving as a novel
target of treatment of SLE.

PMID: 17214576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Lupus. 2006;15(12):840-4.

CAMP response element modulator a expression in patients with systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Kyttaris VC(1), Wang Y, Juang YT, Weinstein A, Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Injury, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver 
Spring, MD 20910, USA.

T cells from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) have high levels of
cAMP response element modulator (CREM)-alpha which bind to the interleukin (IL-2)
promoter and limit IL-2 production. In this case-controlled study, we show that
CREM-alpha mRNA levels were higher in T cells from patients with SLE than
controls while CREB mRNA levels did not differ between the two groups. CREM-alpha
mRNA levels did not correlate with clinical characteristics, disease activity or 
treatment. Nevertheless, there was a trend for patients on high doses of
corticosteroids to have low levels of CREM-alpha mRNA. The discovery of specific 
non-toxic medications that block the expression of CREM-alpha may prove useful in
reversing the aberrant T cell function in SLE.

PMID: 17211988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. GMS Krankenhhyg Interdiszip. 2007 Sep 13;2(1):Doc06.

Reducing the health impact of infectious agents: the significance of preventive
strategies.

Sattar SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research on Environmental Microbiology (CREM), Faculty of Medicine,
University of Ottawa, Canada.

Each year almost 15 million people die of infectious diseases and in all
probability this figure is much higher, because in many cases infection is not at
all recognized as being the cause of death or its contributory role is not known.
There is an increase in the risks posed by infections; the belief in the
omnipotence of drugs has not stood the test of time; rather, by adopting a
counterstance we risk losing all that we accomplished during the last decades.
After all, over the past 40 years we witnessed progress in the development of
reliable and affordable anti-infectives and vaccines. As a result of this, today 
parents have their children vaccinated less often since they are no longer aware 
of the risks posed by lack of vaccination. This will give rise to the sudden
reemergence of certain infectious diseases. And we overlook the fact that by
observing basic rules of hygiene (hand hygiene; water decontamination; etc), we
could save many lives on this earth. It is becoming increasingly more difficult
to treat with antibiotics patients harboring resistant bacterial strains on their
skin. Hospitals need surface disinfection to prevent microbes such as
Clostridiium difficile or norovirus. The institutional use of alcohol-based hand 
disinfectants has by now become an accepted practice in North America. But some
of these substances have dangerous side effects where humans and the environment 
are concerned. Our test methods are not always able to evaluate the actual extent
of the risks posed.Prevention is accorded greater importance in view of the
declining number of therapeutic measures available. But combating pathogenic
microorganisms could, in turn, give rise to problems whose nature we cannot at
all predict today. We need far greater knowledge of the pathogens and should be
less naïve when embracing new technologies, which only seem to solve problems.
What will be the long-term implications if the increasing selective pressure
exerted on these bacteria induces them to become more resistant?We need an
effective combination of treatment and vaccination strategies, together with a
consistent prevention policy. Unlike drugs and vaccinations, disinfectants can be
used in a consistent manner; they can simultaneously eliminate a vast range of
pathogenic microorganisms, without having any major side effects.

PMCID: PMC2831483
PMID: 20200667  [PubMed]


305. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Apr;292(4):G1062-9. Epub 2006 Dec
21.

Inducible cAMP early repressor suppresses gastrin-mediated activation of cyclin
D1 and c-fos gene expression.

Steigedal TS(1), Bruland T, Misund K, Thommesen L, Laegreid A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology, N-7489 Trondheim, Norway.

The gastric hormone gastrin and its precursors promote proliferation in several
gastrointestinal cell types. Here we show that gastrin induces transcription of
cell cycle gene cyclin D1 and protooncogene c-fos in the neuroendocrine
pancreatic cell line AR42J and that this gastrin response is inhibited by
endogenous inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER). The transcriptional repressor
ICER is known to downregulate both its own expression and the expression of other
genes containing cAMP-responsive elements (CREs). Using siRNA, we also show that 
CRE promoter elements are the targets of endogenous ICER in AR42J cells as well
as in the neuroendocrine cell line RIN5F. Our results suggest that ICER plays an 
important role in molecular mechanisms governing gastrin-mediated growth by
modulating gastrin's transcriptional activation of growth-related genes. Our
finding that ICER modulates pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating
polypeptide-activated gene expression also indicates a regulatory effect of ICER 
in the responses of neuroendocrine cells to peptides other than gastrin.

PMID: 17185632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Brain Res. 2007 Jan 26;1130(1):31-7. Epub 2006 Dec 13.

Phosphorylation-dependent degradation of transgenic CREB protein initiated by
heterodimerization.

Mouravlev A(1), Young D, During MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Pathology, The University of Auckland, 85
Park Road, Grafton, Auckland, New Zealand.

The transcription factor CREB (cyclic AMP response element binding protein) is
implicated in diverse brain functions and represents a prospective target in gene
therapy for human disorders. However, the transgenic expression and stability of 
exogenously expressed CREB within the cell remains poorly characterized. Here we 
found that transient expression of a CREB dominant interfering mutant A-CREB or
the inducible cAMP early repressor, ICER, led to the dramatic decrease of
exogenously co-expressed CREB in 293 human embryonic kidney cells. Elevation of
protein kinase A activity within the cells restored CREB protein levels. A-CREB
did not effect the transient expression of a truncated CREB lacking the leucine
zipper domain demonstrating a specific effect of heterodimerization on CREB
protein stability. Somatic gene transfer into the rat brain using a recombinant
adeno-associated virus vector provided robust expression of both transgenic CREB 
and ICER mRNAs under the control of a constitutive neuron specific enolase (NSE) 
promoter. In contrast to ICER, the expression of the transgenic CREB mRNA did not
result in elevation of CREB protein levels within dentate granule cells of the
hippocampus, suggesting its prompt degradation under basal conditions. However,
following tetanization of the perforant pathway, which is known to induce CREB
phosphorylation, there was a significant increase in the amount of transgenic
CREB protein within dentate granule cells. Hence, heterodimerization of
unphosphorylated CREB with either A-CREB or ICER triggers CREB protein
degradation, whereas phosphorylation prevents CREB from such degradation both in 
vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 17169345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Phys Chem B. 2006 Dec 21;110(50):25508-13.

Chemically resolved photovoltage measurements in CdSe nanoparticle films.

Cohen H(1), Sarkar SK, Hodes G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Research Support, The Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot 76100, Israel. hagai.cohen@weizmann.ac.il

Light-induced chemically resolved electrical measurements (CREM) under controlled
electrical conditions are used to study photovoltaic effects at selected regions 
in nanocrystalline CdSe-based films. The method, based on X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS), possesses unique capabilities for exploring charge trapping
and charge transport mechanisms, combining spectrally filtered input signals with
photocurrent detection and with a powerful, site-selective, photovoltage probe.

PMID: 17166000  [PubMed]


308. J Virol. 2007 Feb;81(4):1543-53. Epub 2006 Dec 6.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) bZIP protein interacts with the
cellular transcription factor CREB to inhibit HTLV-1 transcription.

Lemasson I(1), Lewis MR, Polakowski N, Hivin P, Cavanagh MH, Thébault S, Barbeau 
B, Nyborg JK, Mesnard JM.

Author information: 
(1)East Carolina University, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Brody
School of Medicine, 600 Moye Blvd., Greenville, NC 27834, USA. lemassoni@ecu.edu

The complex human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) retrovirus encodes
several proteins that are unique to the virus within its 3'-end region. Among
them, the viral transactivator Tax and posttranscriptional regulator Rex are well
characterized, and both positively regulate HTLV-1 viral expression. Less is
known about the other regulatory proteins encoded in this region of the provirus,
including the recently discovered HBZ protein. HBZ has been shown to negatively
regulate basal and Tax-dependent HTLV-1 transcription through its ability to
interact with specific basic-leucine zipper (bZIP) proteins. In the present
study, we found that HBZ reduces HTLV-1 transcription and virion production. We
then characterized the interaction between HBZ and the cellular transcription
factor CREB. CREB plays a critical role in Tax-mediated HTLV-1 transcription by
forming a complex with Tax that binds to viral cyclic AMP-response elements
(CREs) located within the viral promoter. We found that HBZ and CREB interact in 
vivo and directly in vitro, and this interaction occurs through the bZIP domain
of each protein. We also found that CREM-Ia and ATF-1, which share significant
homology in their bZIP domains with the bZIP domain of CREB, interact with
HBZ-bZIP. The interaction between CREB and HBZ prevents CREB binding to the viral
CRE elements in vitro and in vivo, suggesting that the reduction in HTLV-1
transcription by HBZ is partly due to the loss of CREB at the promoter. We also
found that HBZ displaces CREB from a cellular CRE, suggesting that HBZ may
deregulate CREB-dependent cellular gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1797566
PMID: 17151132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Oct;1080:97-109.

The role of basic leucine zipper protein-mediated transcription in physiological 
and pathological myocardial hypertrophy.

Kehat I(1), Hasin T, Aronheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Technion, Israel Institute of Technology, Rappaport Family Institute in the
Medical Sciences, the B. Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Haifa, Israel 31096.
ikehat@tx.technion.ac.il

Accumulating evidence suggests that nuclear transcription factors from the basic 
leucine zipper (bZIP) family play an important role in cardiac development and
function. This class includes the CREB/ATF family of transcription factors,
namely CREB, cAMP response element modulator (CREM), ATF, and the related AP-1
and C/EBP families. An effort has been made to elucidate the role of specific
bZIP members in the heart. Unfortunately, little insight could be gained from
knockout experiments, either due to embryonic lethal phenotypes or functional
compensation by other bZIP family members. Surprisingly, cardiac overexpression
of several inhibitory transcription factors from the bZIP family, such as a
nonphosphorylatable form of CREB (CREB(ser133)), a nonfunctional isoform of CREM,
or ATF3 resulted in massive atrial dilatation. In order to try and characterize
this pathway we have expressed the potent bZIP inhibitory protein, Jun
dimerization protein 2 (JDP2), specifically in the mouse heart in a temporally
controlled manner. Expression of JDP2 resulted in massive biatrial dilatation;
loss of connexin 40 (Cx40), connexin43 (Cx43), and myosin light chain 2 (MLC2a)
expression; atrioventricular defects in conduction; and a lethal phenotype. All
these effects were independent of any developmental events acquired during
adulthood, and were totally reversible upon abolishing the bZIP inhibition. The
results of this article suggest that bZIP inhibition is sufficient to cause
atrial dilation, that this dilatation is acquired postnatally, and that it is
reversible upon the relief of inhibition. Thus, bZIP repressors may serve as
novel drug targets for the prevention of atrial dilatation a major risk of atrial
fibrillation (AF).

PMID: 17132778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Appl Radiat Isot. 2007 Apr;65(4):392-6. Epub 2006 Nov 14.

Linear transformation of EPR spectra as a method proposed for improving
identification of paramagnetic species in ceramic.

Dobosz B(1), Krzyminiewski R.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Physics Division, Faculty of Physics, Adam Mickiewicz University,
Umultowska 85, 61-614 Poznan, Poland. benia@hoth.amu.edu.pl
<benia@hoth.amu.edu.pl>

In the present paper the paramagnetic centres in pottery generated after
gamma-irradiation were investigated. The computer resolution enhancement method
(CREM) was used to increase the electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra
resolution. The measurements were performed at room and liquid nitrogen
temperatures. The paper shows the results of non-irradiated and gamma-irradiated 
pottery before and after resolution enhancement. Each EPR spectrum showed a
multiple structure after the CREM procedure application. An aluminium hole centre
[AlO(4)](0) has been ascribed to these lines. The g factors are: g(1)=2.0602,
g(2)=2.0079, and g(3)=2.0019 and hyperfine splitting is A(1)=5.5G and A(2)
approximately A(3)=6.3G.

PMID: 17107810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Nano Lett. 2006 Nov;6(11):2462-6.

Transient charge accumulation in a capacitive self-assembled monolayer.

Cohen H(1), Maoz R, Sagiv J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Research Support, The Weizmann Institiute of Science,
Rehovot 76100, Israel. hagai.cohen@weizmann.ac.il

Charge accumulation in an organosilane monolayer self-assembled on silicon is
studied using electron-spectroscopy-based chemically resolved electrical
measurements (CREM). By resolving the net electrical response of the organic
layer, a significant capability of holding extra charge is indicated. Quantum
size effects at a molecularly thin layer and the role of competing discharge
mechanisms, including defect-assisted leakage currents, are discussed.

PMID: 17090074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Endocrinology. 2007 Feb;148(2):743-51. Epub 2006 Nov 2.

The role of inducible repressor proteins in the adrenergic induction of
arylalkylamine-N-acetyltransferase and mitogen-activated protein kinase
phosphatase-1 in rat pinealocytes.

Ho AK(1), Terriff DL, Price DM, Wloka MT, Chik CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, 7-26 Medical Sciences Building, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada. anho@ualberta.ca

In this study, we investigated the role of two inducible repressor proteins,
inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) and Fos-related antigen 2 (Fra-2) in the
adrenergic induction of MAPK phosphatase-1 (MKP-1) as compared with their roles
in the induction of arylalkylamine-N-acetyltransferase (AA-NAT) in rat
pinealocytes. Treatment of pinealocytes with norepinephrine (NE) caused an
increase in the mRNA and protein levels of MKP-1 and AA-NAT, as well as in the
AA-NAT activity and melatonin production. NE stimulation also caused a
simultaneous increase in the mRNA and protein levels of ICER and Fra-2. Transient
knockdown of icer using adenovirus expressing small interfering RNA (siRNA)
abolished the NE induction of icer expression but had little effect on the NE
induction of mkp-1 or aa-nat expression. In contrast, pretreatment with
adenovirus overexpressing icer was effective in reducing the NE induction of
mkp-1 and aa-nat. The inhibitory effect of overexpressing icer was reversed by
cotreatment with siRNA against icer. siRNA against fra-2 also abolished the
NE-stimulated expression of fra-2 but had little effect on the NE induction of
mkp-1 and aa-nat expression. Proteasomal inhibition, which reduced the
NE-stimulated induction of aa-nat, caused a reduction of ICER and Fra-2.
Together, these results indicate that whereas overexpression of ICER can suppress
the NE induction of aa-nat and mkp-1, the amount of the repressors, ICER and
Fra-2, present during NE induction appears insufficient to exert a significant
effect in controlling the expression of these genes.

PMID: 17082254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Insect Mol Biol. 2006 Oct;15(5):551-61.

The PKA-CREB system encoded by the honeybee genome.

Eisenhardt D(1), Kühn C, Leboulle G.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology, FB Biology/Chemistry/Pharmacy, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin,
Germany. theodora@neurobiologie.fu-berlin.de

The cAMP-dependent kinase (PKA) plays a crucial part in long-term memory
formation in the honeybee (Apis mellifera). One of the putative substrates of the
PKA activity is the cAMP response element binding protein (CREB), a transcription
factor in the bZIP protein family. We searched the honeybee genome to
characterize genes from the CREB/CREM and the PKA families. We identified two
genes that encode regulatory subunits and three genes encode catalytic subunits
of PKA. Eight genes code for bZIP proteins, but only one gene was found that
encodes a member of the CREB/CREM family. The phylogenetic relationship of these 
genes was analysed with their Drosophila and human counterparts.

PMCID: PMC1769443
PMID: 17069631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Endocrinol. 2006 Oct;191(1):327-37.

CREM confers cAMP responsiveness in human steroidogenic acute regulatory protein 
expression in NCI-H295R cells rather than SF-1/Ad4BP.

Sugawara T(1), Sakuragi N, Minakami H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan.

Steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR) protein plays a critical role in steroid
hormone synthesis. Tropic hormones induce human StAR gene expression by a
cAMP-dependent pathway. Steroidogenic factor-1/adrenal-4-binding protein
(SF-1/Ad4BP) plays an important role in the expression of human StAR gene. We
investigated the mechanism of cAMP responsiveness in human StAR gene expression
in NCI-H295R cells. The StAR promoter activity and protein levels in cells
subjected to various treatments were examined. Anti-SF-1/Ad4BP IgG transfection
treatment resulted in decreases in the basal StAR promoter activity and StAR
protein levels, but did not affect cAMP-stimulated promoter activity and protein 
levels. The basal and cAMP-stimulated StAR promoter activity levels were reduced 
in SF-1/Ad4BP mutant (G35E)-transfected cells, but the cAMP induction of StAR
promoter activity in response to 1 mM 8-Br-cAMP was not inhibited when G35E
SF-1/Ad4BP mutant expression vectors were co-transfected with cAMP-response
element-binding (CREB) expression vectors. Although the basal StAR mRNA
expression and protein levels were decreased by SF-1/Ad4BP-siRNA treatment, the
cAMP-stimulated StAR mRNA expression and protein levels did not change. The basal
StAR promoter activity level was not decreased by cAMP-response element modulator
(CREM)-siRNA treatment, but the cAMP-stimulated StAR promoter activity level, the
magnitude of cAMP induction of StAR promoter, and the cAMP-stimulated StAR
protein level were decreased. The cAMP induction of StAR promoter activity in
cells was inhibited when S117ACREM mutant expressionvectors were transfected. We 
conclude that inhibition of the function of SF-1/Ad4BP does not reduce the cAMP
induction of StAR promoter activity and protein level. CREM is needed to confer
cAMP responsiveness in human StAR protein expression.

PMID: 17065415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Immunol. 2006 Nov 1;177(9):6159-64.

The transcriptional repressor cAMP response element modulator alpha interacts
with histone deacetylase 1 to repress promoter activity.

Tenbrock K(1), Juang YT, Leukert N, Roth J, Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Rheumatology, University Hospital,
University of Muenster, Röntgenstrasse 21, 48149 Muenster, Germany.
ktenbroc@uni-muenster.de

Transcriptional repression is a fundamental mechanism of gene regulation. cAMP
response element (CRE) modulator (CREM)alpha is an ubiquitously expressed
transcription factor and a counterpart of the activator CREB. In T cells, CREM is
responsible for the termination of the IL-2 expression by a chromatin-dependent
mechanism. We demonstrate in this study that CREMalpha associates with histone
deacetylase (HDAC)1 through its H domain, which is located between the kinase
inducible and DNA binding domains. The CREMalpha-mediated recruitment of HDAC1 to
the CRE sites of the IL-2 and c-Fos promoter causes histone deacetylation and
inaccessibility to restriction enzymes and limited transcriptional activity.
Importantly, the CRE sites of these promoters are crucial for the activity and
binding of HDAC1. Therefore, CREMalpha exerts its repressor activity by a
mechanism that involves recruitment of HDAC1, increased deacetylation of
histones, and repression of promoter activity.

PMID: 17056544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Leukoc Biol. 2007 Jan;81(1):161-7. Epub 2006 Oct 6.

Regulatory T cell-mediated suppression: potential role of ICER.

Bodor J(1), Fehervari Z, Diamond B, Sakaguchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Columbia University, College of Physicians and
Surgeons, 1130 St. Nicholas Ave., New York, NY 10032, USA. jb2562@columbia.edu

How regulatory T (TR) cells dampen T cell responses remains unclear. Multiple
modes of action have been proposed, including cell contact-dependent and/or
cytokine-dependent mechanisms. Suppression may involve direct contact between TR 
cells and responder T cells. Alternatively, TR cells may act on dendritic cells
to reduce their ability to prime T cells by modulating costimulation, inducing
the secretion of suppressive cytokines or the increase of tryptophan metabolism. 
Here, we review emerging, novel mechanisms involved in contact-dependent,
TR-mediated suppression of IL-2 production in responder CD25- T lymphocytes and
the potential involvement of inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) in this
suppression. Finally, cytokines such as TGF-beta and IL-10, produced by TR cells 
or other cells, may exert local suppression, which can be conveyed by basic
mechanism(s) acting in a similar manner as contact-dependent, TR-mediated
suppression.

PMID: 17028200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Microb Ecol. 2006 Oct;52(3):552-63. Epub 2006 Sep 30.

Yeast diversity in the extreme acidic environments of the Iberian Pyrite Belt.

Gadanho M(1), Libkind D, Sampaio JP.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Secção Autónoma de Biotecnologia
(SABT), Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 2829-516
Caparica, Portugal.

In the Iberian Pyrite Belt (IPB), acid rock drainage gives rise to aquatic
habitats with low pH and high concentrations of heavy metals, a situation that
causes important environmental problems. We investigated the occurrence and
diversity of yeasts in two localities of the IPB: São Domingos (Portugal) and Rio
Tinto (Spain). Yeast isolation was performed on conventional culture media (MYP),
acidified (pH 3) media (MYP3), and on media prepared with water from the study
sites (MYPw). The main goal of the study was to determine the structure of the
yeast community; a combination of molecular methods was used for accurate species
identifications. Our results showed that the largest fraction of the yeast
community was recovered on MYPw rather than on MYP and MYP3. Twenty-seven yeast
species were detected, 48% of which might represent undescribed taxa. Among
these, an undescribed species of the genus Cryptococcus required low pH for
growth, a property that has not been observed before in yeasts. The communities
of S. Domingos and R. Tinto showed a considerable resemblance, and eight yeast
species were simultaneously found in both localities. Taking into consideration
the physicochemical parameters studied, we propose a hierarchic organization of
the yeast community in terms of high-, intermediate-, or low-stress conditions of
the environment. According to this ranking, the acidophile yeast Cryptococcus sp.
5 is considered the most tolerant species, followed by Cryptococcus sp. 3 and
Lecytophora sp. Species occurring in situations of intermediate environmental
stress were Candida fluviatilis, Rhodosporidium toruloides, Williopsis
californica, and three unidentified yeasts belonging to Rhodotorula and
Cryptococcus.

PMID: 17013554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Clin Microbiol. 2006 Dec;44(12):4336-41. Epub 2006 Sep 27.

Specific primers for rapid detection of Microsporum audouinii by PCR in clinical 
samples.

Roque HD(1), Vieira R, Rato S, Luz-Martins M.

Author information: 
(1)Lab. Micologia, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical/CREM, Universidade
Nova de Lisboa, Portugal.

This report describes application of PCR fingerprinting to identify common
species of dermatophytes using the microsatellite primers M13, (GACA)4, and
(GTG)5. The initial PCR analysis rendered a specific DNA fragment for Microsporum
audouinii, which was cloned and sequenced. Based on the sequencing data of this
fragment, forward (MA_1F) and reverse (MA_1R) primers were designed and verified 
by PCR to establish their reliability in the diagnosis of M. audouinii. These
primers produced a singular PCR band of 431 bp specific only to strains and
isolates of M. audouinii, based on a global test of 182 strains/isolates
belonging to 11 species of dermatophytes. These findings indicate these primers
are reliable for diagnostic purposes, and we recommend their use in laboratory
analysis.

PMCID: PMC1698423
PMID: 17005755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Genesis. 2006 Oct;44(10):454-64.

Survival of DA neurons is independent of CREM upregulation in absence of CREB.

Parlato R(1), Rieker C, Turiault M, Tronche F, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology of the Cell I, German Cancer Research Center, 
Heidelberg, Germany.

cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) and the related factors CREM (cAMP
response element modulator) and ATF1 (activation transcription factor 1) are
bZIP-domain-containing transcription factors activated through cAMP and other
signaling pathways. The disruption of CREB function in developing and mature
neurons affects their development and survival when associated with loss of CREM.
Since dopaminergic (DA) neurons are affected in several neurological diseases, we
generated CREB conditional mutants in DA neurons by using a newly generated
transgenic Cre line targeting the dopaminergic system (DATCre). Here we report
the generation and analysis of mutant mice lacking CREB in DA neurons
(CREB(DATCre) mutants). During adulthood, lack of CREB leads to a partial loss of
DA neurons. Since CREM is upregulated in absence of CREB, we have introduced this
mutation in a CREM-/- genetic background to assess a compensatory role of CREM.
Additional inactivation of CREM does not lead to a more severe phenotype.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16981198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Appl Microbiol. 2006 Oct;101(4):743-53.

Allen Denver Russell Memorial Lecture, 2006. The use of microbicides in infection
control: a critical look at safety, testing and applications.

Sattar SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research on Environmental Microbiology (CREM), Faculty of Medicine,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada. ssattar@uottawa.ca

Microbial pathogens continue as major threats to health. Indeed, many ongoing
societal changes are enhancing our vulnerability and exposure to several frank
and opportunistic pathogens. This, together with rampant antimicrobial resistance
and reduced prospects for newer drugs and vaccines, is forcing a higher reliance 
on microbiocides in infection prevention and control. That this reliance may not 
be well-founded becomes apparent from a closer look at current ways of testing
and registering microbiocides, their label claims as well as human and
environmental safety of certain widely used microbicidal chemicals. Many methods 
to test microbiocides for registration are flawed and/or entail test conditions
irrelevant to field use. Pathogens listed on product labels may not be among
those amenable to interruption through microbiocide use. The wide variations and 
discrepancies in existing national/regional regulations for registering
microbiocides for sale stifle innovation. This is a critical look at the
above-mentioned issues with emphasis on chemicals meant for use on environmental 
surfaces and medical devices. It highlights better ways to test microbiocides and
to attain global harmonization of testing and product registration. It also
details the known and potential dangers of microbiocide use and what to consider 
in choosing such formulations for optimal safety and effectiveness. End users are
advised to be more critical and prudent in the selection and application of
microbicidal chemicals, manufacturers are encouraged to explore infection control
products and technologies that are safer in the workplace and for the
environment, and regulators are urged to review and update the requirements and
procedures for premarket review of microbiocide efficacy data and label claims.
Independent investigations are also urgently needed to document the proportion of
nosocomial infections that would be amenable to prevention through chemical
disinfection of environmental surfaces.

PMID: 16968286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Androl. 2007 Jan-Feb;28(1):59-66. Epub 2006 Aug 9.

Functional characterization of male germ cell-specific CREM isoforms.

Jaspers S(1), Gellersen B, Kempf R, Samalecos A, Bergmann M, Steger K.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Urologie und Kinderurologie, Rudolf-Buchheim-Strasse 7, 35383
Giessen, Germany.

Due to alternative promoter usage, splicing, and translational initiation,
expression of the cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) gene results in the
production of functionally different CREM proteins with either activating or
repressing potential on target gene expression. Recently, we demonstrated 2 novel
isoforms (CREM-2-F-G-H-Ib and CREM-2-G-H-Ib) in various germ cell types during
normal and impaired human spermatogenesis. In contrast to known isoforms, these
exhibit a transactivation domain but lack a kinase-inducible domain (KID) domain 
resulting in a disruption of the open reading frame. In the present study, we
functionally analyzed these isoforms. Investigation of both in vitro and in vivo 
expressed proteins from human testis RNA suggests that a novel upstream open
reading frame in exon 2 is translated from isoform CREM-2-F-G-H-Ib, giving rise
to a full-length protein. Furthermore, in both isoforms, usage of downstream
adeninethymine-guanines (ATGs) for translation initiation could be observed.
Sequence-specific DNA binding of CREM isoforms was confirmed by electrophoretic
mobility shift assays. Luciferase reporter gene assays in cells transfected with 
novel CREM cDNAs demonstrated that protein kinase A dependent stimulation was
inhibited by coexpression of CREM-2-F-G-H-Ib but not of CREM-2-G-H-Ib.

PMID: 16899810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Neurosci. 2006 Aug 9;26(32):8235-42.

Induction of inducible cAMP early repressor expression in nucleus accumbens by
stress or amphetamine increases behavioral responses to emotional stimuli.

Green TA(1), Alibhai IN, Hommel JD, DiLeone RJ, Kumar A, Theobald DE, Neve RL,
Nestler EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Center for Basic Neuroscience, The University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Previous research has shown that cAMP response element (CRE)-mediated
transcription is activated in the nucleus accumbens, a major brain reward region,
by a variety of environmental stimuli and contributes to neuroadaptations to
these stimuli. CRE-binding protein (CREB) is the most studied activator of CRE
transcription and has been implicated in this brain region as a gating mechanism 
for behavioral responses to emotional stimuli. Little attention, however, has
been given to naturally occurring inhibitors of CRE-mediated transcription, such 
as the inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER), an inhibitory product of the CRE
modulator gene. In the present study, we investigated the extent to which ICER is
induced in the nucleus accumbens by two types of environmental stimuli, stress
and amphetamine, and characterized how induction of ICER in this region affects
complex behavior. We show that stress and amphetamine each induces ICER
expression and that overexpression of ICER in the nucleus accumbens, using
viral-mediated gene transfer, increases behavioral responses to both rewarding
and aversive emotional stimuli. For example, ICER overexpression increases
sensitivity to amphetamine-stimulated locomotor activity as well as to natural
rewards such as sucrose and social grooming. However, ICER overexpression also
increases measures of anxiety in the elevated plus maze and neophobia to novel
tastes. Finally, ICER produces an antidepressant-like effect in the forced swim
test, further indication of an enhanced active response to stress. These results 
suggest that ICER is an important mechanism for modulating CRE-mediated
transcription in the nucleus accumbens.

PMID: 16899718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Mol Reprod Dev. 2006 Nov;73(11):1435-47.

The transcription factor CREMtau and cAMP regulate promoter activity of the
Na,K-ATPase alpha4 isoform.

Rodova M(1), Nguyen AN, Blanco G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

The Na,K-ATPase is an essential enzyme of the plasma membrane that plays a key
role in numerous cell processes that depend on the transcellular gradients of
Na(+) and K(+). Among the various isoforms of the catalytic subunit of the
Na,K-ATPase, alpha4 exhibits the most limited pattern of expression, being
restricted to male germ cells. Activity of alpha4 is essential for sperm
function, and alpha4 is upregulated during spermatogenesis. The present study
addressed the transcriptional control of the human Na,K-ATPase alpha4 gene,
ATP1A4. We describe that a 5' untranslated region of the ATP1A4 gene (designated 
-339/+480 based on the ATP1A4 transcription initiation site) has promoter
activity in luciferase reporter assays. Computer analysis of this promoter region
revealed consensus sites (CRE) for the cyclic AMP (cAMP) response element
modulator (CREM). Accordingly, dibutyryl cAMP (db-cAMP) and ectopic expression of
CREMtau, a testis specific splice variant of CREM were able to activate the
ATP1A4 promoter driven expression of luciferase in HEK 293 T, JEG-3 and GC-1
cells. Further characterization of the effect of db-cAMP and CREMtau on deleted
constructs of the ATP1A4 promoter (-339/+80, and +25/+480), and on the -339/+480 
region carrying mutations in the CRE sites showed that db-cAMP and CREMtau effect
required the CRE motif located 263 bp upstream the transcription initiation site.
EMSA experiments confirmed the CRE sequence as a bonafide CREMtau binding site.
These results constitute the first demonstration of the transcriptional control
of ATP1A4 gene expression by cAMP and by CREMtau, a transcription factor
essential for male germ cell gene expression.

PMID: 16894555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Biol Chem. 2006 Oct 20;281(42):31268-78. Epub 2006 Aug 7.

Transcriptional regulation of the glucose-6-phosphatase gene by cAMP/vasoactive
intestinal peptide in the intestine. Role of HNF4alpha, CREM, HNF1alpha, and
C/EBPalpha.

Gautier-Stein A(1), Zitoun C, Lalli E, Mithieux G, Rajas F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U.449, F-69372 Lyon, France. Amandine.Gautier@univ-lyon1.fr

Gluconeogenesis is induced in both the liver and intestine by increased cAMP
levels. However, hepatic and intestinal glucose production can have opposite
effects on glucose homeostasis. Glucose release into the portal vein by the
intestine increases glucose uptake and reduces food intake. In contrast, glucose 
production by the liver contributes to hyperglycemia in type II diabetes.
Glucose-6-phosphatase (Glc6Pase) is the key enzyme of gluconeogenesis in both the
liver and intestine. Here we specify the cAMP/protein kinase A regulation of the 
Glc6Pase gene in the intestine compared with the liver. Similarly to the liver,
the molecular mechanism of cAMP/protein kinase A regulation involves
cAMP-response element-binding protein, HNF4alpha, CAAT/enhancer-binding protein, 
and HNF1. In contrast to the situation in the liver, we find that different
isoforms of CAAT/enhancer-binding protein and HNF1 contribute to the specific
regulation of the Glc6Pase gene in the intestine. Moreover, we show that
cAMP-response element binding modulator specifically contributes to the
regulation of the Glc6Pase gene in the intestine but not in the liver. These
results allow us to identify intestine-specific regulators of the Glc6Pase gene
and to improve the understanding of the differences in the regulation of
gluconeogenesis in the intestine compared with the liver.

PMID: 16893891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Hum Fertil (Camb). 2006 Jun;9(2):73-9.

Regulation of gene expression in post-meiotic male germ cells: CREM-signalling
pathways and male fertility.

Hogeveen KN(1), Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Strasbourg,
France.

Spermatogenesis is a remarkably complex process in which diploid spermatogonial
stem cells undergo a series of mitotic and meiotic cell divisions to give rise to
haploid round spermatids. These haploid cells then go through a dramatic
morphological remodelling involving extensive chromatin condensation, reduction
in nuclear and cytoplasmic volume, formation of an acrosome system and tail, all 
of which contribute to the formation of a mature spermatozoon fully capable of
fertilizing the oocyte and passing along its genetic information to the next
generation. To accomplish such a complex program, an intricate and efficient
mechanism is required to finely tune the levels of expression of specific genes
necessary for this process. Accordingly, the regulation of gene expression in
post-meiotic male germ cells is governed by specific mechanisms unique to these
cells. The cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) response element modulator
(CREM) is an essential component of this program, and its activity is regulated
through interactions with a germ cell-specific, CREM phosphorylation-independent 
transcriptional co-activator, activator of CREM in testis (ACT). In turn, the
ability of ACT to regulate CREM activity is controlled by a germ cell-specific
kinesin, Kif17b, which regulates the subcellular distribution of ACT. Further,
the mRNA from CREM target genes interacts with several germ cell-specific
RNA-binding proteins, which function to transport and stabilize these mRNAs. This
sophisticated and complex regulation of gene expression in post-meiotic germ
cells is governed by unique mechanisms specific to these cells and is fundamental
to male fertility.

PMID: 16825108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Arch Androl. 2006 Jul-Aug;52(4):311-8.

Effects of calcium channel blockers on the spermatogenesis and gene expression in
peripubertal mouse testis.

Lee JH(1), Kim H, Kim DH, Gye MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul Women's
University, Seoul, Korea.

Treatment of Ca(2+) channel blockers (CCB) to relieve hypertension causes
reversible male infertility, suggesting deregulation of Ca(2+) homeostasis in
testis is closely related with male infertility. To investigate the possible
toxicity of therapeutic application of CCB in childhood, the effect of nifedipine
and ethosuximide, an L-type and T-type CCB, respectively, on the spermatogenesis 
and testicular gene expression was examined. Following the intraperitoneal
injection of either drug for 7 days to 18 days on old mice, the paired testes
weights were significantly lower in mice treated with nifedipine (> or = 10
mg/kg/day) or ethosuximide (100 mg/kg/day) than vehicle controls. In mice given
high drug dosing (100 mg/kg), seminiferous tubules showed immaturity with
spermatogenic arrest at elongating spermatid stage and poorly developed lumen.
Unexpectedly, the expression of activator isoform of transcription factor
cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) mRNA increased together with transition 
protein 2 and protamine 2 mRNA in drug-treated mice testes, suggesting that CCB
may deregulate expression of activator isoform of CREM in male germ cells and
that spermatogenic defect following CCB treatment may attribute to ectopic
expression of CREM-dependent gene battery in testis. Therapeutic application of
CCB in childhood should be cautious because of their potential to cause
spermatogenic defect and altered gene expression in testis.

PMID: 16728347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Mol Hum Reprod. 2006 Apr;12(4):257-62.

Sequencing and haplotype analysis of the activator of CREM in the testis (ACT)
gene in populations of fertile and infertile males.

Christensen GL(1), Wooding SP, Ivanov IP, Atkins JF, Carrell DT.

Author information: 
(1)Andrology and IVF Laboratories, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt
Lake City, 84108, USA.

cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) is a key transcription factor in the
differentiation of round spermatids into mature spermatozoa. During
spermiogenesis, CREM is regulated in part by activator of CREM in the testis
(ACT), which activates CREM in a phosphorylation-independent fashion. We
hypothesized that the ACT gene, which is expressed exclusively in the testis,
could be involved in male factor infertility in patients with idiopathic-impaired
spermatogenesis. To test this hypothesis, we sequenced the coding regions and
flanking intronic regions of the ACT gene in 96 azoo- or oligospermic patients
and 69 fertile controls. A total of 12 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) was
identified, and four of them leading to amino acid substitutions. An association 
study was performed based on calculated haplotype frequencies, and statistically 
significant differences were found between the patient and control populations
for some haplotypes. To help establish the evolutionary relationships between the
haplotypes, the coding regions of both the chimpanzee and the gorilla ACT gene
were sequenced and evaluated. To test whether the different haplotypes conferred 
a functional change to the ACT protein, a yeast two-hybrid assay was designed to 
test the interaction between the two most divergent ACT haplotypes and their
known binding partners, CREM and KIF17b. We identified one ACT haplotype that had
a 45% reduction in its interaction with CREM. Our results suggest that different 
haplotypes within the ACT gene may contribute to male factor subfertility.

PMID: 16687568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Int J Radiat Biol. 2006 Mar;82(3):181-90.

Identification of differentially transcribed genes in human lymphoblastoid cells 
irradiated with 0.5 Gy of gamma-ray and the involvement of low dose radiation
inducible CHD6 gene in cell proliferation and radiosensitivity.

Wang HP(1), Long XH, Sun ZZ, Rigaud O, Xu QZ, Huang YC, Sui JL, Bai B, Zhou PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Toxicology and Oncology, Beijing Institute of
Radiation Medicine, Beijing, PR China.

PURPOSE: To identify candidate genes specifically involved in response to
low-dose irradiation in human lymphoblastoid cells; to better clarify the role of
the human chromodomain helicase DNA binding protein 6 gene (CHD6), one of these
genes, in cell proliferation and radiosensitivity.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: DNA microarray technology was used to analyse global
transcriptional profile in human lymphoblastoid AHH-1 cells at 4 h after exposure
to 0.5 Gy of gamma-ray. Gene expression changes were confirmed by
semi-quantitative reverse transcription--polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and
Northern blot. RNA interfering technology was employed to knock-down the CHD6
gene in A549 cells. Colony-forming ability was used to analyse radiosensitivity.
RESULTS: The microarray assay revealed a set of 0.5 Gy-responsive genes,
including 30 up-regulated genes and 45 down-regulated genes. The up-regulated
genes include a number of genes involved in: signal transduction pathways, e.g., 
STAT3, CAMKK2, SIRT1, CREM, MAPK3K7IP2 and GPR56; transcription or DNA-binding,
e.g., CHD6, CRSP3, SNURF, SH2 domain binding protein 1 and MIZF. Some of the
down-regulated genes are involved in: cytoskeleton and cell movement (WASF2,
LCP1, MSN, NIPSNAP1, KIF2C); DNA replication and repair (MCM2, MCM3, MCM7 and
XRCC-4). Radiation-increased expression of CHD6 was also found in A549 cells and 
HeLa cells. The sustained CHD6 induction was restricted to relatively low doses
(0.2 Gy or 0.5 Gy), no change occurring after 4 Gy irradiation. Silencing of CHD6
mediated by siRNA increased the growth rate of A549 cells by 40 approximately
60%. Most importantly, silencing CHD6 led to an increased radioresistance of A459
cells to radiation doses up to 2 Gy, but barely affected the sensitivity of cells
at 4 and 8 Gy.
CONCLUSION: This study has identified a set of genes responsive to 0.5 Gy of
gamma-rays. CDH6 gene can be specifically up-regulated by low dose irradiation,
and its inducible expression could be involved in a low dose hypersensitive
response.

PMID: 16638715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Biol Reprod. 2006 Aug;75(2):279-88. Epub 2006 Apr 19.

Transcriptional regulation of cyclin D2 by the PKA pathway and inducible cAMP
early repressor in granulosa cells.

Muñiz LC(1), Yehia G, Mémin E, Ratnakar PV, Molina CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, New
Jersey Medical School, New Jersey 07103, USA.

Cyclin D2 (Ccnd2) is an essential gene for folliculogenesis, as null mutation in 
mice impairs granulosa cell proliferation in response to FSH. Ccnd2 mRNA is
induced during the estrus cycle by FSH and is rapidly inhibited by LH. Yet, the
responsive elements and transcription factors accounting for the gene expression 
of cyclin D2 in the ovary have not been fully characterized. Using primary
cultures of rat granulosa cells and immortalized mouse granulosa cells, we
demonstrate a mechanism for the regulation of cyclin D2 at the level of
transcription via a PKA-dependent signaling mechanism. The promoter activity of
cyclin D2 was shown to be induced by FSH and the catalytic alpha subunit of PKA
(PRKACA), and this activity was repressible by inducible cAMP early repressor
(ICER), a cAMP response element (CRE) modulator isoform. In silico analysis of
the mouse, rat, and human cyclin D2 promoters identified two CRE-binding protein 
sites, a conserved proximal element and a less conserved distal element relative 
to the translation start site. The mutation on the proximal element drastically
decreases the effects of PRKACA and ICER on the promoter activity, whereas the
mutation on the distal element did not contribute to the decrease in the promoter
activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and deoxyribonuclease footprint
analysis confirmed ICER binding to the proximal element, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated the occurrence of this binding in vivo.
These results showed a CRE within the upstream region of Ccnd2 that is (at least 
partly) implicated in the stimulation and repression of cyclin D2 transcription. 
Finally, our data suggest that ICER involvement in the regulation of granulosa
cell proliferation as overexpression of ICER results in the inhibition of
PRKACA-induced DNA synthesis.

PMID: 16625003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 2;281(22):15073-81. Epub 2006 Apr 4.

Transcription factors, cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) and Tisp40, act
in concert in postmeiotic transcriptional regulation.

Nagamori I(1), Yomogida K, Adams PD, Sassone-Corsi P, Nojima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, Yamadaoka 3-1, Suita City, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

We previously isolated 80 TISP (transcript induced in spermiogenesis) genes whose
transcription is dramatically induced during spermiogenesis. Our analysis here of
the expression of these genes in the testis of the cAMP-responsive element
modulator (CREM)-null mouse revealed that 54 TISP genes are under the
transcriptional regulation of CREM. One CREM-regulated gene is TISP40, which
encodes a basic leucine zipper (bZip)-type transcription factor bearing a
transmembrane domain that generates the two proteins Tisp40alpha and Tisp40beta. 
Both of these proteins function by binding to UPRE (unfolded protein-response
element) but do not recognize CRE motifs. We show here that Tisp40alpha mRNA is
generated under the direct transcriptional regulation of CREM. CREMtau and Tisp40
form a heterodimer, which functions through CRE but not through UPRE.
Furthermore, binding ability of CREM to CRE is dramatically up-regulated by
forming a heterodimer with Tisp40alphaDeltaTM, a truncated form of Tisp40alpha
that lacks the transmembrane domain. We confirmed that Tisp40 and CREM actually
bind to the Tisp40 promoter in vivo by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay.
Finally, we demonstrate that the Tisp40DeltaTM-CREMtau heterodimer acts as a
recruiter of HIRA, a histone chaperone, to CRE. Taken together, we propose that
Tisp40 is an important transcriptional regulator during spermiogenesis.

PMID: 16595651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Mol Hum Reprod. 2006 Mar;12(3):135-44. Epub 2006 Mar 23.

Transcriptome analysis of FSH and FSH variant stimulation in granulosa cells from
IVM patients reveals novel regulated genes.

Perlman S(1), Bouquin T, van den Hazel B, Jensen TH, Schambye HT, Knudsen S,
Okkels JS.

Author information: 
(1)Maxygen, Hørsholm, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby.

FSH is crucial for oocyte maturation and fertility and is the main component in
infertility treatment in assisted reproduction. The granulosa cells expressing
the FSH receptor interact with the oocyte and provide nourishing substrates
controlling the oocyte maturation. Thus, transcriptome analysis of granulosa
cells stimulated by FSH is of major importance in understanding the communication
between oocytes and granulosa cells. In this study, gene expression profiles were
assessed in human granulosa cells from normal cycling in vitro maturation (IVM)
patients using oligonucleotide gene chips. Granulosa cells were stimulated for 2 
h with either FSH or a previously generated glycosylated FSH variant (FSH1208)
that exhibited increased in vivo activity because of prolonged half-life. The
analysis identified 74 significantly FSH/FSH1208 regulated genes. Amongst these
were well known FSH regulated genes as well as genes not previously described to 
be important in the FSH signalling pathway. These novel FSH regulated genes
include transcription factors [cAMP responsive element modulator (CREM)/inducible
cAMP early repressors (ICER), GATA 6, ZFN 361, Bcl11a, CITED1 and TCF 8] and
other regulatory proteins and enzymes (IGF-BP3, syntaxin and PCK1) possibly
important for oocyte/granulosa cell interaction and function. Array data were
validated for 13 genes by northern blots or RT-PCR. Furthermore, no significant
differences in gene regulation were detected between the two FSH analogs. This
work uncovers novel data important for understanding the folliculogenesis.
Furthermore, the results suggest that FSH1208 has a gene expression profile like 
FSH and thus, in the light of known prolonged in vivo activity, might be a
candidate for improved infertility treatment.

PMID: 16556681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Neuroendocrinol. 2006 Jan;18(1):42-9.

Inhibition of corticotrophin-releasing hormone transcription by inducible
cAMP-early repressor in the hypothalamic cell line, 4B.

Liu Y(1), Kalintchenko N, Sassone-Corsi P, Aguilera G.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Endocrine Physiology, Developmental Endocrinology Branch, National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development/NIH, CRC Room 1-3330, MSC 1303,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

We have shown recently that the rapid decline in corticotrophin-releasing hormone
(CRH) transcription following activation by stress is associated with induction
and binding to the CRH promoter of the repressor isoforms of cAMP responsive
element modulator (CREM), inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER). The ability of
ICER to inhibit CRH transcription was examined in the hypothalamic cell line, 4B,
which expresses CRH. Co-transfection of the inhibitory isoforms of CREM, ICER I
and II and CREMbeta, and CRH promoter-luciferase constructs in 4B cells blunted
basal and forskolin-stimulated CRH promoter activity, an effect which was
abolished by mutation of the CRE of the CRH promoter. Western blot analyses and
electromobility gel-shift and super-shift showed increases in endogenous ICER
after 3 h of incubation with forskolin. Consistent with an inhibitory effect of
CREM on CRH transcription, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays in cells
transfected with ICER I revealed recruitment of CREM by the CRH promoter in
conjunction with decreases in Pol II association. The study shows that generation
of ICER following prolonged stimulation with forskolin, or transfection of an
ICER expression vector in hypothalamic cell lines expressing CRH, is associated
with CREM binding to the CRH promoter and transcriptional repression. The data
support the hypothesis that induction of repressor isoforms of CREM is part of an
intracellular feedback mechanism contributing to the termination of CRH
transcription during stimulation.

PMID: 16451219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Leukoc Biol. 2006 Feb;79(2):378-87.

Suppression of MIP-1beta transcription in human T cells is regulated by inducible
cAMP early repressor (ICER).

Barabitskaja O(1), Foulke JS Jr, Pati S, Bodor J, Reitz MS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Virology, University of Maryland Biotechnology
Institute,Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Local production of macrophage inflammatory protein-1beta (MIP-1beta), a
beta-chemokine that blocks human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) entry into
CD4+ CC chemokine receptor 5+ target cells, may be a significant factor in
resistance to HIV-1 infection and control of local viral spread. The mechanisms
governing MIP-1beta expression in T cells, however, are not well understood. Our 
results suggest that MIP-1beta RNA expression in T cells is dynamically regulated
by transcriptional factors of the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)
responsive element (CRE)-binding (CREB)/modulator family. Transient transfection 
of primary human T cells with 5' deletion and site-specific mutants of the human 
MIP-1beta promoter identified an activated protein-1 (AP-1)/CRE-like motif at
position -74 to -65 base pairs, relative to the TATA box as a vital cis-acting
element and a binding site for inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER). Ectopic
expression of ICER or induction of endogenous ICER with the cAMP agonists
forskolin and prostaglandin E2 resulted in the formation of ICER-containing
complexes, including an ICER:CREB heterodimer to the AP-1/CRE-like site and
inhibition of MIP-1beta promoter activity. Our data characterize an important
binding site for the dominant-negative regulator ICER in the MIP-1beta promoter
and suggest that dynamic changes in the relative levels of ICER and CREB play a
crucial role in cAMP-mediated attenuation of MIP-1beta transcription in human T
cells.

PMID: 16443828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Autoimmun Rev. 2006 Feb;5(2):118-21. Epub 2005 Sep 26.

Transcriptional repression of interleukin-2 in human systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Katsiari CG(1), Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Cellular Injury, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver
Spring, MD 20190, USA. christina.katsiari@na.amedd.army.mil

T cells from patients with SLE produce decreased amounts of interleukin-2 (IL-2),
a central cytokine in the regulation of the immune response. We discuss herein
the abnormalities underlying IL-2 deficiency in SLE T cells.

PMID: 16431340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2006 Jan;64(1):29-36.

Expression of ACTH receptor pathway genes in glucose-dependent insulinotrophic
peptide (GIP)-dependent Cushing's syndrome.

Antonini SR(1), Baldacchino V, Tremblay J, Hamet P, Lacroix A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Endocrine Pathophysiology, Research Centre, Hotel-Dieu du Centre
Hospitalier de l'Universite de Montreal (CHUM), Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: The molecular mechanisms responsible for glucose-dependent
insulinotrophic peptide receptor or gastric inhibitory polypeptide receptor
(GIPR) ectopic expression and function in GIP-dependent Cushing's syndrome (CS)
are still unknown. GIPR presumably acts, like the ACTH receptor (ACTHR), through 
the Gs protein/cyclic AMP/protein kinase A (PKA) pathway to stimulate
steroidogenesis. We studied the expression of several genes involved in this
pathway in the adrenal tissues of patients with GIP-dependent CS.
DESIGN AND METHODS: RNA was extracted from adrenal tissues from nine patients
with GIP-dependent CS [seven ACTH-independent bilateral macronodular adrenal
hyperplasia (AIMAH), two adenomas], two control whole adult adrenals, two
fasciculata cell-enriched preparations from normal adrenals, seven patients with 
Cushing's disease (CD) and two normal pancreas. Multiplex reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) evaluated the expression of GIPR, ACTHR, SF-1,
Nur77, DAX-1, CYP11A, 3beta-HSD, CYP21, CREB and CREM genes.
RESULTS: GIPR mRNA was overexpressed in all GIP-dependent cases. In normal
adrenals and in the adrenal tissues from patients with CD, minimal amounts of
GIPR mRNA were detected. ACTHR mRNA expression was observed in all GIP-dependent 
adrenal tissues. The expression of steroidogenic enzymes and some specific and
ubiquitous transcription factors (TFs) involved in the ACTHR cascade was
significantly reduced.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that the expression of ACTHR and other genes
located downstream in the ACTHR cascade, including steroidogenic enzymes genes
and some transcription factors, are relatively suppressed in GIP-dependent CS.
Although the expression of aberrant receptors plays an important role in
steroidogenesis and initiation of cell proliferation, additional genetic events
might occur, altering the activity of the ACTHR pathway.

PMID: 16402925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Biochem J. 2006 May 1;395(3):543-9.

Two glucose/xylose transporter genes from the yeast Candida intermedia: first
molecular characterization of a yeast xylose-H+ symporter.

Leandro MJ(1), Gonçalves P, Spencer-Martins I.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Biotechnology Unit, Faculty of
Sciences and Technology, New University of Lisbon, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal.

Candida intermedia PYCC 4715 was previously shown to grow well on xylose and to
transport this sugar by two different transport systems: high-capacity and
low-affinity facilitated diffusion and a high-affinity xylose-proton symporter,
both of which accept glucose as a substrate. Here we report the isolation of
genes encoding both transporters, designated GXF1 (glucose/xylose facilitator 1) 
and GXS1 (glucose/xylose symporter 1) respectively. Although GXF1 was isolated by
functional complementation of an HXT-null (where Hxt refers to hexose
transporters) Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain, isolation of the GXS1 cDNA
required partial purification and micro-sequencing of the transporter, identified
by its relative abundance in cells grown on low xylose concentrations. Both genes
were expressed in S. cerevisiae and the kinetic parameters of glucose and xylose 
transport were determined. Gxs1 is the first yeast xylose/glucose-H+ symporter to
be characterized at the molecular level. Comparison of its amino acid sequence
with available sequence data revealed the existence of a family of putative
monosaccharide-H+ symporters encompassing proteins from several yeasts and
filamentous fungi.

PMCID: PMC1462686
PMID: 16402921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Mol Hum Reprod. 2005 Dec;11(12):853-8. Epub 2006 Jan 6.

The role of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta in the transcriptional regulation
of COX-2 in human amnion.

Lee YS(1), Terzidou V, Lindstrom T, Johnson M, Bennett PR.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College Parturition Research Group, Institute of Reproductive and
Developmental Biology, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London, UK.
yun.lee@imperial.ac.uk

Human labour is associated with increased prostaglandin synthesis within the
uterus by the action of the inducible type-2 cyclo-oxygenase enzyme (COX-2). A
major source of prostaglandin is the fetal membranes, in particular the amnion,
in which expression of COX-2 increases in late pregnancy and with labour. The
COX-2 gene promoter contains several putative transcription factor binding sites 
including those for NF-kappaB, AP-1 and C/EBP and therefore has the features of a
rapid response gene. We have previously shown that, in amnion, the NF-kappaB
DNA-binding sites in the COX-2 promoter are essential for gene expression and
that there is an increase in NF-kappaB activity in amnion with the onset of
labour. In this study, we demonstrate that in primary human amnion cells,
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta) DNA-binding sites are crucial for
the function of the COX-2 gene promoter. Three potential C/EBPbeta DNA-binding
sites were identified within the COX-2 promoter which were shown to bind to
C/EBPbeta but not to C/EBPalpha, C/EBPdelta, CREB (cAMP responsive element
modulator) or CREM. Luciferase reporter constructs with site-directed mutagenesis
of the three C/EBPbeta sites in the COX-2 promoter showed reduced expression of
luciferase in transient transfection studies. However, comparison of C/EBPbeta
protein levels and their DNA-binding activity from cells obtained before and
after labour showed no significant differences. This suggests that although
C/EBPbeta plays an essential constitutive role in the expression of COX-2,
C/EBPbeta may not be directly involved in its regulation in association with
human labour.

PMID: 16399783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Blood. 2006 Apr 15;107(8):3243-50. Epub 2005 Dec 15.

Human mast cells express multiple EP receptors for prostaglandin E2 that
differentially modulate activation responses.

Feng C(1), Beller EM, Bagga S, Boyce JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) blocks mast-cell (MC)-dependent allergic responses in
humans but activates MCs in vitro. We assessed the functions of the EP receptors 
for PGE2 on cultured human MCs (hMCs). hMCs expressed the EP3, EP2, and EP4
receptors. PGE2 stimulated the accumulation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP), and suppressed both Fc epsilonRI-mediated eicosanoid production and tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) generation. PGE2 also caused phosphorylation of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), exocytosis, and production of
prostaglandin D2 (PGD2), as well as leukotriene C4 (LTC4) when protein kinase A
(PKA) was inhibited. An EP3 receptor-selective agonist, AE-248, mimicked
PGE2-mediated ERK phosphorylation, exocytosis, and eicosanoid formation.
Selective agonists of both EP2 and EP4 receptors (AE1-259-01 and AE-329,
respectively) stimulated cAMP accumulation. No selective agonist, alone or in
combination, was as effective as PGE2. AE-248, AE1-259-01, and AE-329 all
inhibited Fc epsilonRI-mediated TNF-alpha generation, while AE1-259-01 blocked
eicosanoid production. PGE2 caused the expression of inducible cAMP early
repressor (ICER) by a pathway involving PKA and ERK. Thus, while PGE2 activates
MCs through EP3 receptors, it also counteracts Fc epsilonRI-mediated eicosanoid
production through EP2 receptors and PKA, and blocks cytokine transcription.
These functions explain the potency of PGE2 as a suppressor of early- and
late-phase allergic responses.

PMCID: PMC1895755
PMID: 16357326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Andrologia. 2005 Dec;37(6):228-9.

Transcription factors governing male fertility.

Sassone-Corsi P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire CNRS - Inserm -
Université Louis Pasteur, Illkirch, Strasbourg, France.

PMID: 16336258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2005 Nov;36(6):800-3.

[Screening and identification of human nasopharyngeal carcinoma-associated
antigens].

[Article in Chinese]

Cui XB(1), Xie K, LiangG CY, Deng HX, Wei YQ, Tian L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu 610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to provide an informative marker for
clinical immunopathological diagnosis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and to
lay a foundation for furture study of immunotherapy.
METHODS: The NPC cDNA expression library was screened by serological analysis of 
recombinant cDNA expression libraries (SEREX) technology using xenogenic immune
sera. The positive nucleotide sequences of cDNA inserts were determined and
analysed with DNASIS and BLAST software in EMBL and GenBank.
RESULTS: Eighteen positive clones encoding antigen genes were obtained after
immunoscreening. These antigen genes included known genes, such as MAGE gene,
CREM gene, beta2-microglobulin, Ribosomal Protein, et al, and unknown genes or
ESTs in GenBank. To characterize the expression profile of these genes, the
antibodies in sera from 40 nasopharyngeal carcinoma patients and 40 healthy
donors were assayed with three antigens to screen specific and relative serum
markers for nasopharyngeal carcinoma. The results showed that the positive rates 
for These results indicate nasopharyngeal carcinoma patients were higher than
those for healthy donors.
CONCLUSION: that some of the antigens may be related to nasopharyngeal carcinoma 
and may be valuable tumor markers in the diagnosis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

PMID: 16334557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2005 Jul 1;53(2):295-303.

Yeast community survey in the Tagus estuary.

de Almeida JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)CREM - Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos, Fac. de Ciências e Tecnologia,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Quinta da Torre, Caparica, Portugal.

The yeast community in the waters of the Tagus estuary, Portugal, was followed
for over a year in order to assess its dynamics. Yeast occurrence and incidence
were measured and this information was related to relevant environmental data.
Yeast occurrence did not seem to depend upon tides, but river discharge had a
dramatic impact both on the density and diversity of the community. The
occurrence of some yeasts was partially correlated with faecal pollution
indicators. Yeast isolates were characterized by microsatellite primed PCR
(MSP-PCR) fingerprinting and rRNA gene sequencing. The principal species found
were Candida catenulata, C. intermedia, C. parapsilosis, Clavispora lusitaniae,
Debaryomyces hansenii, Pichia guilliermondii, Rhodotorula mucilaginosa and
Rhodosporidium diobovatum. The incidence of these species was evaluated against
the environmental context of the samples and the current knowledge about the
substrates from which they are usually isolated.

PMID: 16329949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Microb Ecol. 2005 Oct;50(3):408-17. Epub 2005 Nov 24.

Occurrence and diversity of yeasts in the mid-atlantic ridge hydrothermal fields 
near the Azores Archipelago.

Gadanho M(1), Sampaio JP.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Secção Autónoma de Biotecnologia,
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 2829-516,
Caparica, Portugal.

The yeast community associated with deep-sea hydrothermal systems of the
Mid-Atlantic Rift was surveyed for the first time. This study relied on a
culture-based approach using two different growth media: a conventional culture
medium for yeasts supplemented with sea salts (MYPss) and the same medium
additionally supplemented with sulfur (MYPssS). For the evaluation of species
diversity, a molecular approach involving minisatellite-primed polymerase chain
reaction (MSP-PCR) strain typing and sequence analysis of the D1/D2 domains of
the 26S rDNA was followed. In the seven water samples that were studied, the
number of colony-forming units per liter (cfu/L) ranged from 0 to 5940. The
nonpigmented yeasts were much more abundant than the pink-pigmented ones. This
disproportion was not observed in studies of other marine systems and may be due 
to the unique conditions of hydrothermal vents, characterized by a rich animal
and microbial diversity and therefore by the availability of organic compounds
utilizable by yeasts. Higher counts of nonpigmented yeast were obtained using
MYPss, whereas for pink yeasts, higher counts were obtained using MYPssS.
Moreover, among pink yeasts, some of the MSP-PCR classes obtained were composed
of isolates obtained only on MYPssS, which might be an indication that these
isolates are adapted to the ecosystems of the hydrothermal vents. Twelve
phylotypes belonged to the Ascomycota and seven phylotypes belonged to the
Basidiomycota. The nonpigmented yeasts were identified as Candida atlantica, C.
atmosphaerica, C. lodderae, C. parapsilosis, Exophiala dermatitidis, Pichia
guilliermondii, and Trichosporon dermatis, whereas the pigmented yeasts were
identified as Rhodosporidium diobovatum, R. sphaerocarpum, R. toruloides, and
Rhodotorula mucilaginosa. Some of the yeasts that were found belong to
phylogenetic groups that include species reported from other marine environments,
and eight phylotypes represent undescribed species. The new phylotypes found at
Mid-Atlantic Ridge hydrothermal fields represent 33% of the total number of yeast
taxa that were found.

PMID: 16328655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Mar;20(3):584-97. Epub 2005 Nov 3.

Mechanism of repression of the inhibin alpha-subunit gene by inducible
3',5'-cyclic adenosine monophosphate early repressor.

Burkart AD(1), Mukherjee A, Mayo KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, and Center for
Reproductive Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA.

The rodent ovary is regulated throughout the reproductive cycle to maintain
normal cyclicity. Ovarian follicular development is controlled by changes in gene
expression in response to the gonadotropins FSH and LH. The inhibin alpha-subunit
gene belongs to a group of genes that is positively regulated by FSH and
negatively regulated by LH. Previous studies established an important role for
inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) in repression of alpha-inhibin. These
current studies investigate the mechanisms of repression by ICER. It is not clear
whether all four ICER isoforms expressed in the ovary can act as repressors of
the inhibin alpha-subunit gene. EMSAs demonstrate binding of all isoforms to the 
inhibin alpha-subunit CRE (cAMP response element), and transfection studies
demonstrate that all isoforms can repress the inhibin alpha-subunit gene.
Repression by ICER is dependent on its binding to DNA as demonstrated by
mutations to ICER's DNA-binding domain. These mutational studies also demonstrate
that repression by ICER is not dependent on heterodimerization with CREB
(CRE-binding protein). Competitive EMSAs show that ICER effectively competes with
CREB for binding to the inhibin alpha CRE in vitro. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays demonstrate a replacement of CREB dimers bound to the inhibin alpha CRE by
ICER dimers in ovarian granulosa cells in response to LH signaling. Thus, there
is a temporal association of transcription factors bound to the inhibin alpha-CRE
controlling inhibin alpha-subunit gene expression.

PMID: 16269517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Neurosci. 2005 Nov 2;25(44):10105-18.

cAMP response element-binding protein regulates differentiation and survival of
newborn neurons in the olfactory bulb.

Giachino C(1), De Marchis S, Giampietro C, Parlato R, Perroteau I, Schütz G,
Fasolo A, Peretto P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Human Biology, University of Turin, 10123 Turin,
Italy.

Erratum in
    J Neurosci. 2005 Nov 30;25(48):table of contents.

The transcription factor cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) is involved
in multiple aspects of neuronal development and plasticity. Here, we demonstrate 
that CREB regulates specific phases of adult neurogenesis in the subventricular
zone/olfactory bulb (SVZ/OB) system. Combining immunohistochemistry with
bromodeoxyuridine treatments, cell tracer injections, cell transplants, and
quantitative analyses, we show that although CREB is expressed by the SVZ
neuroblasts throughout the neurogenic process, its phosphorylation is transient
and parallels neuronal differentiation, increasing during the late phase of
tangential migration and decreasing after dendrite elongation and spine
formation. In vitro, inhibition of CREB function impairs morphological
differentiation of SVZ-derived neuroblasts. Transgenic mice lacking CREB, in a
null CREM genetic background, show reduced survival of newborn neurons in the OB.
This finding is further supported by peripheral afferent denervation experiments 
resulting in downregulation of CREB phosphorylation in neuroblasts, the survival 
of which appears heavily impaired. Together, these findings provide evidence that
CREB regulates differentiation and survival of newborn neurons in the OB.

PMID: 16267218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Cell Sci. 2005 Nov 15;118(Pt 22):5335-44. Epub 2005 Nov 1.

Glucose represses connexin36 in insulin-secreting cells.

Allagnat F(1), Martin D, Condorelli DF, Waeber G, Haefliger JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Laboratory of Molecular Biology 19-135S,
University Hospital, CHUV-1011 Lausanne, Switzerland.

The gap-junction protein connexin36 (Cx36) contributes to control the functions
of insulin-producing cells. In this study, we investigated whether the expression
of Cx36 is regulated by glucose in insulin-producing cells. Glucose caused a
significant reduction of Cx36 in insulin-secreting cell lines and freshly
isolated pancreatic rat islets. This decrease appeared at the mRNA and the
protein levels in a dose- and time-dependent manner. 2-Deoxyglucose partially
reproduced the effect of glucose, whereas glucosamine, 3-O-methyl-D-glucose and
leucine were ineffective. Moreover, KCl-induced depolarization of beta-cells had 
no effect on Cx36 expression, indicating that glucose metabolism and ATP
production are not mandatory for glucose-induced Cx36 downregulation. Forskolin
mimicked the repression of Cx36 by glucose. Glucose or forskolin effects on Cx36 
expression were not suppressed by the L-type Ca(2+)-channel blocker nifedipine
but were fully blunted by the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) inhibitor H89. 
A 4 kb fragment of the human Cx36 promoter was identified and sequenced.
Reporter-gene activity driven by various Cx36 promoter fragments indicated that
Cx36 repression requires the presence of a highly conserved cAMP responsive
element (CRE). Electrophoretic-mobility-shift assays revealed that, in the
presence of a high glucose concentration, the binding activity of the repressor
CRE-modulator 1 (CREM-1) is enhanced. Taken together, these data provide evidence
that glucose represses the expression of Cx36 through the cAMP-PKA pathway, which
activates a member of the CRE binding protein family.

PMID: 16263767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2006 Apr;16(3):211-9. Epub 2005 Oct 20.

Distinct gene expression profiles in adult rat brains after acute MK-801 and
cocaine treatments.

Storvik M(1), Tiikkainen P, van Iersel M, Wong G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, A.I. Virtanen Institute, Kuopio 70211, Finland.

Uncompetitive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists have been
suggested to attenuate the self-administration and rewarding effects of
psychostimulants. Microarrays containing 14,500 rat cDNAs were hybridized to
identify alterations in gene expression levels in rat brain regions elicited by
the uncompetitive NMDA receptor antagonist MK-801 (dizocilpine, 1 mg/kg), the
dopamine agonist cocaine (20 mg/kg), or combined treatment (MK-801 15 min prior
to cocaine) 4 h after injections. Total genes up regulated (Z-ratio >2) in
parietal cortex and nucleus accumbens were 111 and 158, respectively. Total genes
down regulated (Z-ratio <2) in the same tissues were 360 and 166, respectively.
These genes fell into multiple molecular function gene ontology (GO) categories, 
but were highly represented in catalytic activities (44% of all genes), signal
transduction (14%), protein (20%), nucleotide (18%), and nucleic acid (15%)
binding. In nucleus accumbens, genes up regulated by MK-801 (87 genes) did not
overlap those up regulated by cocaine (46 genes). Genes down regulated by MK-801 
(33 genes) consisted of 2 overlapping genes with those down regulated by cocaine 
(89 genes). In parietal cortex, low numbers of overlapping regulated genes were
also observed. Combined treatments also indicated low numbers (0-10) of genes
commonly regulated when compared with single treatments alone. In situ
hybridisation studies indicated significant increases in b-ZIP transcription
factors (CREM, ICER, CBP, and c-fos) elicited by MK-801 and decreases in c-fos
elicited by cocaine. The results indicate independent gene expression signatures 
following acute MK-801 and cocaine administration that appears to be largely
non-overlapping and context dependent.

PMID: 16242920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Immunol. 2005 Nov 1;175(9):5975-80.

The cyclic AMP response element modulator regulates transcription of the TCR
zeta-chain.

Tenbrock K(1), Kyttaris VC, Ahlmann M, Ehrchen JM, Tolnay M, Melkonyan H, Mawrin 
C, Roth J, Sorg C, Juang YT, Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Rheumatology, University Hospital,
Muenster, Germany. ktenbroc@uni-muenster.de

Systemic lupus erythematosus T cells display decreased amounts of TCR zeta mRNA
that results in part from limited binding of the transcriptional enhancer Elf-1
to the TCR zeta promoter. We have identified a new cis-binding site for the cAMP 
response element (CRE) modulator (CREM) on the TCR zeta promoter, centered on the
-390 nucleotide. Transfection of T cells with an antisense CREM alpha plasmid
reduced the binding of CREM to the TCR zeta promoter, as shown by chromatin and
reporter chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, and enhanced the production of TCR
zeta mRNA and protein. Mutagenesis of the -390 CRE site prevented the binding of 
CREM to the TCR zeta promoter. The mechanism of CREM-mediated repression appears 
to be chromatin dependent, because antisense CREM promotes the acetylation of
histones on the TCR zeta promoter. Finally, we established an enhanced binding of
CREM to the TCR zeta-chain promoter in systemic lupus erythematosus cells
compared with control T cells. Our studies demonstrate that CREM alpha binds to
the TCR zeta promoter and repress its activity.

PMID: 16237091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Neurosci Res. 2005 Oct 15;82(2):273-82.

Lithium-induced gene expression of inducible cyclic adenosine monophosphate early
repressor in the rat adrenal gland.

Spencer CM(1), Jahng JW, Ryu V, Houpt TA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neuroscience, Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida, USA.

Lithium has acute and chronic effects on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal gland
(HPA) axis that are important for both therapeutic (e.g., treatment of mood
disorders) and experimental (e.g., as the toxin in conditioned taste aversion
studies) applications. We visualized lithium-induced activation of the HPA axis
in rats by the adrenal expression of inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER), which
is activated by elevated intracellular cAMP. We have shown that 1)
intraperitoneal lithium chloride (LiCl) induces transient expression of ICER and 
c-fos mRNAs in the rat adrenal cortex and increases plasma level of
corticosterone; 2) the cortical expression of ICER mRNA by LiCl occurs in a
dose-dependent manner; 3) adrenal induction of ICER expression is delayed
compared with c-fos expression; 4) dexamethasone pretreatment (4 mg/kg) blocks
corticosterone release and adrenocortical ICER induction either by systemic LiCl 
(76 mg/kg) or by restraint stress; and 5) intracerebroventricular LiCl (127
microg/5 microl) is sufficient for adrenocortical, but not medullary, ICER
induction. These results suggest that adrenocortical ICER expression could serve 
as a reliable marker for lithium-induced activation of the HPA axis.
Understanding the activation of immediate-early genes such as c-fos or ICER in
response to a single LiCl injection is an important first step in understanding
the long-term changes in gene expression elicited by lithium that are involved in
its therapeutic and toxic effect. The pattern and mechanism by which lithium
stimulates ICER transcription in the adrenal gland would serve as a useful model 
system in future studies of lithium.

PMID: 16175568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Bioessays. 2005 Oct;27(10):1011-25.

Regulated nucleocytoplasmic transport in spermatogenesis: a driver of cellular
differentiation?

Hogarth C(1), Itman C, Jans DA, Loveland KL.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Institute of Medical Research, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.

This review explores the hypothesis that regulation of nucleocytoplasmic
shuttling is a means of driving differentiation, using spermatogenesis as a
model. The transition from undifferentiated spermatogonial stem cell to
terminally differentiated spermatozoon is, at its most basic, a change in the
repertoire of expressed genes. To effect this, the complement of nuclear
proteins, such as transcription factors and chromatin remodelling components must
change. Current knowledge of the nuclear proteins and nucleocytoplasmic transport
machinery relevant to spermatogenesis is consolidated in this review, and their
functional linkages are highlighted not only as a means of regulating nuclear
protein composition, but also as a key mechanism regulating gene transcription
and hence cell fate. Through this, we hypothesize that male germ cell
differentiation is mediated through regulation of nuclear transport machinery
components, and thereby of the access of critical factors to the nucleus. The
importance of nucleocytoplasmic trafficking to male germ cell differentiation is 
discussed, using the sex-determining factors Sry and SOX9, cell cycle regulators,
CREM and cofactors and the Smads as specific examples, together with the roles in
gametogenesis for particular nuclear transport factors in Caenorhabditis elegans 
and Drosophila.

(c) 2005 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 16163727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Mol Hum Reprod. 2005 Aug;11(8):567-74. Epub 2005 Sep 2.

Combinations of genetic changes in the human cAMP-responsive element modulator
gene: a clue towards understanding some forms of male infertility?

Vouk K(1), Hudler P, Strmsnik L, Fink M, Majdic G, Zorn B, Lalli E, Sassone-Corsi
P, Debeljak N, Komel R, Rozman D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Medical, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana,
Slovenia.

The cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) gene plays a pivotal role in the
mouse spermatogenesis, but its role in the human infertility has not been fully
established. We performed a mutation screening in 13 Slovenian men with round
spermatid arrest and in six controls. Eleven genetic changes have been identified
in the human CREM gene, three novel single-nucleotide polymorphisms [within the
promoters P1, P3 and intervening sequence 1 (IVS1)], one insertion (IVS2) and one
non-sense mutation (exon gamma). Some infertile patients seem to accumulate
potentially harmful genetic changes. We identified a patient with no CREM
immunoreactive protein that was homozygous for the nucleotide changes in all
promoters, IVS 1, 2, 6, and was heterozygous for the mutation in exon gamma.
Interestingly, insertion in IVS2 (IVS2-58_55insT) results in a four-fold decrease
in binding of nuclear proteins. Computer predictions suggested the presence of a 
potential novel CREM promoter, however, random amplification of cDNA ends from
the human testis cDNA library was not successful in confirming a novel
transcription start site of the CREM gene. Screening of a larger number of
patients and controls is required to elucidate whether the observed combinations 
of genetic changes in the CREM gene can explain some forms of male infertility.

PMID: 16143638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Endocrinology. 2005 Dec;146(12):5321-31. Epub 2005 Aug 25.

Cholesterogenic lanosterol 14alpha-demethylase (CYP51) is an immediate early
response gene.

Fink M(1), Acimovic J, Rezen T, Tansek N, Rozman D.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Center for Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Lanosterol 14alpha-demethylase (CYP51) responds to cholesterol feedback
regulation through sterol regulatory element binding proteins (SREBPs). The
proximal promoter of CYP51 contains a conserved region with clustered regulatory 
elements: GC box, cAMP-response elements (CRE-like), and sterol regulatory
element (SRE). In lipid-rich (SREBP-poor) conditions, the CYP51 mRNA drops
gradually, the promoter activity is diminished, and no DNA-protein complex is
observed at the CYP51-SRE1 site. The majority of cAMP-dependent transactivation
is mediated through a single CRE (CYP51-CRE2). Exposure of JEG-3 cells to
forskolin, a mediator of the cAMP-dependent signaling pathway, provokes an
immediate early response of CYP51, which has not been described before for any
cholesterogenic gene. The CYP51 mRNA increases up to 4-fold in 2 h and drops to
basal level after 4 h. The inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) is involved in
attenuation of transcription. Overexpressed CRE-binding protein (CREB)/CRE
modulator (CREM) transactivates the mouse/human CYP51 promoters containing
CYP51-CRE2 independently of SREBPs, and ICER decreases the CREB-induced
transcription. Besides the increased CYP51 mRNA, forskolin affects the de novo
sterol biosynthesis in JEG-3 cells. An increased consumption of lanosterol, a
substrate of CYP51, is observed together with modulation of the postlanosterol
cholesterogenesis, indicating that cAMP-dependent stimuli cross-talk with
cholesterol feedback regulation. CRE-2 is essential for cAMP-dependent
transactivation, whereas SRE seems to be less important. Interestingly, when CREB
is not limiting, the increasing amounts of SREBP-1a fail to transactivate the
CYP51 promoter above the CREB-only level, suggesting that hormones might have an 
important role in regulating cholesterogenesis in vivo.

PMID: 16123160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 14;280(41):34521-9. Epub 2005 Aug 15.

The switch in alternative splicing of cyclic AMP-response element modulator
protein CREM{tau}2{alpha} (activator) to CREM{alpha} (repressor) in human
myometrial cells is mediated by SRp40.

Tyson-Capper AJ(1), Bailey J, Krainer AR, Robson SC, Europe-Finner GN.

Author information: 
(1)School of Surgical and Reproductive Sciences, 3rd Floor, William Leech
Building, The Medical School, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle upon
Tyne NE2 4HH, United Kingdom. A.J.Tyson-Capper@ncl.ac.uk

The transcription factor cAMP-response element modulator (CREM) protein, plays a 
major role in cAMP-responsive gene regulation. Biological consequences resulting 
from the transcriptional stimuli of CREM are dictated by the expression of
multiple protein isoforms generated by extensive alternative splicing of its
precursor mRNA. We have previously shown that alternative splicing enables the
expression of the CREM gene to be "switched" within the human myometrium during
pregnancy from the production of CREMtau(2alpha), a potent transcriptional
activator to the synthesis of CREMalpha, a transcriptional repressor. Furthermore
we have recently reported that this change in the expression of CREM spliced
variants is likely to have important ramifications on the regulation of
downstream cAMP-response element-responsive target genes involved in uterine
activity during gestation. We have investigated the splicing factors involved in 
controlling the expression of myometrial CREM splice variants. Data presented
here from transient transfections indicate that the switch in the synthesis of
CREMtau(2)alpha to CREMalpha that occurs during pregnancy is regulated primarily 
by an SR protein family member, SRp40. We also show that expression of this
splicing factor is tightly regulated in the myometrium during pregnancy. SRp40
regulates the splicing of CREM via its interactions with multiple ESE motifs
present in the alternatively exons of CREM. In vitro splicing and electrophoretic
mobility shift assays were employed to confirm the functionality of the
SRp40-binding ESEs, thus providing a mechanistic explanation of how SRp40
regulates the switch in splicing from production of CREMtau(2)alpha to CREMalpha.

PMID: 16103121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Androl. 2005 Sep-Oct;26(5):592-600.

Impaired sperm function after spinal cord injury in the rat is associated with
altered cyclic adenosine monophosphate signaling.

Wang S(1), Wang G, Barton BE, Murphy TF, Huang HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Urology, University of Medicine and
Dentistry, New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

Our previous observations of changes in the expression of cAMP-dependent genes
and the cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) in rat testicular cells after
spinal cord injury (SCI) implied abnormal cAMP signaling as one of the mechanisms
underlying the effects of SCI on spermatogenesis. It was postulated that such
effects might contribute to abnormal sperm function after SCI. In this study, we 
examined this possibility. In spinal cord-contused (SCC) and -transected (SCX)
rats, impaired sperm motility was accompanied by an increase in sperm cAMP
content. Treatment of SCX rats with exogenous testosterone or
follicle-stimulating hormone resulted in a further decrease in sperm motility,
whereas sperm cAMP either increased or remained unchanged. These effects differed
from those in sham control rats that received identical treatments. Results of
these experiments also demonstrated that impaired sperm motility in SCC and SCX
rats was accompanied by decreases in sperm viability and mitochondrial potential,
thus suggesting a possible link between these changes. We concluded that impaired
sperm motility after SCI was associated with decreases in sperm viability and
mitochondrial potential. These effects occurred in the face of elevated sperm
cAMP content and changes in its regulation, suggesting that altered cAMP
signaling events might contribute to impairment of sperm motility and perhaps
other sperm functions after SCI.

PMID: 16088035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. FEMS Yeast Res. 2005 Dec;5(12):1167-83. Epub 2005 Jul 21.

Phylloplane yeasts from Portugal: seven novel anamorphic species in the
Tremellales lineage of the Hymenomycetes (Basidiomycota) producing
orange-coloured colonies.

Inácio J(1), Portugal L, Spencer-Martins I, Fonseca A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos CREM, Biotechnology Unit, Faculdade de
Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal.

A survey of epiphytic yeasts on leaves of selected Mediterranean plant species
collected at the 'Arrábida Natural Park' (Portugal) yielded about 850 isolates,
mostly of basidiomycetous affinity. Amongst the basidiomycetes, 35 strains showed
the following characteristics: production of orange-coloured colonies, ability to
produce starch-like compounds, assimilation of D-glucuronic acid and/or inositol,
inability to utilize nitrate, and formation of ballistoconidia by many of the
isolates. This group of yeasts was assigned to the Tremellales lineage of the
Hymenomycetes and was further characterised using a combination of conventional
phenotypic identification tests with molecular methods, namely PCR fingerprinting
and rDNA sequencing. Eight additional strains presumptively identified as Bullera
armeniaca, B. crocea or Cryptococcus hungaricus were also studied. Twenty-eight
strains could be assigned to or were phylogenetically related to recognised
species of Dioszegia in the 'Luteolus clade', but the 15 remaining strains
belonged to other clades within the Tremellales. Ten phylloplane isolates were
identified as Dioszegia hungarica, one as D. aurantiaca, another as D. crocea and
three others were ascribed to the recently described species D. zsoltii. Seven
novel species, viz. Cryptococcus amylolyticus, C. armeniacus, C. cistialbidi,
Dioszegia buhagiarii, D. catarinonii, D. fristingensis and D. takashimae, are
proposed for the remaining strains that did not correspond to any of the hitherto
recognised species.

PMID: 16081324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Calcif Tissue Int. 2005 Aug;77(2):91-5. Epub 2005 Jul 28.

Identification of novel cAMP responsive element modulator (CREM) isoforms
expressed by osteoblasts.

Liu F(1), Huang YF, Kream BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, 263
Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030, USA.

CREM, the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) responsive element modulator,
belongs to a multigene family of cAMP-responsive transcription factors. CREM
encodes a variety of different isoforms by utilizing four promoters and a complex
pattern of alternative messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) splicing. We showed
previously that parathyroid hormone induces the CREM P2 promoter products known
as ICER (inducible cAMP early repressor) in osteoblasts. Herein we report that
osteoblasts also express at least 15 CREM transcripts initiated from the P1
promoter, including 7 novel transcripts that result from alternative splicing. It
is of interest that we found that CREM-X contains both exon theta1, previously
identified only in P3 promoter products, and a new exon termed L, which is
located upstream of exon theta1.

PMID: 16059773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Int J Androl. 2005 Aug;28(4):215-23.

CREM activator and repressor isoform expression in human male germ cells.

Blöcher S(1), Fink L, Bohle RM, Bergmann M, Steger K.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for General, Thorax and Visceral Surgery, University of Giessen,
Germany.

The transcription factor cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) is known to
play a vital role for male fertility as it has been demonstrated that male mice
lacking a functional CREM gene are infertile. The CREM gene consists of 14 exons.
Owing to alternative exon splicing, CREM gene expression results in the
production of functionally different CREM proteins with either activating or
repressing potential on target gene expression. Infertile men have been reported 
to reveal a substantial reduction of CREM activators and additional inaccurately 
spliced CREM transcripts. In the present study, we analysed the expression of
CREM transcripts with the recently reported leader exons theta1 and theta2 and
identified a new putative CREM repressor, namely theta1-F-H, in patients with
impaired spermatogenesis. In addition, we applied single cell microdissection
followed by RT-PCR with leader exons B, theta1 and theta2 to assign the expressed
CREM activator and repressor isoforms to specific germ cell types within the
seminiferous epithelium. Contrary to dogma, we demonstrated CREM activator and
repressor isoforms in all germ cell types, but not in Sertoli cells. However, the
percentage of germ cell samples that revealed positive RT-PCR signals for these
CREM activators was higher in spermatocytes and round spermatids than in
spermatogonia and elongated spermatids. It remains unknown whether these
activator transcripts are physiologically active. Our data suggest a fine-tuning 
between CREM activator and repressor isoforms in normal germ cells that might be 
disturbed during impaired spermatogenesis.

PMID: 16048633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Sep 9;334(4):1260-5.

CREB expression in cardiac fibroblasts and CREM expression in ventricular
myocytes.

Husse B(1), Isenberg G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Martin-Luther-University Halle, D-06097 Halle,
Germany. britta.husse@medizin.uni-halle.de

Activation of gene expression by the cAMP-dependent signaling pathway is
regulated by members of the cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) family
consisting of CREB, CREM, and ATF-1. It is decisively for the understanding of
the heart function as to which type of heart cells expresses CREB and/or CREM.
Ventricular myocytes and fibroblasts of young (3 months) and old (24 months) rat 
hearts were separately investigated to analyse CREB, CREM, and phospho-CREB.
Western blot showed CREB expression exclusively in fibroblasts but CREM was
predominantly detected in ventricular myocytes. CREB-positive nuclei in heart
sections were only revealed in fibroblasts. CREB was activated by forskolin (10
microM), PMA (500 nM), and cyclical mechanical strain (1 Hz, 5% elongation) in
fibroblasts. The number of CREB-positive myocytes in old rats was larger than in 
young rats. But CREB could not be activated by forskolin (10 microM) in all
myocytes. Our results suggest that the expression of CREB depends on the cell
type and the age of the animal. We discuss that modulation of gene expression as 
it occurs with a age could be affected by the change within the CREB family
members.

PMID: 16043122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Immunol. 2005 Aug 1;175(3):1724-34.

Regulator of complement activation (RCA) locus in chicken: identification of
chicken RCA gene cluster and functional RCA proteins.

Oshiumi H(1), Shida K, Goitsuka R, Kimura Y, Katoh J, Ohba S, Tamaki Y, Hattori
T, Yamada N, Inoue N, Matsumoto M, Mizuno S, Seya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Osaka Medical Center for Cancer and Cardiovascular
Diseases, Osaka, Japan.

A 150-kb DNA fragment, which contains the gene of the chicken complement
regulatory protein CREM (formerly named Cremp), was isolated from a
microchromosome by screening bacterial artificial chromosome library. Within 100 
kb of the cloned region, three complete genes encoding short consensus repeats
(SCRs, motifs with tandemly arranged 60 aa) were identified by exon-trap method
and 3'- or 5'-RACE. A chicken orthologue of the human gene
6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-biphosphatase 2, which exists in close
proximity to the regulator of complement activation genes in humans and mice, was
located near this chicken SCR gene cluster. Moreover, additional genes encoding
SCR proteins appeared to be present in this region. Three distinct transcripts
were detected in RNA samples from a variety of chicken organs and cell lines. Two
novel genes named complement regulatory secretory protein of chicken (CRES) and
complement regulatory GPI-anchored protein of chicken (CREG) besides CREM were
identified by cloning corresponding cDNA. Based on the predicted primary
structures and properties of the expressed molecules, CRES is a secretory
protein, whereas CREG is a GPI-anchored membrane protein. CREG and CREM were
protected host cells from chicken complement-mediated cytolysis. Likewise, a
membrane-bound form of CRES, which was artificially generated, also protected
host cells from chicken complement. Taken together, the chicken possesses an
regulator of complement activation locus similar to those of the mammals, and the
gene products function as complement regulators.

PMID: 16034113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 9;280(36):31739-45. Epub 2005 Jul 7.

Microtubule-independent and protein kinase A-mediated function of kinesin KIF17b 
controls the intracellular transport of activator of CREM in testis (ACT).

Kotaja N(1), Macho B, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, B.P. 10142,
67404 Illkirch-Strasbourg, France.

Kinesins are motor proteins that transport their cargos along microtubules in an 
ATP-dependent manner. The testis-specific kinesin KIF17b was shown to directly
regulate cAMP-response element modulator (CREM)-dependent transcription by
determining the subcellular localization of the activator of CREM in testis
(ACT), the testis-specific coactivator of CREM in postmeiotic male germ cells.
CREM is a crucial transcriptional regulator of many important genes required for 
spermatid maturation, as demonstrated by the complete block of sperm development 
at the first steps of spermiogenesis in crem-null mice. To better understand the 
complex regulation of postmeiotic germ cell differentiation, we further
characterized the ACT-KIF17b interaction, the function of KIF17b, and the
signaling pathways governing its action. In this study, we demonstrated that the 
abilities of KIF17b to shuttle between the nuclear and the cytoplasmic
compartments and to transport ACT are neither dependent on its motor domain nor
on microtubules, thus revealing a novel microtubule-independent function for
kinesins. We also showed that the cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase A mediates 
the phosphorylation of KIF17b, and this modification is important for its
subcellular localization. These results indicate that cyclic AMP signaling
controls CREM-mediated transcription in male germ cells through modification of
KIF17b function.

PMID: 16002395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Biol Reprod. 2005 Oct;73(4):840-7. Epub 2005 Jun 29.

Meiotic messenger RNA and noncoding RNA targets of the RNA-binding protein
Translin (TSN) in mouse testis.

Cho YS(1), Iguchi N, Yang J, Handel MA, Hecht NB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Reproduction and Women's Health, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, 19104, USA.

In postmeiotic male germ cells, TSN, formerly known as testis brain-RNA binding
protein, is found in the cytoplasm and functions as a posttranscriptional
regulator of a group of genes transcribed by the transcription factor CREM-tau.
In contrast, in pachytene spermatocytes, TSN is found predominantly in nuclei.
Tsn-null males show a reduced sperm count and high levels of apoptosis in meiotic
cells, suggesting a critical function for TSN during meiosis. To identify meiotic
target RNAs that associate in vivo with TSN, we reversibly cross-linked TSN to
RNA in testis extracts from 17-day-old and adult mice and immunoprecipitated the 
complexes with an affinity-purified TSN antibody. Extracts from Tsn-null mice
were used as controls. Cloning and sequencing the immunoprecipitated RNAs, we
identified four new TSN target mRNAs, encoding diazepam-binding inhibitor-like 5,
arylsulfatase A, a tetratricopeptide repeat structure-containing protein, and
ring finger protein 139. In contrast to the population of postmeiotic
translationally delayed mRNAs that bind TSN, these four mRNAs are initially
expressed in pachytene spermatocytes. In addition, anti-TSN also precipitated a
nonprotein-coding RNA (ncRNA), which is abundant in nuclei of pachytene
spermatocytes and has a putative polyadenylation signal, but no open reading
frame. A second similar ncRNA is adjacent to a GGA repeat, a motif frequently
associated with recombination hot spots. RNA gel-shift assays confirm that the
four new target mRNAs and the ncRNA specifically bind to TSN in testis extracts. 
These studies have, for the first time, identified both mRNAs and a ncRNA as TSN 
targets expressed during meiosis.

PMID: 15987823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Genes Cells. 2005 Jun;10(6):575-94.

Tisp40, a spermatid specific bZip transcription factor, functions by binding to
the unfolded protein response element via the Rip pathway.

Nagamori I(1), Yabuta N, Fujii T, Tanaka H, Yomogida K, Nishimune Y, Nojima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, Yamadaoka 3-1, Suita City, Osaka, Japan.

TISP40, a mouse spermatid-specific gene, encodes a CREB/CREM family transcription
factor that is predominantly expressed during spermiogenesis. We report here that
TISP40 generates two types of proteins, Tisp40alpha and Tisp40beta, both of which
contain a transmembrane domain and localize to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In
contrast, mutant proteins lacking the transmembrane domain
(Tisp40alpha/betaDeltaTM) primarily localize to the nucleus. Endoglycosidase H
treatment shows that the C-terminus of Tisp40alpha/beta is glycosylated. Protease
experiments demonstrate that Tisp40alpha/beta are Type II transmembrane proteins 
that are released into the nucleus by a two-step cleavage mechanism called
'regulated intramembrane proteolysis' (Rip). Unlike previously published
observations, Tisp40alpha does not bind to the NF-kappaB site; instead, it
specifically binds to the unfolded protein response element (UPRE). Luciferase
assays reveal that Tisp40betaDeltaTM activates transcription through UPRE.
Northern blot analysis shows that Tisp40alpha/betaDeltaTM proteins up-regulate
EDEM (ER degradation of enhancing alpha-manosidase-like protein) mRNA. These
observations unveil a novel event in mouse spermiogenesis and show that the final
stage of transcriptional regulation is controlled by the Rip pathway.

PMID: 15938716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Neurosci Lett. 2005 Sep 2;385(1):87-91.

Photoinducible and rhythmic ICER-CREM immunoreactivity in the rat suprachiasmatic
nucleus.

Schwartz WJ(1), Aronin N, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA, USA. william.schwartz@umassed.edu

Several genes expressed in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) are induced by light
and are candidate links in the photic entrainment pathway of the SCN's circadian 
clock. Since the cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) and CRE-mediated
gene transcription in the SCN appears to be crucial for light-induced phase
shifts of circadian rhythmicity, we analyzed the immunohistochemical expression
of proteins encoded by the cAMP response element modulator (CREM) gene, including
a repressor isoform (inducible cAMP early repressor [ICER]). ICER-CREM
immunoreactivity was detected in cells of the ventrolateral subdivision of the
rat SCN after light administration during the subjective night in constant
darkness; but only late after light onset (at 240 min), following earlier
successive peaks of phosphorylated CREB protein (by 5 min), c-fos mRNA (by 40
min), per 1 mRNA (by 55 min), and c-Fos protein (by 60 min). In constant
darkness, there was a modest but significant endogenous rhythm of ICER-CREM
immunoreactivity, with a two-fold difference between high levels at circadian
time (CT) 10 and low levels at CT 22. Our data raise the possibility that
ICER-CREM might be involved in downregulating the SCN expression of
immediate-early and "clock" genes after their induction by phase-shifting light
pulses.

PMID: 15936880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Neuroscience. 2005;133(3):647-55.

Cyclic AMP response element-binding protein is required for normal maternal
nurturing behavior.

Jin SH(1), Blendy JA, Thomas SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, 103 John Morgan Building, 3620 Hamilton Walk,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6084, USA.

Analysis of mice with targeted disruptions of fosB or the gene encoding dopamine 
beta-hydroxylase suggests that FosB and adrenergic signaling play critical roles 
in maternal nurturing behavior. The majority of neonates born to null females
from either mutation fail to thrive, and virgin mutant females of both lines
exhibit impaired pup retrieval. Considering whether FosB and adrenergic signaling
might share a signaling pathway important for maternal behavior, we examined the 
role of a potential intermediary, cyclic AMP response element-binding protein
(CREB). Here we report that approximately 40% of neonates (all heterozygous) born
to mice lacking the major isoforms of CREB (Creb-alphaDelta-/-) died within
several days of birth. In contrast, heterozygotes born to Creb-alphaDelta+/-
females thrived. Cross-fostering demonstrated that neonates born to
Creb-alphaDelta(-/dagger/-) females thrived when reared by wild-type females, and
that Creb-alphaDelta-/- females were capable of rearing neonates whose maternal
care was initiated by wild-type females. Further, virgin Creb-alphaDelta-/-
females were deficient in pup retrieval despite exhibiting normal investigation
of pups and of novel objects. No maternal behavior phenotype was present in mice 
with a null mutation of the cyclic AMP response element modulator (Crem) gene.
Interestingly, the number of cells immunostaining for phospho-CREB (on Ser(133)) 
in the medial preoptic area of the hypothalamus, a key region for the expression 
of maternal behavior, increased nearly three-fold in wild-type mice following
exposure to pups but not to novel objects. On the other hand, basal expression
and induction of FosB in response to pup exposure appeared to be independent of
CREB because levels were equivalent between wild-type and Creb-alphaDelta-/-
females. These results implicate CREB in maternal nurturing behavior and suggest 
that CREB is not critical for expression or induction of FosB in adult virgin
female mice.

PMID: 15893884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Comput Assist Tomogr. 2005 May-Jun;29(3):305-10.

Registration and fusion of CT and MRI of the temporal bone.

Bartling SH(1), Peldschus K, Rodt T, Kral F, Matthies H, Kikinis R, Becker H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroradiology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
soenkebartling@gmx.de

OBJECTIVE: To present and evaluate a registration method to fuse complementary
information of CT and MRI of the temporal bone.
METHODS: CT and MRI of the temporal bone of 26 patients were independently
registered 4 times. A manual, iterative, intrinsic, rigid, and retrospective
registration method was used. Mean CREm (consistency registration error) was
calculated as a reproducibility measurement.
RESULTS: CREm was 0.6 mm (95% CI = 0.52-0.68 mm). T-test revealed no difference
between pathologic and normal cases (t[102] = -1.71; P = 0.09). Time needed: 13
minutes. In the registered and fused datasets, important bony surgical landmarks 
(eg, facial nerve canal, inner ear) could be assessed in 3 dimensions relatively 
to tumor tissue (eg, acoustic schwannoma). Fluid distribution within partially
obliterated cochleae could be assigned to either scalae.
CONCLUSION: An accurate, reproducible registration and fusion method that
improves tumor surgery and cochlea implantation planning with only minor changes 
to the clinical workflow was presented and described. We suggest this method in
selected cases.

PMID: 15891495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2005 Feb;94(1-3):103-10. Epub 2005 Apr 13.

The hamster androgen receptor promoter: a molecular analysis.

Varriale B(1), Esposito T.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale, Laboratorio di Biologia Molecolare,
Sez. "F. Bottazzi", II Università di Napoli, Via Costantinopoli, 16, 80138
Naples, Italy. bruno.varriale@unina2.it

The steroid/thyroid hormone receptors are members of a very large family of
nuclear-activated transcription factors. These receptors play a crucial role in
most biological function, including regulation of development, metabolism,
behaviour and reproduction. Among androgen receptor (AR), we have recently
demonstrated that its expression in the Harderian gland (HG) of the male hamster 
is under a well-co-ordinated cross-talk between various steroid hormone
receptors. Here, are presented data on the sequence of hamster AR promoter region
(5'UTR) and the molecular tools of its regulation. The 5'UTR is 1585 bp. The
promoter region shows various responsive elements. Two putative CREM elements are
present at -71 and -1576 bp. A putative retinoic acid responsive element is
present at -1476 bp. An androgen/glucocorticoid responsive element is present at 
-473 bp. A putative thyroid hormone-responsive element at -381 bp and an estrogen
responsive element at -230 bp. Also, a homopurinic stretch is evident between
-1199 and -1118. Furthermore, Sp1 sites are also spread along the sequence. As
well as for human, mouse, rat and pig, the hamster lacks the canonical promoter
TATA and CCAAT boxes. Gel retardation experiments confirm the presence of active 
responsive elements for AR, estrogen receptor, glucocorticoid receptor and
thyroid hormone receptor. Previous data on the regulation of expression of AR by 
other members of steroid/thyroid hormone receptors well correlate with sequence
analysis and gel retardation experiments. Thus, androgens, thyroid hormone,
stimulate the AR transcription, while synthetic glucocorticoid (Dex) and estrogen
are potent inhibitors of AR expression. The comparison of hamster AR promoter
sequence with other AR promoter shows an 89, 82, 84 and 84% identity with human, 
rat, mouse and pig AR promoter, respectively. These results, in the light of the 
extreme plasticity of hamster HG, suggest that the comparative study of
expression and regulation of AR gene in the HG of the hamster offers a useful
tool to approach the normal and pathological phenotype in human.

PMID: 15862955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Neurosci. 2005 Apr 20;25(16):4073-81.

Role of glucocorticoids and cAMP-mediated repression in limiting
corticotropin-releasing hormone transcription during stress.

Shepard JD(1), Liu Y, Sassone-Corsi P, Aguilera G.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Endocrine Physiology, Developmental Endocrinology Branch, National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20891, USA.

The role of glucocorticoids and the repressor isoform of cAMP response element
(CRE) modulator (CREM), inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER), in limiting
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) transcription during restraint stress were 
examined in both intact and adrenalectomized rats receiving glucocorticoid
replacement. CRH primary transcript, measured by intronic in situ hybridization, 
increased after 30 min of restraint and returned to basal levels by 90 min,
despite the persistent stressor. The decline was independent of circulating
glucocorticoids, because adrenalectomized rats displayed an identical pattern.
ICER mRNA in the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus (PVN) increased after 30
min and remained elevated for up to 4 h in a glucocorticoid-independent manner.
Western blot and electrophoretic mobility shift assay analyses showed increases
in endogenous ICER in the PVN of rats subjected to restraint stress for 3 h.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed the recruitment of CREM by the CRH
CRE in conjunction with decreases in RNA polymerase II (Pol II) binding in the
PVN region of rats restrained for 3 h. These data show that stress-induced
glucocorticoids do not mediate the limitation of CRH transcription. Furthermore, 
the ability of CREM to bind the CRH CRE and the time relationship between
elevated CREM and reduced Pol II recruitment by the CRH promoter suggest that
inhibitory isoforms of CREM induced during stress contribute to the decline in
CRH gene transcription during persistent stimulation.

PMID: 15843609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Clin Invest. 2005 Apr;115(4):996-1005.

Systemic lupus erythematosus serum IgG increases CREM binding to the IL-2
promoter and suppresses IL-2 production through CaMKIV.

Juang YT(1), Wang Y, Solomou EE, Li Y, Mawrin C, Tenbrock K, Kyttaris VC, Tsokos 
GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Injury, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver 
Spring, Maryland 20910, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2005 Apr;115(4):836-40.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) T cells express high levels of cAMP response
element modulator (CREM) that binds to the IL-2 promoter and represses the
transcription of the IL-2 gene. This study was designed to identify pathways that
lead to increased binding of CREM to the IL-2 promoter in SLE T cells.
Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent kinase IV (CaMKIV) was found to be increased in the
nucleus of SLE T cells and to be involved in the overexpression of CREM and its
binding to the IL-2 promoter. Treatment of normal T cells with SLE serum resulted
in increased expression of CREM protein, increased binding of CREM to the IL-2
promoter, and decreased IL-2 promoter activity and IL-2 production. This process 
was abolished when a dominant inactive form of CaMKIV was expressed in normal T
cells. The effect of SLE serum resided within the IgG fraction and was
specifically attributed to anti-TCR/CD3 autoantibodies. This study identifies
CaMKIV as being responsible for the increased expression of CREM and the
decreased production of IL-2 in SLE T cells and demonstrates that anti-TCR/CD3
antibodies present in SLE sera can account for the increased expression of CREM
and the suppression of IL-2 production.

PMCID: PMC1070410
PMID: 15841182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Mol Hum Reprod. 2005 Apr;11(4):307-17.

Patterns of expression of sperm flagellar genes: early expression of genes
encoding axonemal proteins during the spermatogenic cycle and shared features of 
promoters of genes encoding central apparatus proteins.

Horowitz E(1), Zhang Z, Jones BH, Moss SB, Ho C, Wood JR, Wang X, Sammel MD,
Strauss JF 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Reproduction and Women's Health, University of
Pennsylvania Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Hum Reprod. 2005 Jul;11(7):535.

Sperm are motile cells. Thus, a significant component of the spermatogenic cycle 
is devoted to the formation of flagellum, a process that must be coordinated to
insure proper construction. To document the temporal pattern of flagellar gene
expression, we employed real-time PCR to assess changes in accumulation of a
cohort of genes encoding axoneme, outer dense fibre (ODF) and fibrous sheath (FS)
proteins during the first wave of spermatogenesis in the mouse. Axoneme genes
were expressed first at the pachytene spermatocyte stage, followed by expression 
of transcripts encoding ODF and FS components. However, there were differences
among these families with respect to the time of initial expression and the rate 
of mRNA accumulation. To gain understanding of factors that determine these
patterns of expression, we cloned the promoters of three axoneme central
apparatus genes (Pf6, Spag6 and Pf20). These promoters shared common features
including the absence of a TATA box, and putative binding sites for several
factors implicated in spermatogenesis (CREB/CREM, SOX17 and SPZ1) as well as
ciliogenesis (FOXJ1). Collectively, our findings demonstrate a sequential pattern
of expression of flagellar component genes, differential times of expression or
rates of transcript accumulation within each class and shared promoter features
within a class.

PMID: 15829580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Methods Enzymol. 2005;393:302-15.

Transgenic cAMP response element reporter flies for monitoring circadian rhythms.

Iijima-Ando K(1), Yin JC.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA.

The cAMP response Element (CRE)-binding protein (CREB) is involved in many
adaptive behaviors, including circadian rhythms. In order to assess CREB activity
in vivo, we made transgenic flies carrying a CRE-luciferase reporter and showed
that this reporter is CRE and dCREB2 responsive. dCREB2 is the Drosophila homolog
of mammalian CREB?CREM. The transgenic luciferase activity cycles with a 24-h
periodicity, suggesting that dCREB2 and period are somehow linked. The
CRE-luciferase reporter is a useful monitor of circadian activity, and mutations 
can be found that affect its periodicity, baseline activity, or amplitude.
Analysis of such mutations should reveal information about how particular genes
affect the molecular machinery of circadian cycling and how different genes
affect the activity of dCREB2.

PMID: 15817296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Arch Androl. 2005 Mar-Apr;51(2):93-7.

Decreased testicular expression of cAMP response element modulator (CREM) in rat 
with varicocele.

Yu JJ(1), Xu YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The Affiliated Hospital of Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, The Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai 200233, P.R. China.
yuji917@163.com

This study examines the hypothesis that varicocele would impair the testicular
expression of cAMP response element modulator (CREM) in experimental rats. Thirty
(30) rats were selected at random, of 20 were operated as varicocele's group; of 
10 were for sham-operation as controlled group, testes were removed, fixed and
stained in three months. Makler Score was adopted to analyze the bore, limitan's 
thickness, layer number of cell, the degree of cell's maturity and average score 
in 200 and 100 seminiferous tubulae, respectively. CREM, HSP60 was determinated
by hybridization in situ, the difference between two groups were compared. In
varicocele group, seminiferous tubule's bore was decreased (101 +/- 2.2) vs 146
+/- 4.1), limitan became thicker (3.5 +/- 0.1 vs 1.9 +/- 0.2), cell's layer
number was reduced (3.0 +/- 0.2 vs 5.5 +/- 0.1), cell's maturity turned to
disturbance (3.6 +/- 0.3 vs 4.9 +/- 0.1), the average score was lower than
controlled group (8.5 +/- 0.6 vs 16.0 +/- 1.2), they had significant differences 
(P < 0.001). The testicular CREM expression was significantly lower in varicocele
group than in controlled one (VG2.0 +/- 0.32, SoG3.90 +/- 0.32) (p < 0.001),
which was located in spermatogenous cell to spermatocyte stage. However, HSP60
expression in VG was higher than in SoG (3.85 +/- 0.3 versus 2.1 +/- 0.32) with
significant differences (P < 0.001), the expression located in spermatid.
Varicocele could lead to lower testicular CREM expression and breeding sperm
functional lesion.

PMID: 15804863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Seikagaku. 2005 Jan;77(1):32-8.

[Regulation of spermatid-specific gene expression].

[Article in Japanese]

Kashiwabara S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba Science City, Ibaraki, Japan.

PMID: 15770949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2005 Feb;69(2):261-6.

The administration of retinoic acid down-regulates cAMP-responsive element
modulator (CREM) mRNA in vitamin A-deficient testes.

Matsuda M(1), Hyoudou T, Kadowaki M, Onuki K, Masushige S, Kida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Chemistry, Faculty of Agriculture, Tokyo University
of Agriculture, Tokyo, Japan.

Studies using genetics and vitamin A deficiency (VAD) have shown that vitamin A
and retinoids play essential roles in spermatogenesis at the pre-meiotic stage.
To understand the mechanisms of control in spermatogenesis by retinoic acid, we
investigated whether retinoic acids regulate the expression of downstream
transcription factors that are essential for spermatogenesis. In this study, we
found that administration of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) or retinol to VAD
rats down-regulates the testicular mRNA levels of the cAMP responsive element
modulator (CREM), an essential transcription factor for spermatogenesis.
Conversely, depletion of retinoids from the diet leds to an up-regulation of CREM
expression in adult testes. In addition, RT-PCR analysis indicated that ATRA
specifically represses the expression of the activator spliced variant of CREM
(CREMtau). These results suggest that retinoids function as a negative regulator 
of CREM expression in testes.

PMID: 15725648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Reprod Biomed Online. 2005 Jan;10(1):64-71.

Genetic control of spermiogenesis: insights from the CREM gene and implications
for human infertility.

Krausz C(1), Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Andrology Unit, Department of Clinical Physiopathology, University of
Florence, Viale Pieraccini, 6, Florence 50139, Italy.

Male germ cell differentiation requires a highly cell-specific gene expression
programme that is achieved by unique chromatin remodelling, transcriptional
control, and the expression of testis-specific genes or isoforms. The regulatory 
processes governing gene expression in spermatogenesis have fundamentally unique 
requirements, including meiosis, ongoing cellular differentiation and a peculiar 
chromatin organization. The signalling cascades and the downstream effectors
contributing to the programme of spermatogenesis are currently being unravelled, 
revealing the unique features of germ cell regulatory circuits. This paper
reports on the unique role that CREM exerts as a master regulator. Targeted
inactivation of the genes encoding CREM and ACT has been achieved. ACT
selectively associates with KIF17b, a kinesin motor protein highly expressed in
germ cells. It has been found that KIF17b directly determines the intracellular
localization of ACT. Thus, the activity of a transcriptional co-activator is
intimately coupled to the function of a kinesin via tight regulation of its
intracellular localization. The conservation of these elements and of their
regulatory functions in human spermatogenesis indicates that they are likely to
provide important insights into understanding the molecular mechanisms of human
infertility.

PMID: 15705296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Soc Gynecol Investig. 2005 Feb;12(2):92-7.

Expression and interaction of the transcriptional coregulators, CBP/p300, in the 
human myometrium during pregnancy and labor.

Long AA(1), Chapman NR, Innes B, Europe-Finner GN, Robson SC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Surgical and Reproductive Sciences (Obstetrics and Gynaecology),
University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    J Soc Gynecol Investig. 2005 Feb;12(2):65-6.

OBJECTIVE: In humans, the factors that govern the switch from myometrial
quiescence to coordinated contractions at the initiation of labor are not well
defined. Recent studies have highlighted a role for the coactivator, CREB binding
protein (CBP), in the human myometrium during pregnancy and labor through its
ability to acetylate histones. In the present study, the expression of CBP and
its related coactivator, p300, were examined.
METHODS: Levels and interactions of CBP and its paralogue p300 were determined by
Western blotting, immunohistochemistry, and coimmunoprecipitation experiments
using myometrial biopsy samples from nonpregnant (NP), pregnant nonlaboring (P), 
and spontaneously laboring (SL) women.
RESULTS: Levels of CBP were seen to increase in term P myometrial samples but
were then greatly reduced in SL myometrium. In contrast, levels of p300 remained 
uniform between NP, P, and SL tissues. These observations were confirmed by
immunhistochemical analyses. Immunoprecipitation experiments highlighted that CBP
was able to interact with CREB, CREM, ATF-2, and p300 in P lower segment
myometrium.
CONCLUSION: Recent evidence suggests that competition for CBP plays an important 
role in regulating gene expression during cell growth. Consequently our data
suggest that the increase in myometrial CBP levels during pregnancy may occur to 
meet this increase in CBP demand. Moreover, from coimmunoprecipitation
experiments, this increase in CBP expression would be expected to facilitate the 
transactivation potential of the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-dependent 
transcription factors CREB, CREM, and ATF-2.

PMID: 15695103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Feb;34(1):1-17.

Identification of human myometrial target genes of the cAMP pathway: the role of 
cAMP-response element binding (CREB) and modulator (CREMalpha and CREMtau2alpha) 
proteins.

Bailey J(1), Tyson-Capper AJ, Gilmore K, Robson SC, Europe-Finner GN.

Author information: 
(1)School of Surgical and Reproductive Sciences, The Medical School, University
of Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. jarrod.bailey@ncl.ac.uk

cAMP-response element (CRE) binding (CREB) and modulator (CREM) proteins,
activated by protein kinase A-mediated phosphorylation, bind as homo- and
heterodimers to promoters containing CRE and activator protein 1 (AP-1) sites to 
alter target-gene expression. We have previously reported differential expression
of CREB and CREM splice variants CREMalpha and CREMtau2alpha in human myometrium 
during pregnancy and labour. Via microarray studies with cultured myometrial
cells stably transfected with CREB, CREMalpha and CREMtau2alpha cDNAs, CREB
affected the expression of 958 genes; 522 being up-regulated and 436
down-regulated. CREMalpha altered the expression of 118 genes; 71 were increased 
and 47 decreased. CREMtau2alpha affected 220 genes; 148 were activated and 72
repressed. Notably, genes affected by CREB, CREMalpha and CREMtau2alpha belong to
largely discrete groups: less than 9% were affected by more than one factor.
Genes involved in regulation of cell death and apoptosis, growth and maintenance,
signal transduction, physiological and developmental processes, protein kinase
cascades, extracellular matrix, cytoskeleton, cell-cycle regulation, transport,
and a variety of enzymes, intracellular components and nucleic acid-binding
proteins have been described, many of which are involved in the modulation of
myometrial activity during pregnancy and parturition.

PMID: 15691874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Int J Androl. 2004 Dec;27(6):322-7.

Specialized rules of gene transcription in male germ cells: the CREM paradigm.

Monaco L(1), Kotaja N, Fienga G, Hogeveen K, Kolthur US, Kimmins S, Brancorsini
S, Macho B, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, B.P. 163,
67404 Illkirch, Strasbourg, France.

Specialized transcription complexes that coordinate the differentiation programme
of spermatogenesis have been found in germ cells, which display specific
differences in the components of the general transcription machinery. The
TATA-binding protein family and its associated cofactors, for example, show
upregulated expression in testis. In this physiological context, transcriptional 
control mediated by the activator cAMP response element modulator (CREM)
represents an established paradigm. Somatic cell activation by CREM requires its 
phosphorylation at a unique regulatory site (Ser117) and subsequent interaction
with the ubiquitous coactivator CREB-binding protein. In testis, CREM
transcriptional activity is controlled through interaction with a tissue-specific
partner, activator of CREM in the testis (ACT), which confers a powerful,
phosphorylation-independent activation capacity. The function of ACT was found to
be regulated by the testis-specific kinesin KIF17b. Here we discuss some aspects 
of the testis-specific transcription machinery, whose function is essential for
the process of spermatogenesis.

PMID: 15595950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 25;280(8):6906-14. Epub 2004 Nov 29.

Heart-directed expression of a human cardiac isoform of cAMP-response element
modulator in transgenic mice.

Müller FU(1), Lewin G, Baba HA, Bokník P, Fabritz L, Kirchhefer U, Kirchhof P,
Loser K, Matus M, Neumann J, Riemann B, Schmitz W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Münster, Domagkstrasse
12, D-48149 Münster, Germany. mullerf@uni-muenster.de

The transcriptional activation mediated by cAMP-response element (CRE) and
transcription factors of the CRE-binding protein (CREB)/CRE modulator (CREM)
family represents an important mechanism of cAMP-dependent gene regulation
possibly implicated in detrimental effects of chronic beta-adrenergic stimulation
in end-stage heart failure. We studied the cardiac role of CREM in transgenic
mice with heart-directed expression of CREM-IbDeltaC-X, a human cardiac CREM
isoform. Transgenic mice displayed atrial enlargement with atrial and ventricular
hypertrophy, developed atrial fibrillation, and died prematurely. In vivo
hemodynamic assessment revealed increased contractility of transgenic left
ventricles probably due to a selective up-regulation of SERCA2, the cardiac
Ca(2+)-ATPase of the sarcoplasmic reticulum. In transgenic ventricles, reduced
phosphorylation of phospholamban and of the CREB was associated with increased
activity of serine-threonine protein phosphatase 1. The density of
beta(1)-adrenoreceptor was increased, and messenger RNAs encoding transcription
factor dHAND and small G-protein RhoB were decreased in transgenic hearts as
compared with wild-type controls. Our results indicate that heart-directed
expression of CREM-IbDeltaC-X leads to complex cardiac alterations, suggesting
CREM as a central regulator of cardiac morphology, function, and gene expression.

PMID: 15569686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Endocrinology. 2005 Mar;146(3):1348-56. Epub 2004 Nov 18.

Cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP) enhances cAMP-responsive element
binding (CREB) protein phosphorylation and phospho-CREB interaction with the
mouse steroidogenic acute regulatory protein gene promoter.

Clem BF(1), Hudson EA, Clark BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and The Center for Genetics
and Molecular Medicine, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, 
Kentucky 40292, USA.

Steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) transcription is regulated through 
cAMP-protein kinase A-dependent mechanisms that involve multiple transcription
factors including the cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) family
members. Classically, binding of phosphorylated CREB to cis-acting
cAMP-responsive elements (5'-TGACGTCA-3') within target gene promoters leads to
recruitment of the coactivator CREB binding protein (CBP). Herein we examined the
extent of CREB family member phosphorylation on protein-DNA interactions and CBP 
recruitment with the StAR promoter. Immunoblot analysis revealed that CREB,
cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM), and activating transcription factor
(ATF)-1 are expressed in MA-10 mouse Leydig tumor cells, yet only CREB and ATF-1 
are phosphorylated. (Bu)2cAMP treatment of MA-10 cells increased CREB
phosphorylation approximately 2.3-fold within 30 min but did not change total
nuclear CREB expression levels. Using DNA-affinity chromatography, we now show
that CREB and ATF-1, but not CREM, interact with the StAR promoter, and this
interaction is dependent on the activator protein-1 (AP-1) cis-acting element
within the cAMP-responsive region. In addition, (Bu)2cAMP-treatment increased
phosphorylated CREB (P-CREB) association with the StAR promoter but did not
influence total CREB interaction. In vivo chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
demonstrated CREB binding to the StAR proximal promoter is independent of
(Bu)2cAMP-treatment, confirming our in vitro analysis. However,
(Bu)2cAMP-treatment increased P-CREB and CBP interaction with the StAR promoter, 
demonstrating for the first time the physical role of P-CREB:DNA interactions in 
CBP recruitment to the StAR proximal promoter.

PMID: 15550512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Fertil Steril. 2004 Oct;82 Suppl 3:1072-6.

Normal expression of isoforms activating cyclic adenosine monophosphate
responsive element modulator in patients with spermatid maturation arrest.

Palermo I(1), Arcidiacono G, Barone N, Italia F, Arizzi M, Spera G, Bartoloni G, 
Di Mercurio S, Vicari E, Calogero AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Unit of Pathology and Cytodiagnosis,
University of Catania, Catania, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate whether defective cyclic adenosine monophosphate
responsive element modulator (CREM) expression is the causative factor of
spermatid maturation arrest (SMA).
DESIGN: Comparative evaluation of the testicular histology in patients with SMA
or normal spermatogenesis.
SETTING: University clinic of andrology.
PATIENT(S): Azoospermic patients undergoing testicular biopsy.
INTERVENTION(S): None.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Expression of CREMtau in quantitative
immunohistochemistry analysis of testicular biopsy samples.
RESULT(S): Regular CREM expression was observed in the tubules with round, but
not elongated, spermatids of patients with SMA (n = 9). Quantitative analysis
showed that round spermatids of patients with SMA had a staining intensity
similar to that observed in controls (n = 7).
CONCLUSION(S): Lack of spermatid elongation was not due to defective CREM
expression. Therefore, CREM did not play a pathogenetic role in the onset of SMA 
in humans.

PMID: 15474076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Immunol. 2004 Sep 1;173(5):3557-63.

Cyclic adenosine 5'-monophosphate response element modulator is responsible for
the decreased expression of c-fos and activator protein-1 binding in T cells from
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Kyttaris VC(1), Juang YT, Tenbrock K, Weinstein A, Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Injury, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver 
Spring, MD 20910, USA.

T cells from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus express increased levels 
of the cAMP response element modulator (CREM) that has been shown to bind to the 
IL-2 promoter and suppress its activity. In this study, we demonstrate that CREM 
binds to the proximal promoter of the c-fos proto-oncogene in live systemic lupus
erythematosus T cells and represses its expression following stimulation in
vitro. Decreased levels of c-fos protein result in decreased AP-1 activity, as
determined in shift assays. Blockade of the translation of CREM mRNA with an
antisense CREM vector increases the expression of c-fos and the AP-1 activity.
The levels of c-fos mRNA vary with disease activity. We conclude that CREM
represses the expression of c-fos and limits the activity of the enhancer AP-1.
Thus, CREM is involved indirectly in the modulation of transcriptional regulation
of multiple genes including IL-2.

PMID: 15322221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Exp Cell Res. 2004 Sep 10;299(1):209-26.

A small-scale survey identifies selective and quantitative nucleo-cytoplasmic
shuttling of a subset of CREM transcription factors.

Fenaroli A(1), Vujanac M, De Cesare D, Zimarino V.

Author information: 
(1)DIBIT-San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Via Olgettina 58, 20132 Milan, Italy.

Elucidating dynamic aspects of intracellular localization of proteins is
essential to decipher their functional interaction networks. Although
transcription factors lacking a detectable cytoplasmic fraction have been
generally considered compartmentalized in the nucleus, some were found to shuttle
into the cytoplasm, suggesting functional interactions therein. To further
investigate how common, specific and quantitative is this traffic, we have
employed the heterokaryon assay for a small-scale survey of nuclear factors not
previously tested for their nucleo-cytoplasmic motion. We show that a subset of
cAMP response element (CRE) binding proteins of the CREM type shuttles within a
biologically meaningful time frame, revealing a continuous flow into the
cytoplasm that persists during signaling. Their dynamic behavior, not involving
the classical Exportin-1 pathway, could be ascribed to C-terminal sequences,
containing, in addition to the bZIP domain and the NLS, a nuclear export activity
and an inhibitory activity at an adjacent site. Other proteins examined in this
study either did not shuttle significantly or, like CREB and distinct CREM
isoforms, shuttled with markedly delayed kinetics, denoting considerable
selectivity of this traffic. These findings raise the possibility that events
associated with bi-directional transport and periodic transit through the
cytoplasm may modulate activities of select nuclear transcription factors.

PMID: 15302588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Jul 20;101(29):10620-5. Epub 2004 Jul 9.

Abnormal sperm in mice with targeted deletion of the act (activator of
cAMP-responsive element modulator in testis) gene.

Kotaja N(1), De Cesare D, Macho B, Monaco L, Brancorsini S, Goossens E, Tournaye 
H, Gansmuller A, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, B.P. 10142,
67404 Illkirch-Strasbourg, France.

ACT [activator of cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) in testis] is a
LIM-only protein that interacts with transcription factor CREM in postmeiotic
male germ cells and enhances CREM-dependent transcription. CREM regulates many
crucial genes required for spermatid maturation, and targeted mutation of the
Crem gene in the mouse germ-line blocks spermatogenesis. Here we report the
phenotype of mice in which targeted disruption of the act gene was obtained by
homologous recombination. Whereas the seminiferous tubules of the act(-/-) mice
contain all of the developmental stages of germ cells and the mice are fertile,
the amount of mature sperm in the epididymis is drastically reduced. The residual
sperm display severe abnormalities, including fully folded tails and aberrant
head shapes. These results indicate that numerous postmeiotic genes under CREM
control require the coactivator function of ACT. Thus, the fine-tuning of sperm
development is achieved by the coordinated action of two transcriptional
regulators.

PMCID: PMC489983
PMID: 15247423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004 Jul 13;1679(1):1-9.

Characterization of the prothrombin gene expression during nerve differentiation.

Kim S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, NICHD, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. skim@bsc.as.ua.edu

The transcriptional regulation of the prothrombin gene expression in
neuroblastomas was investigated because of the interest in non-hepatic thrombin
expression and function in the nervous system. The data indicated that the murine
prothrombin gene was distinctively transcribed in proliferating murine N2a cells 
and that the transcripts were decreased during the differentiation of N2a cells. 
The gene transcription in proliferating N2a cells was due to the C-I nuclear
complex formation in the promoter region, -248/-140. Mutation analyses indicated 
that nucleotides from -237 to -231 are the core C-I binding site while the longer
sequence -248/-140 is needed for the C-I binding. The C-I binding to the promoter
-248/-140 could be inhibited by the presence of competitor probe -187/-166, and
the mutation in nucleotides from -186 to -179 significantly diminished not only
the formation of C-I binding in the promoter region but also the promoter
activity in proliferating neuroblastoma cells. Cyclic AMP response element (CRE) 
modulator, CREM, appeared to selectively bind to the sequence encompassing
-186/-179. Taken together, the results indicate that the prothrombin gene
transcription in proliferating N2a cells was critically dependent on the
cooperative interaction between the factor(s) binding to the C-1 cis-acting
element (-237/-231) and the putative CRE site (-186/-179) in the prothrombin
promoter, and that the lack of prothrombin expression that coincided with nerve
differentiation was mainly due to the lack of C-I complex formation in the
promoter.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 15245911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Reproduction. 2004 Jul;128(1):5-12.

Testis-specific transcription mechanisms promoting male germ-cell
differentiation.

Kimmins S(1), Kotaja N, Davidson I, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS-INSERM-Université Louis Pasteur, BP 163, 67404 Illkirch, Strasbourg, France.

Male germ-cell differentiation requires spermatogenic stage- and cell-specific
gene expression that is achieved by unique chromatin remodeling, transcriptional 
control and the expression of testis-specific genes or isoforms. Recent findings 
have shown that the testis has specialized transcription complexes that
coordinate the differentiation program of spermatogenesis. There are male germ
cell-specific differences in the components of the general transcription
machinery. These include upregulated expression of the TATA-binding protein (TBP)
family and its associated cofactors. Importantly, a member of the TBP family,
TBP-like factor (TLF), has a distribution pattern that is dependent on the
spermatogenic cycle and is essential for spermatogenesis. Interestingly
TBP-associated factor (TAF7), a factor of the transcription factor (TF)IID
complex, is exchanged at a critical stage in germ cell development for the
testis-specific paralogue TAF7L. A compelling amount of data has established that
cAMP-response-element modulator (CREM), a transcription factor responsive to the 
cAMP signal transduction pathway, drives expression of key testis-specific genes.
In this review we summarize recent advances in the transcription machinery that
is testis-specific, gene-selective and necessary for the process of
spermatogenesis.

PMID: 15232059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 10;279(37):38797-802. Epub 2004 Jul 1.

Adenylyl cyclase type VI gene transfer reduces phospholamban expression in
cardiac myocytes via activating transcription factor 3.

Gao MH(1), Tang T, Guo T, Sun SQ, Feramisco JR, Hammond HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, USA.

Cardiac-directed expression of adenylyl cyclase type VI (AC(VI)) increases
stimulated cAMP production, improves heart function, and increases survival in
cardiomyopathy. In contrast, pharmacological agents that increase intracellular
levels of cAMP have detrimental effects on cardiac function and survival. We
wondered whether effects that are independent of cAMP might be responsible for
these salutary outcomes associated with AC(VI) expression. We therefore conducted
a series of experiments focused on how gene transcription is influenced by AC(VI)
in cultured neonatal rat cardiac myocytes, with a particular focus on genes that 
might influence cardiac function. We found that overexpression of AC(VI)
down-regulated mRNA and protein expression of phospholamban, an inhibitor of the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase. We determined that the cAMP-responsive-like
element in the phospholamban (PLB) promoter was critical for down-regulation by
AC(VI). Overexpression of AC(VI) did not alter the expression of CREB, CREM,
ATF1, ATF2, or ATF4 proteins. In contrast, overexpression of AC(VI) increased
expression of ATF3 protein, a suppressor of transcription. Following AC(VI) gene 
transfer, when cardiac myocytes were stimulated with isoproterenol or NKH477, a
water-soluble forskolin analog that directly stimulates AC, expression of ATF3
protein was increased even more, which correlated with reduced expression of PLB.
We then showed that AC(VI)-induced ATF3 protein binds to the cAMP-responsive-like
element on the PLB promoter and that overexpression of ATF3 in cardiac myocytes
inhibits PLB promoter activity. These findings indicate that AC(VI) has effects
on gene transcription that are not directly dependent on cAMP generation.

PMID: 15231818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Biochem J. 2004 Oct 1;383(Pt 1):179-85.

cAMP-response element modulator-tau activates a distinct promoter element for the
expression of the phospholipid hydroperoxide/sperm nucleus glutathione peroxidase
gene.

Tramer F(1), Vetere A, Martinelli M, Paroni F, Marsich E, Boitani C, Sandri G,
Panfili E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Macromolecular Chemistry,
University of Trieste, Via L. Giorgieri 1, 34127 Trieste, Italy.

PHGPx (phospholipid hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase) is a selenoprotein
present in at least three isoforms in testis: cytosolic, mitochondrial and
nuclear. All of these derive from the same gene and are structurally related with
the exception of the snPHGPx (sperm nucleus-specific form), which differs from
the others due to the presence of an arginine-rich N-terminus. It has been
demonstrated recently that this N-terminus is encoded by an alternative exon
located in the first intron of the PHGPx gene. The expression of snPHGPx has been
attributed either to an alternative pre-mRNA splicing or to the presence of a
distinct promoter region. Nevertheless, the exact molecular mechanism by which
the expression of snPHGPx occurs has not been demonstrated so far. Preliminary
sequence analysis of the region located upstream of the alternative exon revealed
some potential DNA-binding sites, one of which is specific to the binding of CREM
(cAMP-response element modulator) transcription factors. By using electrophoretic
mobility-shift assays, we demonstrated that both nuclear protein extract from
highly purified rat spermatid cells and recombinant CREM-tau protein can
specifically bind to this element. Furthermore, we cloned a 1059 bp comprising
the intron and the alternative exon for snPHGPx in the pCAT3 reporter vector. By 
transient transfection experiments, we demonstrated that the expression of the
transcription factor CREM-tau can induce the activation of the reporter gene in
NIH-3T3 cell line. These results were confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation 
experiments performed on highly purified rat spermatid cells. On the basis of
these results, we demonstrate that snPHGPx expression is mediated by the
transcription factor CREM-tau, which acts as a cis-acting element localized in
the first intron of the PHGPx gene.

PMCID: PMC1134057
PMID: 15225122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Eur J Immunol. 2004 Jul;34(7):1961-71.

CREB function is required for normal thymic cellularity and post-irradiation
recovery.

Baumann S(1), Kyewski B, Bleckmann SC, Greiner E, Rudolph D, Schmid W, Ramsay RG,
Krammer PH, Schütz G, Mantamadiotis T.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology of the Cell I, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg,
Germany.

Recent generation of genetically modified Creb1 mutant mice has revealed an
important role for CREB (cAMP responsive element binding protein) and the related
proteins CREM (cAMP responsive element modulator) and ATF1 (activating
transcription factor 1) in cell survival, in agreement with previous studies
using overexpression of dominant-negative CREB (dnCREB). CREB and ATF1 are
abundantly expressed in T cells and are rapidly activated by phosphorylation when
T cells are stimulated through the T cell antigen receptor. We show that T
cell-specific loss of CREB in mice, in combination with the loss of ATF1, results
in reduced thymic cellularity and delayed thymic recovery following sublethal
irradiation but no changes in T cell development or activation. These data show
that loss of CREB function has specific effects on thymic T lymphocyte
proliferation and homeostasis in vivo.

PMID: 15214044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Int Rev Immunol. 2004 May-Aug;23(3-4):333-45.

Transcriptional regulation of interleukin 2 in SLE T cells.

Tenbrock K(1), Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Injury, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver 
Spring, MD 20910, USA.

Interleukin-2 (IL-2) is a central cytokine required for the activation of T, B,
and NK cells. It propagates the immune response and terminates it by promoting
the activation induced cell death of T cells. IL-2 production is altered in T
cells of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The consequence of
reduced IL-2 production in SLE is decreased immune response to infectious agents.
Decreased IL-2 production by SLE T cells is the result of transcriptional
repression of the IL-2 gene. This article will review the defective transcription
regulation of IL-2 in SLE T cells, which is the result of decreased expression of
the enhancers NF-kappa B and AP1 and the increased expression of the
transcriptional repressor CREM.

PMID: 15204092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Neurochem Res. 2004 Jun;29(6):1267-73.

Gene expression of transcription factors in the rat brain after morphine
withdrawal.

Ammon-Treiber S(1), Tischmeyer H, Riechert U, Höllt V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Otto von Guericke University,
Magdeburg, Germany.

Multiple approaches have been performed to elucidate the molecular mechanisms
underlying drug withdrawal in opioid-dependent animals. Opiate withdrawal
represents a state of neuronal hyperexcitability in the brain that leads to
alterations in a number of second-messenger systems which, in turn, induce
expression of transcription factors. Whereas earlier studies have primarily
demonstrated an early and transient transcriptional activation of members of the 
Fos, Jun, and Krox families, recent microarray studies investigating the delayed 
response could additionally identify several transcriptional repressors such as
cAMP response element modulator (CREM), IkappaB, silencer factor B,
helix-loop-helix proteins, or glucocorticoid-induced leucine zipper, indicating
the attempt of the brain to re-establish homeostasis after withdrawal-induced
excitation.

PMID: 15176483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Biochemistry. 2004 Jun 8;43(22):7197-206.

Cyclic AMP-mediated upregulation of the expression of neuronal NO synthase in
human A673 neuroepithelioma cells results in a decrease in the level of bioactive
NO production: analysis of the signaling mechanisms that are involved.

Boissel JP(1), Bros M, Schröck A, Gödtel-Armbrust U, Förstermann U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Johannes Gutenberg University, Obere Zahlbacher
Strasse 67, D-55131 Mainz, Germany. boissel@mail.uni-mainz.de

The expression level of neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) can vary depending 
on the (patho)physiological conditions. Here we document a marked induction of
nNOS mRNA, protein, and total NO production in response to dibutyryl cyclic AMP
(db-cAMP) in human A673 neuroepithelial cells. However, the upregulation of nNOS 
was associated with a decreased level of production of bioactive NO and by an
increase in the level of generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). ROS
production could be prevented by the NOS inhibitor L-NAME, suggesting nNOS itself
is involved in ROS generation. Sepiapterin supplementation of db-cAMP-treated
A673 cells could restore full bioactive NO production, most likely by preventing 
the uncoupling of nNOS. nNOS was upregulated by other stable analogues of cAMP,
by the activator of adenylyl cyclase forskolin, by isoproterenol or by dopamine
through activation of D1 receptors, and by inhibitors of phosphodiesterase. cAMP 
did not change the half-life of the nNOS mRNA. Inhibitors of protein kinase A
(PKA), H-89 and R(p)-cAMPS, produced a partial inhibition of basal and
cAMP-induced nNOS expression. cAMP response element binding and modulator
transcription factors (CREB and CREM), typical target proteins of PKA, were
expressed in A673 cells, as was the coactivator CREB binding protein (CBP).
cAMP-stimulated induction of nNOS was significantly enhanced in A673 cells stably
transfected with wild-type CREB and almost abolished in cells transfected with
KCREB (containing a mutation of the DNA binding domain). In A673 cells
transfected with CREB(133) (containing a mutation of the phosphorylatable serine 
133), the overall level of nNOS expression was reduced, but the expressional
stimulation by cAMP remained. This suggests that CREB bypasses, in part, the
classical requirement for phosphorylation and association with CBP. Three members
of the recently described four-and-a-half-LIM-domain proteins (FHL1-FHL3) were
found to be expressed in A673 cells; FHL-1 and FHL-3 were upregulated by cAMP.
These proteins can provide direct activation function to both CREB and CREM, and 
may be responsible for the PKA-independent component of CREB and CREM activity.

PMID: 15170357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Spinal Cord Med. 2004;27(1):55-62.

Effects of exogenous testosterone on testicular function during the chronic phase
of spinal cord injury: dose effects on spermatogenesis and Sertoli cell and sperm
function.

Huang HF(1), Li MT, Wang S, Barton B, Anesetti R, Jetko JA.

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, East Orange, New Jersey, USA.
huanghf@umdnj.edu

INTRODUCTION: Exogenous testosterone has been shown to attenuate spinal cord
injury (SCI)-related regression of spermatogenesis in the rat. The current
experiment investigated the effects of exogenous testosterone in testicular and
sperm functions in the rat during the chronic phase of SCI.
METHODS: Chronic SCI rats were given subcutaneous implants of testosterone-filled
silastic capsules (TC). Northern blot cDNA hybridization was used to measure
testicular levels of Sertoli cell- and germ cell-specific transcripts. Western
blot and immunohistochemistry were used to determine protein level and cellular
localization, respectively, of cyclic adenosine monophosphate-responsive element 
modulator (CREM) in the testes. Flow cytometry was used to determine sperm
viability and mitochondrial potential.
RESULTS: Spontaneous restoration of spermatogenesis occurred in 7 of the 8
untreated SCI rats. Although exogenous testosterone restored complete
spermatogenesis in all SCI rats, regressed seminiferous epithelium remained in
30% to 70% of tubular cross sections in these rats. These effects were associated
with altered responses of germ cell-specific mRNA transcripts to exogenous
testosterone, and abnormal cellular distribution of CREM. Sperm of untreated SCI 
rats exhibited lowered motility, viability, and mitochondrial potential.
Implantation of 10 cm of TC worsened sperm motility in sham control and SCI rats,
but restored sperm viability and mitochondrial potential in SCI rats.
CONCLUSION: Administration of exogenous testosterone to SCI rats during the
chronic phase of injury failed to facilitate spermatogenic restoration over that 
achieved in untreated SCI rats. Abnormalities in postmeiotic spermatogenic
differentiation could contribute to these effects, and perhaps the production of 
sperm with abnormal morphology and/or functions during the chronic phase of SCI.

PMID: 15156938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Reprod Biomed Online. 2004 May;8(5):496-500.

A specific programme of gene transcription in male germ cells.

Kimmins S(1), Kotaja N, Fienga G, Kolthur US, Brancorsini S, Hogeveen K, Monaco
L, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, BP 10142,
67404 Illkirch-Strasbourg, France.

The differentiation of male germ cell requires spermatogenic stage and
cell-specific gene expression that is achieved by unique chromatin remodelling,
transcriptional control, and the expression of testis-specific genes or isoforms.
Specialized transcription complexes that coordinate the differentiation programme
of spermatogenesis have been found in germ cells, which display specific
differences in the components of the general transcription machinery. The
TATA-binding (TBP) protein family and its associated co-factors, for example,
show upregulated expression in testis. In this physiological context,
transcriptional control mediated by the activator CREM represents an established 
paradigm. In somatic cells, activation by CREM requires its phosphorylation at a 
unique regulatory site (Ser117) and subsequent interaction with the ubiquitous
coactivator CBP. In testis, CREM transcriptional activity is controlled through
interaction with a tissue-specific partner, ACT, which confers a powerful,
phosphorylation-independent activation capacity. The function of ACT is regulated
by a testis-specific kinesin, KIF17b. This study discusses some aspects of the
testis-specific transcription machinery, the function of which is essential for
the process of spermatogenesis.

PMID: 15151709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Sarcoidosis Vasc Diffuse Lung Dis. 2004 Mar;21(1):10-8.

Functional genomics and prognosis in sarcoidosis--the critical role of antigen
presentation.

Rutherford RM(1), Staedtler F, Kehren J, Chibout SD, Joos L, Tamm M, Gilmartin
JJ, Brutsche MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital, Galway, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: Sarcoidosis is a systemic disorder of unknown cause, highly variable 
phenotype and unpredictable outcome. Antigen processing, inflammatory response
and immunomodulation appear critical to development and prognosis of the disease.
METHODS: We performed a comprehensive genomic analysis, applying high-density
human GeneChip probe arrays (HUG95A, Affymetrix Inc.) for gene expression
profiling from peripheral blood of patients with acute pulmonary sarcoidosis (n =
12) and matched healthy controls (n = 12), mean age 36 +/- 12 and 33 +/- 10 years
respectively.
RESULTS: At follow-up (18 [15-24] months), 7 patients had self-limited disease
and 5 had persistent disease. Significantly different expression comparing
patients and controls was identified for 1,860 (14.9%) and 729 (5.8%) gene
products at p = 0.05 and p = 0.01 levels respectively. Genes closely associated
with persistent disease included HLA-DRB1*1501 DQB1*0602, TNFA, NFKB, cyclic
AMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) and T-cell activation marker CD69. IL1B, 
IL8, growth related (GRO)-beta/-gamma and CCR 2,5,6 were closely associated with 
self-limited disease.
CONCLUSION: We hypothesize that, in self-limited disease, greater effector cell
activation leads to successful antigen elimination/tolerance, whereas
HLA-DRB1*1501 DQBI*0602-mediated, probably defective/partial T-lymphocyte
activation results in an inefficient primary immune response, antigen intolerance
and persistent disease.

PMID: 15127969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Yeast. 2004 Apr 30;21(6):519-30.

Differential regulation by glucose and fructose of a gene encoding a specific
fructose/H+ symporter in Saccharomyces sensu stricto yeasts.

Rodrigues de Sousa H(1), Spencer-Martins I, Gonçalves P.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Biotechnology Unit, Faculty of
Sciences and Technology, New University of Lisbon, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae transports fructose through a facilitated diffusion
system common to other hexoses and mediated by the Hxt proteins. The related
species S. pastorianus (carlsbergensis) and S. bayanus produce, in addition, a
specific fructose/H(+) symporter. We have previously cloned a gene (FSY1)
encoding the active fructose symporter from S. pastorianus PYCC 4457. Expression 
of Fsy1p in a S. cerevisiae mutant (hxt-null) devoid of the facilitated diffusion
system allows growth on fructose but not on glucose. Here we present results
concerning the regulation of Fsy1p expression, both in S. pastorianus and S.
bayanus, where it occurs naturally, and in suitably engineered S. cerevisiae
transformants. To that purpose, we made use of both Northern blot analysis and a 
Fsy1p-GFP fusion protein. The expression of Fsy1p is strongly regulated by both
the carbon source and its concentration in the growth medium. In S. pastorianus, 
as well as in S. bayanus, very low concentrations of either fructose or glucose
induced expression but higher sugar concentrations prevented transcription of the
gene. Glucose was considerably more effective than fructose in repressing FSY1
expression. Proper regulation of the gene in S. cerevisiae seems to be
exquisitely dependent on sugar transport. Analysis of Fsy1 expression in S.
cerevisiae mutants shows that repression is mainly dependent on Mig1p, the final 
effector of the main glucose repression pathway. Interestingly, Mig1p also seems 
to mediate repression of FSY1 expression by high maltose concentrations.

Copyright 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 15116434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Hosp Infect. 2004 Apr;56 Suppl 2:S64-9.

Microbicides and the environmental control of nosocomial viral infections.

Sattar SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research on Environmental Microbiology (CREM), Faculty of Medicine,
University of Ottawa 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, Ont. K1H 8M5, Canada.
ssattar@uottawa.ca

Viruses are important causes of acute and chronic diseases in humans. Newer
viruses are still being discovered and those that are already known are being
incriminated in the aetiology of clinical conditions with hitherto unknown
causes. Apart from frequently causing infections in the general community, many
types of viruses are also significant nosocomial pathogens. While it is generally
agreed that we underestimate the proportion of nosocomial infections that are
viral, due to a lack of routine monitoring, viruses easily account for more than 
30% of the cases of hospital-acquired infections in many paediatric settings.
Indeed, the relative importance of viruses in this respect is increasing due to a
number of societal and demographic changes as well as alterations in healthcare
practices. Safe vaccines against many common nosocomial viral agents are
currently unavailable while there is also a virtual lack of effective and
affordable chemotherapy against them. There is, therefore, renewed emphasis on
preventive strategies by better understanding of the relative importance of
various vehicles in the nosocomial spread of viruses and by infection control
using microbicides. This, in turn, has stimulated considerable interest in the
development of formulations that are not only safer but which also have
demonstrated activity against major types of nosocomial viral pathogens. Further,
much work is now underway to design better methods to assess the virucidal
activity of microbicides used to decontaminate hands, reusable medical devices
and environmental surfaces in critical areas of healthcare settings. It is
anticipated that these approaches will result in reducing the health and economic
impact of nosocomial infections due to viruses.

PMID: 15110126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2004 Apr 1;126B(1):111-5.

Investigation of polymorphisms in the CREM gene in panic disorder.

Hamilton SP(1), Slager SL, Mayo D, Heiman GA, Klein DF, Hodge SE, Fyer AJ,
Weissman MM, Knowles JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, College of Physicians and Surgeons at Columbia
University and the New York State Psychiatric Institute, 1051 Riverside Drive,
New York, NY 10032, USA.

Clinical and animal studies suggest a role for pathways regulated by cyclic-AMP
in anxiety. Mouse gene deletion studies, our own linkage findings on chromosome
10, and a recently published genetic association study by Domschke et al. [2003: 
Am J Med Genet 117B:70-78] suggest that the cAMP responsive element modulator
(CREM) may be involved in panic disorder. We have employed a family-based design 
to investigate the role of DNA sequence variations in the gene for CREM in panic 
disorder. We have genotyped 613 individuals in 70 panic disorder pedigrees, as
well as 42 parent/offspring triads. Subjects were genotyped at two informative
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and three polymorphic microsatellites in
the CREM genomic region; and the data were analyzed for genetic association and
linkage. Linkage analysis employing several diagnostic/genetic models produced a 
maximum lod score of 0.63 for SNP-1, located in the 5' UTR of CREM, under a
dominant model with a broad diagnostic definition of panic disorder.
Non-parametric analysis, using the NPL statistic or FBAT, also did not support
any linkage or association between the markers and panic disorder. All five
markers (spanning 77 kb) used in the study showed modest, but significant linkage
disequilibrium. Analysis of 2-, 3-, 4-, or 5-marker haplotypes using TRANSMIT
failed to find any globally significant results; however, individual haplotypes
containing a single allele of MS-3 were nominally associated with panic disorder.
These findings provide little additional evidence for a susceptibility locus for 
panic disorder either within the CREM gene or in a nearby region of chromosome
10p11 in our sample.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15048659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Neurosci. 2004 Feb 25;24(8):1967-75.

Inducible cAMP early repressor regulates corticosterone suppression after
tricyclic antidepressant treatment.

Conti AC(1), Kuo YC, Valentino RJ, Blendy JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB) is involved in antidepressant
action, but the role of related CRE-binding transcription factors in the
behavioral and endocrine responses to antidepressants is unclear. Alternative
transcription of the cAMP response element-modulator (CREM) gene yields activator
and repressor isoforms, including the strong repressor inducible cAMP early
repressor (ICER). ICER is highly expressed in hypothalamic tissues and
upregulated after electroconvulsive seizure. Thus, ICER may be a novel mediator
of antidepressant action at endocrine and/or behavioral levels. Here we establish
that both subchronic and chronic desipramine (DMI) treatments upregulate
hypothalamic ICER expression in wild-type mice. Behavioral responses to DMI in
the forced swim and tail suspension tests are unchanged in mice lacking ICER.
However, the ability of DMI to suppress an acute corticosterone response after
swim stress is compromised in ICER-deficient mice, suggesting that increased
hypothalamic ICER mRNA after DMI treatment may be required for suppression of
corticosterone release. To investigate the mechanism underlying this response, we
measured corticotropin releasing factor (CRF), an upstream modulator of
corticosterone release. Using real-time quantitative PCR, we establish that
hypothalamic CRF expression is significantly reduced after swim exposure in
DMI-treated wild-type mice, however DMI is unable to blunt hypothalamic CRF
expression in ICER-deficient mice. Furthermore, we demonstrate that ICER is
enriched in CRF-expressing neurons in the paraventricular nucleus of the
hypothalamus. These data indicate that ICER is required for DMI to reduce
stress-induced corticosterone release through regulation of hypothalamic CRF
expression, revealing a novel role for ICER in antidepressant regulation of the
hypothalamic-pituitary adrenal axis.

PMID: 14985439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Virology. 2004 Jan 20;318(2):556-65.

Interaction between C/EBPbeta and Tax down-regulates human T-cell leukemia virus 
type I transcription.

Hivin P(1), Gaudray G, Devaux C, Mesnard JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Infections Rétrovirales et Signalisation Cellulaire, CNRS/UM I UMR
5121/IFR 122, Institut de Biologie, 34960 Montpellier, cedex 2, France.

The human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) Tax protein trans-activates viral
transcription through three imperfect tandem repeats of a 21-bp sequence called
Tax-responsive element (TxRE). Tax regulates transcription via direct interaction
with some members of the activating transcription factor/CRE-binding protein
(ATF/CREB) family including CREM, CREB, and CREB-2. By interacting with their ZIP
domain, Tax stimulates the binding of these cellular factors to the CRE-like
sequence present in the TxREs. Recent observations have shown that CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta) forms stable complexes on the CRE site in the
presence of CREB-2. Given that C/EBPbeta has also been found to interact with
Tax, we analyzed the effects of C/EBPbeta on viral Tax-dependent transcription.
We show here that C/EBPbeta represses viral transcription and that Tax is no more
able to form a stable complex with CREB-2 on the TxRE site in the presence of
C/EBPbeta. We also analyzed the physical interactions between Tax and C/EBPbeta
and found that the central region of C/EBPbeta, excluding its ZIP domain, is
required for direct interaction with Tax. It is the first time that Tax is
described to interact with a basic leucine-zipper (bZIP) factor without
recognizing its ZIP domain. Although unexpected, this result explains why
C/EBPbeta would be unable to form a stable complex with Tax on the TxRE site and 
could then down-regulate viral transcription. Lastly, we found that C/EBPbeta was
able to inhibit Tax expression in vivo from an infectious HTLV-I molecular clone.
In conclusion, we propose that during cell activation events, which stimulate the
Tax synthesis, C/EBPbeta may down-regulate the level of HTLV-I expression to
escape the cytotoxic-T-lymphocyte response.

PMID: 14972524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Curr Pharm Des. 2004;10(5):471-500.

Molecular genetics of human male infertility: from genes to new therapeutic
perspectives.

Vogt PH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section Molecular Genetics & Infertility, Dept. Gynecol. Endocrinol. &
Reproductive Medicine, University of Heidelberg, D-69115 Heidelberg, Germany.
peter_vogt@med.uni-heidelberg.de

Genetic lesions causing human male infertility are manifold. Besides gross
chromosomal aneuploidies and rearrangements, microdeletions and single gene
defects can interfere with male fertility. Male fertility is not only dependent
on genes controlling the male germ line but also on genes of the networks
functional for male gonad development and male somatic development, respectively.
It is popular to unravel these netweorks with mouse gene knock-out mutants
displaying reproductive defects. However, substantial arguments can be given for 
more functional studies directly on the human genes, because multiple
reproductive proteins evolve quickly most likely for adopting to the specific
needs of the species class. Prominent examples are mutations of the FSHR gene
causing different pathologies in mouse and human and the DAZ gene family not
found in the mouse genome but in the human genome with an essential male
fertility function. Therefore this review is focussed on a comprehensive overview
of human genes known with mutations causing male infertility (AR; AZF gene
families; CFTR, DM-1, DNAH gene family, FGFR1, FSHR, INSL3, KAL-1, LGR8- GREAT,
LHR, POLG). Then some human genes are described well recognised as functional in 
spermatogenesis and male fertility although gene specific mutations causing
infertility were not yet identified (CREM, CDY1, DAZL1, PHGPx, PRM-1, PRM-2).
They are designated as "spermatogenesis phase marker" or "male fertility index"
genes, because they are useful tools for diagnosing the patient's spermatogenesis
disruption phase and for predicting the presence and quality of his mature
sperms. Current therapeutic protocols for human male infertility do usually not
cure the specific gene defect but try to bypass it using Artificial Reproductive 
Technology (ART). Putative imprinting defects in the early embryo probably
associated with the used ART protocol and an increase of chromosome abnormalities
in the ART offspring now strongly asks for a significant improvement of this
outcome requesting urgently more basic research on the genes functioning in the
human male germ line and during early human embryogenesis.

PMID: 14965334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 23;279(17):17772-84. Epub 2004 Jan 30.

PE-1/METS, an antiproliferative Ets repressor factor, is induced by CREB-1/CREM-1
during macrophage differentiation.

Sawka-Verhelle D(1), Escoubet-Lozach L, Fong AL, Hester KD, Herzig S, Lebrun P,
Glass CK.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California at
San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA.

The molecular mechanisms involved in regulating the balance between cellular
proliferation and differentiation remain poorly understood. Members of the
Ets-domain family of transcription factors are candidates for proteins that might
differentially regulate cell cycle control and cell type-specific genes during
the differentiation of myeloid progenitor cells. The Ets repressor PE-1/METS has 
been suggested to contribute to growth arrest during terminal macrophage
differentiation by repressing Ets target genes involved in Ras-dependent
proliferation. An important feature of this regulatory model is that PE-1/METS is
itself induced by the program of macrophage differentiation elicited by M-CSF.
Here, we present evidence that the PE-1/METS gene is a transcriptional target of 
the cyclic AMP response element-binding protein-1 (CREB-1). CREB-1 expression is 
dramatically up-regulated during macrophage differentiation and phosphorylation
of CREB-1 and the related factor CREM-1 are stimulated by M-CSF in a
SAPK2/p38-dependent manner. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrate
that CREB-1/CREM-1 are recruited to the PE-1/METS promoter as well as to the
promoters of other genes that are up-regulated during terminal macrophage
differentiation. Overexpression of CREB-1 stimulates the activities of the
PE-1/METS, and macrosialin promoters, while expression of a dominant negative
form of CREB-1 during macrophage differentiation inhibits expression of the
PE-1/METS and macrosialin genes. Inhibition of CREB function also results in
reduced expression of CD54 and impaired cell adhesion. Taken together, these
findings reveal new roles of CREB-1/CREM-1 as regulators of macrophage
differentiation.

PMID: 14754893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Mol Hum Reprod. 2004 Feb;10(2):129-35.

Expression of activator of CREM in the testis (ACT) during normal and impaired
spermatogenesis: correlation with CREM expression.

Steger K(1), Behr R, Kleiner I, Weinbauer GF, Bergmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, University of
Giessen, Giessen, Germany. Klaus.Steger@vetmed.uni-giessen.de

The cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) is involved in regulating gene
expression in haploid spermatids. Transcriptional activity of the CREM protein is
thought to be regulated by activator of CREM in the testis (ACT). Applying RT-PCR
and in situ hybridization, cell-specific gene expression of ACT was demonstrated 
in man, cynomolgus monkey and mouse. During normal spermatogenesis, RT-PCR
revealed a strong signal in all three species. We sequenced monkey ACT cDNA and
demonstrated that the putative amino acid sequence is highly conserved between
these species. In situ hybridization demonstrated ACT mRNA in mid and late
pachytene spermatocytes and in round spermatids. Among four infertile men with
round spermatid maturation arrest (RSMA), only one patient revealed a strong
signal for ACT, while three patients displayed a weak signal for both RT-PCR and 
in situ hybridization, although germ cells normally expressing ACT were present
in these patients. In addition, CREM knockout mice known to be infertile due to
RSMA also exhibited only a weak amplification product for ACT cDNA. ACT mRNA was 
barely detectable in some round spermatids, but was completely absent in
pachytene spermatocytes. Database search revealed two and one CRE within the
putative human and mouse ACT promoters respectively. Our findings indicate a
conserved function of ACT during the evolution of mammalian spermatogenesis and
suggest a role for CREM in ACT transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 14742698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. FEMS Yeast Res. 2004 Jan;4(4-5):557-61.

Reinstatement of Rhodotorula colostri (Castelli) Lodder and Rhodotorula crocea
Shifrine & Phaff, former synonyms of Rhodotorula aurantiaca (Saito) Lodder.

Inácio J(1), Fonseca A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Biotechnology Unit, Faculdade de
Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Quinta da Torre, 2829-516
Caparica, Portugal.

Rhodotorula aurantiaca (Saito) Lodder is an anamorphic basidiomycetous yeast
species that belongs to the so-called "Erythrobasidium lineage" of the
Urediniomycetes, according to molecular phylogenetic studies based on nucleotide 
sequence analyses of different ribosomal DNA regions. In the most recent editions
of the yeast taxonomy treatises the species Rhodotorula colostri (Castelli)
Lodder and Rhodotorula crocea Shifrine & Phaff were listed as synonyms of R.
aurantiaca. Taxonomic heterogeneity within R. aurantiaca was demonstrated in a
study based on whole-cell protein profiles and is also hinted at by the observed 
differences in physiological and biochemical characteristics among the different 
strains under that species name. We determined partial nucleotide sequences of
the 26S rRNA gene (D1/D2 domains) of strains maintained in the CBS culture
collection under R. aurantiaca, including the type strains of its synonyms. The
results showed that R. colostri and R. crocea are clearly distinct from R.
aurantiaca and from any other currently recognised basidiomycetous yeast species.
Furthermore, phylogenetic analysis of the sequence data placed the former two
species in separate lineages of the Microbotryomycetidae: R. colostri in the
"ruineniae clade" (Sporidiobolus lineage or Sporidiobolales) and R. crocea
loosely linked to Rhodotorula javanica (Microbotryum lineage).

PMID: 14734036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. FEMS Yeast Res. 2004 Jan;4(4-5):541-55.

Characterisation and classification of phylloplane yeasts from Portugal related
to the genus Taphrina and description of five novel Lalaria species.

Inácio J(1), Rodrigues MG, Sobral P, Fonseca A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Secção Autónoma Biotecnologia,
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Quinta da Torre,
2829-516 Caparica, Portugal.

Taphrina Fries is a genus of dimorphic ascomycetes comprising more than 90
species distinguished by the specific infections they produce on different
vascular plants. Their filamentous states are restricted to parasitised plant
tissue whereas the yeast states are saprobic and can be grown on artificial
media. The latter coincide with the anamorphic phases and have been given
separate nomenclatural status by the erection of the genus Lalaria R.T. Moore. In
its original circumscription Lalaria included only 23 yeast states of known
species of Taphrina and its creation was then redundant. Here we describe five
novel species in the genus Lalaria to accommodate a total of 44 yeast isolates
obtained mainly from leaf surfaces (phylloplane) of different plants in Portugal:
Lalaria arrabidae sp. nov. (one strain), L. carpini sp. nov. (one strain), L.
inositophila sp. nov. (37 strains), L. kurtzmanii sp. nov. (one strain) and L.
veronaerambellii sp. nov. (four strains). L. inositophila was notable for its
widespread occurrence since it was recovered during two consecutive years from
the leaves of miscellaneous plant species. In the absence of sexual states and of
unequivocal associations to particular host plants, the taxonomic relationship of
the novel species to the yeast states of Taphrina available from culture
collections was verified by the comparative analysis of physiological and
molecular characteristics. The latter included PCR fingerprinting using single
primers for microsatellite regions, sequencing of the 5' end of the 26S rRNA
(LSU) gene (D1/D2 domains) and of the ITS1 and ITS2 rDNA spacer regions, and
DNA-DNA hybridisation experiments. An emended description of the genus Lalaria is
provided.

PMID: 14734035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Neurochem. 2003 Dec;87(6):1313-20.

Inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) in the nervous system--a transcriptional
regulator of neuronal plasticity and programmed cell death.

Mioduszewska B(1), Jaworski J, Kaczmarek L.

Author information: 
(1)Nencki Institute, Warsaw, Poland Warsaw Agriculture University, Veterinary
School, Warsaw, Poland.

The acronym ICER (inducible cAMP early repressor) refers to a group of four
proteins produced from the CREM/ICER gene due to use of an internal promoter (P2)
placed in an intron of the CREM (cAMP responsive element modulator) gene. The
ICER proteins contain DNA binding/leucine zipper domains that make them
endogenous inhibitors of transcription driven by CREB (cAMP responsive element
binding protein) and its cognates, CREM and ATF-1 (activating transcription
factor-1). ICER expression is inducible in the brain and in neuronal culture by a
variety of stimuli. As a CREB antagonist, ICER appears to be of pivotal
importance in neuronal plasticity and programmed cell death.

PMID: 14713288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Methods Enzymol. 2003;370:396-415.

Functional analysis of transcription factors CREB and CREM.

Macho B(1), Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Genetique et de Biologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire, 1, rue Laurent
Fries, 67404 Illkirch, Strasbourg, France.

PMID: 14712663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Dec 19;312(3):702-7.

Transcriptional regulation of the murine brca2 gene by CREB/ATF transcription
factors.

Callens N(1), Baert JL, Monté D, Sunesen M, Van Lint C, de Launoit Y.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 8117 CNRS, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Université de Lille 1, Institut de
Biologie de Lille, BP 447, 1 rue Calmette, 59021 Lille Cedex, France.

The brca2 gene encodes a nuclear protein which is mainly involved in DNA repair
and, when mutated, is responsible for some of the hereditary breast cancers.
However, brca2 expression is also deregulated in sporadic breast tumors. In the
mouse brca2 gene we had earlier identified a region of 148bp upstream of the
transcription start site sufficient to activate its expression. In the present
report, we show that the -92 to -40bp region is essential for the transcription
of brca2 in murine mammary cells and that this nucleotide sequence contains one
putative CREB/ATF consensus site (cAMP responsive element: CRE). We demonstrated 
that the mutation of this binding site led to a highly significant reduction of
the mouse brca2 transcription, and that CREB, CREM, and/or ATF-1 functionally
bound to and regulated this promoter. Therefore, the regulation of the promoter
of the mouse brca2 gene is driven by this family of transcription factors.

PMID: 14680822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Dec 23;100(26):15566-71. Epub 2003 Dec 12.

The kinesin KIF17b and RNA-binding protein TB-RBP transport specific
cAMP-responsive element modulator-regulated mRNAs in male germ cells.

Chennathukuzhi V(1), Morales CR, El-Alfy M, Hecht NB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Reproduction and Women's Health, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6142, USA.

Testis brain RNA-binding protein (TB-RBP), the mouse orthologue of the human
protein Translin, is a widely expressed and highly conserved protein with
proposed functions in chromosomal translocations, mitotic cell division, and mRNA
transport, stabilization, and storage. Targeted inactivation of TB-RBP leads to
abnormalities in fertility and behavior. A testis-enriched kinesin KIF17b
coimmunoprecipitates with TB-RBP in a RNA-protein complex containing specific
cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM)-regulated mRNAs. The specificity of this
interaction is confirmed by in vivo RNA-protein crosslinking and transfections of
hippocampal neurons. Combining in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry at 
the electron microscope level, a temporally sequential dissociation of KIF17b and
TB-RBP from specific mRNAs is detected with TB-RBP release coincident with the
time of mRNA translation, indicating a separation of the processes of transport
and translation. We conclude that KIF17b serves as a molecular motor component of
a TB-RBP-mouse ribonucleoprotein complex transporting a group of specific
CREM-regulated mRNAs in mammalian male postmeiotic germ cells. Because KIF17b has
been reported to control CREM-dependent transcription in male germ cells by
regulating the intracellular location of the transcriptional coactivator
activator of CREM in testis, this indicates that one kinesin links the processes 
of transcription and transport of specific mRNAs in mammalian male germ cells.

PMCID: PMC307608
PMID: 14673085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Androl. 2004 Jan-Feb;25(1):95-103.

Preservation of spermatogenesis in spinal cord injured rats with exogenous
testosterone. Relationship with serum testosterone levels and cellular
localization of cAMP responsive element modulator.

Huang HF(1), Wang S, Molina CA, Ottenweller JE.

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, East Orange, New Jersey 07103, USA.
huanghf@umdnj.edu

The current experiment examined the effects of exogenous testosterone (T) on
spermatogenesis in rats with spinal cord injury (SCI) and their relationship with
the cellular distribution of a cyclic AMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) in 
testicular cells. Implantation of T-filled Silastic capsules (TCs, 1-20 cm)
resulted in dose-dependent, biphasic changes in testicular T levels and
spermatogenesis in SCI rats. However, dose responsiveness of spermatogenesis to
exogenous T in SCI rats differed from that in sham control rats. Specifically,
implantation of 2-cm TCs enhanced the effects of SCI on spermatogenesis,
resulting in total regression of the seminiferous epithelium. Although 3-cm TCs
maintained complete spermatogenesis in sham control rats, this regimen failed to 
support complete spermatogenesis in SCI rats. Although complete spermatogenesis
was maintained in SCI rats given 5-20-cm TC implants, various abnormalities
persisted. Cellular distribution of CREM remained normal in SCI rats but was
altered in those SCI rats that received 3- or 5-cm TC implants. Such effects were
associated with reduced CREM proteins in testicular tissues. These results were
consistent with altered cAMP signaling and its regulation in testicular cells
after SCI and provided possible mechanistic explanations for the effects of SCI
on spermatogenesis.CONCLUSION: SCI resulted in changes in the responsiveness of
spermatogenesis to exogenous T. These effects were associated with altered
cAMP/CREM signaling in testicular cells. Further studies, including a study of
the relationship between serum T levels and normalcy of sperm functions and the
role of neural-endocrine interactions in mediating the effects of SCI on
spermatogenesis and sperm function, are needed so that therapeutic regimens can
be designed for clinical use.

PMID: 14662791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Endocrinol. 2003 Dec;179(3):417-25.

The inducible isoform of CREM (inducible cAMP early repressor, ICER) is a
repressor of CYP19 rat ovarian promoter.

Morales V(1), Gonzalez-Robayna I, Hernandez I, Quintana J, Santana P, Ruiz de
Galarreta CM, Fanjul LF.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Biología Molecular y Fisiología, Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Las Palmas 35016, Spain.

The synthesis of estradiol by the granulosa cells is a prominent event in ovarian
physiology and depends on the expression of P450(AROM). FSH induces the
expression of P450(AROM) in granulosa cells as a result of the presence in the
ovarian promoter of a CRE (cAMP response element)-like sequence (CLS). In
rodents, LH downregulates aromatase expression during luteinization by an as yet 
undescribed mechanism. In granulosa cells, LH increases the expression of the
inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER), an isoform of CREM (cAMP-responsive
element modulator) that represses cAMP-induced transcription. The possibility
that ICER represses the activity of the aromatase ovarian promoter, thus being
part of the mechanism underlying the effects of LH was investigated. We have
found that: (1) nuclear proteins from forskolin-stimulated granulosa cells were
specifically bound to an oligonucleotide containing the CLS sequence of the CYP19
ovarian promoter and one out of the two protein-DNA complexes formed was
supershifted by an anti-CREM antibody; (2) in granulosa cells, forskolin-induced 
increases in P450(AROM) promoter luciferase reporter gene activity were prevented
by the transient overexpression of ICER; (3) similar results were obtained in
8-Br-cAMP-stimulated R2C cells, a Leydig tumor cell line routinely used for the
study of P450(AROM) promoter activity; (4) both ICER mRNA levels and P450(AROM)
promoter-driven luciferase activity were elevated 6 and 12 h after stimulation of
R2C cells with 8-Br-cAMP and were decreased 24 and 48 h later; (5) in an R2C
polyclonal line overexpressing ICER, the promoter activity at early stages of
stimulation was completely attenuated, while 24 and 48 h downregulation was
prevented in another R2C line stably transfected with an antisense ICER
construct. These results suggest that ICER represses CYP19 ovarian promoter and
that LH-induced expression of ICER may serve to downregulate P450(AROM)
transcription in granulosa cells during luteinization.

PMID: 14656211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2003 Dec 30;212(1-2):29-39.

Analysis of CREM-dependent gene expression during mouse spermatogenesis.

Beissbarth T(1), Borisevich I, Hörlein A, Kenzelmann M, Hergenhahn M,
Klewe-Nebenius A, Klären R, Korn B, Schmid W, Vingron M, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology of the Cell 1, German Cancer Research Center, DKFZ, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 280, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. tim.beissbarth@molgen.mpg.de

The transcription factors CREM, CREB, and ATF-1 constitute a subfamily of
beta-Zip transcription factors. Several different kinase cascades regulate the
activity of these proteins. The activator splice-isoform CREMtau is specifically 
and highly expressed in post-meiotic germ cells during mouse spermatogenesis.
Male mice lacking CREMtau expression are sterile because of stage-specific arrest
of sperm maturation as the spermatids undergo apoptosis. In order to characterize
the genes that are controlled by CREM during post-meiotic differentiation of
round spermatids, we compared the expression levels of mRNA prepared from testes 
of wild-type and CREM-deficient mice by suppression subtractive hybridization
(SSH) and affymetrix oligonucleotide arrays. A set of 956 unique sequences found 
in the CREM SSH library was further characterized by generating stage-specific
expression profiles during spermatogenesis by hybridization with cDNA from
pre-pubertal mice at defined stages of spermatogenesis using nylon DNA arrays.
The resulting expression profiles were arranged in a linear order according to
similarity in their profile shapes to find co-regulation of functionally related 
genes. Our data shows that a large number of genes are transcriptionally
activated in round spermatids when CREM activity is maximal, including functional
groups like transcription factors, proteins involved in signal transduction, and 
metabolic enzymes, therefore providing novel information of post-meiotic
expression of many known as well as novel genes that are either directly or
indirectly influenced by CREM expression.

PMID: 14654248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 6;279(6):4471-8. Epub 2003 Oct 30.

Role of CREB in transcriptional regulation of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta
gene during adipogenesis.

Zhang JW(1), Klemm DJ, Vinson C, Lane MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Biochemistry, Cellular and Molecular
Biology Program, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21205, USA.

The proximal promoter of the C/EBPbeta gene possesses dual cis regulatory
elements (TGA1 and TGA2), both of which contain core CREB binding sites.
Comparison of the activities of C/EBPbeta promoter-reporter genes with
5'-truncations or site-directed mutations in the TGA elements showed that both
are required for maximal promoter function. Electrophoretic mobility shift and
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analyses with antibodies specific to CREB
and ATF1 showed that these CREB family members associate with the proximal
promoter both in vitro and ex vivo. Immunoblotting and ChIP analysis revealed
that other CREB family members, CREM and ATF1, are up-regulated and associate
with the proximal C/EBPbeta promoter in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from
CREB(-/-) mice. ChIP analysis of wild-type MEFs and 3T3-L1 preadipocytes revealed
that interaction of phospho-CREB, the active form of CREB, with the C/EBPbeta
gene promoter occurs only after induction of differentiation of 3T3-L1
preadipocytes and MEFs. Consistent with the interaction of CREB and ATF1 at the
TGA regulatory elements, expression of constitutively active CREB strongly
activated C/EBPbeta promoter-reporter genes, induced expression of endogenous
C/EBPbeta, and caused adipogenesis in the absence of the hormonal inducers
normally required. Conversely, expression of a dominant-negative CREB blocked
promoter-reporter activity, expression of C/EBPbeta, and adipogenesis. When
subjected to the standard adipocyte differentiation protocol, wild-type MEFs
differentiate into adipocytes at high frequency, whereas CREB(-/-) MEFs exhibit
greatly reduced expression of C/EBPbeta and differentiation. The low level of
expression of C/EBPbeta and differentiation in CREB(-/-) MEFs appears to be due
to up-regulation of other CREB protein family members, i.e. ATF1 and CREM.

PMID: 14593102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Oncogene. 2003 Oct 23;22(48):7667-76.

Transfection of K-rasAsp12 cDNA markedly elevates IL-1beta- and
lipopolysaccharide-mediated inducible nitric oxide synthase expression in rat
intestinal epithelial cells.

Takahashi M(1), Mutoh M, Shoji Y, Kamanaka Y, Naka M, Maruyama T, Sugimura T,
Wakabayashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Prevention Basic Research Project, National Cancer Center Research
Institute, 1-1, Tsukiji 5-chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.
mtakahas@gan2.ncc.go.jp

Activating mutations of K-ras are frequent in colon tumors and aberrant crypt
foci, and may play important roles in colon carcinogenesis. Here, we investigated
the effects of a K-ras codon 12 mutation on inducible nitric oxide synthase
(iNOS) expression. When rat intestinal epithelial cells (IEC-6) were transfected 
with K-rasAsp12 cDNA, the iNOS expression linked to interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) 
or lipopolysaccharide (LPS) treatment was markedly increased and prolonged. In
contrast, it was only very faint and transient in cells transfected with the
control vector or K-rasWT. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays demonstrated
that NF-kappaB binding activity induced by IL-1beta or LPS was also increased in 
K-rasAsp12-transfected cells, along with the binding of CREB-1, CREM-1, ATF-1,
ATF-2, and Jun D to a cAMP-responsive element (CRE)-like site and the binding of 
C/EBPbeta to a C/EBP-binding consensus site. Furthermore, the
anchorage-independent growth of K-rasAsp12-transfected cells was markedly
increased by IL-1beta or LPS treatment, and decreased by ONO-1714, an iNOS
inhibitor. In addition, tumor growth in nude mice injected with
K-rasAsp12-transfected cells was significantly suppressed by NOS inhibition with 
50 p.p.m. ONO-1714 or 100 p.p.m. L-NG-nitroarginine methyl ester. These results
suggest that an activating mutation of K-ras can markedly enhance the iNOS
expression mediated by IL-1beta or LPS, through the activation of promoters on
NF-kappaB, C/EBP, and CRE-like sites, and that nitric oxide contributes to the
colony formation and tumor growth of K-ras-transformed cells.

PMID: 14576830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek. 2003;84(3):217-27.

Assessment of yeast diversity in a marine environment in the south of Portugal by
microsatellite-primed PCR.

Gadanho M(1), Almeida JM, Sampaio JP.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Secção Autónoma de Biotecnologia,
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica,
2829-516, Portugal.

The occurrence and diversity of yeasts in seawater was investigated in a study
site located 20 Km off Faro, Portugal, above the Alvares Cabral Trench. A total
of 43 water samples from different layers (above the permanent thermocline, under
the thermocline and near the bottom) and directly from the surface, originated
234 isolates. All the isolates were identified using a molecular approach that
included, in a first stage, MSP-PCR fingerprinting. A total of 31 MSP-PCR classes
were formed, 8 for the pigmented yeasts and 23 for the non-pigmented yeasts. The 
pink coloured isolates were identified by direct comparison of the new
fingerprints with those obtained for representative strains of the various
species. For identification of the non-pigmented yeasts, a representative isolate
of each MSP-PCR class was selected for sequence analysis and compared with
reference sequences. The five most abundant yeast species were Sakaguchia
dacryoidea, Pseudozyma aphidis, Rhodosporidium babjevae, R. diobovatum and
Debaryomyces hansenii. The distribution of isolates and species in the major
taxonomic groups indicated that the number of basidiomycetous yeasts and their
diversity are prevalent in relation to their ascomycetous counterpart. Diversity 
indices were determined and superficial water and water near the bottom had the
highest diversity. The sampling effort effectiveness was estimated, and found to 
correspond to approximately 60% of the species present. MSP-PCR identification
proved suitable for pigmented basidiomycetous yeasts and, when used in
conjunction with sequence analysis, was effective for the characterization of
non-pigmented populations. Our results indicate that the MSP-PCR fingerprinting
method is appropriate for the characterization of large groups of isolates due to
its simplicity and good reproducibility.

PMID: 14574117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 19;278(51):51316-23. Epub 2003 Oct 8.

Overexpression of repressive cAMP response element modulators in high glucose and
fatty acid-treated rat islets. A common mechanism for glucose toxicity and
lipotoxicity?

Zhou YP(1), Marlen K, Palma JF, Schweitzer A, Reilly L, Gregoire FM, Xu GG, Blume
JE, Johnson JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Insulin Secretion Genomics, Metabolex, Inc., Hayward, California
94545, USA. yunping_zhou@merck.com

The hyperlipidemia and hyperglycemia of the diabetic state accelerate beta-cell
dysfunction, yet the mechanisms are not fully defined. We used rat islet-specific
oligonucleotide arrays (Metabolex Rat Islet Genechips) to identify genes that are
coordinately regulated by high glucose and free fatty acids (FFA). Exposure of
rat islets to FFA (125 microM for 2 days) or glucose (27 mM for 4 days) reduced
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion by 70 +/- 5 and 40 +/- 4%, respectively,
relative to control-cultured islets. These treatments also substantially reduced 
the insulin content of the islets. Islet Genechips analysis revealed that the
mRNA levels of cAMP response element modulator (CREM)-17X and inducible cAMP
early repressor were significantly increased in both 27 mM glucose- and
FFA-treated islets. Removing FFA or high glucose from the culture medium restored
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and the mRNA levels of the two CREM
repressors to normal. Northern blot analysis revealed a 5-fold increase in the
abundance of CREM-17X mRNA and a concomitant 50% reduction in the insulin mRNA in
FFA-treated islets. Transient transfection of the insulin-secreting beta HC9
cells with CREM-17X suppressed rat insulin promoter activity by nearly 50%.
Overexpression of CREM-17X in intact islets via adenovirus infection decreased
islet insulin mRNA levels and insulin content and resulted in a significant
decrease in glucose- or KCl-induced insulin secretion. Taken together, these data
suggest that up-regulation of CREM repressors by either FFA or high glucose
exacerbates beta-cell failure in type 2 diabetes by suppressing insulin gene
transcription.

PMID: 14534319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol. 2003;22(2):111-6.

Expression of cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) in rat testes following
chronic cocaine administration.

Li H(1), Dunbar JC, Dhabuwala CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Wayne State University, School of Medicine, Detroit,
Michigan, USA. hli@med.wayne.edu

OBJECTIVE: c-AMP-responsive element modulator (CREM), one of the nuclear factors 
involved in the regulation of gene expression by cAMP, has an important role in
spermatogenesis. Our recent study has shown that chronic administration of
cocaine to male rats results in disruption of spermatogenesis, including
reduction of germ cells. As a further step toward understanding this process, we 
have studied the role of CREM in cocaine-induced testicular damage.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sprague-Dawley rats were administered cocaine
hydrochloride subcutaneously daily for 90 days. Control animals received equal
volumes of normal saline daily for 90 days. Testes were removed after 15, 30, 90 
days of cocaine administration. Total RNA was extracted from the testes and
subjected to RT-PCR. Testicular tissue was also homogenized in a lysis buffer,
and Western blotting was performed using anti-CREM antibody.
RESULTS: RT-PCR analysis detected a single fragment of approximately 520 base
pairs (bp) in control testes at all time points. The cocaine-treated testes
showed reduced expression of CREM fragment. Western blot analysis using CREM
antibodies confirmed the RNA data. There were reduced CREM proteins in the
cocaine-treated testes compared with controls.
CONCLUSIONS: The CREM gene is essential for spermatogenesis. Our results indicate
that the reduction in testicular CREM expression may be one of the mechanisms
responsible for disruption or impairment of spermatogenesis in the testes
following chronic cocaine administration.

PMID: 14533874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Cell Biochem. 2003 Oct 15;90(3):627-40.

Sodium arsenite downregulates transcriptional activity of AP-1 and CRE binding
proteins in IL-1beta-treated Caco-2 cells by increasing the expression of the
transcriptional repressor CREMalpha.

Hershko DD(1), Robb BW, Luo GJ, Hungness ES, Hasselgren PO.

Author information: 
(1)Shriners Hospitals for Children, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

In recent studies, sodium arsenite (SA) inhibited IL-6 production in cultured
intestinal epithelial cells, at least in part by downregulating the activity of
nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB). The influence of SA on the activity of other
transcription factors regulating the interleukin-6 (IL-6) gene in enterocytes is 
not known. We tested the effect of SA on the activity of CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein (C/EBP), activating protein-1 (AP-1), and CRE binding proteins in
IL-1beta-treated Caco-2 cells. DNA binding activity was determined by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and transcriptional activity by
transfecting cells with luciferase reporter plasmids containing promoter
constructs with binding sites for the individual transcription factors. DNA
binding activity for all three transcription factors was increased after
treatment with SA or IL-1beta. In contrast, SA inhibited transcriptional activity
of AP-1 and CRE binding proteins but not C/EBP. Additional experiments provided
evidence that the inhibition of AP-1 and CRE mediated transcriptional activity
was associated with, and probably caused by, increased expression of the
transcriptional repressor cyclic AMP response element modulator (CREM)alpha. The 
present results are consistent with the concept that SA inhibits IL-6 production 
in stimulated enterocytes by downregulating the transcriptional activity of
several, but not all, IL-6-related transcription factors. Because of the multiple
important biological functions of IL-6 in the enterocyte and gut mucosa, methods 
to regulate enterocyte IL-6 production have significant clinical implications.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14523996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Dec;17(12):2554-65. Epub 2003 Sep 25.

Transcriptional control in male germ cells: general factor TFIIA participates in 
CREM-dependent gene activation.

De Cesare D(1), Fimia GM, Brancorsini S, Parvinen M, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 1 rue Laurent 
Fries, 67404 Illkirch, Strasbourg, France.

Regulation of gene expression in haploid male germ cells follows a number of
specific rules that differ from somatic cells. In this physiological context,
transcriptional control mediated by the activator CREM (cAMP-responsive element
modulator) represents an established paradigm. In somatic cells activation by
CREM requires its phosphorylation at a unique regulatory site (Ser117) and
subsequent interaction with the ubiquitous coactivator CBP (cAMP response element
binding protein-binding protein). In testis, CREM transcriptional activity is
controlled through interaction with a tissue-specific partner, ACT (activator of 
CREM in testis), which confers a powerful, phosphorylation-independent activation
capacity. In addition to specialized transcription factors and coactivators, a
variety of general factors of the basal transcriptional machinery, and their
distinct tissue-specific isoforms, are highly expressed in testis, supporting the
general notion that testis-specific gene expression requires specialized
mechanisms. Here, we describe that CREM interacts with transcription factor IIA
(TFIIA), a general transcription factor that stimulates RNA polymerase
II-directed transcription. This association was identified by a two-hybrid
screen, using a testis-derived cDNA library, and confirmed by
coimmunoprecipitation. The interaction is restricted to the activator isoforms of
CREM and does not require Ser117. Importantly, CREM does not interact with
TFIIAtau-ALF, a testis-specific TFIIA homolog. CREM and TFIIA are expressed in a 
spatially and temporally coordinated fashion during the differentiation program
of germ cells. The two proteins also colocalize intracellularly in spermatocyte
and spermatid cells. These findings contribute to the understanding of the highly
specialized rules of transcriptional regulation in haploid germ cells.

PMID: 14512522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Theriogenology. 2003 Oct 15;60(7):1357-69.

Different CREM-isoform gene expression between equine and human normal and
impaired spermatogenesis.

Blöcher S(1), Behr R, Weinbauer GF, Bergmann M, Steger K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, University of
Giessen, Frankfurter Strasse 98, Giessen 35392, Germany.

Histone-to-protamine exchange causes chromatin condensation ceasing gene
expression in elongating spermatids. Gene expression of protamines is regulated
by the transcription factor cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM). Altered
CREM expression results in male infertility, as shown by CREM-knock-out mice
being sterile due to round spermatid maturation arrest and patients exhibiting
round spermatid maturation arrest revealing a lack or substantial reduction of
both CREM-mRNA and CREM-protein. Similar defects in histone-to-protamine exchange
have been suggested in infertile stallions exhibiting enlarged sperm heads. The
CREM-gene consists of 14 exons. Alternative exon splicing results in the
production of both activator and repressor proteins. To further clarify the role 
of different CREM-isoforms for male infertility, the expression pattern of
various CREM-isoforms during equine and human normal and impaired spermatogenesis
was investigated by RT-PCR. Stallions with normal spermatogenesis expressed six
activators and three repressors. In men three activators and seven different
repressors were detected. In one stallion and patients with impaired
spermatogenesis, only repressors were found. It is concluded that (i). stallion
and man reveal a different CREM expression pattern, (ii). the expression of CREM 
activators is a prerequisite for normal spermatogenesis, and (iii). the lack of
CREM activator expression results in male infertility.

PMID: 14511788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2003 Sep;53(Pt 5):1665-70.

Metschnikowia vanudenii sp. nov. and Metschnikowia lachancei sp. nov., from
flowers and associated insects in North America.

Giménez-Jurado G(1), Kurtzman CP, Starmer WT, Spencer-Martins I.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Biotechnology Unit, Faculty of
Sciences and Technology, New University of Lisbon, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal.

Two new species of the ascosporic yeast genus Metschnikowia were isolated from
nectaries and associated muscoid flies of flowers from the common milkweed
(Asclepias syriaca) in North America, and are described as Metschnikowia
vanudenii [type strain=PYCC 4650(T)=CBS 9134(T)=NRRL Y-27243(T)=UWO(PS)
86A4.1(T)] and Metschnikowia lachancei [type strain=PYCC 4605(T)=CBS 9131(T)=NRRL
Y-27242(T)=UWO(PS) 7ASB2.3(T)]. As with the previously described Metschnikowia
gruessii, M. vanudenii has vegetative cells with an 'aeroplane' or cross-like
configuration, produces ovoid chlamydospores and forms ellipsoidopedunculate asci
with two acicular ascospores. Metschnikowia lachancei is distinguished from other
Metschnikowia species by formation of club-shaped asci with 1-2 thick clavate
ascospores. The phylogenetic positions of the proposed new species within
Metschnikowia were determined from sequence analysis of the D1/D2 domain of 26S
rDNA. The new species show low nuclear DNA relatedness with neighbouring taxa.

PMID: 13130066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Biochem J. 2003 Nov 15;376(Pt 1):189-97.

Thimet oligopeptidase expression is differentially regulated in neuroendocrine
and spermatid cell lines by transcription factor binding to SRY (sex-determining 
region Y), CAAT and CREB (cAMP-response-element-binding protein) promoter
consensus sequences.

Morrison LS(1), Pierotti AR.

Author information: 
(1)Biological & Biomedical Sciences, Glasgow Caledonian University, Cowcaddens
Road, Glasgow G4 0BA, Scotland, UK.

The zinc metalloprotease thimet oligopeptidase (EP24.15) is found predominantly
in the neuroendocrine-gonadal axis where it is implicated in the processing of
bioactive peptides, including GnRH (gonadotropin-releasing hormone),
beta-neoendorphin, alpha-neoendorphin and dynorphin(1-8), the progression of
spermatogenesis and the normal clearance of beta-amyloid in brain cells.
Regulation of the enzyme's activity may occur in part by phosphorylation and
redox disruption of intermolecular disulphide bridges. The elevated levels of
both EP24.15 activity and mRNA within testicular and neuroendocrine tissues
indicate that EP24.15 gene expression is differentially regulated. In the present
paper, we present a detailed analysis of the rat EP24.15 promoter region
previously isolated and partially characterized in this laboratory. Employing
site-directed mutagenesis to create a series of promoter deletions and
full-length promoter mutants, and measuring their activity in luciferase reporter
gene and electrophoretic mobility-shift assays, we have shown that the
transcription of the EP24.15 gene is differentially regulated in neuroendocrine
and spermatid cell lines by transcription factor binding to SRY (sex-determining 
region Y), CAAT and CREB (cAMP-response-element-binding protein) promoter
consensus sequences. The key to identifying the in vivo role of thimet
oligopeptidase is likely to be found within the mechanisms by which it is
regulated, and it is therefore of particular significance that EP24.15 expression
is regulated by SRY and CREB/CREM (cAMP-response element modulator), the
principle testes-determining protein and the major orchestrator of
spermatogenesis respectively.

PMCID: PMC1223746
PMID: 12911328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 17;278(42):41047-58. Epub 2003 Jul 31.

Glucose metabolism in cancer: importance of transcription factor-DNA interactions
within a short segment of the proximal region og the type II hexokinase promoter.

Lee MG(1), Pedersen PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University, School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205-2185, USA.

A common signature of many cancers is a high glucose catabolic rate frequently
dependent on the overexpression of Type II hexokinase (HKII), a mitochondrial
bound enzyme that also suppresses cell death. As the tumor HKII promoter plays a 
significant role in HKII overexpression, studies reported here were undertaken to
identify both the major regions and transcription factors involved under
tumor-like conditions. Reporter gene assays following transfection of hepatoma
cells with decreasing segments of the HKII promoter traced its known strength to 
the proximal region (-281 to -35). Mutational analyses showed that in this short 
region GC boxes 1, 2, 5, and 6, a CCAAT box, an inverted CCAAT box, and CRE are
involved in promoter activation. Other studies demonstrated binding of
transcription factors Sp1, Sp2, and Sp3 to GC boxes 1 and 6, Sp1 and Sp2 to GC
boxes 2 and 5, NF-Y to CCAAT boxes, and CREB, ATF1, and CREM to CRE. In addition,
transfection studies involving Sp1, Sp2, Sp3, CREB, and NFY (dominant negative
form) provided evidence that these proteins are promoter activators. Finally,
alignment of available HK proximal promoters showed strong conservation only
among HKII sequences. These findings implicate signaling pathways directed to a
short segment of the proximal region of the HKII promoter as major contributors
to HKII overexpression in many cancers.

PMID: 12893819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Neurosci. 2003 Jul 16;23(15):6304-14.

Does cAMP response element-binding protein have a pivotal role in hippocampal
synaptic plasticity and hippocampus-dependent memory?

Balschun D(1), Wolfer DP, Gass P, Mantamadiotis T, Welzl H, Schütz G, Frey JU,
Lipp HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurophysiology, Leibniz Institute for Neurobiology, 39108
Magdeburg, Germany. balschun@ifn-magdeburg.de

Previous studies addressing the role of the transcription factor cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB) in mammalian long-term synaptic plasticity and
memory by gene targeting were compromised by incomplete deletion of the CREB
isoforms. Therefore, we generated conditional knock-out strains with a marked
reduction or complete deletion of all CREB isoforms in the hippocampus. In these 
strains, no deficits could be detected in lasting forms of hippocampal long-term 
potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD). When tested for
hippocampus-dependent learning, mutants showed normal context-dependent fear
conditioning. Water maze learning was impaired during the early stages, but many 
mutants showed satisfactory scores in probe trials thought to measure
hippocampus-dependent spatial memory. However, conditioned taste aversion
learning, a putatively hippocampus-independent memory test, was markedly
impaired. Our data indicate that in the adult mouse brain, loss of CREB neither
prevents learning nor substantially affects performance in some
hippocampus-dependent tasks. Furthermore, it spares LTP and LTD in paradigms that
are sensitive enough to detect deficits in other mutants. This implies either a
species-specific or regionally restricted role of CREB in the brain and/or a
compensatory upregulation of the cAMP response element modulator (CREM) and other
as yet unidentified transcription factors.

PMID: 12867515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Insect Mol Biol. 2003 Aug;12(4):373-82.

The AmCREB gene is an ortholog of the mammalian CREB/CREM family of transcription
factors and encodes several splice variants in the honeybee brain.

Eisenhardt D(1), Friedrich A, Stollhoff N, Müller U, Kress H, Menzel R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie-Neurobiologie, Freie Universität Berlin, Germany.
theodora@zedat.fu-berlin.de

The transcription factor CREB (cAMP response element binding protein) is required
for the switch from short-term to long-term synaptic plasticity and from
short-term to long-term memory. Its activity is regulated by the cAMP-dependent
signalling cascade, which has been shown to play a crucial role in the honeybee's
long-term memory formation. To elucidate the role of the CREB in honeybee memory 
formation we analysed a CREB-homologous gene, AmCREB, which is expressed as
several transcripts in the honeybee brain. Eight transcripts have been identified
(AmCREB 1-8) that are generated by alternate splicing. One antibody generated
against a subset of these variants reveals a cytosolic localization in the
mushroom body alpha-lobes, the glomeruli of the antennal lobes, the protocerebral
lobes, the central complex and in the optical lobes.

PMID: 12864917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Spinal Cord Med. 2003 Spring;26(1):69-78.

Alteration of cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate signaling in rat testicular
cells after spinal cord injury.

Huang HF(1), Li MT, Wang S, Pogach LM, Ottenweller JE.

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, East Orange, New Jersey, USA.
huanghf@umdnj.edu

INTRODUCTION: Earlier studies demonstrated that the effects of spinal cord injury
(SCI) on spermatogenesis were associated with altered Sertoli cell responses to
treatment with follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and/or testosterone (T).
Because of the importance of the cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP)
signal pathway in hormonal actions on Sertoli cells and spermatogenesis, the
purpose of this study was to determine whether cAMP signaling in testicular cells
is altered after SCI.
METHODS: Rats with SCI were treated with FSH, T, or FSH + T for 7 or 14 days.
Northern blot cDNA hybridization was used to measure testicular levels of Sertoli
and germ cell-specific transcripts encoded by genes that contain cAMP responsive 
element (CRE) and/or steroid hormone responsive element (HRE). Cellular
distribution of CRE modulator (CREM) was determined by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Treatment of sham control rats with FSH or T + FSH for 2 weeks resulted 
in decreases in mRNAs for CREM and CRE binding protein (CREB). Concomitantly,
levels of mRNA for Sertoli cell inhibin alpha and germ cell-specific protamine 1 
(Pm-1), transition protein 2 (TP-2), and lactate dehydrogenase C (LDHC) were all 
reduced. In contrast, identical FSH and/or T treatments resulted in increases in 
levels of CREM and CREB mRNAs in the testes of SCI rats; these effects were
associated with similar changes in mRNAs for inhibin alpha, Pm-1, TP-2, and LDHC.
The effects of SCI on CREM expression were corroborated by similar changes in its
distribution in testicular cells.
CONCLUSION: SCI is associated with changes in FSH and/or T regulation of cAMP/CRE
and HRE signaling in testicular cells. These effects may mediate the effects of
SCI on spermatogenesis.

PMID: 12830973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Neurosci. 2003 Jun 1;23(11):4519-26.

Inducible cAMP early repressor, an endogenous antagonist of cAMP responsive
element-binding protein, evokes neuronal apoptosis in vitro.

Jaworski J(1), Mioduszewska B, Sánchez-Capelo A, Figiel I, Habas A, Gozdz A,
Proszynski T, Hetman M, Mallet J, Kaczmarek L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Nencki Institute, Warsaw
02-093, Poland. jaworski@mit.edu

Active CREB (cAMP responsive element-binding protein) transcription factor is
crucial for neuronal survival. Several members of the CREM/ICER (cAMP responsive 
element modulator/inducible cAMP early repressor) protein family may act as
endogenous CREB antagonists. However, their involvement in a process of
programmed cell death remains unexplored. Here we report that ICER may play such 
a role in neuronal apoptosis because it is upregulated in apoptotic neurons in
vitro, and overexpression of ICER, delivered in adenoviral vector, evokes
programmed cell death of three different kinds of cultured neurons, namely those 
derived from hippocampal dentate gyrus, cerebral cortex, and superior cervical
ganglion. Reporter gene assay with a promoter containing a CREB-responsive
sequence revealed a decrease in both basal and induced CRE-dependent gene
expression in neurons overexpressing ICER. Finally, the level of expression of
the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2, a well known CREB target, was markedly
diminished in ICER-treated neurons. We suggest that the naturally occurring CREB 
functional antagonist ICER may have a specific function in programmed cell death 
of neurons, probably by silencing the expression of anti-apoptotic genes.

PMID: 12805292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Jun;30(3):381-97.

Transcriptional regulation of the mouse steroidogenic acute regulatory protein
gene by the cAMP response-element binding protein and steroidogenic factor 1.

Manna PR(1), Eubank DW, Lalli E, Sassone-Corsi P, Stocco DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX 79430, USA.

Transcriptional induction by cAMP is mediated through the interaction of the cAMP
response-element binding protein (CREB) with a cAMP response element (CRE) in the
promoter of target genes. The steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR) protein gene 
is regulated by cAMP-mediated signaling in steroidogenic cells even though its
promoter lacks a consensus CRE. Previously, we have identified three highly
conserved 5'-CRE half-sites within the -96/-67 bp region of the mouse StAR gene, 
and a member of the CREB family (CREB/CRE modulator (CREM)) was shown to be
involved in its expression and regulation. Here we show that CREB and CREMtau
(but not CREMalpha and CREMbeta) have qualitatively similar effects on StAR
promoter activity in response to (Bu)(2)cAMP. Studies on the effects of the
functional integrity of the CRE half-sites on CREB-dependent (Bu)(2)cAMP-mediated
StAR gene transcription demonstrated the greater importance of the CRE2 site in
comparison with the CRE1 and CRE3 sites. The CRE2 sequence was also found to bind
specifically to recombinant CREB protein and nuclear extract from MA-10 mouse
Leydig tumor cells. The cAMP and CREB/CREM responsive region (-151/-1 bp) of the 
mouse StAR promoter also contains three recognition motifs for steroidogenic
factor 1 (SF-1). Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and reporter gene analyses
demonstrated the involvement of different SF-1 elements in StAR gene expression
with the order of importance being SF-1/3>SF-1/1>SF-1/2. Specific mutations that 
eliminated the binding sites of CRE and SF-1 elements, either alone or in
combination, resulted in an attenuation of StAR promoter activity, indicating
that CREB and SF-1 can regulate StAR gene transcription in a cooperative fashion.
In addition, mammalian two-hybrid assays revealed a high affinity protein-protein
interaction between CREB/CREMtau and SF-1 which appeared to be dependent upon
CREB protein phosphorylation. These findings further demonstrate CREB's role in
StAR gene transcription and also provide evidence that the combined action of
CREB/CREMtau and SF-1 results in enhanced activation of the StAR promoter.

PMID: 12790807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. J Androl. 2003 May-Jun;24(3):371-80.

Spinal cord contusion impairs sperm motility in the rat without disrupting
spermatogenesis.

Huang HF(1), Li MT, Wang S, Wang G, Ottenweller JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Urology, UMD-New Jersey Medical School
Newark, New Jersey 07103, USA. huanghf@umdnj.edu

Our previous studies demonstrated various abnormalities in spermatogenesis after 
spinal cord injury (SCI) in cord-transected rats. In this study, we examined
whether abnormalities in spermatogenesis in SCI rats were related to the degree
of SCI. We used spinal cord-contused (SCC) rats as a model. Adult male
Sprague-Dawley rats were subjected to various degrees of cord contusion caused by
the weight of a rod dropped from different heights (12.5, 25, 50, and 75 mm)
using a New York University IMPACTOR. Testicular histology revealed persistent
complete spermatogenesis in all SCC rats 4, 8, or 14 weeks after cord contusion
regardless of the extent of SCI. Northern blot complementary DNA (cDNA)
hybridization revealed transient but significant decreases in the levels of
Sertoli cell-specific transcripts in SCC rats. In addition, levels of messenger
RNA (mRNA) transcripts for germ cell-specific transition protein-2 and
protamine-1 were consistently decreased in these rats. Such effects were related 
to the height of the weight drop and were associated with reduced levels of mRNA 
for cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) responsive element modulator (CREM).
These results demonstrated specific effects of SCI on spermiogenesis and were
consistent with altered cAMP signaling in testicular cells after SCI. Sperm
motility was also significantly decreased in SCC rats and was related to the
height of weight drop. Normal sperm motility recovered only in those rats injured
by weight drop from 12.5- and 25-mm heights. In summary, current results
demonstrate persistent abnormalities in spermiogenesis and sperm motility in rats
that suffered spinal cord contusion by weight drop. Such effects were related to 
the height of the weight drop and thus to the extent of SCI.

PMID: 12721213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2003 Mar;53(Pt 2):607-16.

Molecular systematics of the dimorphic ascomycete genus Taphrina.

Rodrigues MG(1), Fonseca A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Secçiã Autónoma de Biotecnologia,
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Quinta da Torre,
2829-516 Caparica, Portugal.

The ascomycete genus Taphrina Fries comprises nearly 100 species recognized by
their mycelial states when parasitic on different vascular plants. Whereas the
filamentous state is strictly phytoparasitic, the yeast state is saprobic and can
be cultured on artificial media. Taphrina species are differentiated mainly on
the basis of host range and geographical distribution, type and site of infection
and morphology of the sexual stage in infected tissue. However, there has been
little progress in the systematics of the genus in recent years, mainly because
of the scarcity of molecular studies and available cultures. The main aim of the 
present study was the reappraisal of species boundaries in Taphrina based on the 
genetic characterization of cultures (yeast states) that represent about
one-third of the currently recognized species. The molecular methods used were
(i) PCR fingerprinting using single primers for microsatellite regions and (ii)
determination of nucleotide sequences of two approx. 600 bp nuclear rDNA regions,
the 5' end of the 26S rRNA gene (D1/D2 domains) and the internal transcribed
spacer region (which includes the 5.8S rRNA gene). Sequencing results confirmed
the monophyly of the genus (with the probable exclusion of Taphrina vestergrenii)
and the combined analysis of the two methods corroborated, in most cases,
separation of species defined on the basis of conventional criteria. However,
genetic heterogeneity was found within some species and conspecificity was
suggested for strains that have been deemed to represent distinct species.
Sequences from the ITS region displayed a higher degree of divergence than those 
of the D1/D2 region between closely related species, but were relatively
conserved within species (> 99% identity) and were thus more useful for the
effective differentiation of Taphrina species. The results further allowed other 
topics to be addressed such as the correlation between the molecular phylogenetic
clustering of certain species and the respective host plant family and the
significance of molecular methods in the accurate diagnosis of the different
diseases caused by Taphrina species.

PMID: 12710634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Cancer Lett. 2003 May 8;194(1):37-43.

Clinical relevance of increased retinoid and cAMP transcriptional programs in
tumor cells rendered non-malignant by dominant negative inhibition of NFkappaB.

Andela VB(1), Gingold BI, Souza MD, O'Keefe RJ, Puzas EJ, Schwarz EM, Rosier RN.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Musculoskeletal Research, University of Rochester Medical Center,
575 Elmwood Avenue, #1-7534, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.
valentine_andela@umrc.rochester.edu

Erratum in
    Cancer Lett. 2004 Feb 10;204(1):117.

We previously reported reciprocal regulation of extracellular matrix degrading
enzymes and their endogenous inhibitors by NFkappaB. As such, dominant negative
inhibition of NFkappaB in a murine lung alveolar carcinoma cell, Line 1, afforded
a decrease in malignant proclivity [Cancer Res. 60(23) (2000) 6557-6562].
Contrasting the gene expression profile of malignant Line 1 tumor cells (WT-Line 
1) and their non-malignant counterparts transduced with a dominant negative
inhibitor of NFkappaB (mIkappaB-Line 1), we observed upregulated retinoic acid
receptors (RARs) and the cAMP response element modulator (CREM), in mIkappaB-Line
1 tumor cells, and utilized heterologous promoter-reporter constructs to confirm 
enhanced responsiveness. We translate these findings by inducing retinoid and
cAMP transcriptional programs in WT-Line 1 tumor cells with pharmacologic doses
of all-trans retinoic acid (at-RA) and pentoxyfilline (PTX), respectively, and
demonstrate suppression of NFkappaB activity, tumor cell derived matrix
metalloprotease 9 activity, tumor cell invasiveness in vitro and spontaneous
metastasis in vivo. Our results are consistent with the putative role of
retinoids and cAMP in the malignant reversion of tumor cells and illustrative of 
the binary nature of transcriptional programs that modulate malignant
progression.

PMID: 12706857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 27;278(26):24139-52. Epub 2003 Apr 18.

FHL3 is an actin-binding protein that regulates alpha-actinin-mediated actin
bundling: FHL3 localizes to actin stress fibers and enhances cell spreading and
stress fiber disassembly.

Coghill ID(1), Brown S, Cottle DL, McGrath MJ, Robinson PA, Nandurkar HH, Dyson
JM, Mitchell CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton
3800, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Four and a half LIM domain (FHL) proteins are members of the LIM protein
superfamily. Several FHL proteins function as co-activators of CREM/CREB
transcription factors and the androgen receptor. FHL3 is highly expressed in
skeletal muscle, but its function is unknown. FHL3 localized to the nucleus in
C2C12 myoblasts and, following integrin engagement, exited the nucleus and
localized to actin stress fibers and focal adhesions. In mature skeletal muscle
FHL3 was found at the Z-line. Actin was identified as a potential FHL3 binding
partner in yeast two-hybrid screening of a skeletal muscle library. FHL3
complexed with actin both in vitro and in vivo as shown by glutathione
S-transferase pull-down assays and co-immunoprecipitation of recombinant and
endogenous proteins. FHL3 promoted cell spreading and when overexpressed in
spread C2C12 cells disrupted actin stress fibers. Increased FHL3 expression was
detected in highly motile cells migrating into an artificial wound, compared with
non-motile cells. The molecular mechanism by which FHL3 induced actin stress
fiber disassembly was demonstrated by low speed actin co-sedimentation assays and
electron microscopy. FHL3 inhibited alpha-actinin-mediated actin bundling. These 
studies reveal FHL3 as a significant regulator of actin cytoskeletal dynamics in 
skeletal myoblasts.

PMID: 12704194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. FEMS Yeast Res. 2003 Mar;3(1):45-52.

High capacity xylose transport in Candida intermedia PYCC 4715.

Gárdonyi M(1), Osterberg M, Rodrigues C, Spencer-Martins I, Hahn-Hägerdal B.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM), Faculty of Sciences and Technology,
New University of Lisbon, 2829-516, Caparica, Portugal.

Xylose-utilising yeasts were screened to identify strains with high xylose
transport capacity. Among the fastest-growing strains in xylose medium, Candida
intermedia PYCC 4715 showed the highest xylose transport capacity. Maximal
specific growth rate was the same in glucose and xylose media (mu(max)=0.5 h-1,
30 degrees C). Xylose transport showed biphasic kinetics when cells were grown in
either xylose- or glucose-limited culture. The high-affinity xylose/proton
symport system (Km = 0.2 mM, Vmax = 7.5 mmol h-1 g-1) was more repressed by
glucose than by xylose. The less specific low-affinity transport system (K = 50
mM, Vmax = 11 mmol h-1 g-1) appeared to operate through a facilitated-diffusion
mechanism and was expressed constitutively. Inhibition experiments showed that
glucose is a substrate of both xylose transport systems.

PMID: 12702245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2003 Apr 10;112(1-2):113-25.

Microarray analysis of genes expressed in the frontal cortex of rats chronically 
treated with morphine and after naloxone precipitated withdrawal.

Ammon S(1), Mayer P, Riechert U, Tischmeyer H, Höllt V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Otto von Guericke University,
Leipziger Str. 44, D-39120, Magdeburg, Germany.

Opioid dependence may be associated with adaptive changes in gene expression in
the brain. In the present study we used DNA microarrays (U34A; Affymetrix) to
analyze the expression of about 8000 genes in the frontal cortex of rats
chronically treated with morphine and in rats after naloxone precipitated
withdrawal. Chronic treatment for 10 days with ascending doses of morphine (10-50
mg/kg twice daily) resulted in a more than twofold induction of 14 genes after
the last injection of morphine. The majority of these genes code for heat shock
proteins (hsp70, hsp 27, hsp 40, hsp105, GRP78, etc.). The expression of the heat
shock genes in the morphine-treated animals was reversed by naloxone (10 mg/kg). 
The opioid antagonist, in turn, precipitated withdrawal and increased the
expression of a set of genes which are predominantly transcription factors
(krox20, CREM, NGFI-B, IkappaB, etc). Only a few genes remained increased after
naloxone application. Such persistently changed genes code for arc, a
cytoskeleton-associated protein which is induced by synaptic activity, ania-3, a 
splice variant of the Homer 1 protein which is critically involved in
activity-dependent alterations of synaptic function and rPer2, a protein
regulating circadian rhythms. For selected genes the changes in gene expression
were confirmed by real time PCR and by in situ hybridization. These findings
indicate that the persistent changes in long-lasting plasticity during opiate
dependence do not primarily depend on the increased expression levels of genes
encoding for neurotransmitter, receptor and/or ion channel proteins, but rather
on altered pattern of synaptic connectivity.

PMID: 12670709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2002 Dec 10;82(23):1606-8.

[The correlated study on CREM expression and testicular breeding sperm functional
lesion in rats with varicocele].

[Article in Chinese]

Yu J(1), Chen Z.

Author information: 
(1)Urological department, 1st affiliated hospital, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 
310003, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study male infertility's mechanism caused by varicocele.
METHODS: 30 rats were selected at random, of 20 were operated, as varicocele's
group;of 10 were pseudo-operated, as controlled group, testes were removed,
stained and sectioned. Makler Score were adopted to analyse the bore, limitan's
thickness, layer number of cell, the degree of cell's maturity and average score 
in 200 and 100 seminiferous tubulae respectively. CREM was determined by
hybridization in situ, the difference between two groups was compared.
RESULTS: In varicocele' group, seminiferous tubule's bore was decreased (101.2
+/- 2.2 vs 146.0 +/- 4.1), limitan became thicker (3.5 +/- 0.1 vs 1.9 +/- 0.2),
cell' s layer number was reduced (3.0 +/- 0.2 vs 5.5 +/- 0.1), cell's maturity
turned to disturbance (3.6 +/- 0.3 vs 4.9 +/- 0.1), the average score was lower
than controlled group (16.0 +/- 1.2 vs 8.5 +/- 0.6), they had significant
differences (P < 0.001). CREM expression was lower in varicocele group than in
controlled one (VG 2.0 +/- 0.32, SoG 3.90 +/- 0.32) (P < 0.001), which was
located in spermatogenous cell to spermatocyte stage. The quantu of expression
and score value brought out positive correlation (r = 0.746, P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: CREM lower expression could lead to breeding sperm functional
lesion, which probably was one of the mechanisms of infertility caused by
varicocele.

PMID: 12667366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Immunol. 2003 Mar 15;170(6):2971-6.

The cyclic adenosine 5'-monophosphate response element modulator suppresses IL-2 
production in stimulated T cells by a chromatin-dependent mechanism.

Tenbrock K(1), Juang YT, Tolnay M, Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Injury, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver 
Spring, MD 20910, USA.

The production of IL-2 is tightly controlled by several transcription factors
that bind to the IL-2 promoter. The cAMP response element modulator (CREM) is
known to form complexes with CREB and bind to the -180 site of the IL-2 promoter 
in anergic and in systemic lupus erythematosus T cells. In this study we show
that CREM is transcriptionally induced in T cells following stimulation through
CD3 and CD28, binds to the IL-2 promoter in vivo, and suppresses IL-2 production.
Transfection of an antisense CREM plasmid into T cells blocked the expression and
binding of CREM to the IL-2 promoter and the decrease of IL-2 production, which
follows the early increase after T cell stimulation with CD3 and CD28. In
addition, as assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments, antisense
CREM prevented the binding of protein 300 and cAMP response element binding
protein and promoted the acetylation of histones. Antisense CREM also enhanced
the accessibility of the IL-2 promoter to endonucleases and prevented the
condensation of chromatin in vivo. Our data suggest that upon T cell activation, 
CREM gradually replaces phosphorylated CREB at the -180 site of the IL-2
promoter. CREM, in turn, binds protein 300 and cAMP response element binding
protein, but CREM is unable to activate its histone acetyltransferase activity,
which results in condensation of chromatin and down-regulation of IL-2
production.

PMID: 12626549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Inflamm Res. 2002 Dec;51(12):611-8.

Gene expression profiling of Ca2+-atpase inhibitor DTBHQ and antigen-stimulated
RBL-2H3 mast cells.

Nakamura R(1), Ishida S, Ozawa S, Saito Y, Okunuki H, Teshima R, Sawada J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Immunochemistry, National Institute of Health
Sciences, Kamiyoga 1-18-1, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 158-8501, Japan.

OBJECTIVE AND DESIGN: Ca2+ signaling is critical for mast cell activation by
antigen stimulation, and we previously described that the signaling can be
mimicked by Ca2+-ATPase inhibitors. We therefore investigated the effect of the
Ca2+-ATPase inhibitor and antigen stimulation on the gene expression profiles of 
RBL-2H3 mast cells.
MATERIAL: A Ca2+-ATPase inhibitor, 2,5-di(tert-butyl)-1,4-hydroquinone (DTBHQ),
an antigen (dinitrophenylated BSA), a high-density oligonucleotide microarray
(Affymetrix GeneChip) technique, and a well-characterized rat mast cell line
RBL-2H3 were used.
TREATMENT: RBL-2H3 cells were activated for 3 h with 10 microM DTBHQ, which
increases cytosolic Ca2+ concentration, or 10 microg/ml antigen, which
cross-links IgE receptors, and the mRNA expression profiles (8,799 genes) were
analyzed with GeneChip arrays (n = 3).
METHODS: Expression levels were measured by GeneChip, and the differences were
tested by Welch's t-test and P-values less than 0.05 were considered
statistically significant. Values are expressed as means +/- SEM.
RESULTS: The genes, including MCP-1, GADD45, Relaxin H1, CSF-1, c-jun-oncogene,
Pyk-2, NKR-P2 and CREM, were significantly up-regulated by both DTBHQ and antigen
stimuli, whereas the genes including interleukin (IL)-3, IL-4, IL-9, IL-13,
GADD153, butyrate response factor, and Fas ligand, were up-regulated by DTBHQ
alone. On the other hand, the expression of several genes, including GATA-1, were
down-regulated by DTBHQ stimulation.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest 1) that DTBHQ seems to induce proinflammatory 
responses by stimulating the production of several cytokines through the
expression of several transcription factors, 2) that the changes in gene
expression profile induced by DTBHQ and by IgE receptor cross-linking in mast
cells were almost the same, but many more stress-inducible genes like GADD 153
were up-regulated by the former.

PMID: 12558195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2003 Feb;117B(1):70-8.

Human nuclear transcription factor gene CREM: genomic organization, mutation
screening, and association analysis in panic disorder.

Domschke K(1), Kuhlenbäumer G, Schirmacher A, Lorenzi C, Armengol L, DiBella D,
Gratacos M, Garritsen HS, Nöthen MM, Franke P, Sand P, Fritze J, Perez G, Maier
W, Sibrowski W, Estivill X, Bellodi L, Ringelstein EB, Arolt V, Martin-Santos R, 
Catalano M, Stögbauer F, Deckert J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.

Panic disorder is an anxiety disorder with an estimated heritability of 48%.
Variation in the gene of the nuclear transcription factor "cAMP-responsive
element modulator" (CREM) might contribute to its pathogenesis. CREM knock-out
mice exhibit significantly less anxiety behavior than wild-type mice and the
alternative CREM gene product "inducible cAMP early repressor" (ICER) plays a
pivotal role in the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, which is disturbed 
in panic disorder. We characterized the genomic organization of the human CREM
gene and performed a systematic mutation screening by means of single stranded
conformational analysis (SSCA) in a sample of 40 German patients with panic
disorder (DSM-III-R). Four novel single nucleotide polymorphisms in CREM
promoters P 1 and P 4, one trinucleotide (ATT)-repeat polymorphism in CREM
promoter P 2-generating the ICER isoform-and a rare amino acid substitution in
CREM exon glut 2 were identified. Association analysis in an extended sample of
German patients (n = 88) revealed a significant excess of the shorter CREM P 2
promoter eight-repeat trinucleotide allele and of genotypes containing the
eight-repeat trinucleotide allele in panic disorder (P = 0.02), in particular in 
panic disorder without agoraphobia (P = 0.001). A replication study in
independent Italian (n = 76) and Spanish (n = 62) samples, however, failed to
confirm this observation. This suggests that the CREM P 2 promoter trinucleotide 
polymorphism is not a major susceptibility factor in the pathogenesis of panic
disorder. Functional analysis of the observed CREM P 2 promoter polymorphism as
well as studies in independent panic disorder samples are necessary.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12555239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. FASEB J. 2003 Feb;17(2):144-51.

Novel regulation of cardiac force-frequency relation by CREM (cAMP response
element modulator).

Isoda T(1), Paolocci N, Haghighi K, Wang C, Wang Y, Georgakopoulos D, Servillo G,
Della Fazia MA, Kranias EG, Depaoli-Roach AA, Sassone-Corsi P, Kass DA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA.

The cAMP response element modulator (CREM) plays pivotal roles in the
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. CREM mRNA is robustly expressed in human
myocardium, and identified isoforms may suppress cAMP response element-mediated
transcription. However, little is known about the physiological importance of
CREM in intact hearts remains unknown. We studied CREM-null mice and age-matched 
control littermates by in vivo pressure-volume loops to analyze basal and reserve
cardiac function. Basal systolic and diastolic function, echocardiographic
morphology, and myocardial histology were normal in CREM-null animals. However
functional reserve with increasing heart rate was markedly depressed, with less
contractile augmentation (+22+/-9% CREM-/- vs.+62+/-11% controls, P<0.05) and
relaxation shortening (5+/-5% CREM-/- vs. -18+/-3% controls; P<0.05) at faster
rates. In contrast, isoproterenol dose-responses were similar, suggesting normal 
beta-adrenergic receptor-coupled signaling. Gene expression of calcium handling
proteins (SERCA, phospholamban) and stress-response genes (e.g., alpha-skeletal
actin, beta-myosin heavy chain, natriuretic peptides) were similar between
groups. However, total and serine-phosphorylated phospholamban protein declined
-38 and -64% respectively, and protein phosphatase-1 (PP1) activity increased 44%
without increased protein levels (all P<0.01) in CREM-/- vs. controls. These
results demonstrate novel involvement of CREM in regulation of PP1 activity and
of PLB, likely resulting in a potent frequency-dependent influence on cardiac
function.

PMID: 12554693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Biol Reprod. 2003 Feb;68(2):699-707.

Testis-specific expression of rat mitochondrial glycerol-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase in haploid male germ cells.

Weitzel JM(1), Shiryaeva NB, Middendorff R, Balvers M, Radtke C, Ivell R, Seitz
HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University Hospital
Hamburg-Eppendorf, D-20246 Hamburg, Germany. weitzel@uke.uni-hamburg.de

Mitochondrial glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (mGPDH) is regulated by multiple
promoters in a tissue-specific manner. We characterized the testis-specific
promoter C of the mGPDH gene and investigated the cellular localization of mGPDH 
within the testis. Electrophoretic mobility shift experiments identified a
cAMP-response element (CRE) site at -57 that was active in the testis. An in
vitro-translated CRE modulator (CREM) protein was able to bind this CRE site, and
an anti-CREM antibody interfered with this complex. Ectopic expression of the
testis-specific transcriptional activator CREMtau and protein kinase A in human
hepatocarcinoma HepG2 cells activated a promoter C-driven luciferase construct in
transient transfection experiments. Furthermore, mGPDH expression was
undetectable in testis of CREM-deficient mice. The cellular localization of mGPDH
expression and translation in adult rat testis was determined by in situ
hybridization and immunohistochemistry techniques. The mGPDH transcripts were
detected solely in postmeiotic germ cells. Expression of mGPDH was restricted
from round spermatids to early elongating spermatids. The mGPDH protein was
delayed in postmeiotic germ cells, restricted from late elongating spermatids to 
mature spermatids. Our results indicate that rat mGPDH is expressed by a
testis-specific promoter from haploid male germ cells in a stage-specific manner.

PMID: 12533437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Endocr Res. 2002 Nov;28(4):765-75.

cAMP pathway alterations from the cell surface to the nucleus in adrenocortical
tumors.

Rosenberg D(1), Groussin L, Bertagna X, Bertherat J.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Endocrinologie, INSERM U 567, CNRS UMR 8104, IFR 116, Institut
Cochin, 24 rue du Fg-St-Jacques, 75014, Paris, France.

The cyclic AMP (cAMP) pathway plays a major role in the development of endocrine 
tissues and various molecular defects of key components of this pathway (G
protein, receptors, PKA, ...) have been observed in endocrine tumors.
Hypersecretion of adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH), the key activator of the
cAMP pathway in adrenal cortex, is associated with adrenocortical hyperplasia and
cortisol oversecretion (Cushing's syndrome). The best example of "illegitimate"
membrane receptors expression reported is the abnormal expression of the adenylyl
cyclase activating gastric inhibitory peptide receptor (GIP-R) in
ACTH-independent Cushing's syndrome (ACS). We have observed that ectopic
expression of the GIP-R is frequent in ACTH-Independent Macronodular Adrenal
Hyperplasia (AIMAH), rare in benign adrenal adenoma (AA), but seems absent in
Adrenal Cancer (AC). In vivo systematic screening of AIMAH shows at least one
abnormal response of cortisol (suggesting "illegitimate" membrane receptor
expression) in almost all patients. Somatic and germ line inactivating mutations 
of PRKAR1 (regulatory subunit R1A of PKA) can be observed in patient with
isolated primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease (PPNAD) and AA
responsible for ACS. At the nuclear level, the cAMP pathway regulates
transcription mainly by PKA-dependent phosphorylation of the cyclic AMP response 
element binding (CREB) family of transcription factors (CREB, CREM, and ATF-1).
Cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CREB) is expressed in normal adrenal
cortex. Alterations of CRE binding proteins with loss of CREB expression and
compensatory overexpression of CREMtau is observed in the human adrenocortical
cancer cell line H295R. Similar alterations are found at the protein level in
human malignant adrenocortical tumors. In conclusion, various alterations leading
to activation or inactivation of key components of the cAMP signaling pathway can
be observed in adrenocortical tumorigenesis.

PMID: 12530696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Jan;17(1):141-51.

No circadian rhythms in testis: Period1 expression is clock independent and
developmentally regulated in the mouse.

Morse D(1), Cermakian N, Brancorsini S, Parvinen M, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique-Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale-Université Louis Pasteur, BP 10142, 67404 Illkirch-Strasbourg,
France.

Spermatogenesis is a process whereby haploid spermatozoa differentiate through
meiosis from precursor stem cells. We examined the expression of circadian clock 
genes in the testis, to assess clock control over the timing of different
developmental events. Clock genes are known to oscillate with circadian
rhythmicity in the central clock structure, the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the
hypothalamus, but also in peripheral tissues. Here we show that Per1 gene
expression in the testis is constant over a 24-h period and that the Per1
transcript is expressed at a level higher than the peak values of the Per1
oscillations observed for other tissues. Bmal1, another clock gene whose
expression oscillates in other tissues, also shows constant expression levels in 
the testis. In addition, the levels and phosphorylation state of the PER1 protein
are not oscillating at all times of day. Strikingly, Per1 is restricted primarily
to step 7 to 10 spermatids and thus appears to be developmentally regulated. The 
expression of the Clock transcript is also developmentally regulated, but it is
found principally in spermatogonia and spermatocytes up until the time of the
first meiotic division. Per1 expression is not altered in testes from Clock
mutant mice, suggesting that CLOCK does not activate Per1 in male germ cells, in 
contrast to what it does in other mouse tissues. Taken together, our observations
suggest that the testis, in contrast to all other peripheral tissues, lacks a
functioning circadian clock.

PMID: 12511614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Blood. 2003 May 1;101(9):3615-21. Epub 2002 Dec 27.

Transactivation of the fucosyltransferase VII gene by human T-cell leukemia virus
type 1 Tax through a variant cAMP-responsive element.

Hiraiwa N(1), Yabuta T, Yoritomi K, Hiraiwa M, Tanaka Y, Suzuki T, Yoshida M,
Kannagi R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya,
Japan.

Human T-cell leukemic virus type 1 (HTLV-1)-infected T cells express the
fucosyltransferase (Fuc-T) VII gene involved in the biosynthesis of the leukocyte
sialyl Lewis X, which may be related to tissue infiltration in patients with
malignant adult T-cell leukemia. HTLV-1 induces Fuc-T VII transcription through
the viral transactivator Tax, although the underlying molecular mechanism remains
unknown. In the present study, we analyzed the role of the cis-activating element
in Tax activation using reporter constructs bearing the 5'-regulatory region of
Fuc-T VII in Jurkat T cells. A sequence (GGCTGTGGGGGCGTCATATTGCCCTGG) covering a 
half-palindromic cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-responsive element (CRE)
was found to be required for Tax activation of the Fuc-T VII promoter. We further
demonstrated that transcription factors of the CRE-binding protein
(CREB)/activating transcription factor (ATF) family bind to this CRE-like
sequence and that Tax binds in association with CREB and the coactivator
CREB-binding protein (CBP) in Jurkat T cells. This element, containing the
G+C-rich flanking sequences, is homologous to the Tax-responsive viral CREs in
the HTLV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR)-promoter. Furthermore, CREM alpha, an
isoform of CREB deficient in the glutamine-rich domains, was found to activate
the Fuc-T VII promoter in a phosphorylation-independent manner, similar to the
viral CRE in HTLV-1 LTR but in contrast to the phosphorylation-dependent
activation of the cellular CREs by Tax. These findings indicate that the Fuc-T
VII promoter is transactivated by Tax in concert with CBP through a CRE-like
sequence in a manner similar to that of viral CRE in HTLV-1 LTR.

PMID: 12506041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Neurosci Res. 2003 Jan 15;71(2):208-19.

Traumatic brain injury-induced acute gene expression changes in rat cerebral
cortex identified by GeneChip analysis.

Raghavendra Rao VL(1), Dhodda VK, Song G, Bowen KK, Dempsey RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
Wisconsin 53792, USA. vemugant@neurosurg.wisc.edu

Proper CNS function depends on concerted expression of thousands of genes in a
controlled and timely manner. Traumatic brain injury (TBI) in mammals results in 
neuronal death and neurological dysfunction, which might be mediated by altered
expression of several genes. By employing a CNS-specific GeneChip and real-time
polymerase chain reaction (PCR), the present study analyzed the gene expression
changes in adult rat cerebral cortex in the first 24 hr after a controlled
cortical impact injury. Many functional families of genes not previously
implicated in TBI-induced brain damage are altered in the injured cortex. These
include up-regulated transcription factors (SOCS-3, JAK-2, STAT-3, CREM, IRF-1,
SMN, silencer factor-B, ANIA-3, ANIA-4, and HES-1) and signal transduction
pathways (cpg21, Narp, and CRBP) and down-regulated transmitter release
mechanisms (CITRON, synaptojanin II, ras-related rab3, neurexin-1beta, and
SNAP25A and -B), kinases (IP-3-kinase, Pak1, Ca(2+)/CaM-dependent protein
kinases), and ion channels (K(+) channels TWIK, RK5, X62839, and Na(+) channel
I). In addition, several genes previously shown to play a role in TBI
pathophysiology, including proinflammatory genes, proapoptotic genes, heat shock 
proteins, immediate early genes, neuropeptides, and glutamate receptor subunits, 
were also observed to be altered in the injured cortex. Real-time PCR analysis
confirmed the GeneChip data for many of these transcripts. The novel
physiologically relevant gene expression changes observed here might explain some
of the molecular mechanisms of TBI-induced neuronal damage.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12503083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Science. 2002 Dec 20;298(5602):2388-90.

CREM-dependent transcription in male germ cells controlled by a kinesin.

Macho B(1), Brancorsini S, Fimia GM, Setou M, Hirokawa N, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, B. P. 10142,
67404 Illkirch, Strasbourg, France.

ACT is a LIM-only protein expressed exclusively in round spermatids, where it
cooperates with transcriptional activator CREM in regulating various postmeiotic 
genes. Targeted inactivation of CREM leads to a complete block of mouse
spermiogenesis. We sought to identify the regulatory steps controlling the
functional interplay between CREM and ACT. We found that ACT selectively
associates with KIF17b, a kinesin highly expressed in male germ cells. The
ACT-KIF17b interaction is restricted to specific stages of spermatogenesis and
directly determines the intracellular localization of ACT. Sensitivity to
leptomycin B indicates that KIF17b can be actively exported from the nucleus
through the Crm1 receptor. Thus, a kinesin directly controls the activity of a
transcriptional coactivator by a tight regulation of its intracellular
localization.

PMID: 12493914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Invert Neurosci. 2001 Oct;4(2):95-103. Epub 2001 Aug 15.

Distribution and partial characterization of CREB-like immunoreactivity in the
medicinal leech Hirudo.

Groome JR(1), Pryma D, Donahue RM.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Harvey Mudd College, 1250 North Dartmouth Avenue,
Claremont, CA 91711 USA. groome@thuban.ac.hmc.edu

The presence and distribution of immunoreactivity to the cyclic AMP response
element binding protein (CREB) were determined in the central nervous system
(CNS) and in peripheral tissues of the medicinal leech Hirudo. Western blots
revealed several CREB-immunoreactive (CREB-IR) bands including one whose
molecular weight (43-44 kDa) was similar to mammalian CREB. The 43-44 kDa
CREB-like protein was detected in nuclear extracts of the ventral nerve cord and 
was not observed following preincubation of the primary antiserum with the
epitope sequence. CREB-like immunoreactivity was detected in extracts from each
of six regions of the leech CNS, and in extracts from leech body wall
musculature, crop, intestine, jaw musculature, pharynx, and salivary tissues.
Whole mounts of leech ganglia revealed specific CREB-IR in a restricted
population of neurons distributed throughout the leech CNS. Apparent homologues
to a pair of CREB-IR dorsolateral neurons were observed in most ganglia along the
ventral nerve cord. Several CREB-IR neurons exhibited segmental specificity. A
number of neurons stained with an antiserum to the cyclic AMP response element
modulator (CREM). These neurons showed no overlap in location with CREB-IR
neurons, and this staining was not eliminated with a preabsorption control.
Possible roles for a CREB-like protein in the leech are discussed.

PMID: 12488979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. FASEB J. 2003 Jan;17(1):103-5. Epub 2002 Nov 15.

Impaired cardiac contraction and relaxation and decreased expression of
sarcoplasmic Ca2+-ATPase in mice lacking the CREM gene.

Müller FU(1), Lewin G, Matus M, Neumann J, Riemann B, Wistuba J, Schütz G,
Schmitz W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Münster, Germany.
mullerf@uni-muenster.de

Congestive heart failure is the common endpoint of various cardiac diseases
representing a leading cause of cardiovascular mortality in Western countries.
Characteristic functional alterations of the failing heart are explained by
expressional changes of myocardial regulatory proteins; however, little is known 
about underlying mechanisms regulating cardiac gene expression in the failing
heart. Here, we address the specific role of transcription factor CREM for
cardiac function in CREM mutant mice with complete inactivation of the CREM gene.
We show that CREM mutant mice display distinct alterations of cardiac function
resembling characteristic functional defects of the failing heart. Left
ventricular hemodynamic assessment of CREM mutant mice revealed impairment of
both cardiac contraction and relaxation in basal state, as well as a decreased
responsiveness to beta-adrenergic stimulation. The diminished cardiac contractile
performance was associated with a selective down-regulation of beta1-adrenergic
receptors and a decreased ventricular expression of SERCA, the Ca2+-ATPase of the
sarcoplasmic reticulum. The cardiac phenotype of CREM mutant mice provides the
first evidence that CREM represents an important key regulator of cardiac gene
expression, which is essential for normal left ventricular contractile
performance and response to beta-adrenoreceptor stimulation.

PMID: 12475904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Neurochem Res. 2002 Oct;27(10):1209-20.

Expression profiling to understand actions of NMDA/glutamate receptor antagonists
in rat brain.

Törönen P(1), Storvik M, Lindén AM, Kontkane O, Marvanová M, Lakso M, Castrén E, 
Wong G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Neurobiology Department, A. I. Virtanen 
Institute, Kuopio University, Finland.

Agents acting as noncompetitive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)/glutamate receptor
antagonists induce the expression of several genes in limbic cortical regions,
such as the cingulate, retrosplenial, and entorhinal cortices. These include
important regulatory genes such as the neurotrophin brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF), its receptor trkB, and c-fos. We applied expression profiling
methods to find genes coregulated with BDNF following treatment with the
prototypical NMDA/glutamate receptor antagonist MK-801. Expression profiling
provides a useful technique for describing the molecular and transcriptional
level events that follow various processes. We illustrate the utility of
microarrays to find novel ESTs regulated by MK-801. We also used expression
profiling with microarrays to characterize the levels of transcription factor
cAMP response element modulator (CREM) and inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) 
isoforms that are induced by MK-801. These factors may act as the eventual
repressors for BDNF expression via competition and heterodimerization with
phosphorylated CREB, a transcription factor important for BDNF expression.
Finally, we find and confirm the regulation of Erp29, RTNI, and an ABC
transporter by antagonism of NMDA/glutamate receptors as potential stress related
molecules in brain. The emerging picture generated by using these expression
profiling approaches, identifies several of what likely will be many molecules
that take part in the complex events that occur during BDNF signaling mediated by
blockade of NMDA/ glutamate receptors.

PMID: 12462419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J Neurochem. 2002 Dec;83(5):1072-86.

Gene expression analysis of spontaneously hypertensive rat cerebral cortex
following transient focal cerebral ischemia.

Raghavendra Rao VL(1), Bowen KK, Dhodda VK, Song G, Franklin JL, Gavva NR,
Dempsey RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
Wisconsin 53792, USA. Vemugant@neurosurg.wisc.edu

Identification of novel modulators of ischemic neuronal death helps in developing
new strategies to prevent the stroke-induced neurological dysfunction. Hence, the
present study evaluated the gene expression changes in rat cerebral cortex at 6
and 24 h of reperfusion following transient middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO) by GeneChip analysis. Transient MCAO resulted in selective increased mRNA 
levels of genes involved in stress, inflammation, transcription and plasticity,
and decreased mRNA levels of genes which control neurotransmitter function and
ionic balance. In addition to a number of established ischemia-related genes,
many genes not previously implicated in transient focal ischemia-induced brain
damage [suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS)-3, cAMP responsive element
modulator (CREM), cytosolic retinol binding protein (CRBP), silencer factor-B,
survival motor neuron (SMN), interferon-gamma regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1),
galanin, neurotrimin, proteasome subunit RC8, synaptosomal-associated protein
(SNAP)-25 A and B, synapsin 1a, neurexin 1-beta, ras-related rab3, vesicular GABA
transporter (VGAT), digoxin carrier protein, neuronal calcium sensor-1 and
neurodap] were observed to be altered in the ischemic cortex. Real-time PCR
confirmed the GeneChip results for several of these transcripts. SOCS-3 is a gene
up-regulated after ischemia which modulates inflammation by controlling cytokine 
levels. Antisense knockdown of ischemia-induced SOCS-3 protein expression
exacerbated transient MCAO-induced infarct volume assigning a neuroprotective
role to SOCS-3, a gene not heretofore implicated in ischemic neuronal damage.

PMID: 12437578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Mol Hum Reprod. 2002 Nov;8(11):965-76.

Novel leader exons of the cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate response element
modulator (CREM) gene, transcribed from promoters P3 and P4, are highly
testis-specific in primates.

Gellersen B(1), Kempf R, Sandhowe R, Weinbauer GF, Behr R.

Author information: 
(1)IHF Institute for Hormone and Fertility Research, University of Hamburg,
D-22529 Hamburg, Germany.

Testicular expression of CREM is essential for spermatogenesis in the mouse. From
a monkey testis cDNA library we isolated a CREM transcript isoform with a novel
5' exon theta2 which provides at its 3'-end an in-frame ATG to the downstream
reading frame. 5'-RACE on human testis cDNA indicated that exon theta2 is > or = 
113 bp in size. Moreover, a second novel leader exon, theta1, of > or = 289 bp
was identified and encodes a putative open reading frame of 26 amino acids.
In-vitro translation and cellular expression of CREM-theta1 and CREM-theta2
splice variants cloned from human testis yielded not only full length proteins
but also shorter repressor products resulting from downstream translation
initiation. Upon co-transfection, products of CREM-theta2 cDNA repressed protein 
kinase A-induced activation of a CRE-driven reporter construct. RT-PCR analysis
of primate tissues for CREM-theta2 transcripts showed abundant expression in the 
testis and very low levels or absence from all other tissues tested. CREM-theta1 
mRNA was exclusively expressed in the testis. Promoters P3 and P4, flanking exons
theta1 and theta2, were cloned and found to be non-responsive to protein kinase A
in transfection assays. Furthermore, we show differential activation of P1, P3
and P4 during mouse postnatal testicular development, suggesting cell- and
stage-specific regulatory mechanisms for these CREM promoters.

PMID: 12397208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Genesis. 2002 Nov;34(3):208-14.

ER-based double iCre fusion protein allows partial recombination in forebrain.

Casanova E(1), Fehsenfeld S, Lemberger T, Shimshek DR, Sprengel R, Mantamadiotis 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany. e.casanova@dkfz.de

Erratum in
    Genesis. 2002 Dec;34(4):267.

Here we describe the generation of a new tamoxifen-inducible double Cre fusion
protein generated by fusing two ERT2 domains onto both ends of the iCre
recombinase (a codon improved Cre recombinase). This Cre fusion protein
(ERiCreER) had a twofold increased activity in cell culture assays than the
previously described MerCreMer Cre double fusion protein. ERiCreER was targeted
to the brain by placing it under the control of the promoter from the CamKIIalpha
gene using a 170 kb BAC. The fusion protein was detected in hippocampus, cortex, 
striatum, thalamus, and hypothalamus but not in cerebellum. The ERiCreER was
cytoplasmatic in the absence of tamoxifen and translocated into the nucleus upon 
tamoxifen administration. The activity of the ERiCreER was tested in vivo by
mating the CamKIIalpha ERiCreER transgenic line with mice harbouring exon 10 of
the CREB gene flanked by two LoxP sites. In the absence of tamoxifen, no
background activity was detected in mice older than 6 months. After tamoxifen
administration, most if not all of the ERiCreER fusion protein translocated from 
the cytoplasm to the nucleus; however, only 5-10% of the "floxed" CREB allele was
recombined. Recombination was also visualised at the cellular level by following 
the upregulation of the CREM protein, which corresponds precisely with CREB
loss/recombination. Unlike in other tissues (Sohal et al., 2001; Tannour-Louet et
al., 2002), it appears that in brain, although ERiCreER can bind tamoxifen, the
Cre-recombinase cannot be fully activated.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12395386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Immunol. 2002 Oct 15;169(8):4147-52.

Antisense cyclic adenosine 5'-monophosphate response element modulator
up-regulates IL-2 in T cells from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Tenbrock K(1), Juang YT, Gourley MF, Nambiar MP, Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Injury, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, 503
Robert Grant Avenue, Silver Spring, MD 20910, USA.

The cAMP response element modulator (CREM) has been shown to bind specifically to
the -180 site of the IL-2 promoter in vitro. CREM protein is increased in T cells
of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and it has been considered
responsible for the decreased production of IL-2. In this work we show that
transcriptional up-regulation is responsible for the increased CREM protein
levels and that CREM binds to the IL-2 promoter in live SLE T cells. Suppression 
of the expression of CREM mRNA and protein by an antisense CREM plasmid, which
was force expressed in SLE T cells by electroporation, resulted in decreased CREM
protein binding to the IL-2 promoter and increased expression of IL-2 mRNA and
protein. Our data demonstrate that antisense constructs can be used to
effectively eliminate the expression of a transcriptional repressor. This
approach can be used therapeutically in conditions where increased production of 
IL-2 is desired.

PMID: 12370343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2002 Sep;21(1):1-14.

Molecular mechanisms of neuronal cell death: implications for nuclear factors
responding to cAMP and phorbol esters.

Vyas S(1), Biguet NF, Michel PP, Monaco L, Foulkes NS, Evan GI, Sassone-Corsi P, 
Agid Y.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U497, ENS, 46, Rue d'Ulm, Paris 75005, France. vyas@wotan.ens.fr

Chronic treatment with calcium ionophore A23187 in NGF-differentiated cells
results in cell death that is time- and concentration-dependent. Additionally,
PC12 cells codifferentiated with NGF and dBcAMP become dependent on these factors
for survival and undergo apoptosis when both factors are withdrawn. We show that 
in both cases there is a prolonged induction of c-Fos which correlates with cell 
death. Its continual activation in PC12 cells overexpressing c-FosER results in
caspase-3 cleavage and rapid cell death. Specific phosphorylation of
CREB/CREM(tau) transactivators or their binding to CRE of c-fos was observed. Our
results indicate that prolonged c-Fos induction activates p53. There is increased
nuclear localization of p53, p21 and Bax levels are induced in
NGF/dBcAMP-deprived c-FosER cells, and dominant negative p53 inhibits cell death 
induced either by serum deprivation or by c-Fos. Overall these data implicate
AP-1 as a nuclear target of signal transduction pathways which plays a role in
the activation of apoptosis.

PMID: 12359147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Neurochem. 2002 Oct;83(1):157-66.

Adrenergic inducibility of AP-1 binding in the rat pineal gland depends on prior 
photoperiod.

Guillaumond F(1), Becquet D, Bosler O, François-Bellan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Fédératif Jean-Roche, Faculté de Médecine Nord, Université de la
Méditerranée, Boulevard Pierre Dramard, 13916 Marseille cedex 20, France.

The main known function of the pineal gland in mammals is the temporal
synchronization of physiological rhythms to seasonal changes of day length
(photoperiod). In rat, the transcription factor activating protein-1 (AP-1)
displays a circadian rhythm in its DNA binding in the pineal gland, which results
from the rhythmic expression of Fra-2. We postulated that, if AP-1 is an
important component of pineal gland functioning, then variations in photoperiodic
conditions should lead to an adaptation of the AP-1 binding rhythm. Here we show 
that AP-1 binding patterns adapt to variations in lighting conditions, in the
same way as the rhythm of arylalkylamine-N-acetyltransferase (AA-NAT) activity.
This adaptation appeared to result from photoperiodic adaptation of the rhythmic 
fra-2 gene expression and was reflected by an adapted delay between the onset of 
night and the acrophase of the nocturnal peak. We further showed that
photoperiodic adaptation of both the AP-1 binding and AA-NAT activity rhythms
resulted from adapted changes in adrenergic inducibility of both variables at
night onset. We finally provided evidence that AP-1 shared with the CREM gene
encoding the transcriptional repressor protein inducible cAMP early repressor
(ICER) the ability to be hypersensitive or subsensitive to adrenergic stimuli,
depending on prior photoperiod.

PMID: 12358739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Biol Reprod. 2002 Oct;67(4):1052-7.

Transplantation of wild-type spermatogonia leads to complete spermatogenesis in
testes of cyclic 3',5'-adenosine monophosphate response element
modulator-deficient mice.

Wistuba J(1), Schlatt S, Cantauw C, von Schönfeldt V, Nieschlag E, Behr R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive Medicine of the University, D-48129 Münster,
Germany.

The cAMP response element modulator (CREM) gene encodes transcription factors
that are highly expressed in spermatids. A deficiency of the CREM gene leads to
male infertility in mice due to round spermatid maturation arrest. However, CREM 
is also expressed in testicular Sertoli cells. We investigated whether CREM
deficiency affects the germ line alone or whether the testicular environment is
also dependent on CREM function. We examined the restoration of donor-derived
spermatogenesis in CREM-deficient testes after transfer of wild-type
spermatogonia (16 animals) and after transplantation of germ cells from
CREM-deficient or heterozygous donors into spermatogenic tubules of wild-type
hosts (16 and 12 animals). Six wk after endogenous spermatogenesis had been
depleted by busulphan treatment, spermatogonia were transferred via the rete
testis. Production of donor-derived germ cells in the deficient recipients was
confirmed by testicular histology and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis of
testis fragments 7 and 13 wk after germ cell transfer. Sperm with donor genotype,
as detected by PCR, also were flushed from the epididymis. Germ cell transfer
using heterozygous donors was also successful. CREM-deficient germ cells largely 
failed to colonize wild-type recipient testes. According to these findings, germ 
cell differentiation is dependent on CREM function. The testicular environment of
CREM-deficient mice is not essentially affected and is able to support complete
spermatogenesis in the presence of wild-type germ cells.

PMID: 12297517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. EMBO J. 2002 Sep 2;21(17):4583-92.

Ca2+-dependent block of CREB-CBP transcription by repressor DREAM.

Ledo F(1), Kremer L, Mellström B, Naranjo JR.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, C.S.I.C., Madrid, Spain.

The calcium-binding protein DREAM binds specifically to DRE sites in the DNA and 
represses transcription of target genes. Derepression at DRE sites following PKA 
activation depends on a specific interaction between alphaCREM and DREAM. Two
leucine-charged residue-rich domains (LCD) located in the kinase-inducible domain
(KID) and in the leucine zipper of alphaCREM and two LCDs in DREAM participate in
a two-site interaction that results in the loss of DREAM binding to DRE sites and
derepression. Since the LCD motif located within the KID in CREM is also present 
in CREB, and maps in a region critical for the recruitment of CBP, we
investigated whether DREAM may affect CRE-dependent transcription. Here we show
that in the absence of Ca2+ DREAM binds to the LCD in the KID of CREB. As a
result, DREAM impairs recruitment of CBP by phospho CREB and blocks CBP-mediated 
transactivation at CRE sites in a Ca2+-dependent manner. Thus, Ca2+-dependent
interactions between DREAM and CREB represent a novel point of cross-talk between
cAMP and Ca2+ signalling pathways in the nucleus.

PMCID: PMC126180
PMID: 12198160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Biol Reprod. 2002 Sep;67(3):820-8.

Stage-specific expression of genes associated with rat spermatogenesis:
characterization by laser-capture microdissection and real-time polymerase chain 
reaction.

Sluka P(1), O'Donnell L, Stanton PG.

Author information: 
(1)Prince Henry's Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Victoria, Australia
3168.

Spermatogenesis in the rat consists of 14 unique morphologic cellular
associations between Sertoli cells and developing germ cells within the
seminiferous epithelium. The complexity of the cellular associations leads to
difficulty in the isolation of individual cells at a defined stage of development
for the study of their unique patterns of gene or protein expression. Thus,
laser-capture microdissection is an ideal technique to permit such analysis. This
study used laser-capture microdissection and real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to quantitate the stage-specific
expression of a series of genes of functional significance in hormonal regulation
and cell-cell interactions in spermatogenesis, including cathepsin-L, CREM-tau,
transition protein-1, androgen receptor, beta1-integrin, N-cadherin, and
hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT). Frozen sections (10 micro m) were 
obtained from normal adult rat testes. Laser-capture microdissection (LCM) was
used to capture all cells in cross-sections of seminiferous tubules that were
grouped into stages I-V, VII-VIII, and IX-XIII. Transition protein-1 expression
was lowest during stages I-V and increased 5.9-fold during stages VII-VIII and
IX-XIII (P < 0.01). Cathepsin-L expression was highest during stages I-V and
VII-VIII, falling 4.9-fold during stages IX-XIII (P < 0.05). Similarly, CREM-tau 
expression was highest during stages I-V and VII-VIII, falling 1.6-fold during
stages IX-XIII (P < 0.05). A novel CREM-tau isoform lacking the phosphorylation
domain was also characterized but was not stage-specific. beta1-Integrin,
N-cadherin, and androgen receptor expression did not change between the
spermatogenic stages examined. HPRT housekeeper expression was lowest during
stages I-V but increased 1.5-fold during stages VII-VIII and IX-XIII (P < 0.05). 
This study is the first to apply LCM and real-time RT-PCR analysis to quantitate 
stage-specific changes in the expression of multiple genes in the seminiferous
epithelium.

PMID: 12193390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Biochem Pharmacol. 2002 Aug 15;64(4):689-97.

Synergistic effect of dimethyl sulfoxide on glucagon-like peptide 1
(GLP-1)-stimulated insulin secretion and gene transcription in INS-1 cells:
characterization and implications.

Kemp DM(1), Habener JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 55
Fruit St., WEL320, Boston 02114, USA.

Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) is an incretin hormone that is secreted from the 
enteroendocrine L-cells of the gut in response to nutrient ingestion. GLP-1
enhances both insulin secretion and insulin gene expression in a
glucose-dependent manner via activation of its putative G-protein-coupled
receptor on pancreatic beta-cells. In the presence of DMSO (0.5-2.5%), these
functional responses were enhanced significantly (2- to 2.5-fold) in a
concentration-dependent manner in the beta-cell line INS-1, although basal levels
were not affected. Rat insulin 1 (rINS1) promoter activity appeared to be
augmented in a cAMP-response element (CRE)-dependent manner as the effect of DMSO
was abolished following a mutation in the CRE of the rINS1 promoter. Also,
expression of a generic cAMP-driven reporter gene was enhanced by 1.5% DMSO in
response to GLP-1 (3.5-fold), forskolin (2-fold), and 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine
(2-fold). Analysis of intracellular signaling components revealed that DMSO did
not elevate cAMP levels, protein kinase A activity, or phosphorylated levels of
CRE-binding protein (CREB), CRE-modulator (CREM), and activating transcription
factor-1 (ATF-1). These data suggest that GLP-1 induces insulin gene
transcription in a CREB, CREM, and ATF-1-independent manner in beta-cells. The
mechanism by which DMSO imparts this amplifying action is unclear but may involve
redistribution of intracellular compartments or a direct molecular interaction
with a downstream target of the GLP-1 receptor signaling pathway in the
beta-cell. These effects of DMSO on incretin action may provide novel
applications with respect to further characterizing GLP-1 receptor signaling,
identifying incretin-like compounds in screening assays, and as a therapeutic
treatment in type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 12167488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2002 Jun;968:65-74.

Role of the PKA-regulated transcription factor CREB in development and
tumorigenesis of endocrine tissues.

Rosenberg D(1), Groussin L, Jullian E, Perlemoine K, Bertagna X, Bertherat J.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UPR1524, Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital Cochin,
Université Paris V, Paris, France.

The cAMP pathway plays a major role in the development of endocrine tissues and
various molecular defects of key components of this pathway (G protein,
receptors, PKA, etc.) have been observed in endocrine tumors. The ubiquitous
transcription factor CREB (cAMP-response element binding protein) binds to the
cAMP response element (CRE) and stimulates transcription after phosphorylation on
Ser(133) by PKA. The CREB family of transcription factors contains three members:
CREB, CREM, and ATF-1. Targeted expression of dominant-negative mutants of CREB
in transgenic mice leads to somatotrophs or thyroid hypoplasia. GH-secreting
adenomas are benign secreting tumors expressing an activated mutant G alpha s
protein (Gsp) in about 40% of cases. In GH-secreting adenomas CREB is always
expressed and often highly phosphorylated. The CREM isoform ICER is stimulated by
cAMP, and its expression is increased in Gsp-harboring tumors. After transfection
in pituitary somatotroph cells, activating mutations of Gs protein (Gsp) and
overexpression of wild-type G alpha S stimulate transcription of various
CRE-containing promoters via CREB in a Ser(133)-specific-dependent manner.
Activation of the cAMP pathway by ACTH is required for adrenal cortex (AdCx)
maintenance and steroidogenesis. CREB is expressed in normal AdCx. Alterations of
CRE binding proteins with loss of CREB expression and compensatory overexpression
of CREMtau is observed in the human adrenocortical cancer cell line H295R.
Similar alterations are found at the protein level in human malignant
adrenocortical tumors. In conclusion, the CREB family of transcription factors
plays an important role in the development, differentiation, and proliferation of
endocrine tissues. Various alterations of the CREB family of transcription
factors can be observed in endocrine tumors.

PMID: 12119268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Dev Cell. 2002 Jun;2(6):819-30.

miwi, a murine homolog of piwi, encodes a cytoplasmic protein essential for
spermatogenesis.

Deng W(1), Lin H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, P.O. Box 3709,
DUMC, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

The piwi family genes are crucial for stem cell self-renewal, RNA silencing, and 
translational regulation in diverse organisms. However, their function in mammals
remains unexplored. Here we report the cloning of a murine piwi gene (miwi)
essential for spermatogenesis. miwi encodes a cytoplasmic protein specifically
expressed in spermatocytes and spermatids. miwi(null) mice display spermatogenic 
arrest at the beginning of the round spermatid stage, resembling the phenotype of
CREM, a master regulator of spermiogenesis. Furthermore, mRNAs of ACT (activator 
of CREM in testis) and CREM target genes are downregulated in miwi(null) testes. 
Whereas MIWI and CREM do not regulate each other's expression, MIWI complexes
with mRNAs of ACT and CREM target genes. Hence, MIWI may control spermiogenesis
by regulating the stability of these mRNAs.

PMID: 12062093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2002 Feb 22;187(1-2):115-24.

The expanding family of CREB/CREM transcription factors that are involved with
spermatogenesis.

Don J(1), Stelzer G.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, 52900, Ramat Gan, Israel.
don@mail.biu.ac.il

One of the molecular mechanisms shown to have played a major role in
orchestrating the expression of the many genes with unique cellular and temporal 
specificity in spermatogenesis, is the cAMP-dependent signaling pathway. In this 
pathway, gene expression is mediated primarily by two members of the bZIP
transcription factors-cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB) and
cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM). Both bind a specific cis element,
cAMP-response element (CRE), in the promoter of target genes, both are activated 
by protein kinase A (PKA) phosphorylation that enables binding of CREB binding
protein (CBP) and recruitment of the basal transcription machinery, and both are 
characterized by multiple alternatively spliced forms. Some of these
alternatively spliced forms lack the transactivation domains and hence function
as transcription suppressors. In Sertoli cells, CREB levels fluctuate in a
cyclical manner that depends on the specific cell associations along the
spermatogenic wave. Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) activates the cAMP
signaling pathway and consequently, CREB positively auto-regulates its own
expression (by binding to a CRE like element in its promoter). Subsequently,
activated CREB activates transcription of genes essential for proper germ cell
differentiation. In addition, TNFalpha secreted by round spermatids, activates
NF-kappaB dependent CREB expression in Sertoli cells and thus, contributes to the
elevated CREB levels as long as these cells are intimately associated. Inducible 
cAMP early repressor (ICER), a suppressor isoform of CREM, also activated by
CREB, down regulates CREB expression together with its own expression, resetting 
CREB to basal level that enables a new spermatogenic wave. In germ cells,
antagonist forms of CREM (alpha, beta and gamma) are present in premeiotic cells 
and early prophase spermatocytes. A prominent switch to the CREMtau and
CREMtheta; activating forms starts in pachytene spermatocytes leading to the
activation of haploid genes important for spermiogenesis in round spermatids.
Interestingly, in germ cells, CREM exerts activation of haploid genes independent
of its phosphorylation state. It associates with activator of CREM in testis
(ACT), that has an intrinsic transcriptional activity, rather than with CBP.
These and other findings suggest that the expanding CREB/CREM proteins and
potentially other members of the CREB family are key molecular regulators at all 
stages of spermatogenesis.

PMID: 11988318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Neuroreport. 2002 Apr 16;13(5):707-11.

Biphasic developmental changes in Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent proteins in R6/2
Huntington's disease mice.

Deckel AW(1), Elder R, Fuhrer G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Connecticut Health Center, 263
Farmington Avenue, 06030-2103, USA.

Widespread disturbances in calcium-dependent proteins are reported both in humans
with advanced Huntington's disease (HD) and in symptomatic HD transgenic mice.
Using a HD mouse model transgenic for exon 1 of the abnormal gene (e.g. the Bates
R6/2 mouse), we found increased expression of calmodulin kinase IV and neuronal
nitric oxide synthase (NOS) in 3-week-old presymptomatic HD mice striatum and
cortex. Conversely, reduced expression was found at 6 weeks (early symptom onset)
and 11 weeks (advanced disease) of age. The changes in protein expression may
have a broad impact on the HD striatum. Calmodulin kinase IV directly regulates
the activation of the transcription factors CREB (cyclic AMP response element
binding protein) and CREM (cyclic AMP response element modulator) and, as well,
modulates the activity of neuronal NOS. In homeostasis, nitric oxide is involved 
in long-term potentiation, neurotransmission, endocrine regulation and cerebral
blood flow regulation, among others, while under pathological conditions nitric
oxide combines with superoxide to produce the potent neurotoxin peroxynitrite.
The current findings suggest that mutant HD protein may alter these processes by 
disturbing the regulation of calmodulin kinase IV and neuronal NOS expression
across the lifespan of the HD mouse.

PMID: 11973475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Exp Cell Res. 2002 May 1;275(2):143-54.

Coupling cAMP signaling to transcription in the liver: pivotal role of CREB and
CREM.

Servillo G(1), Della Fazia MA, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS-INSERM-Université Louis Pasteur, 1, rue Laurent Fries, Illkirch, 67404,
France.

Transcriptional factors binding to cAMP-responsive elements (CREs) in the
promoters of various genes belong to the basic domain-leucine zipper superfamily 
and are composed of three genes in mammals, CREB, CREM, and ATF-1. A large number
of CREB, CREM, and ATF-1 proteins are generated by posttranscriptional events,
mostly alternative splicing, and regulate gene expression by acting as activators
or repressors. Activation is classically brought about by signaling-dependent
phosphorylation of a key acceptor site (Ser133 in CREB) by a number of possible
kinases, including PKA, CamKIV, and Rsk-2. Phosphorylation is the prerequisite
for the interaction of CBP (CREB-binding protein), a co-activator that has also
histone acetyltransferase activity. Repression may involve dynamic
dephosphorylation of the activators and thus decreased association with CBP.
Another pathway of transcriptional repression on CRE sites implicates the
inducible repressor ICER (inducible cAMP early repressor), a product of the CREM 
gene. Being an inducible repressor, ICER is involved in autoregulatory feedback
loops of transcription that govern the down-regulation of early response genes,
such as the proto-oncogene c-fos. The liver represents a remarkable physiological
setting where cAMP-responsive signaling plays a major role. Indeed, a finely
tuned program of gene expression is triggered by partial hepatectomy, so that
through specific checkpoints a coordinated regeneration of the tissue is
obtained. Temporal kinetics of transcriptional activation after hepatectomy
reveals a pattern of early induction for several genes, some of them controlled
by the CREB/CREM transcription factors. An important role of CREM in liver
physiology was suggested by the robust induction of ICER after partial
hepatectomy. The delay in tissue regeneration in CREM-deficient mice confirmed
the important function of this factor in regulating hepatocyte proliferation. As 
gene induction is accompanied by critical changes in chromatin organization, the 
deciphering of the specific modification codes that histones display during liver
regeneration and physiology will provide exciting new insights into the dynamics 
of chromatin architecture.

PMID: 11969286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Nat Genet. 2002 May;31(1):47-54. Epub 2002 Apr 22.

Disruption of CREB function in brain leads to neurodegeneration.

Mantamadiotis T(1), Lemberger T, Bleckmann SC, Kern H, Kretz O, Martin Villalba
A, Tronche F, Kellendonk C, Gau D, Kapfhammer J, Otto C, Schmid W, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg,
Germany.

Control of cellular survival and proliferation is dependent on extracellular
signals and is a prerequisite for ordered tissue development and maintenance.
Activation of the cAMP responsive element binding protein (CREB) by
phosphorylation has been implicated in the survival of mammalian cells. To define
its roles in the mouse central nervous system, we disrupted Creb1 in brain of
developing and adult mice using the Cre/loxP system. Mice with a Crem(-/-)
background and lacking Creb in the central nervous system during development show
extensive apoptosis of postmitotic neurons. By contrast, mice in which both Creb1
and Crem are disrupted in the postnatal forebrain show progressive
neurodegeneration in the hippocampus and in the dorsolateral striatum. The
striatal phenotype is reminiscent of Huntington disease and is consistent with
the postulated role of CREB-mediated signaling in polyglutamine-triggered
diseases.

PMID: 11967539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Endocrinology. 2002 May;143(5):1578-88.

Atce1: a novel mouse cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate-responsive
element-binding protein-like gene exclusively expressed in postmeiotic
spermatids.

Stelzer G(1), Don J.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2002 May;143(5):1575-7.

Members of the ATF/CREB family of transcription factors are involved in gene
activation in various physiological systems ranging from metabolite homeostasis, 
through regulation of cell cycle, to learning and memory. Two members of this
family, cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB), and cAMP-responsive
element modulator (CREM) are active during mammalian spermatogenesis and are
required for this process, as has been shown by knockout and dominant negative
experiments. In an effort to identify mouse proteins that interact with the
testis-specific protein Tctex2, a mouse testis expression library was screened
via the two-hybrid system, using the carboxyl-terminal portion of this protein as
bait. A clone containing two overlapping open reading frames, related by a
frameshift of one nucleotide, was subsequently isolated. The peptide that
interacted with Tctex2 does not initiate from a consensus AUG codon, and it is
not clear whether it exists physiologically. However, the other reading frame,
initiating from an AUG codon, encodes a 315-amino acid peptide with significant
sequence homology to a subfamily of the CREB genes whose prototype is the mouse
LZIP peptide. This novel CREB-like peptide, designated Atce1, is specifically
expressed in the testis. A developmental study using Northern hybridization and
in situ hybridization analyses revealed that Atce1 transcripts begin to
accumulate in testes of mice 24 d after birth, reflecting expression in mid/late 
round spermatids. Interestingly, EMSAs revealed that in vitro translated Atce1
binds specifically to a nuclear factor-kappaB-binding element rather then to a
CRE element. Potential roles for Atce1 are discussed.

PMID: 11956138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Apr;87(4):1717-28.

Characterization and functional analysis of cAMP response element modulator
protein and activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) isoforms in the human
myometrium during pregnancy and labor: identification of a novel ATF2 species
with potent transactivation properties.

Bailey J(1), Phillips RJ, Pollard AJ, Gilmore K, Robson SC, Europe-Finner GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Newcastle upon Tyne,
Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 4LP, United Kingdom.
jarrod.bailey@ncl.ac.uk

There is now extensive evidence to indicate that components of the cAMP signaling
pathway are up-regulated in the human myometrium during pregnancy so as to
potentiate the maintenance of uterine quiescence until term. In many tissue and
cell types, increased signaling of the cAMP pathway results in profound changes
in gene expression that are catalyzed via stimulation of PKA and activation of
cAMP-dependent transcription factors that bind cAMP response elements (CREs)
within the promoter regions of affected genes. In the myometrium, these CRE
containing genes include beta2-adrenoceptor, cyclo-oxygenase 2, oxytocin
receptor, and connexin-43. In preliminary investigations, we reported the
differential expression of members of the cAMP bZIP protein family in the
myometrium during pregnancy and labor. In this present study, we have now
identified and functionally characterized these proteins with respect to
myometrial gene expression. We report the identification of a 39,000 mol wt CRE
response element modulator protein (CREM)tau2alpha protein having both
transactivation and transrepressor properties whose expression is sequentially
decreased in the myometrium during gestation and parturition. In contrast,
expression of a myometrial 28,000 mol wt CREMalpha protein having only
transrepressor actions progressively increased in the myometrium during pregnancy
and labor. Similarly, we have isolated two ATF2 proteins of 60,000 and 28,000 mol
wts, which represent full-length ATF2 and a novel small isoform of ATF2 that we
have termed ATF2-small (ATF2-sm). These proteins are potent transactivators of
gene expression and appear to be spatially expressed within the myometrium of the
upper and lower uterine regions. The identification and functional
characterization of these basic region/leucine zipper proteins in the myometrium 
may provide further insight into the molecular mechanisms regulating uterine
activity during fetal maturation and parturition.

PMID: 11932306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Eur J Neurosci. 2002 Mar;15(6):1048-60.

Forced swimming evokes a biphasic response in CREB phosphorylation in
extrahypothalamic limbic and neocortical brain structures in the rat.

Bilang-Bleuel A(1), Rech J, De Carli S, Holsboer F, Reul JM.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Section of Neuropsychopharmacology,
Kraepelinstrasse 2, D-80804 Munich, Germany.

The transcription factor cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) plays a
critical role in plasticity processes underlying learning and memory. We
investigated the phosphorylation of CREB in rat brain after forced swimming, a
stressor known to impact on higher limbic and neocortical brain areas. As shown
by immunohistochemistry, forced swimming increased phosphorylated CREB (P-CREB)
levels in the dentate gyrus, all neocortical areas, the medial, lateral and
basolateral nuclei of the amygdala, cerebellum but not in the hypothalamic
paraventricular nucleus. Distinct differences in the P-CREB pattern were observed
in the deeper vs. superficial layers of the neocortex. The response in P-CREB was
stressor type-specific because exposure to either ether or a cold environment was
ineffective. The forced swimming-induced changes in P-CREB levels showed a
biphasic time-course: an early peak detected at 15 min was followed by a marked
drop at 60 min; a second rise starting after 1-2 h, reached maximal values
between 6 and 8 h, and remained elevated for at least 48 h. Examination of the
neuroanatomical induction pattern of the CRE-inducible immediate early gene
product c-fos revealed that it was only partly overlapping with that of P-CREB.
Western analyses showed that only the 43-kDa CREB protein (an enhancer of
CRE-containing promotors) was phosphorylated after forced swimming, while other
members of the CREB/ATF family (CREM, ATF-1 and ATF-2) remained unaffected. The
NF-kappaB pathway was not activated, indicating that forced swimming does not
unspecifically evoke transcription factor activation. Thus, in contrast to
physical stressors, such as ether or cold exposure, forced swimming, a stressor
with a strong psychological component, elicits the recruitment of the CREB
pathway in a widespread manner in the limbic system and neocortex; brain regions 
known to be implicated in various forms of (stress-related) learning and memory.

PMID: 11918664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Hum Reprod. 2002 Mar;17(3):710-7.

The rate of aneuploidy is altered in spermatids from infertile mice.

Oppedisano L(1), Haines G, Hrabchak C, Fimia G, Elliott R, Sassone-Corsi P,
Varmuza S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Toronto, 25 Harbord St., Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M4S 3G5.

BACKGROUND: It is now possible for infertile males to father their own genetic
children through the technique of ICSI. This prospect has consequently prompted
several investigations into the quality of sperm being retrieved from infertile
males. One potential risk is the use of aneuploid sperm or spermatids, which
might then be transferred to the fertilized oocyte.
METHODS: In this investigation, aneuploidy of spermatids was assessed through
immunocytochemistry using antibodies directed against chromosome centromeric
regions and complexes. Three different types of infertile male mice with
phenotypes closely resembling those described in human non-obstructive
azoospermia [PP1cgamma-deficient mice, CREM-deficient mice and
C57BL/6J.MAC-17(0--23) mice] were examined for chromosome numbers by counting the
number of kinetochores in round spermatids using a CREST antiserum.
RESULTS: PP1cgamma(-/-) and CREM(-/-) spermatids from infertile mice showed
highly significant elevated levels in the rate of aneuploidy compared with
wild-type animals (P < 0.0001). Thus infertile males with independent genetic
mutations resulting in different histopathologies showed a high risk in the level
of aneuploidy in their spermatids.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that impaired spermatogenesis may lead to
production of aneuploid gametes. Analysis of aneuploidy in gametes from infertile
men, coupled with appropriate genetic counselling, is recommended prior to ICSI.

PMID: 11870125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Mar;22(6):1919-25.

Activating transcription factor 1 and CREB are important for cell survival during
early mouse development.

Bleckmann SC(1), Blendy JA, Rudolph D, Monaghan AP, Schmid W, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology of the Cell I, German Cancer Research Centre, 
Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Activating transcription factor 1 (ATF1), CREB, and the cyclic AMP (cAMP)
response element modulatory protein (CREM), which constitute a subfamily of the
basic leucine zipper transcription factors, activate gene expression by binding
as homo- or heterodimers to the cAMP response element in regulatory regions of
target genes. To investigate the function of ATF1 in vivo, we inactivated the
corresponding gene by homologous recombination. In contrast to CREB-deficient
mice, which suffer from perinatal lethality, mice lacking ATF1 do not exhibit any
discernible phenotypic abnormalities. Since ATF1 and CREB but not CREM are
strongly coexpressed during early mouse development, we generated mice deficient 
for both CREB and ATF1. ATF1(-/-) CREB(-/-) embryos die before implantation due
to developmental arrest. ATF1(+/-) CREB(-/-) embryos display a phenotype of
embryonic lethality around embryonic day 9.5 due to massive apoptosis. These
results indicate that CREB and ATF1 act in concert to mediate signals essential
for maintaining cell viability during early embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC135604
PMID: 11865068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Jan;16(1):184-99.

Regulation of steroidogenesis and the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein by a
member of the cAMP response-element binding protein family.

Manna PR(1), Dyson MT, Eubank DW, Clark BJ, Lalli E, Sassone-Corsi P, Zeleznik
AJ, Stocco DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, Texas 79430, USA.

The mitochondrial phosphoprotein, the steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR)
protein, is an essential component in the regulation of steroid biosynthesis in
adrenal and gonadal cells through cAMP-dependent pathways. In many cases
transcriptional induction by cAMP is mediated through the interaction of a cAMP
response-element binding protein (CREB) family member with a consensus cAMP
response element (CRE; 5'-TGACGTCA-3') found in the promoter of target genes. The
present investigation was carried out to determine whether a CRE-binding protein 
(CREB) family member [CREB/CRE modulator (CREM) family] was involved in the
regulation of steroidogenesis and StAR protein expression. Transient expression
of wild- type CREB in MA-10 mouse Leydig tumor cells further increased the levels
of (Bu)2cAMP-induced progesterone synthesis, StAR promoter activity, StAR mRNA,
and StAR protein. These responses were significantly inhibited by transfection
with a dominant-negative CREB (A-CREB), or with a CREB mutant that cannot be
phosphorylated (CREB-M1), the latter observation indicating the importance of
phosphorylation of a CREB/CREM family member in steroidogenesis and StAR
expression. The CREB/CREM-responsive region in the mouse StAR gene was located
between -110 and -67 bp upstream of the transcriptional start site. An
oligonucleotide probe (-96/-67 bp) containing three putative half-sites for
5'-canonical CRE sequences (TGAC) demonstrated the formation of protein-DNA
complexes in EMSAs with recombinant CREB protein as well as with nuclear extracts
from MA-10 or Y-1 mouse adrenal tumor cells. The predominant binding factor
observed with EMSA was found to be the CREM protein as demonstrated using
specific antibodies and RT-PCR analyses. The CRE elements identified within the
-96/-67 bp region were tested for cAMP responsiveness by generating mutations in 
each of the CRE half-sites either alone or in combination. Although each of the
CRE sites contribute in part to the CREM response, the CRE2 appears to be the
most important site as determined by EMSA and by reporter gene analyses. Binding 
specificity was further assessed using specific antibodies to CREB/CREM family
members, cold competitors, and mutations in the target sites that resulted in
either supershift and/or inhibition of these complexes. We also demonstrate that 
the inducible cAMP early repressor markedly diminished the endogenous effects of 
CREM on cAMP-induced StAR promoter activity and on StAR mRNA expression. These
are the first observations to provide evidence for the functional involvement of 
a CREB/CREM family member in the acute regulation of trophic hormone-stimulated
steroidogenesis and StAR gene expression.

PMID: 11773448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Nov;86(11):5443-9.

Variable expression of the transcription factors cAMP response element-binding
protein and inducible cAMP early repressor in the normal adrenal cortex and in
adrenocortical adenomas and carcinomas.

Peri A(1), Luciani P, Conforti B, Baglioni-Peri S, Cioppi F, Crescioli C,
Ferruzzi P, Gelmini S, Arnaldi G, Nesi G, Serio M, Mantero F, Mannelli M.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Unit, Department of Clinical Physiopathology, University of
Florence, 50139 Florence, Italy.

The molecular mechanisms leading to adrenocortical tumorigenesis have been only
partially elucidated so far. Because the pituitary hormone ACTH, via activation
of the cAMP pathway, regulates both cell proliferation/differentiation and
steroid synthesis in the adrenal cortex, in this study we focused on the
cAMP-dependent transcription factors cAMP responsive element modulator (CREM) and
cAMP responsive element binding protein (CREB). We studied CREM and CREB
expression by RT-PCR in human normal adrenal cortex (n = 3), adrenocortical
adenomas (n = 8), and carcinomas (n = 8). We found transcripts corresponding to
the isoforms alpha, beta, gamma, and tau2 of the CREM gene in all of the normal
adrenal tissues, in the adenomas, and in seven of eight carcinomas. On the other 
hand, mRNA for the inducible cAMP early repressor isoforms, which derive from an 
internal promoter of CREM gene, was detected in the normal adrenal and in seven
of eight adenomas, but in only three of eight carcinomas. Similarly, CREB
transcripts were readily detectable in all normal adrenals and adenomas, whereas 
they were not found in four of eight adrenal carcinomas. To further characterize 
the carcinomas, telomerase activity and the expression of the ACTH receptor gene 
were determined. Telomerase activity in the carcinomas resulted in levels
significantly higher than in the adenomas, whereas the levels of ACTH receptor
mRNA were lower in the carcinomas. No correlation was found in the carcinomas
between the levels of the ACTH receptor transcript and the loss of expression of 
CREB/inducible cAMP early repressor, suggesting that this alteration is not
secondary to an upstream disregulation at the receptor level. In conclusion, our 
results suggest that an alteration in cAMP signaling may be associated with
malignancies of the adrenal cortex.

PMID: 11701720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Dec;281(6):E1316-25.

Molecular mechanisms involved in gastrin-mediated regulation of cAMP-responsive
promoter elements.

Thommesen L(1), Hofsli E, Paulssen RH, Anthonsen MW, Laegreid A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biomedical Engineering, Norwegian University of
Science and Technology, N-7489 Trondheim, Norway.

In the present study, we explore the role of cAMP-responsive (CRE) promoter
elements in gastrin-mediated gene activation. By using the minimal CRE promoter
reporter plasmid, pCRELuc, we show that gastrin can activate CRE. This activation
is blocked by H-89 and GF 109203x, which inhibit protein kinases A and C,
respectively. Moreover, Ca(2+)-activated pathways seem to be involved, because
the calmodulin inhibitor W-7 reduced gastrin-mediated activation of pCRELuc.
Deletion of CRE from the c-fos promoter rendered this promoter completely
unresponsive to gastrin, indicating that CRE plays a central role in c-fos
transactivation. Interestingly, gastrin-induced expression of the inducible cAMP 
early repressor (ICER), a gene that is known to be regulated by CRE promoter
elements, was not reduced by H-89, W-7, or GF 109203x. Furthermore, bandshift
analyses indicated that the region of the ICER promoter containing the CRE-like
elements CARE 3-4 binds transcription factors that are not members of the
CRE-binding protein-CRE modulator protein-activating transcription factor, or
CREB/CREM/ATF-1, family. Our results underline the significance of the CRE
promoter element in gastrin-mediated gene regulation and indicate that a variety 
of signaling mechanisms are involved, depending on the CRE promoter context.

PMID: 11701448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol. 2001 Dec;67(6):926-33.

Cadmium uptake by Halimione portulacoides: an ecophysiological study.

Reboredo F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiological Resource Center (CREM), Biotechnology Unit, Faculty of
Sciences and Technology, New University of Lisbon, 2825-114 Caparica, Portugal.

PMID: 11692210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Nov;281(5):E931-7.

CaMKIV/Gr is dispensable for spermatogenesis and CREM-regulated transcription in 
male germ cells.

Blaeser F(1), Toppari J, Heikinheimo M, Yan W, Wallace M, Ho N, Chatila TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

The calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase type IV/Gr (CaMKIV/Gr) is
expressed in male germ cells and spermatids and has been implicated in
controlling the differentiation of germ cells into mature spermatozoa. The
function of CaMKIV/Gr in spermatogenesis was investigated using
CaMKIV/Gr-deficient mice generated by targeted gene disruption.
CaMKIV/Gr-deficient males exhibited normal spermatogenesis, and their fertility
was similar to that of wild-type littermates. Notwithstanding the function of
CaMKIV/Gr as an activator of cAMP response element (CRE)-dependent transcription,
mRNA levels of several testis-specific CRE modulator (CREM)-regulated genes were 
unaltered. These results indicate that CaMKIV/Gr is not essential for
spermatogenesis or for CRE-regulated gene transcription in the testis.

PMID: 11595648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 7;276(49):45530-8. Epub 2001 Sep 19.

Critical roles of a cyclic AMP responsive element and an E-box in regulation of
mouse renin gene expression.

Pan L(1), Black TA, Shi Q, Jones CA, Petrovic N, Loudon J, Kane C, Sigmund CD,
Gross KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York 14263, USA.

Mouse As4.1 cells, obtained after transgene-targeted oncogenesis to induce
neoplasia in renal renin expressing cells, express high levels of renin mRNA from
their endogenous Ren-1(c) gene. We have previously identified a 242-base pair
enhancer (coordinates -2866 to -2625 relative to the CAP site) upstream of the
mouse Ren-1(c) gene. This enhancer, in combination with the proximal promoter
(-117 to +6), activates transcription nearly 2 orders of magnitude in an
orientation independent fashion. To further delimit sequences necessary for
transcriptional activation, renin promoter-luciferase reporter gene constructs
containing selected regions of the Ren-1(c) enhancer were analyzed after
transfection into As4.1 cells. These results demonstrate that several regions are
required for full enhancer activity. Sequences from -2699 to -2672, which are
critical for the enhancer activity, contain a cyclic AMP responsive element (CRE)
and an E-box. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated that
transcription factors CREB/CREM and USF1/USF2 in As4.1 cell nuclear extracts bind
to oligonucleotides containing the Ren-1(c) CRE and E-box, respectively. These
two elements are capable of synergistically activating transcription from the
Ren-1(c) promoter. Moreover, mutation of either the CRE or E-box results in
almost complete loss of enhancer activity, suggesting the critical roles these
two elements play in regulating mouse Ren-1(c) gene expression. Although the
Ren-1(c) gene contains a CRE, its expression is not induced by cAMP in As4.1
cells. This appears to reflect constitutive activation of protein kinase A in
As4.1 cells since treatment with the protein kinase A inhibitor, H-89, caused a
significant reduction in Ren-1(c) gene expression and this reduction is mediated 
through the CRE at -2699 to -2688.

PMID: 11564732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. J Adolesc Health. 2001 Sep;29(3 Suppl):93-100.

Contraceptive choices in HIV infected and HIV at-risk adolescent females.

Belzer M(1), Rogers AS, Camarca M, Fuchs D, Peralta L, Tucker D, Durako SJ;
Adolescent Medicine HIV/AIDS Research Network.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Los Angeles, Division of Adolescent Medicine, Los
Angeles, California 90054-0700, USA.

PURPOSE: To describe reported contraception use in HIV infected and HIV
uninfected but at-risk female adolescents, and determine associations with the
reported consistent use of effective contraception methods, including its
association with pregnancy.
METHODS: HIV infected and at-risk female youth, aged 13-18 years, who were
sexually active and reporting no intention to become pregnant, were included.
Contraception use data from three consecutive visits (approximately 6 months
apart) were used.
RESULTS: Ninety-four percent of HIV infected and 89% of at-risk subjects reported
choosing a main contraception method with demonstrated efficacy when used
consistently. Approximately 50% chose partner condoms. HIV infected youth were
more likely to report 100% partner condom use in the past 3 months (73% vs. 46%; 
OR 3.3; 95% CI: 1.7-5.6). At-risk youth were 2.5 times more likely than HIV
infected subjects to report using nothing (95% CI: 1.1-5.8). Slightly more than
half (56%) demonstrated the consistent reporting of effective methods (CREM) of
contraception. In multivariate analysis, HIV infection (OR 4.0; 95% CI: 2.2-8.2) 
and African-American race (OR 2.7; 95% CI: 1.1-6.6) were significantly associated
with CREM. Subjects reporting inconsistent or unreliable contraception use had
higher 1-year pregnancy rates than CREM subjects (32% vs. 14%; p = .002).
CONCLUSIONS: Only half of HIV infected and at-risk youth reported using effective
contraception consistently, despite its availability. Additionally, regardless of
reported contraceptive use, the rates of unplanned pregnancy were unacceptably
high.

PMID: 11530309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Cell Biochem. 2001 Jun 26-Jul 25;83(1):155-62.

Assessment of promoter elements of the germ cell-specific proacrosin gene.

Schulten HJ(1), Nayernia K, Reim K, Engel W, Burfeind P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Göttingen, Heinrich-Düker-Weg 12,
D-37073 Göttingen, Germany.

The testis-specific proacrosin gene encodes for a fertilization-promoting
protein. In mouse and rat it is first transcribed in late pachytene spermatocytes
and revealed to be translationally regulated. Former proacrosin promoter studies 
demonstrated that elements necessary for conducting a stage and temporal-specific
expression of the gene are located within 0.9 kb upstream of the translational
start codon. In the present study we analyzed putative cis-acting elements
located in this promoter region for their specific binding properties to nuclear 
factors assumed to be involved in proacrosin gene regulation. Supplement of
specific antibodies in electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) revealed that
two Y-box proteins and the transcription factors CREM and YY1 interact with
proacrosin promoter elements. The Y-box proteins, antigenically related to the
frog Y-box proteins FRGY1 and FRGY2, bound to the Y-box (55-66 bp upstream of the
ATG initiation codon) in brain and testis nuclear extracts, respectively. CREM
bound to three elements (30-37, 252-259, and 717-724 bp upstream of ATG). The
ubiquitous transcription factor YY1 bound to a conserved element in the central
proacrosin promoter (457-473 bp upstream of ATG) and showed almost germ
cell-specific truncates in EMSA. These results suggest that the identified
factors are involved in proacrosin gene regulation.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11500964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2001 Oct;33(10):1027-39.

The closely related POU family transcription factors Brn-3a and Brn-3b are
expressed in distinct cell types in the testis.

Budhram-Mahadeo V(1), Moore A, Morris PJ, Ward T, Weber B, Sassone-Corsi P,
Latchman DS.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Molecular Biology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College 
London, 30 Guilford Street, WC1N 1EH, London, UK.

Although the Brn-3a and Brn-3b POU family transcription factors were originally
identified in neuronal cells, their expression in some non neuronal cell types
has previously been reported. Here we report that Brn-3a and Brn-3b are also
expressed in the testis with expression of each factor being observed at distinct
stages of germ cell development. Thus, Brn-3a is expressed in spermatogonia
whereas Brn-3b expression is observed in post-meiotic spermatids. In agreement
with this, Brn-3a expression is detectable much earlier than that of Brn-3b in
testes derived from sexually immature postnatal animals. Similarly, Brn-3b
expression is absent in knock out mice lacking a functional CREM transcription
factor in which the later stages of germ cell development do not occur, whereas
Brn-3a expression is observed at similar levels in the testes of these knock out 
mice. Interestingly, the cellular pattern of Brn-3a expression during germ cell
development coincides with that of the BRCA-1 anti-oncogene. Consistent with the 
possibility that Brn-3a may regulate expression of BRCA-1 in the testis, we have 
shown that Brn-3a can strongly activate the BRCA-1 promoter in co-transfection
experiments whereas Brn-3b does not have this effect. Hence, as observed in
neuronal cells, Brn-3a and Brn-3b may play distinct and important functional
roles in the regulation of gene expression during germ cell development.

PMID: 11470235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Water Sci Technol. 2001;43(12):99-102.

Occurrence of Legionella in groundwater: an ecological study.

Riffard S(1), Douglass S, Brooks T, Springthorpe S, Filion LG, Sattar SA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research on Environmental Microbiology (CREM), Faculty of Medicine,
University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8M5.
sriffard@uottawa.ca

The natural habitat of Legionella is the water environment. Little is known about
their presence in groundwater in spite of the fact that many millions around the 
globe regularly rely on groundwaters. This pilot study was aimed at evaluating
the occurrence of Legionella in groundwater samples (water and biofilms)
collected from various sites. Water and biofilm samples from selected groundwater
sources were examined for Legionella using culture media (selective and
non-selective) and a semi-nested PCR assay. Innovative approaches such as
immunomagnetic separation (IMS) in combination with cultivation and flow
cytometry were also evaluated. The findings available thus far show that (a)
Legionella could be readily recovered from groundwater samples by cultivation
even though their numbers showed considerable variations, (b) surprisingly, the
PCR methodology was not yet as sensitive as cultivation and (c) flow cytometry
was not directly applicable on natural samples because of debris and the high
number of heterotrophic associated microflora from which some members were likely
to cross-react with the monoclonal antibody used for separation procedures (IMS).

PMID: 11464778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Mol Cell. 2001 Mar;7(3):509-15.

Late arrest of spermiogenesis and germ cell apoptosis in mice lacking the
TBP-like TLF/TRF2 gene.

Martianov I(1), Fimia GM, Dierich A, Parvinen M, Sassone-Corsi P, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch, C.U. de Strasbourg, France.

Metazoan genomes encode two related proteins, TBP and the TBP-like factor
(TLF/TRF2), sharing a highly conserved saddle-like domain. TLF is highly
expressed in a finely regulated pattern in the mouse testis during
spermatogenesis. The murine TLF gene has been inactivated using homologous
recombination. TLF-/- mice are viable, but mutant male mice are sterile due to a 
late, complete arrest of spermiogenesis. In mutant animals, spermatogonia and
spermatocytes develop normally, but round spermatids undergo apoptosis at step 7.
Although the expression of the transcriptional activator CREM and many other
postmeiotic genes was unaltered in TLF null mice, several spermiogenesis genes
transcribed in late round spermatids appeared to be under TLF control. Hence, TLF
is not required for embryonic development in the mouse but is essential for
spermiogenesis.

PMID: 11463376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. J Neurosci Res. 2001 Jul 15;65(2):91-9.

CREM and ICER are differentially implicated in trans-synaptic induction of
tyrosine hydroxylase gene expression in adrenal medulla and sympathetic ganglia
of rat.

Trocmé C(1), Ravassard P, Sassone-Corsi P, Mallet J, Biguet NF.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR9923, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire de la Neurotransmission et 
des Processus Neurodégénératifs, Hôpital de la Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France.

Reserpine treatment leads to a trans-synaptic increase of the tyrosine
hydroxylase (TH) gene transcription rate, mRNA and protein levels in
catecholaminergic tissues including the adrenal medulla (AM) and the superior
cervical ganglia (SCG). The TPA-responsive element plays an important role in the
trans-synaptically-induced transcription of the TH gene in the AM, whereas it
does not appear to be involved in the SCG (Trocmé et al. [1997] J. Neurosci. Res.
48:489-498). In this study, we show that another regulatory sequence of the TH
proximal promoter, the cAMP-responsive element (CRE), binds different factors in 
the AM and in the SCG. To elucidate the dynamics of promoter regulation a
complete time course analysis was conducted. Reserpine treatment enhances,
between 1 hr and 8 hr after the injection, the expression and the binding of the 
repressor ICER in the AM, whereas in the SCG it enhances the binding of CREM
factors. These results suggest that the mechanisms mediating trans-synaptic
induction of the TH gene are different in the AM and SCG. The interplay between
positive and negative transcription factors and their kinetics of action are
responsive of the long-term regulation of the TH gene.

PMID: 11438978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2001 Jun 20;179(1-2):17-23.

Transcriptional cascades during spermatogenesis: pivotal role of CREM and ACT.

Fimia GM(1), Morlon A, Macho B, De Cesare D, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS-INSERM-Université Louis Pasteur, B.P. 163, Illkirch, 67404 Strasbourg,
France.

The gene CREM plays key physiological and developmental roles within the
hypothalamic--pituitary--gonadal axis. We have previously shown that CREM is
highly expressed in male postmeiotic cells. Spermiogenesis is a complex process
by which postmeiotic male germ cells differentiate into mature spermatozoa. CREM 
regulates the expression of a number of post-meiotic genes involved in the
process of spermiogenesis. Using homologous recombination we have generated
CREM-mutant mice that display a complete block at the first step of
spermiogenesis. The molecular mechanism by which CREM elicits its regulatory
function involves ACT (Activator of CREM in Testis), a testis-specific
coactivator constituted by a repeat of four and half LIM domains. ACT is
coordinately expressed with CREM, associates with it and confers a powerful
transcriptional activation function. It is able to bypass the classical
requirement of CREM phosphorylation and recruiting of CBP.

PMID: 11420126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Jun 15;29(12):E56-6.

A single vector containing modified cre recombinase and LOX recombination
sequences for inducible tissue-specific amplification of gene expression.

Kaczmarczyk SJ(1), Green JE.

Author information: 
(1)Transgenic Oncogenesis Group, Laboratory of Cell Regulation and
Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The selective alteration of the genome using Cre recombinase to target the
rearrangement of genes flanked by LOX recognition sequences has required the use 
of two separate genetic constructs in trans, one containing cre and the other
containing the gene of interest flanked by LOX sites. We have developed a
strategy in which both the cre recombinase gene and LOX recombination sites may
be cloned within a single vector in cis. This method uses a modified form of Cre 
(CREM) that contains alterations to the 5' region including the introduction of a
Kozak consensus sequence and insertion of a functional intron. This system allows
for the inducible, tissue-specific activation or inactivation of gene expression 
in a single vector and can be utilized for the 300-fold amplification of gene
expression from a weak promoter. This approach can be applied to targeting
strategies for generating genetically altered mice and gene therapy.

PMCID: PMC55755
PMID: 11410679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Int J Androl. 2001 Jun;24(3):126-35.

cAMP response element modulator (CREM): an essential factor for spermatogenesis
in primates?

Behr R(1), Weinbauer GF.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Department of Genetics,
Clinical Research Building, Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, USA.

CREM is a cAMP-related transcription factor and alternate promotor usage and
splicing generate repressor and activator transcripts of CREM within the testis. 
CREM activators are highly expressed in post-meiotic haploid germ cells and are
essential for spermatid maturation in the mouse model as revealed by
gene-targeting studies. Analysis of testicular CREM expression in rodent and
monkey species, and in men yielded a highly comparable pattern thus suggesting
that CREM is of general importance for spermatid development in the mammalian
testis. Also, many CREM target genes have been identified in haploid germ cells. 
Studies in men with spermatogenic disturbance and spermatid maturation arrest
demonstrated abnormal CREM expression and altered splicing events. Collectively, 
the data strongly argue for an essential role of CREM during spermatid maturation
in primates.

PMID: 11380701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Gene. 2001 May 2;268(1-2):141-51.

Identification of a novel DNA regulatory element in the rabbit surfactant protein
B (SP-B) promoter that is a target for ATF/CREB and AP-1 transcription factors.

Berhane K(1), Boggaram V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Health Science Center
at Tyler, Tyler, TX 75708-3154, USA.

Surfactant protein B (SP-B) is required for the maintenance of biophysical
properties and physiological function of pulmonary surfactant. SP-B is expressed 
in a cell/tissue-specific manner by the alveolar type II and bronchiolar (Clara) 
epithelial cells of the lung and is developmentally and hormonally regulated. We 
previously identified a minimal promoter region containing -236/+39 base pairs
(bp) of rabbit SP-B gene that is necessary and sufficient for high level promoter
activity in NCI-H441 cells, a cell line with characteristics of Clara cells. In
this study, we have characterized the functional importance of a novel DNA
regulatory element, termed SP-B CRE, with the sequence TGAGGTCA in the SP-B
minimal promoter. The SP-B CRE sequence shared homology to cyclic AMP responsive 
element (CRE) binding sequence and contained an overlapping nuclear receptor
element binding half-site. Mutation of SP-B CRE into a scrambled sequence reduced
promoter activity by greater than 70%, whereas mutation into a palindromic
consensus CRE increased the promoter activity by 100%. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA) and Western immunoblot analysis of affinity purified proteins 
interacting with SP-B CRE showed that it is a target for binding of members of
the activating transcription factor (ATF)/cyclic AMP response element binding
protein (CREB) family of transcription factors, such as CREB, CREM, ATF-1, ATF-2 
as well as c-Jun and TTF-1. Overexpression of CREB, ATF-2 and c-Jun inhibited
SP-B promoter activity in NCI-H441 cells. These data have shown that members of
the ATF/CREB family of transcription factors and c-Jun play important roles in
mediating the transcriptional regulation of the SP-B gene.

PMID: 11368910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Craniofac Genet Dev Biol. 2000 Oct-Dec;20(4):173-82.

Secalonic acid D alters the expression and phosphorylation of the transcription
factors and their binding to cAMP response element in developing murine secondary
palate.

Umesh H(1), Ganesh B, Reddy CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biomedical Sciences, University of Missouri,
Columbia, USA.

Secalonic acid D (SAD), a cleft palate-inducing mycotoxin, reduces palatal cyclic
AMP (cAMP) levels. cAMP relays its signals via the transcription factors (TF)
such as cAMP response element (CRE) binding protein (CREB), CRE modulator (CREM) 
and activator transcription factor-1 (ATF-1) to CRE-containing genes. These
studies tested the hypothesis that these TF are present and functional in the
developing palate and that SAD alters their expression and function along with
that of the CRE-containing gene, proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA).
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA), using nuclear extracts of control
and SAD-treated developing palate tissues and 32P-labeled CRE revealed the
formation of a DNA-protein complex. Supershift/ablation assays with TF antibodies
showed the presence of CREB, CREM and another unidentified TF but not ATF-1 in
the complex. Western analyses of the DNA-protein complex from preparative EMSA
revealed increased binding of CREB to CRE in direct correlation with increase in 
phospho-CREB (pCREB) in the controls. Exposure to SAD significantly reduced CREB 
binding throughout palate development. This was in correlation with reductions in
pCREB levels on gestational day (GD) 13 and 14 palates. On GD 12, however, SAD
dramatically increased CREB phosphorylation. The ontogeny of palatal CREB and
CREM (several isoforms) expression remained unchanged in controls whereas SAD
increased that of the repressor isoform of CREM. The expression of PCNA was
inhibited by SAD on GD 12. These results show that the cAMP signaling pathway is 
functional in the palate and that SAD alters CREB phosphorylation and inhibits
its binding to CRE. leading to altered expression of genes involved in cell
proliferation, an event critical for normal palate development.

PMID: 11354513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 May 4;283(2):406-11.

Cloning and expression of activator of CREM in testis in human testicular tissue.

Palermo I(1), Litrico L, Emmanuele G, Giuffrida V, Sassone-Corsi P, De Cesare D, 
Maria Fimia G, D'Agata R, Calogero AE, Travali S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Master in
Andrological Sciences: New Methodologies in Human Reproductive Medicine,
University of Catania, Italy.

Activator of cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) in testis (ACT) has
recently been found in the mouse testis where it activates CREM, a transcription 
factor essential for the differentiation of spermatids into mature spermatozoa.
The importance of CREM in human spermatogenesis prompted us to examine whether
ACT was also present in the human testis. Western blot analysis, performed with
an anti-mouse ACT serum, showed the presence of a single immunoreactive band of a
size similar to murine ACT. A library screening resulted in the isolation and
characterization of the complete cDNA which showed 88% homology with the mouse
counterpart. The human ACT gene is composed of five coding exons, being the first
untranslated, and the mRNA spans 835 nucleotides coding for a 284 amino acid
protein. Expression studies by RT-PCR confirmed that ACT is present in normal
human testis. The human ACT gene is localized on the chromosome 6.

PMID: 11327716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Immunol. 2001 Mar 15;166(6):4216-22.

Molecular basis of deficient IL-2 production in T cells from patients with
systemic lupus erythematosus.

Solomou EE(1), Juang YT, Gourley MF, Kammer GM, Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, 
Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a multifactorial autoimmune disease
characterized by diverse cellular and biochemical aberrations, including
decreased production of IL-2. Here we show that nuclear extracts from
unstimulated SLE T cells, unlike extracts from normal T cells, express increased 
amounts of phosphorylated cAMP-responsive element modulator (p-CREM) that binds
the -180 site of the IL-2 promoter. Nuclear extracts from stimulated normal T
cells display increased binding of phosphorylated cAMP-responsive element binding
protein (p-CREB) to the -180 site of the IL-2 promoter, whereas nuclear extracts 
from stimulated SLE T cells display primarily p-CREM and decreased p-CREB
binding. In SLE T cells, p-CREM bound to the transcriptional coactivators, CREB
binding protein and p300. Increased expression of p-CREM correlated with
decreased production of IL-2. The transcription of a reporter gene driven by the 
-180 site was enhanced in normal T cells, but was suppressed in SLE T cells.
These experiments demonstrate that transcriptional repression is responsible for 
the decreased production of IL-2 by SLE T cells.

PMID: 11238674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Biochem J. 2001 Feb 15;354(Pt 1):169-77.

As the proliferation promoter noradrenaline induces expression of ICER (induced
cAMP early repressor) in proliferative brown adipocytes, ICER may not be a
universal tumour suppressor.

Thonberg H(1), Lindgren EM, Nedergaard J, Cannon B.

Author information: 
(1)The Wenner-Gren Institute, The Arrhenius Laboratories F3, Stockholm
University, SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden.

The CREM (cAMP-response-element modulator) gene product ICER (induced cAMP early 
repressor) has been proposed to function as a tumour (cell proliferation)
suppressor. To investigate the generality of this concept, the expression pattern
of ICER in brown adipocytes was followed; this was critical because brown
adipocytes are one of few cell types in which cAMP is associated positively with 
cell proliferation but negatively with apoptosis. In response to the
physiological stimulus of cold (which induces cell proliferation), ICER mRNA
levels were increased in brown adipose tissue in vivo. In brown adipocytes in
primary culture, ICER gene expression was induced by noradrenaline
(norepinephrine) not only in the mature state (where noradrenaline potentiates
differentiation), but also in the proliferative state of the cell cultures (where
noradrenaline enhances cell proliferation). The induction was mediated via
beta-receptors and the cAMP/protein kinase A pathway. The induced ICER appeared
to repress its own expression and that of the beta2-adrenoceptor. It is thus
evident that also in cell types in which cAMP induces proliferation, and even
when these cells are in the proliferative state, ICER expression is induced by
the same agents that stimulate proliferation. This can either mean that ICER is
not a general tumour suppressor, or that brown adipocytes temporally or spatially
avoid this role of ICER.

PMCID: PMC1221641
PMID: 11171092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 13;276(15):11719-28. Epub 2000 Dec 27.

Consensus and variant cAMP-regulated enhancers have distinct CREB-binding
properties.

Craig JC(1), Schumacher MA, Mansoor SE, Farrens DL, Brennan RG, Goodman RH.

Author information: 
(1)Vollum Institute and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon 
Health Sciences University, Portland, Oregon 97201-3098, USA.

Recent determination of the cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) basic
leucine zipper (bZIP) consensus CRE crystal structure revealed key dimerization
and DNA binding features that are conserved among members of the CREB/CREM/ATF-1 
family of transcription factors. Dimerization appeared to be mediated by a
Tyr(307)-Glu(312) interhelical hydrogen bond and a Glu(319)-Arg(314)
electrostatic interaction. An unexpected hexahydrated Mg(2+) ion was centered
above the CRE in the dimer cavity. In the present study, we related these
features to CREB dimerization and DNA binding. A Y307F substitution reduced dimer
stability and DNA binding affinity, whereas a Y307R mutation produced a
stabilizing effect. Mutation of Glu(319) to Ala or Lys attenuated dimerization
and DNA binding. Mg(2+) ions enhanced the binding affinity of wild-type CREB to
the palindromic CRE by approximately 20-fold but did not do so for divergent
CREs. Similarly, mutation of Lys(304), which mediates the CREB interaction with
the hydrated Mg(2+), blocked CREB binding to the palindromic but not the variant 
CRE sequences. The distinct binding characteristics of the K304A mutants to the
consensus and variant CRE sequences indicate that CREB binding to these elements 
is differentially regulated by Mg(2+) ions. We suggest that CREB binds the
consensus and variant CRE sequences through fundamentally distinct mechanisms.

PMID: 11134034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Mol Cell Biochem. 2000 Sep;212(1-2):51-60.

Regulation of tyrosine hydroxylase gene transcription by the cAMP-signaling
pathway: involvement of multiple transcription factors.

Lim J(1), Yang C, Hong SJ, Kim KS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Belmont, MA 02478, USA.

The conversion of L-tyrosine to 3,4-dihydroxy-L-phenylalanine by tyrosine
hydroxylase (TH) is the first and rate-limiting step in biosynthesis of
catecholamine neurotransmitters. TH gene expression is regulated in a cell
type-specific and cAMP-dependent manner. Evidence from this laboratory and others
indicates that the cAMP response element (CRE), residing at -45 to -38 bp
upstream of the transcription initiation site, is essential for both basal and
cAMP-inducible transcription of the TH gene. To understand the control mechanisms
of TH gene transcription in greater detail, we sought to identify and
characterize the transcription factors involved in recognition and activation of 
the CRE of the TH gene. Remarkably, electrophoretic mobility shift assay and
antibody supershift experiments indicated that all three major CRE-binding
protein factors, i.e. CREB, ATF1, and CREM, may participate in forming specific
DNA/protein complexes with the CRE of the TH gene. To address the transcriptional
activation function of individual factors, we replaced the TH CRE with a
GAL4-binding site and cotransfected this modified TH promoter-reporter gene with 
an effector plasmid that encodes GAL4-fused transcription factor. Our results
indicate that CREB but not ATF1 can support basal promoter activity while both
can robustly induce the promoter activity in response to co-expression of the
catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). We further show that
the coactivator CBP up-regulates PKA-mediated activation of the TH promoter and, 
if tethered to the TH promoter by a GAL4-fusion, can robustly transactivate the
TH promoter even in the absence of PKA. Collectively, our results suggest that
multiple CRE-binding factors interact with the CRE and regulate, in conjunction
with the coactivator CBP, the transcriptional activity of the TH gene.

PMID: 11108136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Mol Cell Biochem. 2000 Sep;212(1-2):5-9.

Mechanisms of transcriptional activation of cAMP-responsive element-binding
protein CREB.

Haus-Seuffert P(1), Meisterernst M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Immunology, Department for Proteinbiochemistry, GSF
München, Germany.

The CREB-CREM transcription factors are the main gene regulatory effectors of the
cAMP signaling pathway. The investigations of this family of transcription
factors had a profound impact on the understanding of signaling-induced gene
transcription. Here we discuss some key aspects of the underlying biology, review
transcriptional activation by CREB proteins through transcription cofactors and
present novel insights into the context- and position-specific function of CREB
on complex genes.

PMID: 11108130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2000 Dec 1;169(2):142-50.

Secalonic acid D alters the nature of and inhibits the binding of the
transcription factors to the phorbol 12-O-tetradecanoate-13 acetate-response
element in the developing murine secondary palate.

Balasubramanian G(1), Hanumegowda U, Reddy CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biomedical Sciences, University of Missouri,
Columbia, Missouri 65211, USA.

Secalonic acid D (SAD), a mycotoxin produced by Penicillium oxalicum in corn,
induces cleft palate (CP) in the offspring of exposed dams. Results of recent
studies suggest that protein kinase C (PKC) inhibition by SAD may be relevant to 
its CP-induction. Downstream effects of PKC are determined by the nature of
transcription factors (TF) that form the activator protein-1 (AP-1) and the
binding of AP-1 (and other TF) to the phorbol 12-O-tetradecanoate-13
acetate-response element (TRE) to form AP-1-TRE complex, neither of which have
been studied in the palate. The aims of the present study were to identify the
components of the murine palatal AP-1-TRE complex during development and to
uncover the effects of SAD on this complex. Western blots and gel mobility shift 
assays of control palatal nuclear extracts revealed that, although all relevant
TF are present in the palate throughout development, only cyclic-AMP response
element (CRE) binding protein (CREB) and CRE-modulator protein-1 (CREM-1) and
activating transcription factor-1 bound to TRE on Gestation Day (GD) 12. The
pattern shifted to c-Jun and c-Fos (known AP-1 components) on GD 13 and 14. In
SAD-treated offspring, however, CREM-1 alone; c-Jun, c-Fos, and CREB; and c-Jun
and c-Fos bound to TRE on GD 12, 13, and 14, respectively. Binding of TF to TRE
was inhibited by SAD on both GD 12 and 13. These results suggest that a dynamic
shift in the binding of TF to TRE from PKA- to PKC-responsive TF occurs during
palate development and that teratogens such as SAD can alter both the nature and 
extent of TF binding to TRE.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11097866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Dec;20(24):9120-6.

DREAM-alphaCREM interaction via leucine-charged domains derepresses downstream
regulatory element-dependent transcription.

Ledo F(1), Carrión AM, Link WA, Mellström B, Naranjo JR.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento Biología Molecular y Celular, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología,
CSIC, Madrid, Spain.

Protein kinase A-dependent derepression of the human prodynorphin gene is
regulated by the differential occupancy of the Dyn downstream regulatory element 
(DRE) site. Here, we show that a direct protein-protein interaction between DREAM
and the CREM repressor isoform, alphaCREM, prevents binding of DREAM to the DRE
and suggests a mechanism for cyclic AMP-dependent derepression of the
prodynorphin gene in human neuroblastoma cells. Phosphorylation in the
kinase-inducible domain of alphaCREM is not required for the interaction, but
phospho-alphaCREM shows higher affinity for DREAM. The interaction with alphaCREM
is independent of the Ca(2+)-binding properties of DREAM and is governed by
leucine-charged residue-rich domains located in both alphaCREM and DREAM. Thus,
our results propose a new mechanism for DREAM-mediated derepression that can
operate independently of changes in nuclear Ca(2+).

PMCID: PMC102170
PMID: 11094064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Endocrinology. 2000 Nov;141(11):3923-30.

Novel cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP) response element modulator
theta isoforms expressed by two newly identified cAMP-responsive promoters active
in the testis.

Daniel PB(1), Rohrbach L, Habener JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114,
USA.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2000 Nov;141(11):3921-2.

cAMP signaling contributes to the control of the developmental progression of
germ cells during the spermatogenic cycle. Genes regulated by cAMP include those 
encoding transcription factors such as the cAMP-responsive element modulator
(CREM). The disruption of CREM gene expression in crem null mice results in
arrest of spermatogenesis and infertility. The transcriptional control of the
CREM gene is attributed to two promoters, P1 and P2. The P1 promoter
constitutively activates the synthesis of messenger RNAs encoding activator (tau)
and repressor (alpha) forms of CREM, whereas the cAMP-responsive P2 promoter
activates the formation of messenger RNAs encoding the inducible cAMP early
repressor. Here we report the identification of two additional promoters in the
CREM gene, P3 and P4, that in the rat testis encode two novel transcriptional
activator CREM isoforms, termed CREM theta1 and CREM theta2, respectively.
Notably, the P3 and P4 promoters are activated by cAMP-dependent protein kinase, 
thereby providing cAMP-regulated transcription of CREM activators in addition to 
the established cAMP-regulated inducible cAMP early repressor. Analysis ex vivo
of CREM gene expression in temporally staged segments of the seminiferous tubule 
during the spermatogenic cycle shows that the activities of the P1, P3, and P4
promoters are independently regulated. Our identification of the cAMP-activated
P3 and P4 promoters that direct expression of the novel theta1 and theta2
activator isoforms of CREM brings further insight into the complex expression of 
the CREM gene during germ cell development and may have implications in
understanding the control of fertility.

PMID: 11089521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. J Endocrinol Invest. 2000 Oct;23(9):592-6.

CREM, a master-switch of the transcriptional cascade in male germ cells.

De Cesare D(1), Fimia GM, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS-INSERM,
Université Louis Pasteur, Illkirch, Strasbourg, France.

In eukaryotes, transcriptional regulation upon stimulation of the adenylyl
cyclase signalling pathway is mediated by a family of cAMP-responsive nuclear
factors. The CREB and CREM transcription factors are activated by phosphorylation
of a key serine residue by kinase stimulated by cyclic AMP, calcium, growth
factors and stress signals. Phosphorylation allows recruitment of CBP (CREB
Binding Protein), a large co-activator that contacts the general transcriptional 
machinery. The CREM gene plays a key physiological and developmental role within 
the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. CREM is highly expressed in postmeiotic 
cells upon a striking developmental switch regulated by the pituitary hormone
FSH. CREM-mutant mice generated by homologous recombination reveal that
spermatogenesis stops at the first step of spermiogenesis. Late spermatids are
completely absent while there is a significant increase in apoptotic germ cells. 
Mutant male mice completely lack spermatozoa, a phenotype reminiscent of cases of
human infertility. Interestingly, in male germ cells, CREM is not phosphorylated 
but associates with ACT, a member of the LIM-only class of proteins that has
intrinsic transcriptional activity. Thus, in some circumstance, CREM can bypass
the classical requirement for phosphorylation and association with CBP.

PMID: 11079454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Endocrinol Invest. 2000 Oct;23(9):578-83.

The CREM system in human spermatogenesis.

Peri A(1), Serio M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Physiopathology, University of Florence, Italy.
a.peri@dfc.unifi.it

Spermatogenesis is a multi-step process, regulated by endocrine, paracrine and
autocrine signals, through which immature germ cells differentiate into
spermatozoa. The cAMP-dependent transcription factor CREM directs in the testis
the expression of genes related to the structuring of mature spermatozoa. CREM
gene expression originates different isoforms, which in turn can be divided into 
activators or repressors of gene expression. Whereas only CREM repressors are
expressed in pre-meiotic germ cells in mice, a switch to the expression of the
CREM activator tau occurs in post-meiotic germ cells. In addition, mice lacking
CREM gene are infertile and present an arrest of germ cell maturation at the
stage of round spermatid. We have demonstrated that CREM gene is expressed also
in human germ cells and that a switch from the expression of repressors to
activators is present in normospermic men. In particular, CREM tau mRNA is
located in the cytoplasm of round spermatids. Conversely, in patients showing a
testicular pattern of round spermatid maturation arrest only CREM repressors are 
expressed. Other reports have confirmed our data, supporting the hypothesis that 
CREM plays a role also in human spermatogenesis and that the absence of "the CREM
switch" can be associated to spermatogenic arrest.

PMID: 11079452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Blood. 2000 Nov 1;96(9):3215-23.

Identification and characterization of CKLiK, a novel granulocyte
Ca(++)/calmodulin-dependent kinase.

Verploegen S(1), Lammers JW, Koenderman L, Coffer PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, University Medical Centre Utrecht, 3584 CX
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Human granulocytes are characterized by a variety of specific effector functions 
involved in host defense. Several widely expressed protein kinases have been
implicated in the regulation of these effector functions. A polymerase chain
reaction-based strategy was used to identify novel granulocyte-specific kinases. 
A novel protein kinase complementary DNA with an open reading frame of 357 amino 
acids was identified with homology to calcium-calmodulin-dependent kinase I
(CaMKI). This has been termed CaMKI-like kinase (CKLiK). Analysis of CKLiK
messenger RNA (mRNA) expression in hematopoietic cells demonstrated an almost
exclusive expression in human polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN). Up-regulation
of CKLiK mRNA occurs during neutrophilic differentiation of CD34(+) stem cells.
CKLiK kinase activity was dependent on Ca(++) and calmodulin as analyzed by in
vitro phosphorylation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate responsive element
modulator (CREM). Furthermore, CKLiK- transfected cells treated with ionomycin
demonstrated an induction of CRE- binding protein (CREB) transcriptional activity
compared to control cells. Additionally, CaMK-kinasealpha enhanced CKLiK
activity. In vivo activation of CKLiK was shown by addition of interleukin (IL)-8
to a myeloid cell line stably expressing CKLiK. Furthermore inducible activation 
of CKLiK was sufficient to induce extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK)
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase activity. These data identify a novel
Ca(++)/calmodulin-dependent PMN- specific kinase that may play a role in
Ca(++)-mediated regulation of human granulocyte functions.

PMID: 11050006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Nov;20(22):8613-22.

A family of LIM-only transcriptional coactivators: tissue-specific expression and
selective activation of CREB and CREM.

Fimia GM(1), De Cesare D, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS-INSERM,
Université Louis Pasteur, 67404 Illkirch-Strasbourg, France.

Transcription factors of the CREB family control the expression of a large number
of genes in response to various signaling pathways. Regulation mediated by
members of the CREB family has been linked to various physiological functions.
Classically, activation by CREB is known to occur upon phosphorylation at an
essential regulatory site (Ser133 in CREB) and the subsequent interaction with
the ubiquitous coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP). However, the mechanism by 
which selectivity is achieved in the identification of target genes, as well as
the routes adopted to ensure tissue-specific activation, remains unrecognized. We
have recently described the first tissue-specific coactivator of CREB family
transcription factors, ACT (activator of CREM in testis). ACT is a LIM-only
protein which associates with CREM in male germ cells and provides an activation 
function which is independent of phosphorylation and CBP. Here we characterize a 
family of LIM-only proteins which share common structural organization with ACT. 
These are referred to as four-and-a-half-LIM-domain (FHL) proteins and display
tissue-specific and developmentally regulated expression. FHL proteins display
different degrees of intrinsic activation potential. They provide powerful
activation function to both CREB and CREM when coexpressed either in yeast or in 
mammalian cells, specific combinations eliciting selective activation. Deletion
analysis of the ACT protein shows that the activation function depends on
specific arrangements of the LIM domains, which are essential for both
transactivation and interaction properties. This study uncovers the existence of 
a family of tissue-specific coactivators that operate through novel,
CBP-independent routes to elicit transcriptional activation by CREB and CREM. The
future identification of additional partners of FHL proteins is likely to reveal 
unappreciated aspects of tissue-specific transcriptional regulation.

PMCID: PMC102166
PMID: 11046156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Mol Hum Reprod. 2000 Nov;6(11):967-72.

CREM activator and repressor isoforms in human testis: sequence variations and
inaccurate splicing during impaired spermatogenesis.

Behr R(1), Weinbauer GF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive Medicine of the University, Domagkstr. 11, D-48129
Münster, Germany.

cAMP responsive element modulator (CREM) activators are specifically expressed in
haploid germ cells prior to cell elongation and are essential for spermatid
development in mice. Recent studies indicate that CREM activators are also
involved in the process of spermatid maturation in men. Unlike the activators,
CREM repressors were suggested to be absent from adult mouse and dog testes. The 
present work investigates CREM transcripts in human testis with normal (n = 4)
and impaired spermatogenesis (n = 2). Two activator transcripts could be
identified corresponding to the tau2 isoform with and without exon gamma.
Interestingly, four CREM repressors could be isolated from specimens with
complete spermatogenesis. These were gamma-repressor (exons B, E, F, H, I(b)),
CREM DeltaC-F, beta (exons B, G, H, I(b)), CREM DeltaC-G, beta (exons B, H,
I(b)), and CREM DeltaC-G, alpha (exons B, H, I(a), I(b)). These isoforms were
also present in cynomolgus monkey testes. A novel CREM splice variant (CREM
DeltaC-H) was detected in a specimen with spermatid maturation defect. Beyond
that, inaccurate CREM splicing, giving rise to inactive transcripts, was
encountered in a specimen with impaired spermatogenesis. In conclusion, several
CREM repressor transcripts are present in adult human testes, and altered
transcript splicing is associated with impaired spermatogenesis.

PMID: 11044457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Int J Androl. 2000 Oct;23(5):266-77.

Marmoset spermatogenesis: organizational similarities to the human.

Millar MR(1), Sharpe RM, Weinbauer GF, Fraser HM, Saunders PT.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Reproductive Sciences Unit, Centre for Reproductive Biology,
Edinburgh EH3 9ET, UK.

The common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus), a small New World primate of high
fecundity, is widely used in reproductive research. The aim of the present study 
was to determine the organization of the germ cells within the seminiferous
epithelium, the duration of the spermatogenic cycle and the number of
spermatogonial mitoses. Antibodies to cAMP response element modulator (CREM) and 
proliferating nuclear cell antigen (PCNA) and a cRNA directed against protamine
P2 and morphological criteria were used to discriminate between stages of the
spermatogenic cycle. Plastic sections were used to document the cell associations
present in each of the nine stages of spermatogenesis. Up to five such stages
could be observed within individual cross-sections of seminiferous tubules. Based
on the pattern of incorporation of bromodeoxyuridine the length of the
spermatogenic cycle was estimated to be 10 days and the duration of
spermatogenesis to be 37 days. Four mitotic divisions were noted in
spermatogonia. It is concluded that the organization of spermatogenesis in the
marmoset has similarities to the human ('helical') and this makes the marmoset a 
suitable model for studies relevant to human testicular function.

PMID: 11012784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Med Virol. 2000 Oct;62(2):286-92.

Repression of tax-mediated human t-lymphotropic virus type 1 transcription by
inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) protein in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells.

Newbound GC(1), O'Rourke JP, Collins ND, Andrews JM, DeWille J, Lairmore MD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Retrovirus Research and Department of Veterinary Biosciences, Ohio 
State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) infection causes adult T-cell leukemia
and is characterized by long periods of clinical latency with low levels of viral
production. Transcription of HTLV-1 is controlled through sequences in the
promoter and enhancer regions of the long terminal repeat of the integrated
provirus. Important among these sequences are three 21 bp imperfect repeats
responsive to the viral oncogenic protein Tax (TRE). Members of the
CREB/ATF-1/CREM family of transcription factors bind to TRE-1 and are critical
for HTLV-1 transcription. Other less studied family members include the inducible
cAMP early repressor (ICER) proteins. ICER proteins lack phosphorylation and
activation domains and are potent inhibitors of transcription. The ability of
ICER to bind TRE-1 and its effects on HTLV-1 Tax mediated transcription have not 
been studied in the natural cell targets of the virus, peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC). We show that ICER mRNA levels are low in quiescent
PBMC, but rise and remain elevated for up to 18 hr after mitogenic stimulation of
these cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays using recombinant Tax and ICER
demonstrate that ICER binds TRE-1 and that binding is increased in the presence
of Tax. Furthermore, over expression of ICER IIgamma suppressed Tax-mediated
transcription whereas an anti-sense ICER II plasmid designed to block endogenous 
ICER enhanced Tax-mediated transcription in activated PBMC. Together our data
indicate that ICER inhibits Tax-mediated transcription in activated PBMC and
suggest a role for ICER in maintenance of HTLV-1 persistence.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11002260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 10;275(45):35242-7.

The structure of a CREB bZIP.somatostatin CRE complex reveals the basis for
selective dimerization and divalent cation-enhanced DNA binding.

Schumacher MA(1), Goodman RH, Brennan RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Vollum Institute,
Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland, Oregon 97201-3098, USA.

The cAMP responsive element-binding protein (CREB) is central to second messenger
regulated transcription. To elucidate the structural mechanisms of DNA binding
and selective dimerization of CREB, we determined to 3.0 A resolution, the
structure of the CREB bZIP (residues 283-341) bound to a 21-base pair
deoxynucleotide that encompasses the canonical 8-base pair somatostatin cAMP
response element (SSCRE). The CREB dimer is stabilized in part by ionic
interactions from Arg(314) to Glu(319') and Glu(328) to Lys(333') as well as a
hydrogen bond network that links the carboxamide side chains of
Gln(322')-Asn(321)-Asn(321')-Gln(322). Critical to family selective dimerization 
are intersubunit hydrogen bonds between basic region residue Tyr(307) and leucine
zipper residue Glu(312), which are conserved in all CREB/CREM/ATF-1 family
members. Strikingly, the structure reveals a hexahydrated Mg(2+) ion bound in the
cavity between the basic region and SSCRE that makes a water-mediated DNA
contact. DNA binding studies demonstrate that Mg(2+) ions enhance CREB bZIP:SSCRE
binding by more than 25-fold and suggest a possible physiological role for this
ion in somatostatin cAMP response element and potentially other CRE-mediated gene
expression.

PMID: 10952992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Eur J Biochem. 2000 Sep;267(17):5438-49.

Structure and expression of the mouse gene encoding the endozepine-like peptide
from haploid male germ cells.

Valentin M(1), Balvers M, Pusch W, Weinbauer GF, Knudsen J, Ivell R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Hormone and Fertility Research, University of Hamburg, Germany.

The endozepine-like peptide (ELP) represents a testis-specific isoform of the
ubiquitous acyl-CoA binding protein (ACBP) and is highly expressed in late
haploid stages of male germ cell development. The genomic sequence of the
functional ELP gene as well as that of a pseudogene were analysed from
independent bacteriophage clones of a 129sv mouse genomic library. Unlike the
ACBP gene, which comprises four exons, the ELP gene has only a single intron
within the region of the 5' untranslated region, suggesting that, like some other
haploid expressed genes, the ELP gene might have evolved by retroposon-mediated
gene duplication. Primer extension analysis was used to define the start site for
transcription and hence the 5' promoter region. Electrophoretic mobility shift
analysis was carried out on this region comparing nuclear extracts from adult
mouse testis with those from mouse liver. Several testis-specific DNA-protein
complexes were observed throughout 700 bp upstream of the transcription start
site. One of these could be identified as corresponding to a steroidogenic
factor-1 (SF-1) binding element. Further analysis using pure transcription
factors showed that this element at position -340 was able to bind specifically
to both SF-1 and to the germ cell nuclear factor (GCNF). Immunohistochemical
analysis using an ELP-specific antibody showed that expression was very
restricted within the testis to the postmeiotic germ cells, and in the ovary to
interstitial/luteal cells, cell-types known to express GCNF and SF-1,
respectively. Testes of CREM-tau knockout mice, lacking all spermatogenic stages 
later than round spermatids, were devoid of ELP immunoreactivity, whereas in RAD6
knockout mice the few remaining elongated spermatids were clearly defined by this
excellent late haploid marker product. The ELP gene and its product thus offer an
ideal system with which to investigate the differentiation of late haploid stages
of spermatogenesis.

PMID: 10951202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Neuroreport. 2000 Aug 3;11(11):2577-80.

Blockade of cyclic AMP-responsive element DNA binding in the brain of CREB
delta/alpha mutant mice.

Pandey SC(1), Mittal N, Silva AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Psychiatric Institute, University of Illinois at
Chicago and VA Chicago Health Care System, 60612, USA.

The cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) gene transcription factor has 
been implicated in the synaptic plasticity and memory. Here, we investigated the 
mechanisms of CREB and/or cyclic AMP-responsive element modulatory protein (CREM)
binding to CRE sites in brain tissues. CRE-DNA binding was determined in nuclear 
extracts obtained from the several brain structures of wild-type and CREB
delta/alpha mutant mice. It was found that antibodies to CREB, phosphorylated
CREB, and CREM supershifted the CRE-DNA binding complex in cortical nuclear
extracts from wild-type mice, which suggests that the CRE-DNA binding complex
contains both CREB and CREM proteins. In contrast, CRE-DNA binding is abolished
in the cortex, hippocampus, cerebellum, and amygdala of CREB delta/alpha mutant
mice. Because the CREB delta and alpha isoforms have been deleted in CREB mutant 
mice, consequently, other forms of CREB, such as CREB-beta and CREM, are
up-regulated. These results suggest that the binding of CREM to CRE sites
requires the presence of CREB delta/alpha, and that CREB-beta may be inefficient 
in binding to CRE-sites. Thus, these results indicate that CREB delta/alpha
mutant mice are a useful animal model for studying the functional role of
CREB-dependent gene expression.

PMID: 10943725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Jul 5;273(2):776-83.

The structure of the human LIM protein ACT gene and its expression in tumor cell 
lines.

Morgan MJ(1), Whawell SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, Eastman Dental Institute for Oral Health Care
Sciences, London, WC1X 8LD, United Kingdom. mmorgan@eastman.ucl.ac.uk

We describe the human ACT genomic and cDNA sequence which like its murine
counterpart contains the defining secondary structure of the FHL (Four-and-a-Half
LIM-domain) LIM-protein family. The coding region of the human ACT gene spans
five exons. This distribution is very similar to the FHL1 gene and includes the
arrangement of split codons across exon boundaries suggesting that these genes
share a common ancestor. The human ACT gene was not detected by Northern analysis
in the adult testis although this is the only known site of expression found with
its murine counterpart. However, the human ACT gene was found to be expressed in 
a panel of human tumor cell lines derived from squamous cell carcinomas,
melanomas, and leukemias. Interestingly, FHL1, FHL2, and FHL3 were also found to 
be expressed in some of these cell lines and the results suggest an important
role for FHLs in tumor biology.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10873680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Hum Reprod. 2000 Jul;6(7):648-60.

Expression of the cyclic AMP-dependent transcription factors, CREB, CREM and
ATF2, in the human myometrium during pregnancy and labour.

Bailey J(1), Sparey C, Phillips RJ, Gilmore K, Robson SC, Dunlop W, Europe-Finner
GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Newcastle upon Tyne,
UK. jarrod.bailey@ncl.ac.uk

Elevated concentrations of cyclic AMP (cAMP) in the human myometrium may promote 
uterine quiescence during pregnancy by protein kinase A (PKA)-mediated
phosphorylation and subsequent inactivation of myosin light-chain kinase, as well
as by the phosphorylation and activation of cAMP-dependent transcription factors.
In this context, we show that the altered expression of cAMP response-element
binding protein (CREB), cAMP response-element modulator protein (CREM) and
activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) are implicated in the maintenance of
myometrial quiescence during fetal maturation and the switch to uterine
activation at term. Using electrophoretic mobility shift and super shift assays, 
as well as immunoblotting of paired myometrial tissue samples from non-pregnant, 
pregnant non-labouring and spontaneous labouring women, we defined the patterns
of expression of various isoforms of these proteins in the human uterus. Here, we
report spatio-temporal changes in the expression of a 43 kDa form of CREB, a 28
kDa CREM-like protein, and a novel 28 kDa ATF2-like protein which are
differentially expressed, depending on the gestational state of the uterus.
Changes in the pattern of expression of these potent transcription factors may
have an important role in the control of uterine activity throughout pregnancy.

PMID: 10871653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2000 Jul;294(1):52-60.

Induction of cAMP response element modulator (CREM) and inducible cAMP early
repressor (ICER) expression in rat brain by uncompetitive N-methyl-D-aspartate
receptor antagonists.

Storvik M(1), Lindén AM, Kontkanen O, Lakso M, Castrén E, Wong G.

Author information: 
(1)A. I. Virtanen Institute, University of Kuopio, Kuopio, Finland.

The N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) subtype of glutamate receptor mediates fast
excitatory neurotransmission, and agents that attenuate this function are
neuroprotective, anesthetic, and psychotropic. To determine whether cAMP
regulatable transcription factors play a role in the neurochemical actions of
agents acting through NMDA receptors, the effects of the acute administration of 
uncompetitive and competitive antagonists on the expression of cAMP response
element modulator (CREM) and inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) transcription 
factors were examined. In situ hybridization to rat brain sections revealed that 
ICER mRNA expression was significantly increased by uncompetitive NMDA receptor
antagonists (MK-801, phencyclidine, ketamine, memantine) but not by the
competitive antagonist CPP [(+/-)-3-(2-carboxypiperazin-4-yl)-propyl-1-phosphonic
acid] or other psychotropic agents (clozapine, haloperidol, desipramine). Major
brain regions where ICER transcripts were increased were the hippocampus,
parietal cortex layers IV and VI, temporal cortex, cingulate cortex, thalamus,
and granule cell layer of the olfactory bulb. Northern and Western blot analyses 
indicated that CREM mRNA and protein, respectively, were also increased after
MK-801 treatment, but ICER isoforms predominate during both basal and induced
conditions. MK-801 also transiently increased the binding of proteins to cAMP
response element, which was supershifted by anti-CREM antibody, indicating that
increased mRNA and protein levels have functional consequences on gene
transcription. These results provide evidence for the involvement of CREM and
ICER family transcription factors in the pharmacologic effects of uncompetitive
NMDA receptor antagonists.

PMID: 10871295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Reprod Dev. 2000 Jun;56(2 Suppl):228-9.

CREM: a master-switch regulating the balance between differentiation and
apoptosis in male germ cells.

Sassone-Corsi P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Strasbourg, France.
paolosc@igbmc.u-strasbg.fr

Cyclic AMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) is a transcription factor highly
expressed in the post-meiotic germ cells of the testis. Its pivotal role is to
regulate the expression of several germ cell-specific genes, a crucial function
as demonstrated by the severe phenotype of mice whose CREM gene was mutated by
homologous recombination. CREM-deficient male animals are sterile and display a
ten-fold increase in the apoptosis of germ cells. Recent results have shown that 
CREM needs a tissue-specific co-activator, ACT (activator of CREM in testis) to
elicit its regulatory function in testis.

PMID: 10824972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Neurochem Int. 2000 Aug-Sep;37(2-3):163-70.

The high-affinity glutamate transporters GLT1, GLAST, and EAAT4 are regulated via
different signalling mechanisms.

Gegelashvili G(1), Dehnes Y, Danbolt NC, Schousboe A.

Author information: 
(1)NeuroScience PharmaBiotec Research Center, Department of Pharmacology, Royal
Danish School of Pharmacy, Copenhagen, Denmark. gege@mail.dfh.dk

High-affinity glutamate transporters ensure termination of glutamatergic
neurotransmission and keep the synaptic concentration of this amino acid below
excitotoxic levels. However, neuronal glutamate transporters, EAAC1 and EAAT4,
are located outside the synaptic cleft and contribute less significantly to the
glutamate uptake in the brain than two astroglial transporters, GLAST and GLT1.
Aberrant functioning of the glutamate uptake system seems to be linked to some
neurodegenerative disorders (eg amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, ALS). Expression
of glutamate transporters is differentially regulated via distinct cellular
mechanisms. GLT1, which is expressed at very low levels in cultured astrocytes,
is strongly induced in the presence of neurons. The present immunocytochemical
data provide further evidence that neuronal soluble factors, rather than physical
contact between neurons and glia, determine the induction of GLT1 in astrocytes. 
This effect is apparently mediated by yet undefined growth factor(s) via the
tyrphostin-sensitive receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signalling, that in turn,
supports the downstream activation of p42/44 MAP kinases and the CREM and ATF-1
transcription factors. RTK-independent simultaneous activation of the CREB
transcription factor suggests a possible involvement of complementary pathway(s).
Neuronal soluble factors do not affect expression of GLAST, but induce supporting
machinery for differential regulation of GLAST via the astroglial metabotropic
glutamate receptors, mGluR3 and mGluR5. Thus, long-term treatment with the group 
I mGluR agonist, DHPG, causes down-regulation of GLAST, whereas the group II
agonist, DCG-IV, has an opposite effect on the expression of GLAST in astrocytes.
However, in BT4C glioma cells glutamate or other transportable substrates
(D-aspartate and L-2,4-trans-PDC) induced cell-surface expression of EAAT4 in a
receptor-independent manner. The activity-dependent trafficking of this
transporter which also exhibits properties of a glutamate-gated chloride channel 
may play functional roles not only in neuronal excitability, but in glioma cell
biology as well.

PMID: 10812201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Biol Reprod. 2000 May;62(5):1344-51.

Cloning and expression analysis of testis-specific cyclic 3', 5'-adenosine
monophosphate-responsive element modulator activators in the nonhuman primate
(Macaca fascicularis): comparison with other primate and rodent species.

Behr R(1), Hunt N, Ivell R, Wessels J, Weinbauer GF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive Medicine of the University, D-48129 Münster,
Germany.

The cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) gene encodes a transcription factor 
that is essential for spermatogenesis. In mouse testis, several CREM repressors
and activators have been identified. In contrast to the situation for the mouse, 
however, little is known about CREM isoforms in the primate testis. We analyzed
CREM isoforms and mRNA expression in a clinically relevant primate model, the
cynomolgus monkey (Macaca fascicularis). A cDNA library was generated from monkey
testis; and two activator isoforms (tau2 with and without exon gamma) were
identified, which displayed high sequence identity to mouse and human isoforms.
The insertion of exon gamma was observed for the first time in the primate
testis. CREM activator expression was confined to the testis, where it was seen
in late pachytene spermatocytes and round spermatids in specific spermatogenic
stages, as revealed by in situ hybridization. Comparison of the mRNA and the
recently described protein expression indicated a lack of translational delay of 
CREM expression. Comparative analysis of testicular CREM expression by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction yielded several transcripts in the rat,
mouse, hamster, and marmoset; two transcripts in cynomolgus and rhesus monkeys;
and one transcript in men. These findings suggest an evolutionary trend from
multiple activator isoforms to a single activator transcript in men.

PMID: 10775186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Novartis Found Symp. 2000;227:5-14; discussion 15-8.

Rhythmic transcription: the molecular basis of oscillatory melatonin synthesis.

Foulkes NS(1), Cermakian N, Whitmore D, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS-INSERM-ULP, Illkirch-Strasbourg, France.

Pulsatile hormone synthesis and secretion are characteristic features of various 
oscillatory biological systems. Circadian rhythms are critical in the regulation 
of most physiological functions, and much interest has been centred on the
understanding of the molecular mechanisms governing them. Adaptation to a
changing environment is an essential feature of physiological regulation. The
day-night rhythm is translated into hormonal oscillations governing the
metabolism of all living organisms. In mammals the pineal gland is responsible
for the circadian synthesis of the hormone melatonin in response to signals
originating from the endogenous clock located in the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN). The molecular mechanisms involved in rhythmic synthesis of
melatonin involve the CREM gene, which encodes transcription factors responsive
to activation of the cAMP signalling pathway. The CREM product, ICER, is
rhythmically expressed and participates in a transcriptional autoregulatory loop 
which also controls the amplitude of oscillations of serotonin N-acetyl
transferase, the rate-limiting enzyme of melatonin synthesis. Thus, a
transcription factor modulates the oscillatory levels of a hormone.

PMID: 10752062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Prog Nucleic Acid Res Mol Biol. 2000;64:343-69.

Transcriptional regulation by cyclic AMP-responsive factors.

De Cesare D(1), Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire
CNRS-INSERM-Université Louis Pasteur, Illkirch-Strasbourg, France.

In eukaryotes, transcriptional regulation on stimulation of the adenylate cyclase
signaling pathway is mediated by a family of cyclic AMP-responsive nuclear
factors, including CREB, CREM, and ATF-1. These factors contain the basic
domain/leucine zipper motifs and bind as dimers to cAMP-responsive elements
(CREs). The activation function of CRE-binding proteins is modulated by
phosphorylation by several kinases and is mediated by coactivators such as CBP
and p300. Activation might also be independent of CBP and phosphorylation in some
specific cell types, such as male germ cells, wherein the protein ACT confers a
powerful activation function to CREM. The inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER)
protein is the only inducible member of this family. The induction of this
powerful repressor is likely to be important for the transient nature of
cAMP-induced gene expression. CRE-binding proteins have been found to play an
important role in the physiology of the pituitary gland, in regulating
spermatogenesis, in the response to circadian rhythms, and in the molecular basis
of memory.

PMID: 10697414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Biol Chem. 2000 Feb 11;275(6):4244-50.

Regulation of inducible cAMP early repressor expression by gastrin and
cholecystokinin in the pancreatic cell line AR42J.

Thommesen L(1), Nørsett K, Sandvik AK, Hofsli E, Laegreid A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biomedical Engineering, Norwegian University of
Science and Technology, N-7489 Trondheim, Norway.

The CREM gene encodes both activators and repressors of cAMP-induced
transcription. Inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) isoforms are generated upon 
activation of an alternative, intronic promoter within the CREM gene. ICER is
proposed to down-regulate both its own expression and the expression of other
genes that contain cAMP-responsive elements such as a number of growth factors.
Thus, ICER has been postulated to play a role in proliferation and
differentiation. Here we show that ICER gene expression is induced by gastrin,
cholecystokinin (CCK), and epidermal growth factor in AR42J cells. The time
course of gastrin- and CCK-mediated ICER induction is rapid and transient,
similar to forskolin- and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate-induced ICER
expression. The specific CCK-B receptor antagonist L740,093 blocks the gastrin
but not the CCK response, indicating that both the CCK-B and the CCK-A receptor
can mediate ICER gene activation. Noteworthy, CREB is constitutively
phosphorylated at Ser-133 in AR42J cells, and ICER induction proceeds in the
absence of increased CREB Ser(P)-133. Gastrin-mediated ICER induction was not
reduced in the presence of the protein kinase A inhibitor H-89, indicating a
protein kinase A-independent mechanism. This is the first report on ICER
inducibility via G(q)/G(11) protein-coupled receptors.

PMID: 10660591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Mol Neurosci. 1999 Feb;12(1):35-51.

PhosphoCREB and CREM/ICER: positive and negative regulation of proenkephalin gene
expression in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus.

Borsook D(1), Smirnova O, Behar O, Lewis S, Kobierski LA.

Author information: 
(1)Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 
02114, USA.

In the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus (PVN), the proenkephalin gene may be 
upregulated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and downregulated by the GABA-A agonist
muscimol. Candidate transcription factors regulating the proenkephalin gene in
opposite directions are cAMP-response-element-binding protein (CREB) (when
phosphorylated, a positive regulator) and cAMP-responsive modulatory inducible
cAMP early repressor (CREM/ICER) (a negative regulator). Our results demonstrate 
that CREM alpha,beta,gamma transcripts and ICER are induced in the PVN by LPS and
remain elevated for periods of up to 12 h. PhosphoCREB is elevated after LPS
administration, peaking at 8 h, but remaining elevated over control levels at 12 
h. Phospho-CREB induction by LPS is also seen in primary hypothalamic cultures.
Cotransfection of ICER with ENK-CAT12 into primary hypothalamic cultures produced
a decrease in chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) levels following cAMP or
LPS stimulation. PhosphoCREB is downregulated and CREM/ICER is upregulated in the
PVN by muscimol, suggesting that the regulation of these transcription factors
may underlie the inhibitory effect of muscimol on target genes in the PVN.

PMID: 10636469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Jan;85(1):345-54.

Loss of expression of the ubiquitous transcription factor cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB) and compensatory overexpression of the activator
CREMtau in the human adrenocortical cancer cell line H295R.

Groussin L(1), Massias JF, Bertagna X, Bertherat J.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe d'Etude en Physiopathologie Endocrinienne, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, UPR1524, Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire,
Université René Descartes-Paris V, France.

The pituitary hormone ACTH, acting through the cAMP pathway, plays a key role in 
proliferation and differentiation of the adrenal cortex. CAMP response element
(CRE)-binding protein (CREB) is an ubiquitous transcription factor that binds to 
the CRE present in the promoter of numerous genes and mediates transcription
stimulation by cAMP. Characterization of CRE-binding proteins was performed in
the H295R cell line, which is considered a model for human adrenocortical tumor
studies. Western blot and RT-PCR studies demonstrated that CREB is not expressed 
in the human adrenocortical cancer cell line H295R, whereas it is expressed in
normal adrenal. During transient transfection experiments, cAMP stimulation of
two reporter genes containing canonical CRE was maintained. Cotransfection of the
dominant negative inhibitor A-CREB, which prevents transcription factors
containing a CREB-like leucine zipper domain to bind DNA, completely inhibited
cAMP-induced stimulation of CRE activity. Western blot and RT-PCR studies showed 
that activating transcription factor-1 (ATF-1), CRE modulator-alpha/gamma
(CREMalpha/gamma), and CREMtau2alpha are expressed in H295R cells. High amounts
of CREM proteins were present in H295R, demonstrating an overexpression of this
transcription factor in the absence of CREB. Furthermore, expression of the
activator isoform CREMtau was very high in H295R compared to normal adrenal
cortex. Transfection assays demonstrated that CREMtau2alpha is a potent
stimulator of CRE activity in H295R. Finally, gel retardation assays showed that 
CREM and ATF-1 are the nuclear proteins that specifically bind the CRE in H295R
cells, whereas CREM binding to CRE is not observed in a CREB-expressing cell
line. H295R cells are the first established nontransgenic cell line that does not
express the ubiquitous transcription factor CREB. H295R demonstrates that CREMtau
up-regulation can compensate for CREB deficiency to maintain CRE regulation by
cAMP and is a model of compensation mechanisms between the members of the CREB/
CREM/ATF-1 family of transcription factors. This loss of CREB expression and the 
overexpression of CREM could be linked to cellular transformation, as the normal 
adrenal cortex express high levels of CREB and no or low levels of CREMtau.

PMID: 10634409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Androl. 1999 Nov-Dec;20(6):747-54.

Round spermatids show normal testis-specific H1t but reduced cAMP-responsive
element modulator and transition protein 1 expression in men with round-spermatid
maturation arrest.

Steger K(1), Klonisch T, Gavenis K, Behr R, Schaller V, Drabent B, Doenecke D,
Nieschlag E, Bergmann M, Weinbauer GF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Veterinary Anatomy, Giessen, Germany.
klaus.steger@vetmed.uni-giessen.de

During spermiogenesis, histones are replaced by transition proteins, which in
turn are replaced by protamines. The TNP1 gene-encoding TP1 (transition protein
1) protein contains a cAMP-responsive element (CRE) that serves as binding site
for the CRE modulator (CREM). To gain further insight into the complex regulation
of nucleoprotein exchanges in haploid spermatids and its potential role for
spermatogenic impairment, we studied the gene expression of testis-specific
histone H1t, CREM, and TNP1 in testicular biopsies from men with normal
spermatogenesis (n = 20) and with round spermatid maturation arrest (n = 16).
During normal spermatogenesis, H1t messenger RNA (mRNA) was present in
86.2%+/-8.7% of pachytene spermatocytes (stages III-V), whereas H1t protein was
synthesized in 83.5%+/-13.0% of pachytene spermatocytes (stages III-V) and
persisted in 95.2%+/-3.1% of spermatids (steps 1-5). CREM mRNA was detectable in 
74.2%+/-9.4% of pachytene spermatocytes (stages IV-V) and in 78.7%+/-10.0% of
spermatids (steps 1-3). CREM protein was synthesized in 81.2%+/-14.2% of
spermatids (steps 1-3). TNP1 mRNA was present in 80.0%+/-13.5% of spermatids
(steps 2-4), whereas TP1 protein was synthesized in 89.7%+/-5.3% of spermatids
(steps 3-4). In men with round spermatid maturation arrest, spermatids only
develop to step 3 of differentiation. These spermatids were devoid of both CREM
and TP1 but did contain H1t. These results indicate that TP1 is likely to be an
important parameter in the histone-to-protamine exchange and in the initiation of
spermatid elongation. CREM is involved in the regulation of TNP1 gene expression 
and consequently plays a vital role in the correct differentiation step from
round spermatids to mature spermatozoa.

PMID: 10591614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Immunol. 1999 Dec 15;163(12):6631-9.

The -180 site of the IL-2 promoter is the target of CREB/CREM binding in T cell
anergy.

Powell JD(1), Lerner CG, Ewoldt GR, Schwartz RH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. jpowell@niaid.nih.gov

Anergic T cells display a marked decrease in their ability to produce IL-2 even
in the presence of optimal TCR and costimulatory signals. Using IL-2
enhancer/promoter-driven reporter constructs, we have previously identified a
region that appears to be a target for cis transcriptional repression in anergy. 
This region of the promoter, which shares partial homology with a consensus
AP-1-binding sequence, is located about -180 bp from the transcriptional start
site. In the present study, we demonstrate that cAMP response element-binding
protein/cAMP response element modulator (CREB/CREM), activating transcription
factor-2/c-Jun, and Jun-Jun/Oct complexes bind to this site. However, the
induction of anergy by prolonged stimulation through the TCR led to an increase
in binding of only the CREB/CREM complex. Furthermore, the level of binding of
this complex appeared to be up-regulated in both resting and restimulated anergic
T cells. Finally, an IL-2 promoter-driven reporter construct that contained a
mutation that specifically reduced the binding of the CREB/CREM complex displayed
a decreased ability to be affected by anergy, while a construct that contained a 
mutation that decreased the binding of the Jun-Jun/Oct complex was still
susceptible to anergy. These findings suggest that the -180 region of the IL-2
promoter is the target of a CREB/CREM transcriptional inhibitor that contributes 
to the repression of IL-2 production in T cell anergy.

PMID: 10586058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1999 Sep 10;155(1-2):101-13.

The inducible cyclic adenosine monophosphate early repressor (ICER) in the
pituitary intermediate lobe: role in the stress response.

Mazzucchelli C(1), Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS-INSERM-ULP, Illkirch, Strasbourg, France.

The cAMP signalling pathway plays a key role in the regulation of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. Transcription factor CREM (cAMP response
element modulator) is implicated in the modulation of a number of neuroendocrine 
functions. By virtue of an alternative, intronic promoter CREM generates the
powerful transcriptional repressor ICER (inducible cAMP early repressor), which
displays a pronounced neuroendocrine-specific expression. Here we document a
remarkable induction of ICER in response to acute stress in the intermediate lobe
(IL) of the pituitary gland. The induction is transient and is preceded by CREB
phosphorylation. Adrenergic stimulation directs ICER induction in the IL through 
the activation of both beta2-adrenergic and corticotrophin-releasing hormone
receptors. These receptors are positively coupled to the adenylate cyclase
signalling pathway, which regulates hormone release from the IL, implicating ICER
in the modulation of peptide secretion. We show that targeted ablation of the
CREM gene in the mouse causes a chronic increase of beta-endorphin levels.
Altered hormonal production occurs both in basal conditions and after stress.
Thus, early ICER induction in the IL may be involved in the modulation of gene
expression in response to stress.

PMID: 10580843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Nov 23;96(24):14094-9.

Altered emotional and locomotor responses in mice deficient in the transcription 
factor CREM.

Maldonado R(1), Smadja C, Mazzucchelli C, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Structurale, Institut National de 
la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U266, France. rafael.maldonado@cexs.upf.es

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000 Feb 15;97(4):1949. Mazucchelli C [corrected to
Mazzucchelli C].

Various transcription factors act as nuclear effectors of the cAMP-dependent
signaling pathway. These are the products of three genes in the mouse, CREB, CRE 
modulator (CREM), and ATF-1. CREM proteins are thought to play important roles
within the hypothalamic-pituitary axis and in the control of rhythmic functions
in the pineal gland. We have generated CREM-mutant mice and investigated their
response in a variety of behavioral tests. CREM-null mice show a drastic increase
in locomotion. In contrast to normal mice, the CREM-deficient mice show equal
locomotor activity during the circadian cycle. The anatomy of the hypothalamic
suprachiasmatic nuclei, the center of the endogenous pacemaker, is normal in
mutant mice. Remarkably, CREM mutant mice also elicit a different emotional
state, revealed by a lower anxiety in two different behavioral models, but they
preserve the conditioned reactiveness to stress. These results demonstrate the
high degree of functional specificity of each cAMP-responsive transcription
factor in behavioral control.

PMCID: PMC24196
PMID: 10570204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Eur J Neurosci. 1999 Oct;11(10):3753-6.

Experience-dependent increase in cAMP-responsive element binding protein in
synaptic and nonsynaptic mitochondria of the rat hippocampus.

Bevilaqua LR(1), Cammarota M, Paratcha G, de Stein ML, Izquierdo I, Medina JH.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biologia Celular y Neurociencias 'Prof. dr Educardo de Robertis',
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires (UBA), Argentina.

Cyclic AMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) plays a pivotal role in the 
formation of long-term memory in Drosophila, Aplysia, mice and rats. Recently, we
were able to demonstrate that CREB and its serine 133 phosphorylated form p-CREB 
are localized in synaptic and nonsynaptic mitochondria of the rat brain. Here we 
report on the effect of a one-trial inhibitory avoidance training procedure on
mitochondrial CREB from the rat hippocampus. This aversively motivated training
task is associated with a time-dependent increase (34-35%) in both p-CREB and
CREB immunoreactivities detected in synaptic mitochondria of the hippocampus. In 
nonsynaptic mitochondria, p-CREB levels increased in both trained and shocked
animals. In addition to CREB, two CRE-element binding repressors, CREB-2 and
CREM-1, were also detected in purified brain mitochondria. No changes were
observed in CREB-2 and CREM-1 immunoreactivities in hippocampal synaptic
mitochondria after an inhibitory avoidance training. Taken together the present
findings represent the first evidence showing that brain mitochondrial CREB may
participate in plasticity-dependent changes associated with a behavioural
training procedure.

PMID: 10564381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Nov;13(11):1951-62.

Cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate(cAMP)/cAMP-responsive element modulator
(CREM)-dependent regulation of cholesterogenic lanosterol 14alpha-demethylase
(CYP51) in spermatids.

Rozman D(1), Fink M, Fimia GM, Sassone-Corsi P, Waterman MR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Medical Center for Molecular Biology, Medical
Faculty University of Ljubljana, Slovenia. rozman@ibmi.mf.uni-lj.si

Lanosterol 14alpha-demethylase (CYP51) produces MAS sterols, intermediates in
cholesterol biosynthesis that can reinitiate meiosis in mouse oocytes. As a
cholesterogenic gene, CYP51 is regulated by a sterol/sterol-regulatory element
binding protein (SREBP)-dependent pathway in liver and other somatic tissue. In
testis, however, cAMP/cAMP-responsive element modulator CREMtau-dependent
regulation of CYP51 predominates, leading to increased levels of shortened CYP51 
mRNA transcripts. CREM-/- mice lack the abundant germ cell-specific CYP51 mRNAs
in testis while expression of somatic CYP51 transcripts is unaffected. The mRNA
levels of squalene synthase (an enzyme preceding CYP51 in cholesterol
biosynthesis in testis of CREM-/- mice are unchanged as compared with wild-type
animals, showing that regulation by CREMtau is not characteristic for all
cholesterogenic genes expressed during spermatogenesis. The -334/+314 bp CYP51
region can mediate both the sterol/SREBP-dependent as well as the
cAMP/CREMtau-dependent transcriptional activation. SREBP-1a from somatic cell
nuclear extracts binds to a conserved CYP51-SRE1 element in the CYP51 proximal
promoter. The cAMP-dependent transcriptional activator CREMtau from germ cell
nuclear extracts binds to a conserved CYP51-CRE2 element while no SREBP-1 binding
is observed in germ cells. The two regulatory pathways mediating expression of
CYP51 describe this gene as a cholesterogenic gene (SREBP-dependent expression in
liver and other somatic cells) and also as a haploid expressed gene
(CREMtau-dependent expression in haploid male germ cells). While in somatic cells
all genes involved in cholesterol biosynthesis are regulated coordinately by the 
sterol/SREBP-signaling pathway, male germ cells contain alternate routes to
control expression of cholesterogenic genes.

PMID: 10551787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mech Dev. 1999 Oct;88(1):55-66.

Essential role of CREB family proteins during Xenopus embryogenesis.

Lutz B(1), Schmid W, Niehrs C, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany. lutz@mpipsykl.mpg.de

The leucine zipper transcription factors cAMP response element binding protein
(CREB), cAMP response element modulatory protein (CREM) and activating
transcription factor 1 (ATF1) bind to the cAMP response element (CRE) with the
palindromic consensus sequence TGACGTCA. Their transcriptional activities are
dependent on serine phosphorylation induced by various extracellular signals such
as hormones, growth factors and neurotransmitters. Here we show that CREB is the 
predominant CRE-binding protein in Xenopus embryos and that it plays an essential
role during early development. The importance of CREB for morphogenetic processes
was assessed by injection of RNA encoding a dominant-negative form of CREB that
is fused to a truncated progesterone receptor ligand binding domain. In this
fusion protein, a dominant-negative function can be induced by application of the
synthetic steroid RU486 at given developmental stages. The inhibition of CREB at 
blastula and early gastrula stages leads to severe posterior defects of the
embryos reflected by strong spina bifida, whereas the inhibition of CREB at the
beginning of neurulation resulted in stunted embryos with microcephaly. In these 
embryos, initial induction of neural and mesodermal tissues is not dependent on
CREB function, as genes such as Otx2, Krox20, Shh and MyoD are still expressed in
injected embryos. But the expression domains of Otx2 and MyoD were found to be
distorted reflecting the abnormal development in both neural and somitic
derivatives. In summary, our data show that CREB is essential during several
developmental stages of Xenopus embryogenesis.

PMID: 10525188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Int Urol Nephrol. 1999;31(2):237-46.

The role of autosomal cell apoptosis regulator genes in human spermatogenesis.

Lin WW(1), Lamb DJ, Lipshultz LI, Kim ED.

Author information: 
(1)Scott Department of Urology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Immunohistochemical analysis of the expression of the autosomal apoptosis
regulator genes, BAX, bcl-2, p53, and cyclic-AMP responsive element modulator
(CREM) in testis biopsies from infertile men demonstrated that BAX, bcl-2, and
p53 immunoreactivity was absent irrespective of seminiferous tubule histology. In
contrast, cell-specific CREM immunoreactivity in round spermatids, with complete 
absence of CREM in patient biopsies showing spermatocyte maturation arrest and
Sertoli cell only, was evident, suggesting a possible role of autosomal genes in 
the regulation of apoptosis in human spermatogenesis regulation.

PMID: 10481969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Reprod Dev. 1999 Sep;54(1):8-16.

Characterization of the genomic structure of the murine Spam1 gene and its
promoter: evidence for transcriptional regulation by a cAMP-responsive element.

Zheng Y(1), Martin-Deleon PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware,
USA. pdeleon@udel.edu

The Sperm Adhesion Molecule 1 (SPAM1), also known as PH-20, is a sperm
membrane-bound protein that has been shown to have bifunctional roles in
fertilization. It is encoded by a gene that is widely conserved in mammalian
species, underscoring its importance in the fertilization process. Here we
determined the genomic structure of the murine homologue, Spam1, using PCR
analysis, and studied its transcriptional regulation. The gene covers
approximately 10.5 kb of genomic DNA, is encoded by four exons, and the splice
site consensus sequence is maintained in all intron-exon junctions, similar to
that reported for the human homologue. With primer extension analysis, two
transcription initiation sites were detected. One was assigned to the residue C
and the other (a minor site) to the residue G, at positions 1 and -56,
respectively. These are at 313 and 369 nucleotides upstream of the translation
initiation codon, ATG. In about 770 bp upstream region of Spam1 that has been
cloned and sequenced, multiple transcription factor binding sites including a CRE
(cAMP-responsive element) were found. We specifically studied the function of the
eight nucleotide CRE sequence (TGATGTCA) at -57 (or -62 depending on the strain
of mice) of the promoter region. It can bind to the transcription factor CREM
(cAMP-responsive element modulator) in gel mobility shift assays using mouse
testis nuclear extract, and the binding can be inhibited by a 28 bp
oligonucleotide containing the CRE sequence. Similar binding and inhibition
assays using rat nuclear extract suggest the existence of a rat CRE sequence and 
the involvement of CREM in rat Spam1 expression. In vitro transcription assays
suggest that CRE is necessary for the transcriptional activity of the murine
promoter, and Northern analysis shows that Spam1 transcripts are absent in
CREM-knockout mice. The results strongly suggest that the murine Spam1 expression
is under the control of CREM, and that this transcriptional regulator for Spam1
might be conserved in other mammals, at least in the rat.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10423292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jul 23;274(30):21095-103.

The cyclic AMP response element modulator family regulates the insulin gene
transcription by interacting with transcription factor IID.

Inada A(1), Someya Y, Yamada Y, Ihara Y, Kubota A, Ban N, Watanabe R, Tsuda K,
Seino Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolism and Clinical Nutrition, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan 606-8507, USA. inada@metab.kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

We analyzed a mechanism of transcriptional regulation of the human insulin gene
by cyclic AMP response element modulator (CREM) through four cyclic AMP response 
elements (CREs). We isolated two novel CREM isoforms (CREMDeltaQ1 and
CREMDeltaQ2), which lack one of the glutamine-rich domains, Q1 and Q2
respectively, and six known isoforms (CREMtaualpha, CREMalpha, inducible cyclic
AMP early repressor (ICER) I, ICER Igamma, CREM-17X, and CREM-17) from rat
pancreatic islets and the RINm5F pancreatic beta-cell line. CREM isoforms
functioned as efficient transcriptional activators or repressors to modulate
insulin promoter activity by binding to all of the insulin CREs. The binding
activity of repressors is higher than that of activators and suppressed not only 
basal activity but also activator-induced activities. Furthermore, CREM activator
interacted directly with the transcription factor IID components hTAF(II)130 and 
TATA box-binding protein (TBP). These results suggest that the activation of the 
insulin gene transcription by CREM activator is mediated by not only direct
binding to the CREs but also by recruiting transcription factor IID to the
insulin promoter via its interaction with hTAF(II)130 and TBP. On the other hand,
the CREM repressor ICER competitively interrupts the binding of the activators to
CREs and does not interact with either TBP or hTAF(II)130; therefore, it might
fail to stabilize the basal transcriptional machinery and repress
transactivation.

PMID: 10409662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1999 Jul 5;70(2):219-30.

CREB mediates the cAMP-responsiveness of the tyrosine hydroxylase gene: use of an
antisense RNA strategy to produce CREB-deficient PC12 cell lines.

Piech-Dumas KM(1), Tank AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Box 711, 601 Elmwood Ave., Rochester, NY 14642, USA.
piechk@pharmacol.rochester.edu

cAMP initiates the PKA signaling cascade in rat pheochromocytoma PC12 cells,
resulting in transcriptional activation of the tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) gene.
This effect is mediated primarily through the cAMP responsive element (CRE),
located at position -45 to -38 within the TH gene promoter. In this study, we
applied an antisense RNA strategy to evaluate the role of the cAMP responsive
element binding protein (CREB) in regulating TH gene expression. CREB antisense
RNA expression vectors were stably introduced into PC12 cells to generate cell
lines deficient in CREB. CREB protein and mRNA levels were diminished up to 90%
in the stably transfected cell lines. Promoter analysis experiments demonstrated 
that cAMP-mediated inducibility of either TH gene proximal promoter activity or
the activity of the TH CRE by itself fused upstream of a basal promoter was
diminished in CREB-deficient cell lines. PKA activity in the CREB-deficient cell 
lines was comparable to the activity in control cell lines. In addition, neither 
ATF1, nor CREM proteins were significantly down-regulated in the CREB-deficient
cells. Most significantly, the cAMP-inducibility of endogenous TH mRNA was
completely blocked in the CREB-deficient cells, indicating that the response of
the endogenous gene to cAMP was dependent on CREB. These results support the
hypothesis that CREB (not other CRE-binding proteins) is the key transcription
factor that is required for regulating TH gene expression in response to cAMP.
Furthermore, our studies indicate that these CREB-deficient PC12 cells are
excellent tools to study the participation of CREB in gene regulation.

Copyright 1999 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 10407170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Trends Biochem Sci. 1999 Jul;24(7):281-5.

Signaling routes to CREM and CREB: plasticity in transcriptional activation.

De Cesare D(1), Fimia GM, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS - INSERM 
- Université Louis Pasteur, B. P. 163, 67404 Illkirch - Strasbourg, France.

The CREB and CREM transcription factors are activated by phosphorylation of a key
serine residue by kinases stimulated by cyclic AMP, Ca2+, growth factors and
stress signals. Phosphorylation allows recruitment of CREB-binding protein (CBP),
a large co-activator that contacts the general transcriptional machinery. Studies
of the physiological roles played by CREB and CREM have uncovered novel routes of
transcriptional activation. For example, in male germ cells CREM is not
phosphorylated but associates with ACT, a member of the LIM-only class of
proteins that has intrinsic transcriptional activity. Thus, in some
circumstances, CREM can bypass the classical requirement for phosphorylation and 
association with CBP.

PMID: 10390618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1998;63:631-42.

Mechanisms of activation by CREB and CREM: phosphorylation, CBP, and a novel
coactivator, ACT.

Fimia GM(1), De Cesare D, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS, INSERM, 
Université Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France.

PMID: 10384328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jul;19(7):5001-13.

Human Cdc34 and Rad6B ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes target repressors of cyclic
AMP-induced transcription for proteolysis.

Pati D(1), Meistrich ML, Plon SE.

Author information: 
(1)Texas Children's Cancer Center, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis controls diverse physiological processes in
eukaryotes. However, few in vivo targets of the mammalian Cdc34 and Rad6
ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes are known. A yeast-based genetic assay to identify 
proteins that interact with human Cdc34 resulted in three cDNAs encoding bZIP DNA
binding motifs. Two of these interactants are repressors of cyclic AMP
(cAMP)-induced transcription: hICERIIgamma, a product of the CREM gene, and
hATF5, a novel ATF homolog. Transfection assays with mammalian cells demonstrate 
both hCdc34- and hRad6B-dependent ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis of hICERIIgamma 
and hATF5. This degradation requires an active ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme and
results in abrogation of ICERIIgamma- and ATF5-mediated repression of
cAMP-induced transcription. Consistent with these results, the endogenous ICER
protein is elevated in cells which are null for murine Rad6B (mHR6B-/-) or
transfected with dominant negative and antisense constructs of human CDC34. Based
on the requirement for CREM/ICER and Rad6B proteins in spermatogenesis, we
determined expression of Cdc34, Rad6B, CREM/ICER isoforms, and the
Skp1-Cullin-F-box ubiquitin protein ligase subunits Cul-1 and Cul-2, which are
associated with Cdc34 activity during murine testicular development. Cdc34,
Rad6B, and the Cullin proteins are expressed in a developmentally regulated
manner, with distinctly different patterns for Cdc34 and the Cullin proteins in
germ cells. The Cdc34 and Rad6B proteins are significantly elevated in meiotic
and postmeiotic haploid germ cells when chromatin modifications occur. Thus, the 
stability of specific mammalian transcription factors is the result of complex
targeting by multiple ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes and may have an impact on
cAMP-inducible gene regulation during both meiotic and mitotic cell cycles.

PMCID: PMC84326
PMID: 10373550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Endocrinology. 1999 Jun;140(6):2746-54.

Germ cell-specific cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate response element
modulator expression in rodent and primate testis is maintained despite
gonadotropin deficiency.

Behr R(1), Weinbauer GF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive Medicine of the University, Munster, Germany.

cAMP response element modulator (CREM) is an important component of the
cAMP-mediated signaling pathway and is essential for differentiation of haploid
male germ cells. In the rodent, testicular expression of CREM is believed to be
controlled by FSH. We studied the expression pattern of CREM and gonadotropic
control in the nonhuman primate and rodent testis. Adult cynomolgus monkeys
(Macaca fascicularis) received daily either vehicle or the potent GnRH antagonist
(ANT) cetrorelix for periods of 25 and 56 days. Rats were also exposed to vehicle
or ANT for periods of 14 and 42 days. ANT treatment suppressed pituitary
gonadotropin secretion, reduced testis size, and altered spermatogenesis. A
rabbit polyclonal antibody raised against recombinant CREM tau and reacting with 
CREM alpha, -beta, -gamma, -tau1, and -tau2 at similar affinities was used for
immunocytochemistry and Western blotting. CREM expression was seen in round
spermatids, with highest levels during spermatogenic stages V-VII, but declined
with progression of spermatid development in the primate. Similar observations
were made for the rat testis. Thus, CREM expression was maximal at the onset of
acrosome formation and was low or undetectable upon initiation of spermatid
elongation in both species. A weak, but specific, CREM signal was seen in mid- to
late pachytene spermatocytes and during meiotic division in both species. After
ANT exposure, the germ cell- and stage-specific pattern of CREM expression was
quantitatively retained at all time points and in both species. Northern and
Western blot analysis confirmed the maintenance of testicular CREM expression
despite 25 days of ANT treatment. A retrospective immunocytochemical analysis of 
rat testes 14 days posthypophysectomy revealed CREM signals in round spermatids. 
These findings demonstrate that the testicular expression of CREM is not entirely
dependent on gonadotropic hormones but, rather, on the maturational stage of
haploid round germ cells.

PMID: 10342865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Neuron. 1999 Apr;22(4):777-87.

The Drosophila dCREB2 gene affects the circadian clock.

Belvin MP(1), Zhou H, Yin JC.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York 11724, USA.

We report the role of dCREB2, the Drosophila homolog of CREB/CREM, in circadian
rhythms. dCREB2 activity cycles with a 24 hr rhythm in flies, both in a
light:dark cycle and in constant darkness. A mutation in dCREB2 shortens
circadian locomotor rhythm in flies and dampens the oscillation of period, a
known clock gene. Cycling dCREB2 activity is abolished in a period mutant,
indicating that dCREB2 and Period affect each other and suggesting that the two
genes participate in the same regulatory feedback loop. We propose that dCREB2
supports cycling of the Period/Timeless oscillator. These findings support CREB's
role in mediating adaptive behavioral responses to a variey of environmental
stimuli (stress, growth factors, drug addiction, circadian rhythms, and memory
formation) in mammals and long-term memory formation and circadian rhythms in
Drosophila.

PMID: 10230797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Apr 14;1445(1):31-8.

Regulation of cAMP responsive element binding modulator isoforms in cultured rat 
ovarian granulosa cells.

Kameda T(1), Mizutani T, Minegishi T, Ibuki Y, Miyamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Biosignal Research Center Institute for Molecular and Cellular Regulation,
Gunma University, Maebashi, Gunma 371-8512, Japan.

A pituitary glycoprotein hormone FSH stimulates ovarian granulosa cells to induce
ovarian follicular development. In this study we identified rat ovarian genes
that were rapidly induced by FSH in the cultured rat granulosa cells by means of 
subtraction cloning. Complementary DNA clones encoding cAMP responsive element
binding modulator (CREM) were identified as one of the FSH inducible genes.
Northern blotting and reverse transcription and polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) analyses revealed that only the repressor type of CREM gene products,
ICER (inducible cAMP early repressor) isoforms, were induced by FSH treatment in 
cultured rat granulosa cells. The induction of ICER by FSH was mimicked by
reagents known to increase intracellular cAMP levels, indicating that the
induction is through cAMP and protein kinase A signal transduction system.
Induction of ICER was also confirmed as the protein levels. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assay of granulosa cell extracts with a radiolabeled double
stranded oligonucleotide corresponding to somatostatin cAMP responsive element
also revealed that only the ICER proteins were induced by FSH treatment, whereas 
levels of CREM proteins were nearly constant regardless of the FSH treatment. Our
present study demonstrates that FSH-induced and cAMP-mediated induction and
attenuation of transcriptional responses by CREM gene products may be a key
mechanistic component for the granulosa cell differentiation and proliferation.

PMID: 10209256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Nature. 1999 Mar 11;398(6723):165-9.

CBP-independent activation of CREM and CREB by the LIM-only protein ACT.

Fimia GM(1), De Cesare D, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS-INSERM-ULP, Illkirch, Strasbourg, France.

Transcriptional activation by CREB and CREM requires phosphorylation of a serine 
residue within the activation domain (Ser 133 in CREB; Ser 117 in CREM) which as 
a result interacts with the coactivator CBP. The activator CREM is highly
expressed in male germ cells and is required for post-meiotic gene expression.
Using a two-hybrid screen, we have isolated a testis-derived complementary DNA
encoding a protein that we term ACT (for activator of CREM in testis), a LIM-only
protein which specifically associates with CREM. ACT is expressed coordinately
with CREM in a tissue- and developmentally regulated manner. It strongly
stimulates CREM transcriptional activity in yeast and mammalian cells and
contains an intrinsic activation function. As ACT bypasses the classical
requirements for activation, namely phosphorylation of Ser 117 and interaction
with CBP, it represents a new route for transcriptional activation by CREM and
CREB. ACT may define a previously undiscovered class of tissue-specific
coactivators whose function could be specific for distinct cellular
differentiation programmes.

PMID: 10086359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr Hum Retrovirol. 1999 Jan 1;20(1):1-10.

Comparison of HTLV-I basal transcription and expression of CREB/ATF-1/CREM family
members in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and Jurkat T cells.

Newbound GC(1), O'Rourke JP, Collins ND, DeWille J, Lairmore MD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Retrovirus Research and Department of Veterinary Biosciences, The
Ohio State University, Columbus 43210-1092, USA.

HTLV-I is the etiologic agent of adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma and is associated
with tropical spastic paraparesis/HTLV-I-associated myelopathy. Following
integration into the host cell genome, HTLV-I replication is regulated by both
host and viral mechanisms that control transcription. Low levels of viral
transcription (basal transcription) occur before expression of the virally
encoded Tax protein (Tax-mediated transcription). Members of the cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) response element binding (CREB)/activating transcription
factor 1 (ATF-1) family of transcription factors bind three 21-bp repeats
(Tax-responsive element-1, or TRE-1) within the viral promoter and are important 
for basal and Tax-mediated transcription. Using mitogen stimulated and quiescent 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and Jurkat cells, we compared
differences in basal transcription and amounts and binding of transcription
factors with TRE-1. We demonstrate that amounts of transcriptionally active
phosphorylated CREB protein (P-CREB) differ between activated PBMC and Jurkat
cells. Following stimulation, P-CREB levels remain elevated in PBMC for up to 24 
hours whereas CREB is dephosphorylated in Jurkat cells within 4 hours following
stimulation. The differences in P-CREB levels between PBMC and Jurkat cells were 
directly correlated with basal transcription of HTLV-I in the two cell types.
Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we determined that the pattern of
band migration differed between the two cell types. These data demonstrate that
PBMC differentially regulate basal HTLV-I transcription compared with Jurkat T
cells, and this differential regulation is due, in part to differential
phosphorylation and binding of CREB/ATF-1 to TRE-1 in the HTLV-I promoter. We
demonstrate the utility of using primary lymphocyte models to study HTLV-I
transcription in the context of cell signaling and suggest that activated PBMC
maintain elevated levels of P-CREB, which promote basal HTLV-I transcription and 
enhance viral persistence in vivo.

PMID: 9928723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Dec 30;253(3):712-8.

Transcriptional repressors are increased in pancreatic islets of type 2 diabetic 
rats.

Inada A(1), Yamada Y, Someya Y, Kubota A, Yasuda K, Ihara Y, Kagimoto S, Kuroe A,
Tsuda K, Seino Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolism and Clinical Nutrition, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Japan.

To further clarify the mechanism of impaired insulin gene transcription in the
diabetic state, we investigated the expression and function of the
transcriptional repressor CREM (CRE modulator) in rat pancreatic islets. The CREM
gene generates both transcriptional activators and repressors by alternative
splicing and an intronic promoter. We isolated a novel alternatively spliced CREM
isoform, CREM-17X, which efficiently represses insulin gene transcription, in
addition to the three previously reported repressors. We also compared mRNA
levels of insulin and the CREM repressors in pancreatic islets of Wistar and GK
(Goto-Kakizaki) rats, the well-characterized spontaneous animal model of type 2
diabetes. The CREM repressor levels are increased, and the expression of insulin 
mRNA is decreased in GK rats, suggesting that increased CREM repressor expression
in pancreatic islets could contribute to the decreased insulin gene transcription
that results in impaired insulin secretion in type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 9918792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 29;274(5):3042-7.

Unique regulation of immediate early gene and tyrosine hydroxylase expression in 
the odor-deprived mouse olfactory bulb.

Liu N(1), Cigola E, Tinti C, Jin BK, Conti B, Volpe BT, Baker H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Cornell University Medical College at
The Burke Medical Research Institute, White Plains, New York 10605, USA.

Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), expressed in a population of periglomerular neurons
intrinsic to the olfactory bulb, displays dramatic down-regulation in response to
odor deprivation. To begin to elucidate the importance of immediate early genes
(IEG) in TH gene regulation, the present study examined expression of IEGs in the
olfactory bulb in response to odor deprivation. In addition, the composition of
TH AP-1 and CRE binding complexes was investigated in control and odor-deprived
mice. Immunocytochemical studies showed that c-Fos, Fos-B, Jun-D, CRE-binding
protein (CREB), and phosphorylated CREB (pCREB) are colocalized with TH in the
dopaminergic periglomerular neurons. Unilateral naris closure resulted in
down-regulation of c-Fos and Fos-B, but not Jun-D, CREB, or pCREB, in the
glomerular layer of the ipsilateral olfactory bulb. Gel shift assays demonstrated
a significant decrease (32%) in TH AP-1, but not CRE, binding activity in the
odor-deprived bulb. Fos-B was found to be the exclusive member of the Fos family 
present in the TH AP-1 complex. CREB, CRE modulator protein (CREM), Fos-B, and
Jun-D, but not c-Fos, all contributed to the CRE DNA-protein complex. These
results indicated that Fos-B, acting through both AP-1 and CRE motifs, may be
implicated in the regulation of TH expression in the olfactory bulb dopaminergic 
neurons.

PMID: 9915843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Eur J Biochem. 1999 Jan;259(1-2):370-8.

Requirement for cAMP-response element (CRE) binding protein/CRE modulator
transcription factors in thyrotropin-induced proliferation of dog thyroid cells
in primary culture.

Uyttersprot N(1), Costagliola S, Dumont JE, Miot F.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Research Institute, Free University of Brussels, Belgium.

In several cell types, mostly of epithelial origin, activation of the cAMP
pathway triggers DNA synthesis and cell division. Regulation of gene expression
by cAMP involves phosphorylation by pyruvate kinase A and activation of
cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB)/CRE modulator (CREM) transcription
factors which bind DNA to CRE sites. On the other hand, several CREM isoforms are
transcriptional repressors, such as the inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER)
transcription factors, which are synthesized from an intronic promoter of the
CREM gene. This study investigated the potential role of CREB/CREM transcription 
factors in the cAMP mitogenic pathway, using an experimental model of epithelial 
cells in primary culture, i.e. dog thyroid cells stimulated by
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). In response to TSH, CREB/CREM transcription
factors were phosphorylated on the serine residue of the pyruvate kinase A
consensus site. In addition, the synthesis of ICER mRNAs was strongly induced by 
TSH. This transient upregulation of ICER expression correlated with increased
protein levels. It was restricted to the cAMP pathway, as neither epidermal
growth factor nor phorbol myristate acetate, which are potent mitogens for dog
thyroid cells, induced ICER expression. On the other hand, increased expression
of ICER mRNAs was not detected in dog thyroids chronically stimulated by TSH in
vivo. The requirement for CREB/CREM transcription factors in the mitogenic effect
of TSH was assessed by transfecting expression vectors encoding CREM repressors
into dog thyrocytes in order to interfere with CRE-mediated gene transcription.
The ectopic expression of ICER Igamma or CREM alpha isoforms inhibited DNA
replication in dog thyrocytes stimulated by TSH. This inhibitory effect was
dependent on the ability of CREM repressors to form dimers but did not involve
their DNA-binding capacity. Together these results show that CREB/CREM
transcription factors are tightly regulated, at the transcriptional and
post-translational levels, by TSH in dog thyroid cells, and provide clear
evidence that their activity is required for the cAMP-dependent proliferation of 
cells in primary culture. Moreover, the transient induction of ICER transcription
factors during mitogenic stimulation by TSH raises questions about the role of
these potent repressors of CRE-dependent transcription as timers of cellular
proliferation.

PMID: 9914516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Neuroscience. 1998 Sep;86(2):499-510.

Plasticity- and neurodegeneration-linked cyclic-AMP responsive element
modulator/inducible cyclic-AMP early repressor messenger RNA expression in the
rat brain.

Konopka D(1), Szklarczyk AW, Filipkowski RK, Trauzold A, Nowicka D, Hetman M,
Kaczmarek L.

Author information: 
(1)Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, Warsaw, Poland.

In order to explore the role of CREM (cyclic-AMP responsive element modulator)
gene expression in the function of the central nervous system, the gene
transcripts were investigated in the rat brain in several conditions linked to
increased neuronal activity. Up-regulation of CREM messenger RNA levels in the
hippocampus was found to follow intraperitoneal administration of kainate (10
mg/kg). This increase was observed in both the dentate gyrus and hippocampus
proper (CA subfields) and reached its maximum at 6 h after the treatment.
Intrahippocampal injection of N-methyl-D-aspartate (200 nmol) resulted in
elevated CREM messenger RNA expression as well. A similar increase of the
messenger RNA abundance was also observed in the retrosplenial cortex after
treating the female rats with a high dose (5 mg/kg) of dizocilpine maleate, an
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist. All these conditions are linked to
neuronal excitation and neurodegeneration. However, an increase in CREM messenger
RNA accumulation was also observed in the visual cortex after exposure of
dark-adapted animals to the light, a procedure linked to neuronal plasticity. In 
the latter condition, it was found that CREM messenger RNA reached its highest
levels at 6 h, i.e. later than the maximal increase of expression of immediate
early genes such as c-fos, jun B and zif268, observed 45 min following the onset 
of visual stimulation. The ICER (inducible cyclic-AMP early repressor) form of
CREM messenger RNA was identified to be induced by the light exposure. Finally,
it was also found that cycloheximide, an inhibitor of protein synthesis,
overinduces CREM/ICER gene expression. Together, these data suggest that
CREM/ICER may be responsive to neuronal activation. Furthermore, given that CREM 
products have been shown previously to down-regulate expression of immediate
early genes in vitro, they suggest that ICER may function as a molecular switch
involved in down-regulation of immediate early gene expression in the rat brain.

PMID: 9881864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Oncogene. 1998 Dec 10;17(23):3015-9.

ICER-IIgamma is a tumor suppressor that mediates the antiproliferative activity
of cAMP.

Razavi R(1), Ramos JC, Yehia G, Schlotter F, Molina CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, New Jersey Medical School, Newark
07103, USA.

The second messenger cAMP inhibits the proliferation of most cell types. The
nuclear response of cAMP is mediated by transcription factors like the
cAMP-Responsive Element Modulator (CREM) gene. One of the products of the CREM
gene, the transcriptional repressor Inducible cAMP Early Repressor-IIgamma
(ICER-IIgamma), is induced by cAMP. ICER-IIgamma blocks cells at the G2/M
boundary of the cell cycle. Here we show that ICER-IIgamma dramatically inhibits 
the growth and DNA synthesis of mouse pituitary tumor cells and human
choriocarcinoma cells. This alteration in cell growth is coupled with reduced
ability of these cells to grow in an anchorage-independent manner and to form
tumors in mice. These data demonstrate that ICER-IIgamma is a tumor suppressor
gene product mediating the antiproliferative activity of cAMP.

PMID: 9881703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 1998 Dec;28(3):370-490.

Inducible and constitutive transcription factors in the mammalian nervous system:
control of gene expression by Jun, Fos and Krox, and CREB/ATF proteins.

Herdegen T(1), Leah JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, University of Kiel, Hospitalstrasse 4, 24105, Kiel,
Germany.t.herdegen@pharmakologie.uni-kiel.de

This article reviews findings up to the end of 1997 about the inducible
transcription factors (ITFs) c-Jun, JunB, JunD, c-Fos, FosB, Fra-1, Fra-2,
Krox-20 (Egr-2) and Krox-24 (NGFI-A, Egr-1, Zif268); and the constitutive
transcription factors (CTFs) CREB, CREM, ATF-2 and SRF as they pertain to gene
expression in the mammalian nervous system. In the first part we consider basic
facts about the expression and activity of these transcription factors: the
organization of the encoding genes and their promoters, the second messenger
cascades converging on their regulatory promoter sites, the control of their
transcription, the binding to dimeric partners and to specific DNA sequences,
their trans-activation potential, and their posttranslational modifications. In
the second part we describe the expression and possible roles of these
transcription factors in neural tissue: in the quiescent brain, during pre- and
postnatal development, following sensory stimulation, nerve transection
(axotomy), neurodegeneration and apoptosis, hypoxia-ischemia, generalized and
limbic seizures, long-term potentiation and learning, drug dependence and
withdrawal, and following stimulation by neurotransmitters, hormones and
neurotrophins. We also describe their expression and possible roles in glial
cells. Finally, we discuss the relevance of their expression for nervous system
functioning under normal and patho-physiological conditions.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 9858769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Genes Dev. 1998 Dec 1;12(23):3639-43.

Transcription factor CREM coordinates the timing of hepatocyte proliferation in
the regenerating liver.

Servillo G(1), Della Fazia MA, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique-Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale-Université Louis Pasteur (CNRS-INSERM-ULP), 67404 Illkirch,
Strasbourg,

The liver regenerates upon partial hepatectomy (PH) as terminally differentiated 
hepatocytes undergo a tremendous proliferative process. CREM gene expression is
powerfully induced during liver regeneration. We show that cell proliferation is 
significantly reduced upon PH in CREM-/- mice. There is a reduction in DNA
synthesis, in the number of mitosis and of phosphorylated histone H3-positive
cells. The post-PH proliferation peak is delayed by 10 hr, indicating an altered 
hepatocyte cell cycle. Expression of cyclins A, B, D1, E, and cdc2, of c-fos and 
tyrosine aminotransferase is deregulated. CREM mutation results in delayed
S-phase entry, impairing the synchronization of proliferation.

PMCID: PMC317249
PMID: 9851970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Eur J Biochem. 1998 Nov 15;258(1):123-31.

Transcriptional regulation of the tissue-type plasminogen-activator gene in human
endothelial cells: identification of nuclear factors that recognise functional
elements in the tissue-type plasminogen-activator gene promoter.

Costa M(1), Shen Y, Maurer F, Medcalf RL.

Author information: 
(1)Monash University, Department of Medicine, Box Hill Hospital, Victoria,
Australia.

The gene encoding human tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA) is regulated in 
a cell-type-specific manner. Previous studies in non-endothelial cells have
indicated that basal and phorbol ester mediated induction is controlled by a cAMP
response element (CRE) referred to as the tPACRE, and an activating protein 2
(AP-2)-like site. The classification of the AP-2-like site was assigned on the
basis of its sequence homology, but has been shown in some cell systems to be
recognised by promoter-specific transcription factor-1 (Sp-1). Here, we have
investigated the transcriptional regulation of the t-PA gene in endothelial cells
and addressed the functional roles of the tPACRE and the Sp-1/AP-2-like sites.
5'-RACE experiments indicate that the t-PA gene uses two transcription initiation
sites in these cells with the downstream site being preferred. Functional
analyses of the t-PA promoter using reporter-gene constructs transfected into
C11STH endothelial cells demonstrate that the first 410 bp of the t-PA promoter
confers an increase in reporter-gene activity on treatment with 4beta-phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA). Mutagenesis of either the tPACRE or the Sp-1/AP-2 
site weakens both basal and inducible expression, while disruption of both sites 
renders the promoter completely unresponsive. Using supershift assays, we
identify the predominant tPACRE-binding proteins in nuclear extracts prepared
from both C11STH cells and primary umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) as
activating transcription factor 2, CREB (cAMP-responsive-element-binding
protein), CREM (cAMP response element modulator) and c-jun. Treatment of cells
with PMA results in a selective recruitment of jun-D to the tPACRE, while Sp-1
was identified as the major transcription factor that recognises the AP-2-like
site. Based on this data and previous reports, we have reassigned this as a
Sp-1-binding site. Finally, the identification of specific endothelial-derived
t-PACRE-binding proteins suggests an integral role for these factors in the
regulation of t-PA gene expression in human endothelial cells.

PMID: 9851700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Mol Med (Berl). 1998 Nov-Dec;76(12):811-7.

Regulating the balance between differentiation and apoptosis: role of CREM in the
male germ cells.

Sassone-Corsi P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Illkirch, Strasbourg, France.

Various endocrine and neuronal functions are governed by the cAMP-dependent
signaling pathway. In eukaryotes, transcriptional regulation upon stimulation of 
the adenylyl cyclase signaling pathway is mediated by a family of cAMP-responsive
nuclear factors. This family consists of a large number of members which may act 
as activators or repressors. These factors contain the basic domain/leucine
zipper motifs and bind as dimers to cAMP-response elements (CRE). The function of
CRE-binding proteins (CREBs) is modulated by phosphorylation by several kinases. 
Direct activation of gene expression by CREBs requires phosphorylation by the
cAMP-dependent protein kinase A to the serine-133 residue. The gene CREM encodes 
various transcription factors which play key physiological and developmental
roles within the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. We have previously shown
that the transcriptional activator CREMtau is highly expressed in postmeiotic
cells. Spermiogenesis is a complex process by which postmeiotic male germ cells
differentiate into mature spermatozoa. This process involves remarkable
structural and biochemical changes which are under the hormonal control of the
hypothalamic-pituitary axis. We have addressed the specific role of CREM in
spermiogenesis using CREM-mutant mice generated by homologous recombination.
Analysis of the seminiferous epithelium from mutant male mice reveals that
spermatogenesis stops at the first step of spermiogenesis. Late spermatids are
completely absent while there is a significant increase in apoptotic germ cells. 
A series of postmeiotic germ cell-specific genes are not expressed. Mutant male
mice completely lack spermatozoa. This phenotype is reminiscent of cases of human
infertility.

PMID: 9846951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Bone Miner Res. 1998 Dec;13(12):1846-51.

Parathyroid hormone induces expression of the inducible cAMP early repressor in
osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells and mouse calvariae.

Tetradis S(1), Nervina JM, Nemoto K, Kream BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Diagnosis, School of Dental Medicine, The University of
Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, Connecticut, USA.

Parathyroid hormone (PTH) regulates gene expression in skeletal osteoblasts
mainly through the cAMP-protein kinase A (PKA) pathway. In neuroendocrine cells, 
activation of the cAMP-PKA signaling pathway leads to induction of the inducible 
cAMP early repressor (ICER), which is transcribed from an intronic promoter of
the CREM gene and acts as a transcriptional repressor. To investigate whether PTH
induces ICER expression in osteoblastic cells, RNA from MC3T3-E1 cells was
subjected to reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction using primers
spanning the ICER sequence. Amplified products were subcloned, sequenced, and
used as a probe for Northern blot analysis. In MC3T3-E1 cells, PTH induced ICER
mRNA levels, which peaked at 2 h and declined to baseline by 8 h. Cycloheximide
caused superinduction of ICER mRNA in response to PTH. In cultured mouse
calvariae, PTH also induced ICER mRNA accumulation, which peaked at 2 h and
returned almost to baseline by 10 h. Overexpression of ICER IIgamma decreased
both baseline and PTH-stimulated prostaglandin G/H synthase 2 promoter activity
in MC3T3-E1 cells. The induction of ICER represents a novel mechanism by which
PTH regulates gene expression in osteoblastic cells.

PMID: 9844102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Biol Chem. 1998 Dec 4;273(49):32377-9.

CREB is a regulatory target for the protein kinase Akt/PKB.

Du K(1), Montminy M.

Author information: 
(1)Joslin Diabetes Center, Research Division, Department of Cell Biology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

The nuclear factor CREB stimulates the expression of cellular genes following its
protein kinase A-mediated phosphorylation at Ser-133. Ser-133 phosphorylation, in
turn, activates target gene expression by promoting recruitment of the
co-activator CBP. Recent studies showing that CREB and its paralog CREM are
required for survival of certain cell types prompted us to examine whether CREB
is a nuclear target for activation via the growth factor-dependent Ser/Thr kinase
Akt/PKB. When overexpressed in serum-stimulated cells, Akt/PKB potently induced
Ser-133 phosphorylation of CREB and promoted recruitment of CBP. Correspondingly,
Akt/PKB stimulated target gene expression via CREB in a
phospho(Ser-133)-dependent manner. Akt/PKB induced CREB activity only in response
to serum stimulation, and this effect was suppressed by the phosphatidylinositol 
3-kinase inhibitor LY 294002. Our results support the notion that Akt/PKB
promotes cell survival, at least in part, by stimulating the expression of
cellular genes via the CREB/CBP nuclear transduction pathway.

PMID: 9829964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 1998 Aug;9(4):475-82.

CREM: a master-switch governing male germ cells differentiation and apoptosis.

Sassone-Corsi P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Mole@a3culaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique INSERM-ULP, 67404 Illkirch, Strasbourg,
France.

Several endocrine and neuronal functions are governed by the cAMP-dependent
signalling pathway. In eukaryotes, transcriptional regulation upon stimulation of
the adenylyl cyclase signalling pathway is mediated by a family of
cAMP-responsive nuclear factors. The CREM gene plays a key physiological and
developmental role within the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. CREM is highly
expressed in postmeiotic cells upon a striking developmental switch regulated by 
the pituitary hormone FSH. CREM-mutant mice generated by homologous recombination
reveal that spermatogenesis stops at the first step of spermiogenesis. Late
spermatids are completely absent while there is a significant increase in
apoptotic germ cells. A series of post-meiotic germ cell-specific genes are not
expressed. Mutant male mice completely lack spermatozoa. This phenotype is
reminiscent of cases of human infertility.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9813195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1998 Aug 25;143(1-2):167-78.

Inducible cAMP early repressor ICER down-regulation of CREB gene expression in
Sertoli cells.

Walker WH(1), Daniel PB, Habener JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston 02114, USA.

The cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) and the cAMP-responsive element 
modulator (CREM) are cyclically expressed in the seminiferous tubules during
spermatogenesis. In the somatic Sertoli cells, which are the major supporters of 
germ cell development in the seminiferous tubules, the expression of CREB is
cyclical and appears to be regulated by the levels of cAMP produced in response
to the pituitary derived follicle-stimulating hormone FSH. Cyclic AMP response
elements (CREs) located in the promoter of the CREB gene were shown earlier to be
implicated in an autopositive feedback loop that up-regulates the expression of
CREB. Here we show that in Sertoli cells FSH-mediated induction of the CREM
repressor isoform, ICER (inducible cAMP early repressor) is correlated with the
inhibition and delay of CREB gene expression in the seminiferous tubules. ICER
binds to the two CREs located in the promoter of the CREB gene and in transient
transfection assays of Sertoli cells, ICER expression vectors down-regulate
transcription of a reporter gene driven by the CREB gene promoter. In addition,
analyses of ICER and CREB gene expression in isolated segments of rat
seminiferous tubules reveals stage-specific and cycle-dependent expression of
ICER. The periods of enhanced expression of ICER correspond to the stages of
spermatogenesis with the lowest levels of CREB expression. We suggest that the
expression of ICER in Sertoli cells may contribute to the periodic repression of 
CREB gene expression during the repeated 12-day cycles of spermatogenesis, and
may be required to reset the levels of activator CREB prior to the initiation of 
each new cycle of spermatogenesis.

PMID: 9806361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Med Hypotheses. 1998 Sep;51(3):267-8.

Vitamin D and serotonin in winter.

Partonen T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Calcitriol accumulates in the nuclei of adrenal medullary cells, stimulating the 
tyrosine hydroxylase gene expression. The transcription of the CREM gene is
induced by adrenergic input to the pineal gland at night. Depending on the
photoperiod of the prior night length, the CREM gene is either subsensitive or
supersensitive to induction. Guided by the memory of past photoperiods, the
induced changes in melatonin synthesis may mediate either the inhibitory or
stimulatory effects on bodily functions. Calcitriol might inhibit the binding of 
melatonin to the nuclear retinoid Z receptors, which would result in the
increased serotonin levels. Serotonin synthesis is hypothesized to be dependent
on the duration of light exposure the previous summer.

PMID: 9792205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Cell. 1998 Oct 16;95(2):211-23.

CREB1 encodes a nuclear activator, a repressor, and a cytoplasmic modulator that 
form a regulatory unit critical for long-term facilitation.

Bartsch D(1), Casadio A, Karl KA, Serodio P, Kandel ER.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, College of Physicians and Surgeons of
Columbia University and New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York 10032,
USA. db57@columbia.edu

Although CREB seems to be important for memory formation, it is not known which
of the isoforms of CREB, CREM, or ATF1 are expressed in the neurons that undergo 
long-term synaptic changes and what roles they have in memory formation. We have 
found a single Aplysia CREB1 gene homologous to both mammalian CREB and CREM and 
have characterized in the sensory neurons that mediate gill-withdrawal reflex the
expression and function of the three proteins that it encodes: CREB1a, CREB1b,
and CREB1c. CREB1a is a transcriptional activator that is both necessary and,
upon phosphorylation, sufficient for long-term facilitation. CREB1b is a
repressor of long-term facilitation. Cytoplasmic CREB1c modulates both the short-
and long-term facilitation. Thus, in the sensory neurons, CREB1 encodes a
critical regulatory unit converting short- to long-term synaptic changes.

PMID: 9790528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998 Oct;83(10):3722-6.

Cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate-responsive element modulator gene expression
in germ cells of normo- and oligoazoospermic men.

Peri A(1), Krausz C, Cioppi F, Granchi S, Forti G, Francavilla S, Serio M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Physiopathology, University of Florence School of
Medicine, Italy. a.peri@dfc.unifi.it

In about one third of infertile men the cause of impaired spermatogenesis is not 
known. Spermatogenesis appears to be mediated at least in part by the pituitary
gonadotropins, which activate the cAMP-dependent signaling pathway. The end point
of this pathway is the activation of nuclear transcription factors, such as
cAMP-responsive element-binding protein and cAMP-responsive element modulator
(CREM). These factors, upon binding to gene sequences identified as cAMP response
elements, modulate the expression of germ cell-specific genes that, in turn,
promote the completion of spermatogenesis. The expressions of the cAMP-responsive
element-binding protein and CREM genes create different isoforms, which can be
divided into two groups: activators or repressors of gene regulation. Only CREM
repressors are expressed in premeiotic germ cells in mice, whereas a switch to
the expression of the CREM activator tau is observed from postmeiotic germ cells 
onward. Completion of germ cell maturation appears to be dependent on this
phenomenon. Recently, mice lacking CREM gene expression have been generated.
These animals were infertile and presented a developmental arrest of germ cell
maturation at the stage of early spermatid. In this report we demonstrate that
CREM gene expression also occurs in human germ cells. In particular, we
determined by RT-PCR that a switch from the expression of CREM repressors to CREM
activators is present in postmeiotic germ cells in normospermic men. Conversely, 
in oligoazoospermic patients only the expression of CREM repressors was detected.
These data were confirmed by in situ hybridization studies in which transcripts
for CREM activators were detected in postmeiotic germ cells in testis specimens
showing conserved spermatogenesis, but not in specimens showing maturation arrest
at the spermatid stage. Thus, our results indicate that the lack of a switch in
the expression of CREM gene isoforms may be related to impaired spermatogenesis
in humans.

PMID: 9768690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Neurosci. 1998 Oct 15;18(20):8163-74.

Regulation of tyrosine hydroxylase gene expression during transdifferentiation of
striatal neurons: changes in transcription factors binding the AP-1 site.

Guo Z(1), Du X, Iacovitti L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of Pennsylvania and
Hahnemann University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19129, USA.

We have shown previously that the synergistic interaction of acidic fibroblast
growth factor (aFGF) and a coactivator (dopamine, protein kinase A, or protein
kinase C activator) will induce the novel expression of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)
in neurons of the developing striatum. In this study we sought to determine
whether, concomitant with TH expression, there were unique changes in
transcription factors binding the AP-1 regulatory element on the TH gene. Indeed,
we found a significant recruitment of proteins into TH-AP-1 complexes as well as 
a shift from low- to high-affinity binding. Supershift experiments further
revealed dramatic changes in the proteins comprising the AP-1 complexes,
including recruitment of the transcriptional activators c-Fos, a novel Fos
protein, Fos-B, and Jun-D. Concomitantly, there was a decrease in repressor-type 
factors ATF-2 and CREM-1. aFGF appeared to play a central but insufficient role, 
requiring the further participation of at least one of the coactivating
substances. Experiments examining the signal transduction pathway involved in
mediating these nuclear events demonstrated that the presence of only an FGF (1, 
2, 4, 9) competent to induce TH caused the phosphorylation of mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK). Moreover, the treatment of cells with MEK/ERK inhibitors
(apigenin or PD98059) eliminated TH expression and the associated AP-1 changes,
suggesting that MAPK was a critical mediator of these events. We conclude that,
during transdifferentiation, signals may be transmitted via MAPK to the TH-AP-1
site to increase activators and reduce repressors, helping to shift the balance
in favor of TH gene expression at this and possibly other important regulatory
sites on the gene.

PMID: 9763463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. FEBS Lett. 1998 Sep 4;434(3):251-4.

An AP-1 site in the promoter of the human IL-5R alpha gene is necessary for
promoter activity in eosinophilic HL60 cells.

Baltus B(1), van Dijk TB, Caldenhoven E, Zanders E, Raaijmakers JA, Lammers JW,
Koenderman L, de Groot RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, University Hospital Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Interleukin-5 (IL-5) plays a crucial role in the proliferation, differentiation
and activation of eosinophils. The IL-5 receptor is composed of an IL-5-specific 
alpha subunit, which is expressed by eosinophils and basophils, and a beta
c-subunit shared with the receptors for IL-3 and GM-CSF. We identified an AP-1
element which is important for IL-5R alpha promoter activity in eosinophilic HL60
cells. The AP-1 site and the previously identified EOS1 site cooperate, since
single mutation of either of the sites decreased promoter activity. We show that 
the AP-1 site of the IL-5R alpha promoter binds multiple proteins, including
cJun, CREB, and CREM.

PMID: 9742933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. FASEB J. 1998 Sep;12(12):1191-9.

Identification and expression of a novel isoform of cAMP response element
modulator in the human heart.

Müller FU(1), Bokník P, Knapp J, Neumann J, Vahlensieck U, Oetjen E, Scheld HH,
Schmitz W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Universität Münster, Germany.
mullerf@uni-muenster.de

In end-stage human heart failure, excessive beta-adrenergic stimulation of the
cAMP-dependent signaling pathway due to enhanced endogenous catecholamines is
hypothesized to contribute to expressional alterations of myocardial regulatory
proteins. The cAMP response element modulator (CREM) regulates the transcription 
of cAMP-responsive genes and might be involved in the regulation of cardiac gene 
expression. Using the reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, we
identified a novel CREM mRNA, CREM-Ib deltaC-X, in the human heart.
Overexpression of CREM-Ib deltaC-X decreased cAMP response element (CRE)
-mediated gene transcription in HIT-T15 cells, and this activity was assigned to 
the part of the sequence encoding putative internally translated proteins. Two of
three possible internally translated proteins were immunologically identified in 
cells overexpressing CREM-Ib deltaC-X tagged with the hemagglutinin epitope of
the influenza virus. Both proteins were expressed in bacteria and showed
CRE-specific DNA binding, formation of heterodimers with the cAMP response
element binding protein (CREB), and inhibition of CREB's binding to the CRE. CREM
expression was detected on the mRNA and protein levels in the human heart. We
conclude that CREM-Ib deltaC-X generates internally translated repressors of
CRE-mediated gene transcription, suggesting the first example for the existence
and function of human cardiac CREM.

PMID: 9737722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Neurosci. 1998 Jul 15;18(14):5301-10.

A complex program of striatal gene expression induced by dopaminergic
stimulation.

Berke JD(1), Paletzki RF, Aronson GJ, Hyman SE, Gerfen CR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Plasticity Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Dopamine acting in the striatum is necessary for normal movement and motivation. 
Drugs that change striatal dopamine neurotransmission can have long-term effects 
on striatal physiology and behavior; these effects are thought to involve
alterations in gene expression. Using the 6-hydroxydopamine lesion model of
Parkinson's disease and differential display PCR, we have identified a set of
more than 30 genes whose expression rapidly increases in response to stimulation 
of striatal dopamine D1 receptors. The induced mRNAs include both novel and
previously described genes, with diverse time courses of expression. Some genes
are expressed at near-maximal levels within 30 min, whereas others show no
substantial induction until 2 hr or more after stimulation. Some of the induced
genes, such as CREM, CHOP, and MAP kinase phosphatase-1, may be components of a
homeostatic response to excessive stimulation. Others may be part of a genetic
program involved in cellular and synaptic plasticity. A very similar set of genes
is induced in unlesioned animals by administration of the psychostimulant cocaine
or the antipsychotic eticlopride, although in distinct striatal cell populations.
In contrast to some previously described early genes, most of the novel genes are
not induced in cortex by apomorphine, indicating specificity of induction. Thus
we have identified novel components of a complex, coordinated genetic program
that is induced in striatal cells in response to various dopaminergic
manipulations.

PMID: 9651213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Jun;12(6):785-800.

Gonadotropins regulate inducible cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate early
repressor in the rat ovary: implications for inhibin alpha subunit gene
expression.

Mukherjee A(1), Urban J, Sassone-Corsi P, Mayo KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Cell Biology, Northwestern 
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA.

Many hormones that stimulate intracellular signaling pathways utilizing the
second messenger cAMP affect gene expression in target cells through the
activation of cAMP-responsive transcriptional regulatory proteins. Two of the
best characterized of these are the cAMP-response element (CRE)-binding protein
(CREB) and the CRE-modulatory protein (CREM). CREB and CREM are expressed as a
family of proteins that have diverse activities in either stimulating or
repressing gene transcription. In this study we examined the expression and
regulation of the CREM gene in the rat ovary and in granulosa cells, to determine
whether repressor isoforms of CREM might have a role in the LH-mediated
suppression of inhibin alpha-subunit gene expression that occurs just before
ovulation. We found that the predominant CREM mRNAs in the ovary correspond to
previously described internal transcripts of the CREM gene that encode the
inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER). ICER mRNAs are strongly induced in the
ovary by exogenous gonadotropins in immature rats and are transiently expressed
in the ovary immediately after the preovulatory LH surge in adult cycling rats.
Although ICER is expressed in multiple ovarian cell types, expression in
granulosa cells is observed only in response to LH stimulation. ICER mRNAs are
also induced by the activation of cAMP-signaling pathways in cultured primary
granulosa cells. To determine whether ICER can act as a functional repressor to
modulate potential target genes such as the inhibin alpha-subunit gene, an ICER
expression construct was transiently co-transfected into a granulosa cell line
along with an inhibin alpha-subunit promoter-luciferase reporter gene. Both basal
and cAMP-induced expression of the inhibin alpha-subunit promoter were suppressed
by ICER. These studies reveal that CREM, a tissue-specific factor, is expressed
and regulated by gonadotropins in the ovary, that the predominant CREM
transcripts encode the repressor protein ICER, and that ICER is capable of
inhibiting cAMP-induced expression of the inhibin alpha-subunit gene. Our
findings are consistent with a role for repressors such as ICER in mediating the 
suppression of inhibin alpha-subunit gene expression that occurs in the ovary at 
the time of the preovulatory LH surge.

PMID: 9626654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Biol Cell. 1997 Nov;89(8):487-94.

Rhythmic transcription: the molecular basis of circadian melatonin synthesis.

Foulkes NS(1), Whitmore D, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS-INSERM-ULP, Illkirch, France.

Adaptation to a changing environment is an essential feature of physiological
regulation. The day/night rhythm is translated into hormonal oscillations
governing the physiology of all living organisms. In mammals the pineal gland is 
responsible for the synthesis of the hormone melatonin in response to signals
originating from the endogenous clock located in the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN). The molecular mechanisms involved in rhythmic synthesis of
melatonin involve the CREM gene, which encodes transcription factors responsive
to activation of the cAMP signalling pathway. The CREM product, ICER, is
rhythmically expressed and participates in a transcriptional autoregulatory loop 
which also controls the amplitude of oscillations of serotonin N-acetyl
transferase (AANAT), the rate-limiting enzyme of melatonin synthesis. In
contrast, chick pinealocytes possess an endogenous circadian pacemaker which
directs AANAT rhythmic expression. cAMP-responsive activator transcription
factors CREB and ATF1 and the repressor ICER are highly conserved in the chick
with the notable exception of ATF1 that possesses two glutamine-rich domains in
contrast to the single domain encountered to date in mammalian systems. ICER is
cAMP inducible and undergoes a characteristic day-night oscillation in expression
reminiscent of AA-NAT, but with a peak towards the end of the night.
Interestingly CREB appears to be phosphorylated constitutively with a transient
fall occurring at the beginning of the night. Thus, a transcription factor
modulates the oscillatory levels of a hormone.

PMID: 9618898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Transgenic Res. 1998 Mar;7(2):105-12.

Maternally expressed PGK-Cre transgene as a tool for early and uniform activation
of the Cre site-specific recombinase.

Lallemand Y(1), Luria V, Haffner-Krausz R, Lonai P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel.

A transgenic mouse strain with early and uniform expression of the Cre
site-specific recombinase is described. In this strain, PGK-Crem, Cre is driven
by the early acting PGK-1 promoter, but, probably due to cis effects at the
integration site, the recombinase is under dominant maternal control. When Cre is
transmitted by PGK-Crem females mated to males that carry a reporter transgene
flanked by loxP sites, even offspring that do not inherit PGK-Cre delete the
target gene. It follows that in the PGK-Crem female Cre activity commences in the
diploid phase of oogenesis. In PGK-Crem crosses complete recombination was
observed in all organs, including testis and ovary. We prepared a mouse stock
that is homozygous for PGK-Crem and at the albino (c) locus. This strain will be 
useful for the early and uniform induction of ectopic and dominant negative
mutations, for the in vivo removal of selective elements from targeted mutations 
and in connection with the manipulation of targeted loci in 'knock in' and
related technologies.

PMID: 9608738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 1998 Jan;30(1):27-38.

Coupling gene expression to cAMP signalling: role of CREB and CREM.

Sassone-Corsi P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch, C.U.
de Strasbourg, France.

Several endocrine and neuronal functions are governed by the cAMP-dependent
pathway. Transcriptional regulation upon stimulation of this pathway is mediated 
by a family of cAMP-responsive nuclear factors. This family consists of a large
number of members, which may act as activators or repressors. These factors
contain the basic domain/leucine zipper motifs and bind as dimers to
cAMP-response elements (CRE). CRE-binding protein (CREBs) function is modulated
by phosphorylation by several kinases. Direct activation of gene expression by
CREB requires phosphorylation by the cAMP-dependent PKA to serine 133. Among the 
repressors, ICER (Inducible cAMP Early Repressor) deserves special mention. ICER 
is generated from an alternative CREM promoter and is the only inducible
CRE-binding protein. ICER negatively autoregulates the alternative promoter,
generating a feedback loop. ICER expression is tissue specific and
developmentally regulated. The kinetics of ICER expression are characteristic of 
an early response gene. CREM plays a key physiological and developmental role
within the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. The transcriptional activator
CREM is highly expressed in postmeiotic cells. The role of CREM in spermiogenesis
was addressed using CREM knock-out mice. Spermatogenesis stops at the first step 
of spermiogenesis in the mutants and there is a significant increase in apoptotic
germ cells. This phenotype is reminiscent of cases of human infertility. ICER is 
regulated in a circadian manner in the pineal gland, the site of the hormone
melatonin production. This night-day oscillation is driven by the endogenous
clock (located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus). The synthesis of melatonin is
regulated by a rate-limiting enzyme, serotonin N-acetyltransferase (NAT).
Analysis of the CREM-null mice and of the promoter of the NAT gene revealed that 
ICER controls the amplitude and rhythmicity of NAT, and thus the oscillation in
the hormonal synthesis of melatonin.

PMID: 9597751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 17;273(16):9971-5.

A cyclic AMP response element in the angiotensin-converting enzyme gene and the
transcription factor CREM are required for transcription of the mRNA for the
testicular isozyme.

Kessler SP(1), Rowe TM, Blendy JA, Erickson RP, Sen GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Lerner Research Institute, The Cleveland 
Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

The angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) gene produces two mRNA species from
tissue-specific promoters. The transcription start site of the mRNA for the
smaller testicular isozyme (ACET) is located within an intron of the larger
transcription unit that encodes the pulmonary isozyme (ACEP).We have previously
demonstrated that a 298-base pair DNA fragment, 5' to the rabbit ACET mRNA
transcription initiation site, can activate the testicular expression of a
transgenic reporter gene. In the current study, using the same transgenic
reporter system, we identified a putative cyclic AMP response element present
within this DNA fragment to be absolutely essential for transcriptional
activation. Moreover, we observed that ACET mRNA was not expressed in the testes 
of mice homozygous for a null mutation in the transcription factor CREM. However,
in the same mice, ACEP mRNA was abundantly expressed in the lung. Our
observations indicate that ACET mRNA expression in the testes is regulated by the
putative cyclic AMP response element present 5' to the transcription start site
and the corresponding transcription factor CREM.

PMID: 9545342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Gene. 1998 Jan 12;206(2):237-45.

Structural organization and chromosomal localization of the mouse tesk1
(testis-specific protein kinase 1) gene.

Toshima J(1), Nakagawara K, Mori M, Noda T, Mizuno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Kyushu University, Hakozaki,
Fukuoka 812-81, Japan.

TESK1 (testis-specific protein kinase 1) is a protein serine-threonine kinase,
containing characteristic structural features composed of an N-terminal kinase
domain and a C-terminal proline-rich domain. Tesk1 mRNA is predominantly
expressed in testicular germ cells, and developmental changes of expression in
mouse testis suggest a role for this kinase in spermatogenesis. In the present
study, we isolated and determined the overall sequence of the mouse Tesk1 gene,
which spans 6.1 kilobases (kb) and contains 10 exons and 9 introns. The protein
kinase domain is located in exons 1-9, while the proline-rich domain is in exons 
9 and 10. The deduced 627 amino acid sequence of mouse TESK1 shows 97% and 94%
identity with the rat and human TESK1, respectively. Sequence of the 5'-flanking 
and -untranslated region is devoid of a TATA box, but does contain several
potential binding sites for transcription factors, including Sp1, AP-1, c-Myc,
SRY and CREM (cyclic AMP-responsive element modulator). As CREM is implicated in 
the activation of several male germ cell-specific genes, it is suggested that the
expression of the Tesk1 gene is under the control of CREM transcription activity.
The Tesk1 gene was mapped to mouse chromosome 4A5-C1 by fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

PMID: 9469938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Eur J Neurosci. 1997 Dec;9(12):2778-83.

Peripheral noxious stimulation induces CREM expression in dorsal horn:
involvement of glutamate.

Naranjo JR(1), Mellström B, Carrión AM, Lucas JJ, Foulkes NS, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Cajal, CSIC, Madrid, Spain.

Peripheral noxious stimulation is known to trigger signalling cascades in neurons
of the spinal cord. The response to pain and stress at the level of gene
expression involves transcriptional activation of several cyclic AMP responsive
genes. Here, we show induction of the CREM (cyclic-AMP responsive element
modulator) gene in distinct subpopulations of spinal cord neurons upon thermal
noxious stimulation. The addition of forskolin or glutamate to cultured spinal
cord neurons results in the induction of the CREM isoform, ICER (Inducible
cyclic-AMP Early Repressor), a powerful repressor of cAMP-induced transcription. 
Overexpression of ICER in cultured spinal cord neurons results in the repression 
of the c-fos and c-jun promoters induced by forskolin and glutamate. On this
basis, we postulate that early activation of ICER in spinal cord participates in 
the attenuation of early gene induction following noxious stimulation.

PMID: 9517483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Biol Reprod. 1998 Mar;58(3):754-9.

Deoxyribonucleic acid-protein interactions and expression of the human
testis-specific lactate dehydrogenase promoter: transcription factor Sp1 plays a 
major role.

Bonny C(1), Cooker LA, Goldberg E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA.

The human testis-specific lactate dehydrogenase c gene (ldh-c) shows an
exceptionally large window of expression throughout pre- and postmeiotic stages
of the male germ cell lineage. In order to characterize the multiple
stage-specific transcription factors necessary for ldh-c expression, we
previously characterized the human ldh-c core promoter. Here, we used a
combination of gel retardation assays and an in vitro transcription system
derived from human tissues to better define the elements that govern ldh-c
transcription. Three classes of transcriptional regulators were defined by these 
experiments. 1) The Sp1 transcription factor is a testis-"enriched" protein that 
is absent from most somatic tissues and that appears to play a major role in
determining ldh-c expression in the testis. Highest levels of Sp1 during
spermatogenesis correlate with maxima of ldh-c expression. 2) The testis-specific
cAMP response element modulator (CREM) transcription factor binds a cAMP response
element (CRE)-like sequence located at position -433. This transcriptional
activator might contribute to postmeiotic transcription of ldh-c. 3) Factors
present in tissues negative for ldh-c expression appear to bind both the CRE-like
sequence and an adjacent hormone response element. The presence of this element
could be involved in regulating ldh-c through the glucocorticoid/androgen
pathways at the early stages of ldh-c expression.

PMID: 9510963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mol Hum Reprod. 1998 Jan;4(1):9-15.

Testicular cAMP responsive element modulator (CREM) protein is expressed in round
spermatids but is absent or reduced in men with round spermatid maturation
arrest.

Weinbauer GF(1), Behr R, Bergmann M, Nieschlag E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive Medicine of the University, Münster, Germany.

Mice lacking the functional cAMP responsive element modulator (CREM) gene, a
component of cAMP-mediated signal transduction, exhibit a specific arrest of
round spermatid development although follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and
androgen secretion are not impaired. We studied testicular expression of CREM
protein by immunocytochemistry in four patients with complete spermatogenesis
(obstructive azoospermia), in 20 infertile patients with round spermatid
maturation arrest (n = 10) or mixed atrophy (n = 10) and in six prostate cancer
patients undergoing orchidectomy. Concentrations of testosterone were below
normal in three patients. Concentrations of luteinizing hormone (LH) were lowered
in two patients and elevated in one patient. FSH concentrations were above normal
in ten patients. During normal spermatogenesis, CREM was expressed in nuclei of
round spermatids in stages I-III of spermatogenesis but not in elongating
spermatids. Western blot analysis of testes from prostate cancer patients
indicated a major CREM band of approximately 35 kDa. Among patients with
predominant round spermatid maturation arrest, CREM expression was significantly 
reduced (P < 0.05) or undetectable as revealed by quantitative image analysis.
CREM-negative spermatids failed to progress beyond stage III of spermatogenesis. 
Our observations suggest a role for CREM in human spermatid development and raise
the possibility that altered CREM expression could be associated with spermatid
maturation defects in some cases of idiopathic male infertility.

PMID: 9510006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Reprod Dev. 1998 Jan;49(1):81-91.

Expression of a testis-specific putative actin-capping protein associated with
the developing acrosome during rat spermiogenesis.

Hurst S(1), Howes EA, Coadwell J, Jones R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Signalling, Babraham Institute, Cambridge, England.
Hursts@bbsrc.ac.uk

Actin-capping proteins are ubiquitous components of mammalian cells. They are
known to regulate the polymerization state of actin and hence indirectly control 
the activity of the cytoskeleton and cell shape. As part of our investigation
into the molecular mechanisms that direct differentiation of a round spermatid
into an elongating spermatozoa, we report on a testis-specific 1.7-kb transcript 
from rat testis with sequence similarities to the alpha subunit of actin-capping 
proteins (ACPs) from somatic cells. The transcript contains a putative
cAMP-responsive motif (CREM) upstream of the initiation codon in the DNA sequence
and is expressed postmeiotically, first appearing between 20 and 30 days of
postnatal development. The primary amino acid sequence is 90% identical to that
of a previously identified testis-specific mouse protein, gsg3, both showing
approximately 40% homology to the alpha subunit of somatic ACPs. An
affinity-purified polyclonal antibody to a synthetic peptide derived from the rat
transcript identified a 32-kDa protein on Western blots of testicular extracts.
Indirect immunofluorescent localization of the protein on frozen sections of
adult rat testis showed that it is intracellular and accumulates asymmetrically
in the cytoplasm of round spermatids coincident with the position of the
developing acrosome. This spatial expression parallels the distribution of
F-actin during sperm differentiation, supporting the hypothesis that
testis-specific ACPs have an important role in determining the final shape of
mature sperm heads. A disturbance in the expression of these ACPs may underlie
many of the abnormalities in sperm morphology observed in infertile semen.

PMID: 9406198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Oncogene. 1997 Nov 13;15(20):2493-500.

Cross-talk in signal transduction: Ras-dependent induction of cAMP-responsive
transcriptional repressor ICER by nerve growth factor.

Monaco L(1), Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, INSERM, Illkirch, Strasbourg, France.

The CREM gene encodes both activators and repressors of cAMP-induced
transcription. By virtue of an alternative, intronic promoter within the gene,
the ICER (Inducible cAMP Early Repressor) isoform is generated. ICER acts as a
dominant negative regulator and is cAMP-inducible in various neuroendocrine cells
and tissues. ICER negatively autoregulates its own expression, and appears to
participate in the molecular events governing oscillatory hormonal regulations.
Here we report that ICER is inducible with nerve growth factor (NGF). This is the
first example of cAMP-independent induction of ICER expression. Importantly,
induction by NGF occurs via a subset of the CREs present in the ICER promoter
which were previously shown to direct cAMP-inducibility. ICER induction
correlates with a NGF-mediated phosphorylation of CREB. Both CREB phosphorylation
and ICER inducibility require an intact Ras-dependent signalling pathway. We show
that increased ICER levels result in the attenuation of c-fos expression. The
activation of a powerful repressor of cAMP-responsive transcription by NGF, whose
transduction signalling is cAMP-independent, constitutes a notable example of
nuclear cross-talk and thus is likely to have relevant physiological
implications.

PMID: 9395245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Trends Neurosci. 1997 Oct;20(10):487-92.

Rhythmic transcription: the molecular basis of circadian melatonin synthesis.

Foulkes NS(1), Borjigin J, Snyder SH, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch,
France.

Adaptation to a changing environment is an essential feature of physiological
regulation. The day-night rhythm is translated into hormonal oscillations
governing the metabolism of all living organisms. In mammals the pineal gland is 
responsible for the synthesis of the hormone melatonin in response to signals
originating from the endogenous clock located in the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN). The molecular mechanisms involved in rhythmic synthesis of
melatonin involve the cAMP response element modulator (crem) gene, which encodes 
transcription factors responsive to activation of the cAMP signalling pathway.
The CREM product, inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER), is rhythmically
expressed and participates in a transcriptional autoregulatory loop that also
controls the amplitude of oscillations of 5-HT N-acetyl transferase, the
rate-limiting enzyme of melatonin synthesis. Thus, a transcription factor
modulates the oscillatory levels of a hormone.

PMID: 9347618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 24;272(43):27382-92.

The homeodomain protein Arix interacts synergistically with cyclic AMP to
regulate expression of neurotransmitter biosynthetic genes.

Swanson DJ(1), Zellmer E, Lewis EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland, Oregon 97201, USA.

Transcription of the neurotransmitter biosynthetic genes tyrosine hydroxylase and
dopamine beta-hydroxylase (DBH) is regulated by cell type-specific transcription 
factors, including the homeoprotein Arix, and second messengers, including cyclic
AMP. The cis-acting regulatory sites of the DBH gene which respond to Arix and
cAMP lie adjacent to each other, between bases -180 and -150, in a regulatory
element named DB1. Neither Arix nor cyclic AMP analogs alone effectively
stimulate transcription from the DBH promoter in non-neuronal cell cultures.
However, when Arix is present together with cAMP, transcription is substantially 
activated. Synergistic transcription from the DBH promoter can also be elicited
by cotransfection of Arix with an expression vector encoding the catalytic
subunit of protein kinase A. Nuclear extracts from PC12 cells display a
cAMP-induced complex binding to the DB1 element, and antisera to transcription
factors CREB, CREM, Fos, and Jun indicate that these proteins, or closely related
family members, interact with DB1. A dominant negative construct of CREB inhibits
the response of the DBH promoter to protein kinase A. These results demonstrate a
synergistic interaction between a homeodomain protein and the cAMP signal
transduction system and suggest that similar interactions may regulate the
tissue-specific expression of neuroendocrine genes.

PMID: 9341190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mol Endocrinol. 1997 Sep;11(10):1425-34.

Ectopic ICER expression in pituitary corticotroph AtT20 cells: effects on
morphology, cell cycle, and hormonal production.

Lamas M(1), Molina C, Foulkes NS, Jansen E, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch,
Strasbourg, France.

The products of the cAMP response element modulator (CREM) gene play an important
role in the transcriptional response to cAMP in endocrine cells. By virtue of an 
alternative, intronic promoter within the gene, the inducible cAMP early
repressor (ICER) isoform is generated. ICER was shown to act as a dominant
negative regulator and to be cAMP-inducible in various neuroendocrine cells and
tissues. ICER negatively autoregulates its own expression and has been postulated
to participate in the molecular events governing oscillatory hormonal
regulations. To elucidate ICER function in pituitary physiology, we have
generated AtT20 corticotroph cell lines expressing the sense or antisense ICER
transcript under the control of the cadmium-inducible human methallothionein IIA 
promoter. Here we demonstrate that changes in the regulated levels of ICER have
drastic consequences on the physiology of the corticotrophs. Ectopic ICER
expression induces remarkable modifications in AtT20 morphology. Cells with
persistent, nonregulated high levels of ICER are blocked in the G2/M phase of the
cell cycle, while the opposite effect is obtained in cells expressing an
antisense ICER transcript. We show that the effect of ICER on the AtT20 cell
cycle is correlated to a direct down-regulation of the cyclin A gene promoter by 
ICER. Finally, we show that ACTH hormonal secretion from the corticotrophs is
completely blocked by ICER ectopic expression. Interestingly, this effect is not 
due to a direct regulation of the POMC gene, but is mediated by a transcriptional
control of the prohormone convertase 1 gene. These results point to a key
regulatory function of CREM in pituitary physiology.

PMID: 9280058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mol Endocrinol. 1997 Sep;11(10):1415-24.

The dynamics of the transcriptional response to cyclic adenosine
3',5'-monophosphate: recurrent inducibility and refractory phase.

Lamas M(1), Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
Nationale de la Recherche Scientifique, INSERM, Strasbourg, France.

Activation of the cAMP signal transduction pathway results in the transcriptional
induction of many genes. Several of them are induced with kinetics characteristic
of the early response. One of these, the cAMP response element modulator (CREM)
gene, is cAMP-inducible by virtue of an intronic promoter that directs the
synthesis of the dominant negative inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER). ICER is
involved in the down-regulation of its own promoter via an autoregulatory loop.
Thus, while phosphorylation of cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) by
the cAMP-dependent protein kinase A is the prerequisite for induction, it has
been proposed that the following attenuation involves both CREB dephosphorylation
and repression by the inducible repressor ICER. Here we show that ectopic
expression of sense or antisense ICER in corticotroph AtT20 cells dramatically
modifies the normal CREM inducibility profile. We have investigated the kinetics 
of CREM inducibility by recurrent stimulation of the cAMP-signaling pathway. We
define the presence of a refractory phase that follows the first induction cycle.
Accumulation of cAMP, protein kinase A activity, CREB/CREM phosphorylation, and
ICER levels contribute to the refractory period. Strikingly, the length of the
refractory period is determined by the length of the stimulation by cAMP
responsible for the first cycle of induction.

PMID: 9280057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Oncogene. 1997 Aug 14;15(7):827-36.

The transcriptional repressor ICER and cAMP-induced programmed cell death.

Ruchaud S(1), Seité P, Foulkes NS, Sassone-Corsi P, Lanotte M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U301, Centre G. Hayem, Hôpital St Louis, Paris, France.

The cAMP pathway plays a central role in the response to hormonal signals for
cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. In IPC-81 leukaemia cells,
activation of the cAMP pathway by prostaglandin E1 treatment, or other
cAMP-elevating agents, induces apoptosis within 4-6 h. Inhibition of mRNA or
protein synthesis during the first 2 h of cAMP induction protects cells from
apoptosis, suggesting a requirement for early gene expression. cAMP-dependent
protein kinase phosphorylates a class of nuclear factors and thereby regulates
the transcription of a specific set of genes. Here we show that CREM (cAMP
Responsive Element Modulator) expression is induced rapidly upon prostaglandin E1
treatment of IPC-81 cells. The induced transcripts correspond to the early
product ICER (Inducible cAMP Early Repressor). ICER expression remains elevated
until the burst of cell death. Protein synthesis inhibitors which prevent
cAMP-induced apoptosis also block de novo ICER synthesis. Transfected IPC-81 cell
lines, constitutively expressing high level of ICER are resistant to cAMP-induced
cell death. In these transfected cells, cAMP fails to upregulate the ICER
transcripts demonstrating that ICER exerts strongly its repressor function on
CRE-containing genes. That an early expression of ICER blocks apoptosis, suggests
that gene repression by endogenous ICER in IPC-81 is insufficient or occurs too
late to protect cells against death. ICER transfected cells rescued from
cAMP-induced apoptosis are growth arrested. It shows for the first time that CREM
activation directly participates to the decision of the cell to die. ICER, by
sequentially repressing distinct sets of CRE-containing genes could modulate cell
fate.

PMID: 9266969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Aug 8;237(1):74-8.

Dog CREM transcription factors: cloning, tissue distribution, and identification 
of new isoforms.

Uyttersprot N(1), Miot F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Interdisciplinary Research, Free University of Brussels, Belgium.
nuytters@ulb.ac.be

CREM (cAMP Response Element Modulator) transcription factors are involved in the 
cAMP-dependent transcriptional regulation of CRE-containing genes. Multiple CREM 
transactivators and repressors are generated from a single gene by alternative
splicings and use of an alternative intronic promoter. Here we report the cloning
and sequencing of the full-length dog CREM cDNA, corresponding to the CREMtau
alpha splice variant. Amino acid sequence identity with mouse and human orthologs
reached 94.5% and 91.0% respectively. Using the RNAse Protection Assay (RPA)
method with three distinct probes, we analyzed the expression of the various CREM
transcripts in several dog tissues. We showed that CREM transcription factors
have a restricted tissue distribution and that the ratio between activators and
repressors varies considerably from one tissue to another. Moreover, we
amplified, by RT-PCR, a cDNA that corresponds to two new CREM isoforms and
confirmed, by RPA experiments, the presence of these mRNAs in dog thyroid and in 
other tissues. These transcripts result from splicing of the gamma domain and
encode potential CREM transactivators (CREMtau alphagamma and CREMtau2
alphagamma).

PMID: 9266832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. FEBS Lett. 1997 Jun 23;410(1):22-4.

Cyclic AMP signalling and cellular proliferation: regulation of CREB and CREM.

Della Fazia MA(1), Servillo G, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS-Inserm,
B.P. 163, Illkirch, Strasbourg, France.

In eukaryotes, transcriptional regulation upon stimulation of the adenylyl
cyclase signalling pathway is mediated by a family of cAMP-responsive nuclear
factors. This family consists of a large number of members which may act as
activators or repressors. These factors contain the basic domain/leucine zipper
motifs and bind as dimers to cAMP-response elements (CRE). The function of
CRE-binding proteins (CREB) is modulated by phosphorylation by the cAMP-dependent
protein kinase. The ICER (inducible cAMP early repressor) protein is the only
inducible member of this family and is a product of the CREM gene. The induction 
of this powerful repressor is likely to be important for the transient nature of 
cAMP-induced gene expression. CREB proteins have been found to play an important 
role in the physiology of neuroendocrine functions. In addition, recent results
indicate that CREB and CREM could be involved in the proliferation of hepatocytes
which follows partial hepatectomy.

PMID: 9247115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Oncogene. 1997 Apr 3;14(13):1601-6.

Cyclic AMP signalling pathway and cellular proliferation: induction of CREM
during liver regeneration.

Servillo G(1), Penna L, Foulkes NS, Magni MV, Della Fazia MA, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto di Patologia Generale, Università di Perugia, Policlinico Monteluce,
Italy.

The CREM gene encodes both activators and repressors of cAMP-induced gene
expression. An isoform of CREM encodes the powerful transcriptional repressor
ICER (Inducible cAMP Early Repressor), which has been shown to be inducible by
virtue of an alternative, intronic promoter. The CREM gene belongs to the early
response class and displays a characteristic neuroendocrine cell- and
tissue-specific expression. To date ICER inducibility has been described in
non-replicating, terminally differentiated tissues. In this paper we document a
robust induction of CREM expression in the regenerating rat liver after partial
hepatectomy. This represents the first link of inducible CREM expression to the
phenomenon of cellular proliferation. Furthermore, it represents the first
example of transcriptional activation of a cAMP-responsive factor in the
regenerating liver. This has significant physiological relevance since the
adenylate cyclase signalling pathway is strongly implicated in liver
regeneration. Finally, we show that the repressor ICER is inducible in the
hepatoma cell line H35 upon activation of the adenylate cyclase and
phosphorylation of the activator CREB.

PMID: 9129151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jan 31;272(5):2646-51.

Differential activation of viral and cellular promoters by human T-cell
lymphotropic virus-1 tax and cAMP-responsive element modulator isoforms.

Laurance ME(1), Kwok RP, Huang MS, Richards JP, Lundblad JR, Goodman RH.

Author information: 
(1)Vollum Institute, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland, Oregon 97201,
USA.

We have previously proposed that cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB)
activity is stimulated by human T-cell lymphotropic virus-1 (HTLV-1) Tax through 
two mechanisms that are differentially dependent upon CREB phosphorylation. We
have tested this model by examining how Tax affects transcriptional activation
mediated by the cAMP-responsive element (CRE) modulator (CREM). The CREM proteins
are highly homologous to CREB, particularly in their DNA-binding domains and the 
kinase-inducible domain (KID), a region that interacts with the coactivator
CREB-binding protein (CBP) in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. Despite this
similarity, most CREM isoforms are transcriptional repressors. CREMalpha lacks
the glutamine-rich domains found in CREB that are essential for transcriptional
activation. We show that the normally repressive CREMalpha activates the HTLV-1
and cellular CREs in the presence of Tax; activation of the viral element is
phosphorylation-independent, and activation of the cellular CRE is
phosphorylation-dependent. CREMDelta(C-G) lacks both the KID and the
glutamine-rich regions. This isoform activates the HTLV-1 long terminal repeat in
a phosphorylation-independent manner, but does not activate the cellular CRE.
This study suggests that Tax, interacting with the basic/zipper region of CREM,
recruits CBP to the viral promoter. Tax activation of the cellular CRE depends on
the KID and its ability to interact with CBP in a phosphorylation-dependent
manner.

PMID: 9006899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Jan 7;94(1):127-32.

PU.1 can participate in an active enhancer complex without its transcriptional
activation domain.

Pongubala JM(1), Atchison ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104, 
USA.

The transcription factor PU.1 is necessary for the development of multiple
hematopoietic lineages and contributes to the activity of the immunoglobulin
kappa 3' enhancer. A variety of proteins bind to the 3' enhancer (PU.1, PIP,
ATF1, CREM, c-Fos, c-Jun, and E2A), but the mechanism of 3'-enhancer activity and
the proteins necessary for its activity are presently unclear. We show here that 
PU.1 participates with other transcription factors in forming a higher-order
complex with 3'-enhancer DNA sequences. Each protein is necessary for formation
of this complex. Individually, transcription factors that bind to the 3' enhancer
do not appreciably stimulate transcription in a cell type in which the 3'
enhancer is normally silent (NIH 3T3). However, mixture of multiple transcription
factors (PU.1, PIP, c-Fos, and c-Jun) can greatly activate the enhancer. PU.1 is 
necessary for maximal enhancer activity, but mutants of PU.1 that lack the
transcriptional activation domain are nearly as efficient at stimulating enhancer
activity as the wild-type PU.1 protein. PU.1 apparently can activate
transcription by playing an architectural role in interactions with other
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC19254
PMID: 8990172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Recent Prog Horm Res. 1997;52:389-406; discussion 406-7.

Regulation and properties of the rat Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV 
gene and its protein products.

Means AR(1), Ribar TJ, Kane CD, Hook SS, Anderson KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV (CaMKIV) is a monomeric
multifunctional enzyme that is expressed only in subanatomical portions of the
brain, T lymphocytes, and postmeiotic male germ cells. It is present in the
nucleus of the cells in which it is expressed and can phosphorylate and activate 
the cyclic AMP response element binding proteins CREB and CREM tau in a manner
analogous to protein kinase A. In the absence of Ca2+/calmodulin, CaMKIV is
inactive. Activation requires three events: 1) binding of Ca2+/calmodulin; 2)
phosphorylation of a single threonine residue present in the activation loop by a
separate protein kinase that is also Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent; and 3)
autophosphorylation of serine residues present in the extreme N-terminus that is 
required to relieve a novel form of autoinhibition. The gene for rat CaMKIV has
been cloned and found to span 42 kb of DNA. The gene encodes three proteins:
namely, the alpha and beta forms of CaMKIV that differ only in that the beta form
contains a 28 amino acid N-terminal extension as well as calspermin. Calspermin
is the C-terminal 169 amino acids of CaMKIV that binds Ca2+/calmodulin and is
expressed only in postmeiotic male germ cells. The promoter for calspermin
resides in the penultimate intron of the CaMKIV gene and is regulated by two
CREs. This promoter is sufficient to faithfully target expression of a reporter
gene to the postmeiotic male germ cells of transgenic mice. Transgene expression 
can be induced in cells from the transgenic mice that do not normally express it 
by transfection of CREM tau and CaMKIV. These data suggest that rearrangement of 
chromatin during meiosis together with the expression of CREM tau at high levels 
are sufficient to control expression of the calspermin promoter during
spermatogenesis. On the other hand, the developmental expression of CaMKIV in
brain and thymus appears to be controlled by thyroid hormone mediated via the
thyroid hormone receptor alpha. In T lymphocytes, CaMKIV will phosphorylate CREB 
in response to signals that result in T cell activation. Transgenic mice that
express a kinase minus mutant of CaMKIV specifically in thymic T cells show a
marked reduction of total thymic cellularity. The remaining T cells undergo a
much greater than normal rate of spontaneous apoptosis when placed in culture.
These cells fail to generate the signals to phosphorylate CREB and produce
significantly less of the cytokine Interleukin-2 (IL-2) in response to agents
that either increase intracellular Ca2+ and/or activate protein kinase C.
Collectively, the data suggest that CaMKIV may be involved both in preventing
apoptosis during T cell development and also in the early cascade of events that 
is required to activate the mature T cells in response to a mitogenic stimulus.

PMID: 9238860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Recent Prog Horm Res. 1997;52:121-39; discussion 139-40.

Coupling signalling pathways to transcriptional control: nuclear factors
responsive to cAMP.

Tamai KT(1), Monaco L, Nantel F, Zazopoulos E, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Genetique et de Biologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch,
Strasbourg, France.

Several endocrine and neuronal functions are governed by the cAMP-dependent
signalling pathway. In eukaryotes, transcriptional regulation upon stimulation of
the adenylyl cyclase signalling pathway is mediated by a family of
cAMP-responsive nuclear factors. This family consists of a large number of
members that may act as activators or repressors. These factors contain the basic
domain/ leucine zipper motifs and bind as dimers to cAMP-response elements (CRE).
The function of CRE-binding proteins (CREBs) is modulated by phosphorylation by
several kinases. Direct activation of gene expression by CREB requires
phosphorylation by the cAMP-dependent protein kinase A to the serine-133 residue.
Among the repressors, ICER (Inducible cAMP Early Repressor) deserves special
mention. ICER is generated from an alternative CREM promoter and constitutes the 
only inducible cAMP-responsive element binding protein. Furthermore, ICER
negatively autoregulates the alternative promoter, thus generating a feedback
loop. In contrast to the other members of the CRE-binding protein family, ICER
expression is tissue specific and developmentally regulated. The kinetics of ICER
expression are characteristic of an early response gene. Our results indicate
that CREM plays a key physiological and developmental role within the
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. We have previously shown that the
transcriptional activator CREM is highly expressed in postmeiotic cells.
Spermiogenesis is a complex process by which postmeiotic male germ cells
differentiate into mature spermatozoa. This process involves remarkable
structural and biochemical changes that are under the hormonal control of the
hypothalamic-pituitary axis. We have addressed the specific role of CREM in
spermiogenesis using CREM-mutant mice generated by homologous recombination.
Analysis of the seminiferous epithelium from mutant male mice reveals that
spermatogenesis stops at the first step of spermiogenesis. Late spermatids are
completely absent, while there is a significant increase in apoptotic germ cells.
A series of postmeiotic germ cell-specific genes are not expressed. Mutant male
mice completely lack spermatozoa. This phenotype is reminiscent of cases of human
infertility. We have shown that ICER is regulated in a circadian manner in the
pineal gland, the site of the hormone melatonin production. This night-day
oscillation is driven by the endogenous clock (located in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus, SCN). The synthesis of melatonin is regulated by a rate-limiting enzyme,
the serotonin N-acetyltransferase (NAT). By using the CREM-deficient mice and by 
analysis of the regulatory region of the gene encoding the serotonin NAT, we have
established that ICER is responsible for the amplitude and rhythmicity of NAT and
thus for the oscillation in the hormonal synthesis of melatonin.

PMID: 9238850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Androl. 1997 Jan-Feb;18(1):62-70.

Alternative splicing of CREB and CREM mRNAs in an immortalized germ cell line.

Sanborn BM(1), Millan JL, Meistrich ML, Moore LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bio-chemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Houston
Medical School 77225, USA.

Alternative splicing of CREB (cAMP response element binding protein) and CREM
(cAMP response element modulator) mRNAs in separated pachytene spermatocyte,
round spermatid, and elongated spermatid fractions and the germ cell-derived
immortalized cell line GC-2spd(ts) was studied by reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Both primary germ cells and the GC-2spd(ts)
cell line expressed the testis-specific CREB splice variant containing exon W. In
the CREB C-E exon region, both primary germ cells and GC-2spd(ts) cells produced 
RT-PCR products that included exon Y. RT-PCR using CREM primers produced multiple
bands in primary germ cells. The truncated CREAM deltaC-G form was found in all
the germ cell fractions. The smaller splice forms of CREM were more prominent in 
the GC-2spd(ts) cells. GC-2spd(ts) cells resembled F9 teratocarcinoma cells more 
closely than primary germ cells with respect to the relative expression of both
CREB and CREM alternative splice products. In Sertoli cells, RT-PCR products of
CREB exon lacking W and the product corresponding to CREM delta C-G were most
prominent. These data show that the GC-2spd(ts) cell line retains some
qualitative characteristics of primary germ cells with respect to alternative
splicing of CREB and CREM mRNA.

PMID: 9089069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Cell Biochem. 1997 Jan;64(1):94-105.

Tissue-specific protein-DNA interactions of the mouse protamine 2 gene promoter.

Ha H(1), van Wijnen AJ, Hecht NB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts 02155, USA.

During spermiogenesis, the haploid phase of spermatogenesis, the genome is
packaged into a highly compacted form and this process requires replacement of
histones by protamines. In the mouse, protamines are encoded by two genes, which 
are transcriptionally regulated in testis. To understand the regulation of
transcription of the mouse protamine 2 (mP2) gene, the tissue-distribution of
sequence-specific interactions between nuclear proteins and promoter DNA
sequences have been analyzed. Protein binding to the promoter region from -370 to
+65 was studied using DNase I footprinting and gel shift assays. Five protein
binding sites were identified, which are recognized by nuclear proteins from
either testis or liver. Site 1 from -64 to -48, contains part of a cAMP
responsive element (CRE), which in testis is recognized by CREM tau, an activator
of post-meiotic transcription. Testicular protein(s) also binds to three other
promoter domains: site 2, -87 to -67, a region containing a CAAT box, and sites 4
and 5, -239 to -210 and -328 to -311, sequences with similarity to consensus
steroid hormone responsive elements (HRE). In contrast, interactions between the 
mP2 promoter and nuclear factors from liver, a tissue in which the mP2 gene is
not transcribed, are observed at sites 1, 2, and 4, as well as at an additional
region at site 3, -202 to -175. Because occupancy at site 3 appears to correlate 
with inactivation of the gene in non-testicular tissues, whereas testicular
protein binding at site 5 appears to be associated with active transcription, we 
conclude that the mP2 promoter displays intricate tissue-specific patterns of
protein/DNA interactions at key regulatory elements.

PMID: 9015758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Endocrinol. 1997 Jan;11(1):97-113.

Human endometrial stromal cells express novel isoforms of the transcriptional
modulator CREM and up-regulate ICER in the course of decidualization.

Gellersen B(1), Kempf R, Telgmann R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Hormone and Fertility Research University of Hamburg, Germany.

Decidualization of human endometrial stromal (ES) cells in culture can be
triggered by a sustained elevation of intracellular cAMP for several days and is 
characterized by activation of the cAMP-responsive decidual PRL (dPRL) gene
promoter. We investigated the expression of the cAMP response element (CRE)
binding protein CREB, and the modulators CREM (cAMP response element modulator)
and ICER (inducible cAMP early repressor), in relation to decidualization of ES
cells. We isolated all four known ICER isoforms from ES cells, which differ by
the presence or absence of the small exon gamma and the presence of either
DNA-binding domain (DBD) I or II. Of the various CREM isoforms, we cloned six
transcript species, all containing DBD I. These were the known repressor
CREM-alpha, the potential activator CREM-tau 2 alpha, and four novel forms whose 
reading frames were blocked upstream of the DBD. Two of these forms contained a
novel exon psi, which is 100 bp in length, resides downstream of the first
protein-coding exon of the CREM gene, and introduces an early in-frame stop
codon. Surprisingly, in cotransfection assays, all four novel CREM isoforms were 
potent inhibitors of protein kinase A-stimulated transcription of a reporter gene
construct driven by a CRE. By in vitro transcription/translation of all six CREM 
cDNAs, we demonstrated internal translation initiation at three different
methionine residues, giving rise to novel short and very short C-terminal
proteins comprising DBD I. These proteins bound to a cAMP response element as
homodimers or as heterodimers with each other or with CREB. Immunofluorescence
showed nuclear localization of C-terminal CREM proteins expressed from all six
CREM cDNAs. Comparison of undifferentiated and decidualized ES cells showed no
difference in the level of expression of any of the CREM transcript species.
Likewise, CREB was evenly expressed between the two populations. In contrast,
ICER transcripts were strongly up-regulated in decidualized ES cells in parallel 
with the induction of dPRL expression. It appears paradoxical that in vivo, in
response to a permanent cAMP stimulus, ICER is up-regulated without displaying
negative autoregulation of its own gene or suppression of the dPRL promoter.
Elevated ICER levels in decidualized ES cells may be indicative of the presence
of overriding amounts of transcriptional activators such as full length CREM-tau 
or CREB which, in turn, upon cAMP-induced phosphorylation, contribute to the
induction of the dPRL gene.

PMID: 8994192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 6;271(49):31650-6.

The cAMP response elements of the alpha subunit gene bind similar proteins in
trophoblasts and gonadotropes but have distinct functional sequence requirements.

Heckert LL(1), Schultz K, Nilson JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA. jhn@po.cwru.edu

The alpha subunit gene encodes a common subunit shared by all glycoprotein
hormones. This single copy gene is expressed in pituitary gonadotropes and
thyrotropes of all mammals and in placental trophoblasts of primates and horses. 
Tandem cAMP response elements (CREs) in the promoter of the human gene are key
mediators of this pattern of cell-specific expression. Replacing the palindromic 
CREs with non-primate variant CREs significantly attenuated activity in
trophoblasts but not in gonadotropes. Furthermore, proteins binding the
palindromic CRE cross-reacted with antibodies for CREB, CREM, ATF1, ATF2, and
c-Jun, while proteins binding the variant CRE cross-reacted only with ATF2 and
c-Jun antibodies. The data suggest that ATF2 and c-Jun can activate transcription
through the CREs in gonadotropes but not in trophoblasts. Additional analyses
indicated that while promoters with either palindromic or variant CREs have
similar overall activity in gonadotropes, the variant CREs make a much smaller
contribution to promoter activity than their palindromic counterparts. The weaker
contribution of the variant CREs is compensated by the activity of two upstream
elements present in the promoter. This compensation probably occurs through an
indirect mechanism, as the binding affinity of proteins to the CRE is not
influenced by the presence of these upstream elements.

PMID: 8940185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Minerva Endocrinol. 1996 Dec;21(4):123-31.

[Azoospermia and genetic mutations: implications for the methods of in vitro
fertilization].

[Article in Italian]

Rocchietti March M(1), Aversa A, Caprio M, Fabbri A, Isidori A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Fisiopatologia Medica, Cattedra di Andrologia, Università
degli Studi di Roma, La Sapienza, Roma.

Much evidence suggests the fundamental role of the Y chromosome during
spermatogenesis. Especially, a gene on the long arm (localized in a portion of
the chromosome called Yq11), the AZF (azoospermic factor), is necessary for the
achievement and the maintenance of the spermatogenetic process. In fact mutations
and deletions in this part of the chromosome inevitably cause severe
oligozoospermia or azoospermia. Furthermore other genes on the short arm seem to 
have a role during spermatogenesis: they are called ZFY (zink finger Y, which
encodes a DNA binding protein) and TSPY (expressed in the spermatids nuclei); but
the function of these genes is still uncertain, since at this moment no deletions
or mutations have been found at this level. Further genes only recently cloned
include the CREM (cAMP-responsive element modulator), whose mutation causes
azoospermia with a spermatidic arrest in the mouse, and the complex
c-kit/Steel-factor. The latter is essential for spermatogonial proliferation and 
differentiation, so that an alteration at this level can determine spermatogonial
arrest or the absence of germinal cells with the presence of Sertoli cells only
(Sertoli cells only syndrome). In contrast with AZF, both the CREM gene and
c-kit/Steel-factor genes are autosomal (chromosome 10 for the CREM, 4 for c-kit, 
1 for Steel-factor, respectively). Several genes may be involved in the
spermatogenetic process, but their role, excepting for AZF, is still unclear.

PMID: 9132563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Dec 1;24(23):4751-8.

Nucleosome assembly on the human c-fos promoter interferes with transcription
factor binding.

Schild-Poulter C(1), Sassone-Corsi P, Granger-Schnarr M, Schnarr M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UPR 9002 du CNRS, Strasbourg, 
France. cschild@civich.ottawa.on.ca

cAMP-responsive-element (CRE)-binding factors interaction with nucleosomal DNA
has been investigated in vitro on the human c-fos promoter. Analysis of
nucleosome reconstitution of this promoter shows a preferential nucleosome
positioning on the proximal promoter sequences, including the CRE centered at -60
relative to the start site of transcription. CRE-binding protein (CREB) and
modulator protein (CREM) are unable to interact with their recognition site
incorporated in a nucleosome. However, competition between transcription factor
binding and nucleosome assembly allows CREM binding and induces important
modifications in the nucleosomal structure suggesting the displacement of
nucleosomes. These findings imply that binding of transcription factors to the
CRE prior to cAMP induction might be required to prevent the incorporation of
this element in a nucleosome.

PMCID: PMC146296
PMID: 8972862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Nov 26;93(24):14140-5.

Transcriptional control of circadian hormone synthesis via the CREM feedback
loop.

Foulkes NS(1), Borjigin J, Snyder SH, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch,
France.

Transcription factor cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) plays a key
physiological and developmental role within the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal
axis. The use of an alternative, intronic promoter within the CREM gene is
responsible for the production of a cAMP-inducible repressor, inducible cAMP
early repressor (ICER). ICER negatively autoregulates the ICER promoter, thus
generating a feedback loop. We have previously documented a striking,
clock-driven circadian fluctuation of CREM expression in the pineal gland.
Oscillating ICER levels tightly correlate with fluctuations in the synthesis of
the pineal hormone melatonin, whose production is also driven by the endogenous
clock. Melatonin in turn regulates the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. The enzyme
serotonin N-acetyltransferase (NAT) catalyzes the rate limiting step in melatonin
synthesis. Thus, oscillations in NAT levels determine the circadian synthesis of 
melatonin. Here we demonstrate that NAT expression is dramatically increased in
CREM-deficient mice that we have generated by homologous recombination.
Characterization of the NAT promoter shows the presence of a ICER binding site.
In addition, transfection studies show that ICER powerfully represses NAT
transcription. Our results implicate CREM as a central regulator of output
functions of the clock. Indeed, CREM acts as a key regulator of oscillatory
hormonal synthesis.

PMCID: PMC19507
PMID: 8943074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Oct 29;93(22):12262-6.

cAMP-response element modulator tau is a positive regulator of testis angiotensin
converting enzyme transcription.

Zhou Y(1), Sun Z, Means AR, Sassone-Corsi P, Bernstein KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA.

Testis angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) is a unique form of ACE, only produced
by male germ cells, and results from a testis-specific promoter found within the 
ACE gene. We have investigated the role of cAMP-response element modulator
(CREM)tau in testis ACE transcription. In gel shift experiments, testes nuclear
proteins retard an oligonucleotide containing the cAMP-response element (CRE)
found at position -55 in the testis ACE promoter. Anti-CREM antibody supershifts 
this complex. Competitive gel shift shows that recombinant CREM tau protein and
testis nuclear proteins have a similar specificity of binding to the tests ACE
CRE. Functional analysis using in vitro transcription and transfection studies
also demonstrate that CREM tau protein is a transcriptional activator of the
testis ACE promoter. Western blot analysis identifies CREM tau protein in the
protein-DNA complex formed between nuclear proteins and the testis ACE CRE motif.
This analysis also identified other CREM isoforms in the gel-shifted complex,
which are thought to be CREM tau 1/2, CREM alpha/beta, and S-CREM. These data
indicate that CREM tau isoforms play an important role as a positive regulator in
the tissue-specific expression of testis ACE.

PMCID: PMC37978
PMID: 8901568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Neurosci Lett. 1996 Oct 18;217(2-3):169-72.

Light-induced expression of transcription factor ICER (inducible cAMP early
repressor) in rat suprachiasmatic nucleus is phase-restricted.

Stehle JH(1), Pfeffer M, Kühn R, Korf HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University, Frankfurt, Germany.

The mammalian hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) harbors an intrinsic
circadian oscillator driving a variety of endogenous rhythms. SCN activity is
entrained to environmental lighting conditions by photic information from the
retina. Light-induced phase shifts involve cAMP and Ca2+ as second messengers and
are linked to transcriptional and translational processes. Using in situ
hybridization with a cDNA fragment of the cAMP responsive element modulator
(CREM) isoform inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) we demonstrate a
light-induced upregulation of CREM mRNA in rat SCN during the second half of the 
night. Notably, ICER is the only member of the CREM family which is
transcriptionally inducible. We suggest that a stimulus-induced upregulation of
ICER expression can inhibit cAMP-inducible genes in rat SCN via its
trans-repressing potency.

PMID: 8916099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Biol Chem. 1996 Oct 11;271(41):25375-81.

Inducible cAMP early repressor can modulate tyrosine hydroxylase gene expression 
after stimulation of cAMP synthesis.

Tinti C(1), Conti B, Cubells JF, Kim KS, Baker H, Joh TH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Cornell University Medical College at
The Burke Medical Research Institute, White Plains, New York 10605, USA.

Members of the CREB/CREM/ATF family of transcription factors either enhance or
repress transcription after binding to the cAMP response elements (CREs) of
numerous genes. The rat gene for tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) bears a canonical CRE,
at base pairs -38 through -45 from the transcription initiation site, that is
essential for basal and cAMP-stimulated transcription (Kim, K.-S., Lee, M. K.,
Carroll, J., and Joh, T. H. (1993) J. Biol. Chem. 268, 15689-15695; Lazaroff, M.,
Patankar, S., Yoon, S. O., and Chikaraishi, D. M. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. 270,
21579-21589). The current study identifies CRE-binding proteins induced in
pharmacological paradigms characterized by TH activation. PC12- and rat adrenal
gland-derived nuclear proteins retarded a TH-CRE oligonucleotide in gel mobility 
shift assays with virtually identical patterns. These differed substantially from
patterns exhibited by extracts from locus ceruleus or from neuroblastoma
(SK-N-BE()C) and locus ceruleus-derived (CATH.a) cell lines. Forskolin
stimulation of PC12 cells and reserpine treatment of rats increased, in nuclear
extracts derived from cells and adrenal glands, respectively, the amount of a
fast moving CRE/protein complex that was supershifted by an anti-CREM antibody.
Subsequent Western, Northern, and polymerase chain reaction analyses indicated
that a specific member of the CREM family, the inducible cAMP early repressor
(ICER), was strongly induced in both systems. Cotransfection of PC12 cells with
TH2400CAT plasmid and the expression vector pCMV-ICER-Ib demonstrated that ICER
efficiently represses the transcriptional activity of the TH gene promoter. In
addition, PKA-stimulated transcriptional activity of the promoter was effectively
suppressed by ICER. These results suggest that ICER can modulate cAMP-stimulated 
transcription of the TH gene and provide a model accounting for rapid reversal of
increased TH transcription following elevations in cAMP.

PMID: 8810303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Front Biosci. 1996 Sep 1;1:d266-9.

CREM: a transcriptional master switch during the spermatogenesis differentiation 
program.

Nantel F(1), Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Genetique et de Biologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire, 1 rue Laurent 
Fries, BP 163, ILLKIRCH Cedex, C.U. de Strasbourg, France.

Spermatogenesis is a complex differentiation process under the hormonal control
of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. The CREM gene encodes activators and
repressors of cAMP-mediated gene transcription. The transcript corresponding to
the activator isoform CREMtau is found at high levels in pachytene spermatocytes 
onwards. The CREMtau protein, however, is present only in post-meiotic spermatids
where it activates the transcription of testis-specific genes, such as the
protamines and transition proteins. Mice in which the CREM gene has been
inactivated by homologous recombination have been generated. Homozygous male
mutant mice are sterile and produce no spermatozoa. Histological analysis of the 
seminiferous tubules reveal a complete arrest of spermatogenesis at the first
step of spermiogenesis. CREM deficiency results in the lack of post-meiotic gene 
expression and a ten-fold increase in apoptotic germ cells. These results
demonstrate the essential role of CREM in spermatogenesis and are reminiscent of 
some cases of male infertility.

PMID: 9159233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Eur J Endocrinol. 1996 Aug;135(2):171.

Spermiogenesis requires the transcription factor CREM (cyclic AMP-response
element modulator).

Bertherat J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Endocrinologie and INSERM CJF 92-08, CHU Cochin, Paris, France.

PMID: 8810726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Neurochem. 1996 Aug;67(2):490-7.

Adrenergic regulation of ICER (inducible cyclic AMP early repressor) and
beta1-adrenergic receptor gene expression in C6 glioma cells.

Fitzgerald LR(1), Li Z, Machida CA, Fishman PH, Duman RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06508, USA.

ICER (inducible cyclic AMP early repressor), a member of the cyclic AMP response 
element (CRE) modulator (CREM) family of transcription factors, is a powerful
repressor of cyclic AMP-mediated transactivation. Our studies characterize the
regulation of ICER in C6 glioma cells and investigate its role in repressing
transcription of the beta1-adrenergic receptor (beta1AR) gene. Incubation with
isoproterenol (100 nM) results in a rapid induction in levels of mRNA for ICER
and its splice variant ICERgamma, with maximal induction occurring after 2 h of
treatment. Incubation with isoproterenol also increased levels of CREM isoforms
within 1 h; this was unexpected given previous reports that these isoforms are
not rapidly induced. Increased expression of ICER and CREM was accompanied by
induction of two CRE-binding complexes. The presence of ICER in these two
CRE-binding complexes is demonstrated by their disruption with CREM antibody and 
by their comigration with recombinant ICER. Because the time course for
isoproterenol induction of ICER mRNA and CRE binding corresponds to that for
down-regulation of beta1AR mRNA levels in C6 glioma cells, the influence of ICER 
beta1AR transcription was directly examined. Coexpression of ICER significantly
decreased transcriptional activity of a rat beta1AR promoter-luciferase reporter 
construct that contains a CRE. In contrast, coexpression of ICER did not
influence two truncated rat beta1AR promoter constructs that lack the CRE site.
These data demonstrate that ICER can interact at the beta1AR promoter to repress 
transcription.

PMID: 8764572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jul 19;271(29):17425-32.

Expression and regulation of the lipoprotein lipase gene in human adrenal cortex.

Staels B(1), Martin G, Martinez M, Albert C, Peinado-Onsurbe J, Saladin R, Hum
DW, Reina M, Vilaro S, Auwerx J.

Author information: 
(1)U.325 INSERM, Département d'Athérosclérose, Institut Pasteur, 1 Rue Calmette, 
59019 Lille, France.

Lipoprotein lipase (LPL), an enzyme which hydrolyzes triglycerides and
participates in the catabolism of remnant lipoproteins, plays a crucial role in
energy and lipid metabolism. The goal of this study was to analyze the expression
and regulation of the LPL gene in human adrenals. Reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction amplification and sequence analysis
demonstrated the presence of LPL mRNA in fetal and adult human adrenal cortex.
Furthermore, the human adrenocortical carcinoma cell line, NCI-H295, expresses
LPL mRNA and protein, which is localized to the outer cellular membrane as
demonstrated by immunofluorescence confocal microscopy and can be released in the
medium by heparin addition. To asses whether the LPL gene is regulated by agents 
regulating adrenal steroidogenesis, NCI-H295 cells were treated with activators
of second messenger systems. Whereas the calcium-ionophore A23187 did not affect 
LPL gene expression, treatment with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate decreased LPL
mRNA levels in a time- and dose-dependent manner. This decrease after phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate was associated with diminished heparin-releasable LPL
mass and activity in the culture medium. Addition of the cAMP analog 8-Br-cAMP to
NCI-H295 cells resulted in a rapid, but transient dose-dependent induction of LPL
mRNA. Treatment with the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide gradually
induced, whereas simultaneous addition of cAMP and cycloheximide superinduced LPL
mRNA levels. Nuclear run-on analysis indicated that the effects of cAMP and
cycloheximide occurred at the transcriptional and post-transcriptional level,
respectively. Transient co-transfection assays demonstrated that the first 230
base pairs of the proximal LPL promoter contain a cAMP-responsive element
activated by protein kinase A and transcription factors belonging to the
CREB/CREM family. These data indicate that LPL is expressed in human adrenal
cortex and regulated in NCI-H295 adrenocortical carcinoma cells by activators of 
the protein kinase A and protein kinase C second messenger pathways in a manner
comparable to P450scc, which catalyzes the first step in adrenal steroidogenesis.
These observations suggest a role for LPL in adrenal energy and/or lipid
metabolism and possibly in steroidogenesis.

PMID: 8663337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Biochemistry. 1996 Jul 2;35(26):8662-9.

Identification of an Spl-like element within the immunoglobulin kappa 3' enhancer
necessary for maximal enhancer activity.

Costa MW(1), Atchison ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennyslvania, Philadelphia 19104, USA.

A number of functional DNA sequences have been identified within the murine
immunoglobulin kappa 3' enhancer (kappaE3'). These DNA sequences were identified 
using plasmid reporter constructs in which the centrally active core region (or
mutants of that region) of the enhancer was placed directly adjacent to the
promoter of a reporter construct. Functional DNA sequences thus identified were
found to bind to the transcription factors PU.1, NF-EM5, E2A, ATF-1, or CREM. In 
the studies reported here, we show that additional enhancer sequences that lie
outside of the core region are necessary for maximal enhancer activity when the
core region is not directly adjacent to the promoter. A series of progressive and
internal deletion constructs shows that enhancer sequences between nucleotides
275 and 329 are important for enhancer activity. Progressive deletion to
nucleotide position 329 resulted in a 4-fold reduction in enhancer activity.
Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we show that this segment of the
enhancer binds to ubiquitously expressed nuclear factors. Dimethyl sulfate
methylation interference assays indicated protein-DNA interactions within a
G-rich sequence between positions 302 and 306 and an A-rich sequence between
positions 319 and 329. Ultraviolet light protein-DNA cross-linking studies
revealed nuclear factors of approximately 85 and 105 kDa that bind to the newly
identified enhancer region. Oligonucleotide competition studies and binding
studies with purified Sp1 or Sp1 antibodies indicate that Sp1 can bind to this
sequence. These studies show that functional sequences within the kappaE3'
enhancer include an Sp1-like site approximately 90 bp 5' of the central 132 bp
region originally believed to account for most of the enhancer activity.

PMID: 8679628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Microsc Res Tech. 1996 Jun 1;34(2):118-22.

Expression of the somatostatin gene and receptors in the rat harderian gland.

Mato ME(1), Puig-Domingo M, Fornas O, Webb SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Autonomous 
University of Barcelona, Spain.

Somatostatin is one of the numerous peptides described in the Harderian gland of 
different animals. With the aim of trying to elucidate its physiological role, we
investigated whether this peptide is expressed in OFA rat Harderian gland at
different ages and seasons and, if so, studied the regulatory proteins involved
in the activation of the somatostatin gene, and also whether it contains any
somatostatin receptors. Nursing (4-15-day-old), prepubertal (21-30-day-old), and 
adult (54-day-old) OFA rats were sacrificed by decapitation throughout the year, 
and the Harderian glands were excised and immediately frozen in liquid N2. The
expression of somatostatin and its receptors was investigated using RT-PCR
techniques; additionally, the existence of proteins which bind to cAMP responsive
elements (CRE) was investigated using a band-shift technique. The somatostatin
gene was expressed in the Harderian gland of rats aged 4-30 days in autumn and
winter but not in spring and summer or in older animals. However, the
somatostatin receptor was expressed throughout the year at all the ages studied. 
In the autumn, nuclear proteins binding to CRE (CREB) were present in
8-10-day-old rats but not in younger 4-day-old animals. We conclude that rat
Harderian gland cells transcribe the somatostatin gene depending on the season
and age of the animals, while its receptor is always present at all the ages
studied; the CREB found produces the same retardation complex as ICER (inducible 
cAMP early repressor), an isoform of CREM (cAMP responsive element modulator),
which in the pineal has been shown to be under adrenergic control. Since
somatostatin expression is regulated by cAMP mechanisms, it is feasible that the 
existence of this repressor ICER could explain why somatostatin expression
disappears in adult animals once maturation is complete.

PMID: 8722705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Nature. 1996 May 2;381(6577):83-5.

Adaptive inducibility of CREM as transcriptional memory of circadian rhythms.

Foulkes NS(1), Duval G, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Strasbourg,
France.

The CREM gene encodes the transcriptional repressor ICER, which has been
implicated in the molecular mechanisms controlling circadian rhythms in mammals. 
ICER is rhythmically expressed in the pineal gland, with peak levels occurring at
night. ICER levels are regulated by light by means of the suprachiasmatic nucleus
(SCN); transcription is induced during darkness by adrenergic input to the pineal
gland from the SCN, which activates the ICER promoter using cyclic AMP and the
transcriptional activator CREB. This induction is transient because ICER
represses its own transcription. Here we show that the response of the CREM gene 
to adrenergic stimulation is determined by night length. Depending on the
photoperiod of the prior entraining cycles, the CREM gene is either subsensitive 
or supersensitive to induction. This differential responsiveness is controlled by
the changing balance between positive (CREB) and negative (ICER) transcriptional 
regulators. Thus, the transcriptional response of the CREM gene is determined by 
the memory of past photoperiods.

PMID: 8609995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 1996 May-Jun;7(4):133-8.

Role of transcription factors CREB and CREM in cAMP-regulated transcription
during spermatogenesis.

Walker WH(1), Habener JF.

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

The cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) and the cAMP-responsive element 
modulator (CREM) are cyclically expressed at high levels during spermatogenesis. 
Cyclical expression of CREB and CREM in germ and somatic Sertoli cells correlates
with the fluctuations in cAMP signaling induced by the pituitary gonadotropic
hormones FSH and LH both during sexual maturation of the testis and during the
12-day cycles of spermatogenesis that occur in the adult testis. CREB and CREM
are expressed at different times during the spermatogenic cycle, undergo
programmed sequential switches from activator to repressor isoforms by mechanisms
of alternative exon splicing and promoter usage, and are autoregulated by cAMP
signaling in opposing directions. cAMP response elements located in the promoter 
of the CREB gene upregulate the expression of activator CREBs, whereas cAMP
autoregulatory response elements in the internal promoter of the CREM gene induce
expression of repressor CREM isoforms. The complex mechanisms for the regulation 
of the expression of CREB and CREM in the testis appear to reflect critical
adaptations for regulating key target genes essential for the development of germ
cells.

PMID: 18406739  [PubMed]


95. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 May;16(5):2174-82.

Genetic characterization of transactivation of the human T-cell leukemia virus
type 1 promoter: Binding of Tax to Tax-responsive element 1 is mediated by the
cyclic AMP-responsive members of the CREB/ATF family of transcription factors.

Bantignies F(1), Rousset R, Desbois C, Jalinot P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UMR49 CNRS/ENSL, France.

To achieve a better understanding of the mechanism of transactivation by Tax of
human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 Tax-responsive element 1 (TRE-1), we developed
a genetic approach with Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We constructed a yeast reporter
strain containing the lacZ gene under the control of the CYC1 promoter associated
with three copies of TRE-1. Expression of either the cyclic AMP response
element-binding protein (CREB) or CREB fused to the GAL4 activation domain (GAD) 
in this strain did not modify the expression of the reporter gene. Tax alone was 
also inactive. However, expression of the reporter gene was induced by
coexpression of Tax and CREB. This effect was stronger with the GAD-CREB fusion
protein. Analysis of different CREB mutants with this genetic system indicated
that the C-terminal 92 amino acid residues, which include the basic domain and
the leucine zipper, are necessary and sufficient to mediate transactivation by
Tax. To identify cellular proteins binding to TRE-1 in a Tax-dependent manner,
this strain was also used to screen a library of human cDNAs fused to GAD. Of
five positive clones isolated from 0.75 x 10(6) yeast colonies, four were members
of the CREB/activating transcription factor (ATF) family: CREB, two isoforms of
the cyclic AMP-responsive element modulator (CREM), and ATF-1. Interestingly,
these three proteins can be phosphorylated by protein kinase A and thus form a
particular subgroup within the CREB/ATF family. Expression of ATF-2 in S.
cerevisiae did not activate TRE-1 in the presence of Tax. This shows that in a
eukaryotic nucleus, Tax specifically interacts with the basic domain-leucine
zipper region of ATF-1, CREB, and CREM. The fifth clone identified in this
screening corresponded to the Ku autoantigen p70 subunit. When fused to GAD, the 
C-terminal region of Ku was able to activate transcription via TRE-1 but this
activation was not dependent on Tax.

PMCID: PMC231205
PMID: 8628284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 1996 Apr 29;351(1339):561-7.

CREM: a master-switch in the transcriptional response to cAMP.

Lamas M(1), Monaco L, Zazopoulos E, Lalli E, Tamai K, Penna L, Mazzucchelli C,
Nantel F, Foulkes NS, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch, C.
U. de Strasbourg, France.

The CREM gene encodes both repressors and activators of cAMP-dependent
transcription in a tissue and developmentally regulated manner. In addition,
multiple and cooperative phosphorylation events regulate the function of the CREM
proteins. CREM plays a key physiological and developmental role within the
hypothalamic-pituitary axis. There is a functional switch in CREM expression
during the development of male germ cells which is directed by the pituitary
hormone FSH. The CREM protein in germ cells is a powerful activator which appears
to function as a master-switch in the regulation of postmeiotic genes. CREM is
inducible by activation of the cAMP signalling pathway with the kinetics of an
early response gene. The induction is transient, cell-specific, does not involve 
increased transcript stability and does not require protein synthesis. The
subsequent decline in CREM expression requires de novo protein synthesis. The
induced transcript encodes ICER and is generated from an alternative, intronic
promoter. ICER functions as a powerful repressor of cAMP-induced transcription,
and represses the activity of its own promoter, thus constituting a negative
autoregulatory loop.

PMID: 8735279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Nature. 1996 Mar 14;380(6570):162-5.

Severe impairment of spermatogenesis in mice lacking the CREM gene.

Blendy JA(1), Kaestner KH, Weinbauer GF, Nieschlag E, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology of the Cell I Division, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Spermatogenesis is a complex developmental process that occurs in several phases.
A large number of genes have been identified that are expressed during
spermatogenesis, but the biological significance of many of these is not yet
known. We have used gene targeting to selectively eliminate the transcription
factor CREM (cyclic AMP- responsive element modulator), which is thought to be
important for mammalian spermatogenesis. Male mice deficient for all CREM
proteins are sterile, as their developing spermatids fail to differentiate into
sperm, and postmeiotic gene expression in the testis declines dramatically. The
cessation of sperm development is not accompanied by decreases in the levels of
follicle-stimulating hormone or testosterone. Our findings indicate that the CREM
gene is essential for spermatogenesis, and mice deficient for this transcription 
factor could serve as a model system for the study of idiopathic infertility in
men.

PMID: 8600391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Nature. 1996 Mar 14;380(6570):159-62.

Spermiogenesis deficiency and germ-cell apoptosis in CREM-mutant mice.

Nantel F(1), Monaco L, Foulkes NS, Masquilier D, LeMeur M, Henriksén K, Dierich
A, Parvinen M, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Insitut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cullulaire, CNRS-INSERM,
B.P. 163, Strasbourg, France.

Spermiogenesis is a complex process by which postmeiotic male germ cells
differentiate into mature spermatozoa. This process involves remarkable
structural and biochemical changes including nuclear DNA compaction and acrosome 
formation. Transcription activator CREM (cyclic AMP-responsive element modulator)
is highly expressed in postmeiotic cells, and CREM may be responsible for the
activation of several haploid germ cell-specific genes involved in the
structuring of the spermatozoon. The specific role of CREM in spermiogenesis was 
addressed using CREM-mutant mice generated by homologous recombination. Analysis 
of the seminiferous epithelium in mutant male mice reveals postmeiotic arrest at 
the first step of spermiogenesis. Late spermatids are completely absent, and
there is a significant increase in apoptotic germ cells. We show that CREM
deficiency results in the lack of postmeiotic cell-specific gene expression. The 
complete lack of spermatozoa in the mutant mice is reminiscent of cases of human 
infertility.

PMID: 8600390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. EMBO J. 1996 Mar 1;15(5):1098-106.

Targeting of the CREB gene leads to up-regulation of a novel CREB mRNA isoform.

Blendy JA(1), Kaestner KH, Schmid W, Gass P, Schutz G.

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany.

To define the role of cAMP signaling in gene control, we have generated mice with
a mutation in the cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) gene. Mice
carrying this mutation are viable but show an impairment in memory consolidation.
In further analysis of these mice, we have found an up-regulation of a CREB
isoform that has not been described previously . The new isoform, termed CREB
beta, has nearly the same transactivation potential as the other CREB isoforms
and is expressed ubiquitously. The up-regulation appears to be due to an increase
in alternative splicing or mRNA stability, but not to an increase in
transcriptional rate. Due to the relatively low levels of expression in all
tissues, the role of this isoform is likely to be minor in the wild-type mouse.
However, its dramatic up-regulation in the mutant mouse, together with the
specific deficiencies recently observed in these mice, suggest that it has a very
specific role in compensating for CREB alpha and delta in some, but not all,
areas where CREB function has been implicated. Together with the up-regulation of
the cAMP response element modulator protein (CREM) mRNA and protein levels
demonstrated previously in CREB mutant mice, we suggest that the up-regulation of
CREB beta may also contribute to compensation within the CREB/ATF family of
transcription factors, when CREB delta and CREB alpha are absent.

PMCID: PMC450007
PMID: 8605879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 1996 Feb 29;351(1336):201-9.

The nuclear response to cAMP: role of transcription factor CREM.

Lalli E(1), Lee JS, Lamas M, Tamai K, Zazopoulos E, Nantel F, Penna L, Foulkes
NS, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch,
France.

In eukaryotes, transcriptional regulation upon stimulation of the adenylate
cyclase signalling pathway is mediated by a family of cAMP-responsive nuclear
factors. This family consists of a large number of members which may act as
activators or repressors. These factors contain the basic domain/leucine zipper
motifs and bind as dimers to cAMP-response elements (CRE). The function of
CRE-binding proteins is modulated by phosphorylation by several kinases. The ICER
(inducible cAMP early repressor) protein is the only inducible member of this
family. The induction of this powerful repressor is likely to be important for
the transient nature of cAMP-induced gene expression. CRE-binding proteins have
been found to play an important role in the physiology of the pituitary gland, in
regulating spermatogenesis, in the response to circadian rhythms and in the
molecular basis of memory.

PMID: 8650267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mol Endocrinol. 1996 Feb;10(2):159-70.

Characterization of the cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate response element of 
the rabbit surfactant protein-A gene: evidence for transactivators distinct from 
CREB/ATF family members.

Michael LF(1), Alcorn JL, Gao E, Mendelson CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at
Dallas 75235-9038, USA.

Surfactant protein-A (SP-A) gene transcription in fetal lung explants is
stimulated by factors that increase intracellular cAMP. In transfected type II
cells, expression of fusion genes containing 991 bp of 5'-flanking DNA from the
rabbit SP-A gene linked to the human GH gene as reporter is stimulated more than 
20-fold by cAMP. Mutagenesis of a putative cAMP responsive element (CRE) located 
-261 bp upstream of the SP-A transcription initiation site to a sequence known
not to bind the transcription factor CRE-binding protein (CREB) caused a marked
decrease in basal and cAMP-inducible reporter gene expression. This element,
termed CREsp-a (TGACCTCA), differs by one nucleotide from a palindromic CRE
(CREpal, TGACGTCA), which is known to bind CREB as a homodimer. In the present
study, we found that mutagenesis of CREsp-a to CREpal also caused a marked
decrease in basal and cAMP-induced fusion gene expression. The findings of
competitive electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) using fetal rabbit lung 
nuclear extracts suggest that different protein complexes bind CREsp-a and
CREpal. By UV cross-linking analysis, an approximately 43-kilodalton protein
complex was found to interact both with CREsp-a and CREpal; however, purified
CREB was ineffective in binding CREsp-a but did bind CREpal. In EMSA using fetal 
rabbit lung nuclear proteins, antibodies directed against CREB, CRE modulator
(CREM), and activating transcription factor-1 (ATF-1) failed to supershift the
complex of proteins bound to CREsp-a; whereas, a supershift was evident using
CREpal as a probe. Moreover, in competition EMSA using radiolabeled CREsp-a and
fetal rabbit lung nuclear proteins, a purified basic leucine zipper (bLZ)
polypeptide failed to compete for binding. By contrast, the bLZ polypeptide
competed effectively with CREpal for lung nuclear protein binding. This finding
suggests that leucine zipper transcription factors do not bind CREsp-a.
Additionally, expression of a CREsp-a:HIS3 fusion gene in yeast was unaffected
either by CREB or bLZ polypeptides fused to the GAL4 activation domain. By
contrast, HIS3 expression was markedly induced both by CREB and bLZ fusion
proteins in a CREpal:HIS3 yeast strain. By competition EMSA using mutagenized
CREsp-a oligonucleotides, the critical protein-binding nucleotides in CREsp-a
were found to constitute a hexameric element, TGACCT, which corresponds to a
binding site for members of the steroid receptor superfamily. Since the TGACCT
motif is present in the SP-A gene as a single site, we propose that a unique
orphan member of the steroid receptor superfamily may bind to this element.

PMID: 8825556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Recept Signal Transduct. 1996;6(3-4):179-93.

Occupancy and composition of proteins bound to the AP-1 sites in the
glucocorticoid receptor and c-jun promoters after glucocorticoid treatment and in
different cell types.

Barrett TJ(1), Vedeckis WV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University
Medical Center, New Orleans, USA.

The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and c-jun promoters both contain activator
protein-1 (AP-1) sites (GR AP-1 site and c-jun AP-1 site, respectively) that vary
from the consensus AP-1 site. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) were 
used to monitor GR AP-1 and c-jun AP-1 oligonucleotide binding by nuclear
extracts from AtT-20 and L929 cells that were hormone- and vehicle-treated for 1,
6, or 24 h. Both AtT-20 and L929 cell nuclear extracts bound the c-jun AP-1 site 
somewhat better than the GRAP-1 site and, in the majority of cases, extracts from
hormone-treated cells shifted both GRAP-1 and c-jun AP-1 oligonucleotides more
than nontreated nuclear extracts. Supershift assays, using Jun and Fos family
member-specific antibodies, showed that protein complexes formed by AtT-20 cell
nuclear extracts bound to the c-jun AP-1 site were comprised of Jun family
members, JunD, JunB, and cJun. No Fos family members were present. However,
protein complexes from AtT-20 nuclear extracts that bound the GR AP-1 site were
supershifted by JunD, JunB, cJun, and Fra-2 specific antibodies. In L929 cell
nuclear extracts, the c-jun AP-1 site is bound by JunD and cJun. No clear
association of Fos family members with the c-jun AP-1 site could be demonstrated.
The GR AP-1 site bound protein complexes composed of JunD, JunB, Fra-2, and Fra-1
from L929 nuclear extracts. This demonstrates that the composition of the protein
complexes that associate with the c-jun AP-1 site differs from those that bind
the GR AP-1 site. These data also indicate that the protein complexes that bind
the GR and c-jun AP-1 sites are cell-type-specific. Computer analysis also
revealed five putative cyclic AMP response elements (CREs) in the GR promoter.
Relative mobility shift and binding studies suggest that CRE binding protein
(CREB), CREB modulator (CREM), or CREB/CREM may be associated with the c-jun AP-1
and/or GR AP-1 sites, but the association at these sites occurs at a lower
binding affinity than for a consensus CRE. Nuclear extracts from AtT-20 and L929 
cells were able to shift the CRE, and supershift analysis revealed that Jun
family members are part of the protein complexes that bind the CRE. Pan Jun and
pan Fos antibodies were able to supershift protein-CRE complexes formed using NIH
3T3 nuclear extracts. These data raise the possibility that the promiscuous
binding of CREB and/or CREM to the AP-1 site, and AP-1 transcription factors to
one or more CREs, in the GR promoter may contribute to the regulation of GR gene 
expression.

PMID: 9259052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1996;61:285-94.

Rhythmic transcription and autoregulatory loops: nuclear pacemaker CREM.

Lamas M(1), Lalli E, Foulkes NS, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
Illkirch-Strasbourg, France.

PMID: 9246457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Neurochem. 1996 Jan;66(1):429-32.

Electroconvulsive seizure increases the expression of CREM (cyclic AMP response
element modulator) and ICER (inducible cyclic AMP early repressor) in rat brain.

Fitzgerald LR(1), Vaidya VA, Terwilliger RZ, Duman RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Connecticut Mental Health Center, New Haven 06508,
USA.

Rapid expression of ICER (inducible cyclic AMP early repressor), an inducible
member of the CREM (cyclic AMP response element modulator) family of
transcription factors, has been reported in neuroendocrine tissues and cell
lines, but not in brain. In the present study, we demonstrate that acute
electro-convulsive seizure (ECS) increases the expression of ICER in several rat 
brain regions. RNase protection analysis demonstrated that 1-2 h after
administration of ECS, levels of mRNA for ICER and a splice variant, ICER gamma, 
were significantly increased in hippocampus, frontal cortex, and cerebellum. It
is surprising that ECS also increased levels of mRNA for several CREM isoforms
that previous studies have reported were not rapidly inducible. In situ
hybridization analysis confirmed these findings and demonstrated that ECS
induction of ICER was most obvious in the dentate gyrus granule cell layer of
hippocampus and deep layers of cerebral cortex. Induction of ICER and CREM was
accompanied by increased expression of two small CRE-binding complexes. Gel
supershift analysis with CREM/ICER antisera confirmed that the inducible
CRE-binding complexes contain CREM/ICER. Induction of CREM and ICER may
contribute to negative feedback regulation of gene transcription that is
increased by acute seizure and activation of CREB (cyclic AMP response
element-binding protein.

PMID: 8522985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Neuroreport. 1995 Dec 29;7(1):289-93.

Differential modulation of brain immediate early genes by intraperitoneal LiCl.

Lamprecht R(1), Dudai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.

We have used in situ hybridization to investigate the modulation of expression of
the immediate early genes (IEGs) c-fos, fos-B, zif/268 and CREM in rat brain
following oral administration of saccharin, i.p. injection of LiCl, and
conditioned taste aversion (CTA) training in which these stimuli are used as the 
conditioned stimulus (CS) and the unconditioned stimulus (UCS), respectively.
Modulation of c-fos, zif/268 and CREM was detected in the NTS, PBN, hypothalamic 
PVN and central nucleus of the amygdala after the administration of the UCS but
not the CS. Our data are consonant with the hypothesis that differential and
combinatorial expression of IEGs plays a role in encoding the representation of
LiCl-induced malaise in the brain.

PMID: 8742472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. FEBS Lett. 1995 Dec 27;377(3):413-8.

Modulation of Tax and PKA-mediated expression of HTLV-I promoter via cAMP
response element binding and modulator proteins CREB and CREM.

Bodor J(1), Walker W, Flemington E, Spetz AL, Habener JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Massachusetts General Hospital
(WEL320), Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston 02114, USA.

Nuclear proteins of the human peripheral blood T lymphocytes that bind to the
CREs located within three 21-bp repeat enhancers of the HTLV-I promoter belong to
the CREB/CREM family of bZIP transcription factors. It has been shown previously 
that Tax enhances transactivation of these CREs by direct interactions with the
bZIP domain of the transcription factors to stabilize DNA-binding. We show that
CREB and CREM bind all three CRE sequences of the HTLV-I promoter which are
important determinants in Tax-elicited transactivation as well as PKA-mediated
activation of the HTLV-I promoter. Tax and PKA activate transcription from a
HTLV-I-LTR CAT reporter plasmid transfected to NIH 3T3 cells, and CREM attenuates
the activation. In the context of a GAL4 CREB fusion protein in which the
DNA-binding bZIP domain of CREB is replaced by GAL4 binding domain, a single
amino acid substitution of serine-133, phosphorylated by PKA and critical for the
transactivation function of CREB, attenuates both Tax and PKA-mediated
transcriptional responses. These observations suggest that Tax enhances
CREB-mediated transactivation of the HTLV-I promoter by a mechanism apart from,
and/or in addition to, the reported stabilization of DNA-binding by interaction
with the bZIP domain of CREB.

PMID: 8549766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Biol Chem. 1995 Dec 8;270(49):29507-14.

Organization and analysis of the complete rat calmodulin-dependent protein kinase
IV gene.

Sun Z(1), Means RL, LeMagueresse B, Means AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

A 42-kilobase pair region of rat DNA containing the Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent
protein kinase IV (CaM kinase IV) gene has been cloned and characterized. The
gene consists of 12 exons and 11 introns and is predicted to encode both beta and
alpha forms of CaM kinase IV as well as the testis-specific calmodulin-binding
protein calspermin. The promoter utilized to generate the alpha-kinase isoform is
located in intron 1, whereas the promoter utilized to produce the calspermin
transcript is contained in intron 10. The calspermin promoter region which
extends from -200 to +321 relative to the calspermin transcription initiation
site that contains two cyclic AMP response elements (CRE) at -70 and -50 and has 
been shown previously to be inactive in NIH3T3 cells (Sun, Z., Sassone-Corsi, P.,
and Means, A. R. (1995) Mol. Cell. Biol. 15, 561-571) was ligated to the lacZ
reporter gene and used to generate transgenic mice. The promoter was expressed
exclusively in postmeiotic testis where beta-galactosidase was found
predominantly in elongating spermatids. The cell and developmental specificity of
transgene expression was very similar to the pattern shown by the endogenous
gene. Although the transgene promoter was silent in somatic tissues,
beta-galactosidase expression could be restored in primary cultures of skin
fibroblasts by introduction of vectors encoding CREM tau and CaM kinase IV.

PMID: 7493991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Dec 5;92(25):11696-700.

Structural and functional analysis of pp70S6k.

Cheatham L(1), Monfar M, Chou MM, Blenis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02130, USA.

The pp70/85-kDa S6 kinases, collectively referred to as pp70S6k, are thought to
participate in transit through the G1 phase of the cell cycle. pp70S6k regulates 
the phosphorylation of the 40S ribosomal protein S6 and the transcription factor 
CREM tau. pp70S6k is regulated by serine/threonine phosphorylation, and although 
1-phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and phospholipase C have been implicated as
upstream regulators, the mechanism of activation and identity of the upstream
pp70S6k kinases remain unknown. To improve our understanding of how this
mitogen-stimulated protein kinase is regulated by growth factors and the
immunosuppressant rapamycin, we have initiated a structure/function analysis of
pp70S6k. Our results indicate that both the N and C termini participate in the
complex regulation of pp70S6k activity.

PMCID: PMC40469
PMID: 8524831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Nov 7;92(23):10673-7.

Pituitary follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) induces CREM gene expression in
Sertoli cells: involvement in long-term desensitization of the FSH receptor.

Monaco L(1), Foulkes NS, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale, Université Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France.

Transcription factor CREM (cAMP-responsive element modulator) plays a pivotal
role in the nuclear response to cAMP in neuroendocrine cells. We have previously 
shown that follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) directs CREM expression in male
germ cells. The physiological importance of FSH in Sertoli cell function prompted
us to analyze its effect on CREM expression in these cells. We observed a
dramatic and specific increase in the CREM isoform ICER (inducible cAMP early
repressor) expression, with a peak 4 h after FSH treatment of primary Sertoli
cells. Interestingly, induced levels of ICER protein persist for a considerably
longer time. Induction of the repressor ICER accompanies early down-regulation of
the FSH receptor transcript, which leads to long-term desensitization. Here we
show that ICER represses FSH receptor expression by binding to a CRE-like
sequence in the regulatory region of the gene. Our results confirm the crucial
role played by CREM in hormonal control and suggest its role in the long-term
desensitization phenomenon of peptide membrane receptors.

PMCID: PMC40674
PMID: 7479863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Oct 10;92(21):9633-7.

Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)-directed induction of the CREM gene in the
thyroid gland participates in the long-term desensitization of the TSH receptor.

Lalli E(1), Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique-Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale, Illkirch, CU de Strasbourg, France.

Thyroid gland function is regulated by the hypothalamic-pituitary axis via the
secretion of TSH, according to environmental, developmental, and circadian
stimuli. TSH modulates both the secretion of thyroid hormone and gland trophism
through interaction with a specific guanine nucleotide-binding protein-coupled
receptor (TSH receptor; TSH-R), which elicits the activation of the
cAMP-dependent signaling pathway. After TSH stimulation, the levels of TSH-R RNA 
are known to decrease dramatically within a few hours. This phenomenon ultimately
leads to homologous long-term desensitization of the TSH-R. Here we show that TSH
drives the induction of the inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) isoform of the 
cAMP response element (CRE) modulator gene both in rat thyroid gland and in the
differentiated thyroid cell line FRTL-5. The kinetics of ICER protein induction
mirrors the down-regulation of TSH-R mRNA. ICER binds to a CRE-like sequence in
the TSH-R promoter and represses its expression. Thus, ICER induction by TSH in
the thyroid gland represents a paradigm of the molecular mechanism by which
pituitary hormones elicit homologous long-term desensitization.

PMCID: PMC40856
PMID: 7568187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Biol Chem. 1995 Sep 15;270(37):21893-901.

The factor binding to the glucocorticoid modulatory element of the tyrosine
aminotransferase gene is a novel and ubiquitous heteromeric complex.

Oshima H(1), Szapary D, Simons SS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Steroid Hormones Section, NIDDK/Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Glucocorticoid induction of the tyrosine aminotransferase gene deviates from that
of many glucocorticoid-responsive genes by having a lower EC50 and displaying
more agonist activity with a given antiglucocorticoid. A cis-acting element,
located 3646 base pairs upstream of the start of tyrosine aminotransferase gene
transcription, has been found to be sufficient to reproduce these variations with
heterologous genes and promoters (Oshima, H., and Simons, S.S., Jr. (1992) Mol.
Endocrinol. 6, 416-428). This element has been called a glucocorticoid modulatory
element, or GME. Others have called this sequence a cyclic AMP-responsive element
(CRE) due to the binding of the cyclic AMP response element binding protein
(CREB). We now report the partial purification and characterization of two new
proteins (GMEB1 and -2) of 88 and 67 kDa that bind to the GME/CRE as a
heteromeric complex. This purification was followed by the formation of a
previously characterized, biologically relevant band in gel shift assays. By
several biochemical criteria, the GMEBs differed from many of the previously
described CREB/CREM/ATF family members. Partial peptide sequencing revealed that 
the sequences of these two proteins have not yet been described. Size exclusion
chromatography and molecular weight measurements of the gel-shifted band
demonstrated that the GMEBs bound to the GME as a macromolecular complex of about
550 kDa that could be dissociated by deoxycholate. Similar experiments showed
that CREB bound to the GME as heteromeric complexes of about 310 and 360 kDa. As 
determined from gel shift assays, GMEB1 and -2 are not restricted to rat liver
cells but appear to be ubiquitous. Thus, these novel GMEBs may participate in a
similar modulation of other glucocorticoid-inducible genes in a variety of cells.

PMID: 7665613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Biol Chem. 1995 Sep 8;270(36):20962-7.

An intron facilitates activation of the calspermin gene by the testis-specific
transcription factor CREM tau.

Sun Z(1), Means AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

Erratum in
    1995 Nov 24;270(47):28494.

Calspermin is a high affinity Ca2+/calmodulin binding protein that is found only 
in postmeiotic male germ cells. Our previous studies have shown that the
calspermin transcript is produced by utilization of a testis-specific promoter
located within an intron of the calmodulin kinase IV gene. This promoter contains
two cAMP response element-like motifs that bind the testis-specific transcription
factor CREM tau. This interaction is required for transcriptional activation.
Here we describe a novel regulatory element, the 111-base pair first intron of
the calspermin gene, which is also required for enhancement of transcription by
CREM tau via the cAMP response element motifs. Deletion or inversion of this
intron results in loss of CREM tau-mediated stimulation of transcription.
However, CREM tau stimulates calspermin promoter activity when the intron is
moved upstream of the promoter but only when inserted in the proper orientation. 
Footprint, linker scanning, and deletion analyses were used to identify
regulatory elements in the intron. We suggest that the intron functions as an
orientation-dependent but position-independent regulatory element to activate the
calspermin promoter by facilitating the stimulatory effect of CREM tau on
transcription.

PMID: 7673120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Sep;15(9):5123-30.

A Drosophila CREB/CREM homolog encodes multiple isoforms, including a cyclic
AMP-dependent protein kinase-responsive transcriptional activator and antagonist.

Yin JC(1), Wallach JS, Wilder EL, Klingensmith J, Dang D, Perrimon N, Zhou H,
Tully T, Quinn WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Science, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge 02139, USA.

We have characterized a Drosophila gene that is a highly conserved homolog of the
mammalian cyclic AMP (cAMP)-responsive transcription factors CREB and CREM.
Uniquely among Drosophila genes characterized to date, it codes for a
cAMP-responsive transcriptional activator. An alternatively spliced product of
the same gene is a specific antagonist of cAMP-inducible transcription. Analysis 
of the splicing pattern of the gene suggests that the gene may be the predecessor
of the mammalian CREB and CREM genes.

PMCID: PMC230759
PMID: 7651429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Biol Chem. 1995 Aug 11;270(32):19078-85.

The cyclic AMP response elements of the genes for angiotensin converting enzyme
and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (GTP) can mediate transcriptional
activation by CREM tau and CREM alpha.

Goraya TY(1), Kessler SP, Stanton P, Hanson RW, Sen GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Ohio 44195, USA.

The potential of the CREM family of proteins to activate transcription of the
genes encoding the testis-specific isozyme of angiotensin converting enzyme
(ACET) and the gluconeogenic enzyme, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (GTP)
(PEPCK) (EC 4.1.1.32) were investigated. Both CREM tau and CREM alpha bind
efficiently to the putative cyclic AMP response element (CRE) present in the ACET
gene (CRET) and to the CRE in the PEPCK gene. In HepG2 cells, the CRE was
required for the strong stimulation by CREM tau of the expression of a chimeric
PEPCK (-210 to +73)-chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) gene. The CRE could 
be mutated to the CRET sequence without losing the stimulatory effects of CREM
tau. However, a similar chimeric gene driven by the regulatory region of the ACET
gene, which contains the CRET site, could only be stimulated by CREM tau when its
imperfect TATA element was mutated to an authentic TATA. Surprisingly, CREM
alpha, an alleged inhibitor of CRE-mediated transcription, stimulated the
expression of both PEPCK-CAT and ACET-CAT genes in HepG2 cells, a process which
required the presence of the CRE and the CRET sites, respectively. In contrast,
when the same CRE elements were used to drive the transcription of a chimeric
gene containing the thymidine kinase promoter linked to the CAT structural gene, 
CREM alpha inhibited its expression in HepG2 and JEG3 cells. The expression of
the same chimeric gene, however, was stimulated by CREM alpha in F9 embryonal
carcinoma cells. These results demonstrated that the nature of the
transcriptional effects of CREM isoforms on CRE-mediated transcription depends on
the specific gene, the specific cell type and the promoter context of the CRE
site.

PMID: 7642572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Anticancer Drugs. 1995 Aug;6(4):615-8.

Cyclosporine A increases serum cortisol levels in rabbits.

Cufer T(1), Vrhovec I, Skrk J, Pfeifer M, Pajk B, Zakotnik B, Filipic B, Rode B, 
Sikic BI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oncology, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

P-glycoprotein (P-gp), a membrane protein that was originally found to be
involved in the efflux of cytotoxic drugs out of the tumor cells, is also present
in a variety of normal human and animal tissues, such as the adrenal cortex. The 
function of P-gp in the adrenal cortex has not been defined yet. The aim of our
study was to determine whether the blockade of P-gp by cyclosporine A (CsA)
dissolved in Cremophor EL (Crem) inhibits cortisol secretion in rabbits. In 14
rabbits, the baseline and ACTH stimulated serum cortisol levels were measured
before and after CsA treatment. Seven rabbits were treated with 2 x 30 mg/kg CsA 
and seven with 2 x 90 mg/kg CsA injected s.c. Serum cortisol levels were
determined by radioimmunoassay adjusted for expected values. The whole blood CsA 
levels were determined by a commercially available fluorescence polarization
immunoassay. Serum cortisol levels, both baseline and ACTH stimulated,
significantly increased after both low and high dose CsA treatment. The increase 
was dose dependent. The mean baseline cortisol levels increased from 5.7 (SD =
6.3) to 15.0 nmol/l (SD = 7.2) in the low dose group and from 7.7 (SD = 4.9) to
44.9 nmol/l (SD = 13.8) in the high dose group. The mean cortisol levels 8 h
after ACTH stimulation increased from 53.3 (SD = 34.5) to 106.0 nmol/l (SD =
33.0) in the low dose group and from 47.7 (SD = 12.2) to 153.0 nmol/l (SD = 55.1)
in the high dose group.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7579569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Immunobiology. 1995 Jul;193(2-4):155-60.

Positive regulation of the nuclear activator CREM by the mitogen-induced p70 S6
kinase.

de Groot RP(1), Ballou LM, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes, Faculté de Médecine,
Institut de Chimie Biologique, Strasbourg, France.

PMID: 8530139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Mol Endocrinol. 1995 Jun;9(6):706-16.

Developmental maturation of pineal gland function: synchronized CREM inducibility
and adrenergic stimulation.

Stehle JH(1), Foulkes NS, Pévet P, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiologie des Fonctions Rythmiques et Saisonnieres, Centre Nationale de
Recherche Scientifique, Strasbourg, France.

The cAMP response element modulator (CREM) gene encodes multiple activators and
repressors of cAMP-responsive transcription. Differential splicing generates a
developmental switch in CREM function during spermatogenesis, while the use of an
alternative promoter is responsible for the production of a cAMP-inducible
transcriptional repressor, ICER (inducible cAMP early repressor). The ICER
promoter is strongly inducible by cAMP because of the presence of four tandemly
repeated cAMP response elements. Furthermore, ICER negatively autoregulates the
ICER promoter activity, thus generating a feedback loop. CREM constitutes an
early response gene of the cAMP pathway in several neuroendocrine cells. We have 
previously shown that CREM is highly expressed in the adult rat pineal gland at
nighttime. Here, we show that the only additional site of rhythmic ICER
expression within the photoneuroendocrine system is the lamina intercalaris.
Ontogenetically, the ICER day-night switch and cAMP inducibility mature in the
pineal gland at the end of the first postnatal week. Importantly, this correlates
with the onset of melatonin synthesis and the establishment of functional
adrenergic innervation. At this developmental phase we document a significant
increase in protein kinase A levels, thus suggesting that ICER inducibility
reflects a complete maturation of the cAMP-dependent signaling pathway at the
nuclear level.

PMID: 8592516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jun;15(6):3301-9.

Cell cycle regulation of cyclin A gene expression by the cyclic AMP-responsive
transcription factors CREB and CREM.

Desdouets C(1), Matesic G, Molina CA, Foulkes NS, Sassone-Corsi P, Brechot C,
Sobczak-Thepot J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U370, Faculté
Necker, Paris, France.

Cyclin A is a pivotal regulatory protein which, in mammalian cells, is involved
in the S phase of the cell cycle. Transcription of the human cyclin A gene is
cell cycle regulated. We have investigated the role of the cyclic AMP
(cAMP)-dependent signalling pathway in this cell cycle-dependent control. In
human diploid fibroblasts (Hs 27), induction of cyclin A gene expression at G1/S 
is stimulated by 8-bromo-cAMP and suppressed by the protein kinase A inhibitor
H89, which was found to delay S phase entry. Transfection experiments showed that
the cyclin A promoter is inducible by activation of the adenylyl cyclase
signalling pathway. Stimulation is mediated predominantly via a cAMP response
element (CRE) located at positions -80 to -73 with respect to the transcription
initiation site and is able to bind CRE-binding proteins and CRE modulators.
Moreover, activation by phosphorylation of the activators CRE-binding proteins
and CRE modulator tau and levels of the inducible cAMP early repressor are cell
cycle regulated, which is consistent with the pattern of cyclin A inducibility by
cAMP during the cell cycle. These results suggest that the CRE is, at least
partly, implicated in stimulation of cyclin A transcription at G1/S.

PMCID: PMC230563
PMID: 7760825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Biol Chem. 1995 Apr 28;270(17):10304-13.

Activating transcription factor 1 and cyclic AMP response element modulator can
modulate the activity of the immunoglobulin kappa 3' enhancer.

Pongubala JM(1), Atchison ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, University of Pennsylvania, School of Veterinary
Medicine, Philadelphia 19104, USA.

Previously we determined that the immunoglobulin kappa 3' enhancer (kappa E3')
contains at least two functional DNA sequences (PU.1/NF-EM5 and E2A) within its
132-base pair active core. We have determined that the activities of these two
sequences are insufficient to account for the entire activity of the 132-base
pair core. Using site-directed linker scan mutagenesis across the core fragment
we identified several additional functional sequences. We used one of these
functional sequences to screen a lambda gt11 cDNA expression library resulting in
the isolation of cDNA clones encoding the transcription factors ATF-1 (activating
transcription factor) and CREM (cyclic AMP response element modulator). Because
ATF-1 and CREM are known to bind to cAMP response elements (CRE), this functional
sequence was named the kappa E3'-CRE. We show that dibutyryl cAMP can increase
kappa E3' enhancer activity, and in transient expression assays ATF-1 caused a
4-5-fold increase in the activity of the core enhancer while CREM-alpha
expression resulted in repression of enhancer activity. RNA analyses showed
increased levels of ATF-1 mRNA during B cell development and some changes in CREM
transcript processing. By joining various fragments of the kappa E3' enhancer to 
the kappa E3'-CRE, we observed that the kappa E3'-CRE can synergistically
increase transcription in association with the PU.1/NF-EM5 binding sites,
suggesting a functional interaction between the proteins that bind to these DNA
sequences. Consistent with this possibility, we found that ATF-1 and CREM can
physically interact with PU.1. The isolation of activator and repressor proteins 
that bind to the kappa E3'-CRE may relate to previous conflicting results
concerning the role of the cAMP signal transduction pathway in kappa gene
transcription.

PMID: 7730336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Neurovirol. 1995 Mar;1(1):62-77.

Characterization of a glial cell-specific DNA-protein complex formed with the
human T cell lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I) enhancer.

Wessner R(1), Tillmann-Bogush M, Wigdahl B.

Author information: 
(1)Pennsylvania State University, College of Medicine, Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, Hershey 17033, USA.

Human T cell lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I) encodes the trans-activator, Tax,
which facilitates viral transcription from three 21 bp repeated elements within
the U3 region of the long terminal repeat (LTR). Electrophoretic mobility shift
(EMS) analyses utilizing double-stranded (ds) oligonucleotides homologous to each
of the 21 bp repeats and nuclear extracts derived from selected cell lines of
lymphocytic, neuronal, and glial origin have demonstrated the differential
binding of cellular factors to each of the three 21 bp repeats. Specifically,
both a glial cell-specific DNA-protein complex (designated GCS) and 21 bp
repeat-specific DNA-protein complexes (designated U1 and U2) were detected. The
formation of the GCS DNA-protein complex may involve activating transcription
factor (ATF)/cAMP-response element (CRE) binding protein (CREB) family member(s) 
while the formation of the U1 and U2 DNA-protein complexes may involve an
Sp1-related factor. In addition, three ATF-CREB-related DNA-protein complexes
common to each individual 21 bp repeat (designated C1-C3) were also detected.
However, we demonstrated that the abundance of the C1 and C2 DNA-protein
complexes detected with the individual 21 bp repeats and glial cell nuclear
extract was relatively low compared to that obtained with lymphocyte, monocyte,
or neuronal nuclear extracts. We also have demonstrated that the ATF-CREB factors
participating formation of the GCS DNA-protein complex are distinct from those
participating in formation of the C1-C3 DNA-protein complexes. Based on
nucleotide sequence requirements and immunoreactivity, we suggest that the GCS
DNA-protein complex may contain a novel glial cell type specific ATF-CREB-related
factor(s). Furthermore, we demonstrate that the CRE modulator (CREM) protein in
conjunction with the ATF/CREB factor, CREBP1, interact with each of the three 21 
bp repeats to form the C3 DNA-protein complex. However, the abundance of the C3
DNA-protein complex formed utilizing the promoter proximal repeat is dramatically
lower compared to either of the other two 21 bp repeat elements. Based on these
observations, we suggest that the differential binding of cellular factors to
each of the three 21 bp repeat elements may play a role in basal as well as
Tax-mediated LTR-directed transcription within cell populations of either immune 
or nervous system origin.

PMID: 9222343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Feb;15(2):653-60.

Transcriptional regulation of the mouse alpha A-crystallin gene: activation
dependent on a cyclic AMP-responsive element (DE1/CRE) and a Pax-6-binding site.

Cvekl A(1), Kashanchi F, Sax CM, Brady JN, Piatigorsky J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, National Eye Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-2730.

Two cis-acting promoter elements (-108 to -100 and -49 to -33) of the mouse alpha
A-crystallin gene, which is highly expressed in the ocular lens, were studied.
Here we show that DE1 (-108 to -100; 5'TGACGGTG3'), which resembles the consensus
cyclic AMP (cAMP)-responsive element sequence (CRE; 5'TGACGT[A/C][A/G]3'),
behaves like a functional CRE site. Transfection experiments and electrophoretic 
mobility shift assays (EMSAs) using site-specific mutations correlated a loss of 
function with deviations from the CRE consensus sequence. Results of EMSAs in the
presence of antisera against CREB, delta CREB, and CREM were consistent with the 
binding of CREB-like proteins to the DE1 sequence. Stimulation of alpha
A-crystallin promoter activity via 8-bromo-cAMP, forskolin, or human T-cell
leukemia virus type I Tax1 in transfections and reduction of activity of this
site in cell-free transcription tests by competition with the somatostatin CRE
supported the idea that DE1 is a functional CRE. Finally, Pax-6, a member of the 
paired-box family of transcription factors, activated the mouse alpha
A-crystallin promoter in cotransfected COP-8 fibroblasts and bound to the -59 to 
-29 promoter sequence in EMSAs. These data provide evidence for a synergistic
role of Pax-6 and CREB-like proteins for high expression of the mouse alpha
A-crystallin gene in the lens.

PMCID: PMC231924
PMID: 7823934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jan;15(1):561-71.

Calspermin gene transcription is regulated by two cyclic AMP response elements
contained in an alternative promoter in the calmodulin kinase IV gene.

Sun Z(1), Sassone-Corsi P, Means AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710.

The transcript for the high-affinity Ca2+/calmodulin-binding protein calspermin
is generated from the gene encoding Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV
only in postmeiotic germ cells during spermatogenesis. We demonstrate that this
testis-specific calspermin transcript can be produced in heterologous cells by
utilization of a promoter located in an intron of the calmodulin (CaM) kinase IV 
gene. Critical motifs within this promoter are two cyclic AMP response element
(CRE)-like sequences located about -70 and -50 bp upstream of the transcriptional
initiation site. Both CRE motifs are footprinted by the authentic testis-specific
transcriptional activator CREM tau or by CREM tau present in adult testis nuclear
extract. Whereas a 2.1-kb DNA fragment containing the calspermin promoter is
inactive when transfected into NIH 3T3 cells, activity can be restored by
cotransfection of CREM tau and protein kinase A or CaM kinase IV but not CaM
kinase II alpha. Restoration of activity is greatly reduced by mutation of the
two CRE motifs. Since CRE-like motifs have been identified in many genes uniquely
expressed in postmeiotic germ cells, which contain abundant CREM tau protein, we 
suggest that CREM tau may function as one transcription factor responsible for
the expression of postmeiotic germ cell-specific genes.

PMCID: PMC232013
PMID: 7799965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 1995;121(9-10):521-8.

HTLV-1 oncoprotein Tax deregulates transcription of cellular genes through
multiple mechanisms.

Yoshida M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Tokyo, Japan.

Infection of a human retrovirus HTLV-1 induces adult T cell leukemia and a
neurological disease, HAM/TSP. Regulatory protein Tax of HTLV-1 is thought to
contribute to the pathogenesis. We have studied the mechanism of transcriptional 
activation induced by Tax protein and identified two independent mechanisms: (a) 
binding to the enhancer-binding proteins, CREB, CREM, NF-kappa B and SRF,
resulting in the activation of these factors through indirect binding to each
specific DNA sequence, and (b) binding to I kappa B protein resulting in the
suppression of the negative regulator I kappa B, which binds to NF-kappa B. In
addition to these factors, a new protein GLI/THP is also involved in the
transactivation. On the basis of these mechanisms, gene regulations in vitro and 
in vivo in HTLV-1-infected cells are discussed.

PMID: 7559731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Dec 20;91(26):12423-7.

An isoform of transcription factor CREM expressed during spermatogenesis lacks
the phosphorylation domain and represses cAMP-induced transcription.

Walker WH(1), Sanborn BM, Habener JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston 02114.

cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) and modulator protein (CREM)
regulate the transcription of cAMP-responsive genes via phosphorylation by
cAMP-dependent protein kinase A. Reverse transcription and polymerase chain
amplification of RNA from male germ cells identify an alternatively spliced CREM 
isoform, CREM delta C-G, lacking four exons including those encoding the protein 
kinase A-regulated phosphorylation domain and the flanking glutamine-rich
transcriptional activation domains. CREM delta C-G retains exons that encode the 
basic-leucine zipper (bZIP) DNA-binding domain, binds to cAMP response elements
(CREs), and competitively inhibits binding of CREB and CREM to CREs. Expression
of CREM delta C-G inhibits transcription of a CRE-containing chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase reporter plasmid induced by endogenous CREB. Antiserum to CREM 
detects CREM delta C-G in elongated spermatids from rat testis. These
observations indicate that CREM delta C-G is a unique form of a competitive
negative regulator of CREB-mediated gene transcription expressed in a
maturation-dependent manner in haploid germ cells. The developmental specificity 
of CREM delta C-G suggests that it may play a role in transcriptional regulation 
during spermatogenesis.

PMCID: PMC45450
PMID: 7809053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Biol Reprod. 1994 Dec;51(6):1322-9.

Identification of a functional cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate response
element in the 5'-flanking region of the gene for transition protein 1 (TP1), a
basic chromosomal protein of mammalian spermatids.

Kistler MK(1), Sassone-Corsi P, Kistler WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of South Carolina,
Columbia 29208.

Transition protein 1 (TP1) is a small basic chromosomal protein that appears in
mammalian spermatids during the period of chromatin condensation. The gene for
TP1 from several species contains an apparent cAMP response element (CRE) in the 
immediate 5'-flanking region. The recent identification of high expression of the
novel CRE-activating protein (CREM tau) in advanced testicular germ cells
provided a stimulus to ask whether or not the TP1 CRE is functional. To this end 
we show both by gel retardation and by footprint assays that TP1 CRE forms
specific bound complexes with proteins in whole testis nuclear extracts and that 
these complexes involve CREM as evidenced by recognition by a specific antibody. 
In addition, the TP1 CRE forms specific bound complexes with bacterially
expressed CREM tau. Finally, the TPI CRE conveys protein kinase A-dependent
induction to a linked chloramphenicol acetyl transferase gene when transfected
into JEG-3 cells. Accordingly, TP1 is a good candidate for a testis-specific gene
subject to CREM tau regulation.

PMID: 7888512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Biol Chem. 1994 Nov 18;269(46):28839-43.

Modulatory function of CREB.CREM alpha heterodimers depends upon CREM alpha
phosphorylation.

Loriaux MM(1), Brennan RG, Goodman RH.

Author information: 
(1)Vollum Institute, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland 97201-3098.

The cAMP-responsive element (CRE) modulator protein CREM alpha has been proposed 
to be a negative regulator of the CRE-binding protein (CREB). Precisely how CREM 
alpha inhibits CREB function is unclear, however. CREM alpha and CREB have highly
related structures, and both proteins bind to consensus CRE sequences with
similar affinities. Furthermore, both proteins can be phosphorylated by
cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA). Two models have been proposed to explain
how CREM alpha could prevent the activation of genes by PKA-phosphorylated CREB: 
inhibitory CREM alpha homodimers could prevent occupancy of the CRE by CREB, or
CREM alpha could block gene activation by forming non-functional CREB.CREM alpha 
heterodimers. To determine whether CREB-CREM alpha heterodimers are indeed
non-functional, we engineered the leucine zipper regions of the two proteins to
direct the pattern of dimerization. We then tested the biological activities of
the phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated complexes in in vivo transcription
assays. Our results indicate that CREM alpha can contribute to PKA-mediated gene 
activation when selectively heterodimerized with CREB. Furthermore, this
transcriptional activity depends upon the ability of the complexes to be
phosphorylated by PKA.

PMID: 7961842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Nov;14(11):7363-76.

A complex array of positive and negative elements regulates the chicken alpha
A-crystallin gene: involvement of Pax-6, USF, CREB and/or CREM, and AP-1
proteins.

Cvekl A(1), Sax CM, Bresnick EH, Piatigorsky J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, National Eye Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-2730.

The abundance of crystallins (> 80% of the soluble protein) in the ocular lens
provides advantageous markers for selective gene expression during cellular
differentiation. Here we show by functional and protein-DNA binding experiments
that the chicken alpha A-crystallin gene is regulated by at least five control
elements located at sites A (-148 to -139), B (-138 to -132), C (-128 to -101), D
(-102 to -93), and E (-56 to -41). Factors interacting with these sites were
characterized immunologically and by gel mobility shift experiments. The results 
are interpreted with the following model. Site A binds USF and is part of a
composite element with site B. Site B binds CREB and/or CREM to enhance
expression in the lens and binds an AP-1 complex including CREB, Fra2 and/or JunD
which interacts with USF on site A to repress expression in fibroblasts. Sites C 
and E (which is conserved across species) bind Pax-6 in the lens to stimulate
alpha A-crystallin promoter activity. These experiments provide the first direct 
data that Pax-6 contributes to the lens-specific expression of a crystallin gene.
Site D (-104 to -93) binds USF and is a negative element. Thus, the data indicate
that USF, CREB and/or CREM (or AP-1 factors), and Pax-6 bind a complex array of
positive and negative cis-acting elements of the chicken alpha A-crystallin gene 
to control high expression in the lens and repression in fibroblasts.

PMCID: PMC359271
PMID: 7935450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Cell. 1994 Oct 7;79(1):81-91.

Positive regulation of the cAMP-responsive activator CREM by the p70 S6 kinase:
an alternative route to mitogen-induced gene expression.

de Groot RP(1), Ballou LM, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

Activation of the adenylyl cyclase signaling pathway elicits the induction of
genes via activators binding to cAMP-responsive elements (CREs). Nuclear factor
CRE modulator (CREM) is activated by PKA-mediated phosphorylation on a serine at 
position 117. We show that Ser-117 is also phosphorylated by the
mitogen-activated p70 S6 kinase (p70S6K) in vitro. Activation of cellular p70S6K 
by serum factors enhances Ser-117 phosphorylation and CREM transactivation.
Coexpression of p70S6K significantly increases transactivation by a GAL4-CREM
fusion. The macrolide rapamycin, a potent and specific inhibitor of p70S6K in
vivo, completely blocks CREM activation induced by serum and by p70S6K. Thus,
CREM constitutes a target for mitogenic signaling through p70S6K and may acts as 
a nuclear effector in which transduction pathways may converge and cross-talk.

PMID: 7923380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1994 Oct;26(1-2):259-70.

The transcription factor CREB is not phosphorylated at serine 133 in axotomized
neurons: implications for the expression of AP-1 proteins.

Herdegen T(1), Gass P, Brecht S, Neiss WF, Schmid W.

Author information: 
(1)II. Institute of Physiology, University of Heidelberg, FRG.

The present study has investigated whether nerve fiber transection alters the
phosphorylation of serine at position 133 (Ser133) of the transcription factor
CREB (phosphoCREB). Activation of CREB by phosphorylation has a major function in
the control of gene transcription. PhosphoCREB was visualized by antisera that
specifically react with an epitope comprising the phosphorylated Ser133 of CREB
as well as of CREM and ATF1 proteins. In untreated rats, nuclear immunoreactivity
(IR) of phosphoCREB was consistently visible, e.g. in the cortex, thalamic and
hypothalamic compartments and central termination areas of primary somatosensory 
afferents. Transection of peripheral (sciatic nerve), cranial (hypoglossal and
facial nerve) and central (medial forebrain bundle and mammillo-thalamic tract)
nerve fibers did not increase phosphoCREB-IR in the axotomized neurons between 5 
min and 30 days post-axotomy. In contrast, phosphoCREB-IR appeared after 24 h in 
glial cells adjacent to the axotomized motoneurons and persisted up to 4 weeks.
This increase in glial phosphoCREB-IR was paralleled by enhanced expression of
the CREB protein itself. Between 20 min and 24 h following sciatic nerve
transection, the number of phosphoCREB labeled nuclei also increased in neurons
of the ipsilateral superficial dorsal horn of lumbar L3-L5 spinal cord segments. 
These data suggest that phosphorylation of Ser133 in CREB/CREM/ATF1 proteins is
not involved in the transcriptional control of early-response genes such as c-jun
in axotomized neurons following nerve transection. This is in contrast to the
reported phosphorylation of CREB and its trans-acting effects on immediate-early 
genes such as c-fos after transynaptic neuronal excitation.

PMID: 7854055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Jun 7;91(12):5647-51.

Targeted mutation of the CREB gene: compensation within the CREB/ATF family of
transcription factors.

Hummler E(1), Cole TJ, Blendy JA, Ganss R, Aguzzi A, Schmid W, Beermann F, Schütz
G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell I, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

The cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) has been implicated as a key
regulator in the transcriptional control of many genes. To assess the functional 
importance of CREB in vivo and its role in development, we used gene targeting to
generate mice with a disruption of the CREB gene. Homozygous mutant mice appeared
healthy and exhibited no impairment of growth or development. In this report we
demonstrate that CREB and two other members of the CREB/ATF family, cAMP response
element modulation protein (CREM) and activating transcription factor 1 (ATF1),
appear to form a unique subgroup within this extensive class of transcription
factors. Examination of CREM mRNA and protein levels in CREB mutant mice
demonstrated overexpression of CREM in all tissues examined, but no change in
ATF1 levels. These data demonstrate that CREB is not the sole mediator of
cAMP-dependent transcriptional regulation and probably acts in concert with a
specific subset of cAMP response element-binding proteins to transduce the cAMP
signal and, in its absence, these same proteins can compensate for CREB function 
in vivo.

PMCID: PMC44053
PMID: 8202542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Int J Androl. 1994 Jun;17(3):149-60.

Localization of mRNAs by in-situ hybridization to the residual body at stages
IX-X of the cycle of the rat seminiferous epithelium: fact or artefact?

Millar MR(1), Sharpe RM, Maguire SM, Gaughan J, West AP, Saunders PT.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Reproductive Biology Unit, Edinburgh, UK.

Several recent articles have reported localization of specific mRNAs in the rat
testis to stage IX and X seminiferous tubules using in-situ hybridization. In all
cases the expression was located basally in the tubules and appeared as discrete 
round clusters of grains close to the lamina propria. The localization was
interpreted as being in Sertoli cells or leptotene spermatocytes. In this study
we demonstrate that this pattern is most probably due to artefactual binding of
probes to the residual body (RB). In the present study testicular tissue,
perfusion-fixed with Bouin's and embedded in paraffin, was used, as this resulted
in excellent morphological preservation such that RBs within tubules at stages
VIII-X were clearly distinguishable. RNA content of the RBs was demonstrated at
stages VIII-X using methyl green pyronin staining, and could be eliminated by
pretreatment with RNAse or trichloroacetic acid. Localization of mRNAs for 11
seminiferous tubule proteins was assessed using 35S-labelled and
digoxigenin-labelled riboprobes (activin receptor-II, alpha-inhibin, transferrin,
androgen-binding protein (ABP), cyclic protein-2 (CP-2), CREM, sulphated
glycoproteins 1 and 2 (SGP-1 and SGP-2), transition protein 2 (TP-2) and
cystatin-C), and digoxigenin-labelled oligonucleotide probes (transition
protein-1 (TP-1), TP-2 and protamine-1). All of these probes showed localization 
to the correct cell type(s) within the seminiferous epithelium. In addition, six 
antisense riboprobes (activin receptor-II, CREM, SGP-2, CP-2, cystatin C and
alpha-inhibin) showed hybridization to basally located residual bodies in tubules
at stages IX-X on one or more occasions, whereas residual bodies around the edge 
of the lumen (stage VIII) or in transit through the seminiferous epithelium
showed no hybridization; sense probes showed no localization to residual bodies. 
A common feature of the probes which localized to the basal RBs was that they had
been prepared using cDNA cloned into Bluescript SK- vector such that the
antisense strand was generated from the T7 polymerase promotor. A cRNA prepared
using T7 polymerase and Bluescript vector alone and a GC-rich 27mer
oligonucleotide corresponding to the region of the multiple cloning site of
Bluescript adjacent to the T7 site both localized uniquely to basal RB. It is
concluded that the hybridization seen within RBs is probably a subtle artefact
unique to RBs undergoing dissolution following fusion with Sertoli cell
lysosomes, and may reflect nonspecific hybridization to GC-rich fragments of RNA.

PMID: 7960190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Leukemia. 1994 Apr;8 Suppl 1:S51-3.

Mechanism of transcriptional activation of viral and cellular genes by oncogenic 
protein of HTLV-1.

Yoshida M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Tokyo, Japan.

Regulatory protein Tax of human T cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) positively 
regulates the transcription of its own genome and specific cellular genes, and
contributes to the pathogenicity in ATL, HAM/TSP and other associated diseases.
The one mechanism of the transcriptional activation includes binding of Tax
protein in nucleus to enhancer binding proteins of CREB, CREM, NF-kappa B p50,
NF-kappa B p105 and SRF which bind to enhancer DNA. The other includes
Tax-binding to NF-kappa B proteins in the cytoplasm resulting in nuclear
translocation of active transcription factors. The interaction of Tax with
cellular transcription factors thus ultimately results in cellular proliferation,
immortalization and transformation leading to specific diseases.

PMID: 8152304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1994 Apr;100(1-2):121-4.

The key role of CREM in the cAMP signaling pathway in the testis.

Delmas V(1), Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, U184 de l'INSERM, Institut de Chimie Biologique, Faculté de Medecine,
Strasbourg, France.

PMID: 8056145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Biol Reprod. 1994 Apr;50(4):869-81.

Differential regulation of cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP) response
element-binding protein and cAMP response element modulator messenger ribonucleic
acid transcripts by follicle-stimulating hormone and androgen in the adult rat
testis.

West AP(1), Sharpe RM, Saunders PT.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Reproductive Biology Unit, Centre for Reproductive Biology, Edinburgh,
United Kingdom.

Hormonal regulation of the expression of mRNA transcripts for cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB) and cAMP response element modulator (CREM) during 
spermatogenesis was studied in the adult rat testis. Northern analysis of CREB
and CREM identified two mRNA transcripts for CREM (2.4 and 1.6 kb) and one
transcript for CREB (2.0 kb). Analysis of mRNAs from isolated testicular cells by
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT/PCR) showed that CREM mRNAs
were expressed by the germ cells but not the Sertoli or interstitial cells,
whereas CREB mRNA was located in germ cells, Sertoli cells, and interstitial
cells. RNA was isolated and analyzed from the testes of 1) rats treated for 24 h 
with FSH, 2) rats in which androgen withdrawal had been induced by ethane
dimethane sulphonate (EDS) treatment 6 days earlier (EDS-treated), 3) EDS-treated
rats supplemented with testosterone (EDS + T), or 4) intratesticular
administration or dibutyryl cAMP (dbcAMP) in the preceding 24 h. CREM mRNA
transcript expression was found to be decreased after all of these treatments in 
samples from intact testis and from isolated cells. Expression of the CREB
transcript was also decreased by EDS-induced androgen withdrawal, but not by FSH 
or EDS + T. In situ hybridization of paraffin-embedded testis sections probed
with digoxigenin-labeled riboprobes confirmed the localization of CREB and CREM
mRNA to the same cell types as found with RT/PCR. No stage-dependent expression
of CREM mRNA transcripts could be observed. Hybridization of the CREB probe was
highest around the base of stage VII-VIII tubules, and this was shown to be
androgen-dependent. The data presented suggest that regulation of the expression 
of CRE-binding protein mRNAs in Sertoli and germ cells during spermatogenesis is 
dependent on both androgen and FSH. However, the effects of androgen or FSH on
the regulation of CRE-binding protein mRNAs are different.

PMID: 7515286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Blood. 1994 Mar 1;83(5):1337-47.

Synergistic reversal of multidrug-resistance phenotype in acute myeloid leukemia 
cells by cyclosporin A and cremophor EL.

Ross DD(1), Wooten PJ, Tong Y, Cornblatt B, Levy C, Sridhara R, Lee EJ, Schiffer 
CA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Maryland Cancer Center, Baltimore 21201.

Cremophor (Crem) EL, the vehicle for intravenous delivery of cyclosporin A (CsA),
has been reported to counteract multidrug resistance (MDR) in P-glycoprotein
(Pgp)-over-expressing cell lines. Because of this, we sought to determine whether
Crem functions independently as a modulator of MDR in blast cells obtained from
acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) patients, and the nature of its interaction in
combination with CsA in reversing an MDR phenotype. In the phenotypically
classical MDR AML cell lines HL-60/Vinc (overexpresses Pgp) or HL-60/AR (does not
overexpress Pgp), the dose causing half-maximum enhancement (D50) of daunorubicin
(DNR, 1 micrograms/mL, 3 hours) accumulation was achieved by the combination of
CsA and Crem (CsA/Crem) at 1.2 mumol/L CsA. In contrast, the D50 for Crem alone
was approached at an amount that would be needed to suspend 6.2 mumol/L CsA for
HL-60/Vinc, and 81 mumol/L CsA for HL-60/AR. The D50 concentrations for CsA alone
(dissolved in ethanol, which does not alter DNR accumulation) were also higher
than those for CsA/Crem, being 6.5 mumol/L for HL-60/Vinc, and 3.1 mumol/L for
HL-60/AR. The maximum absolute level of enhancement of DNR accumulation (Emax) in
each cell line was approximately equivalent for CsA/Crem or CsA alone, and was
equal to the 3 hr intracellular DNR accumulation observed in parental, drug
sensitive HL-60/W cells. For Crem alone, HL-60/AR and HL-60/Vinc cells showed
markedly different responses: HL-60/Vinc cells attained intracellular DNR content
comparable to HL-60/W, whereas HL-60/AR cells achieved only approximately 35% of 
this level. Multiple-drug effects were analyzed by calculation of the Combination
Index (Chou and Talalay, Adv Enzyme Regul 22:27, 1984), which indicated that CsA 
and Crem are synergistic in causing enhancement of DNR accumulation in these MDR 
HL-60 cell lines. In blasts from AML patients, 5 mumol/L CsA/Crem or an
equivalent amount of Crem alone each caused significant (P < .001) enhancement of
DNR accumulation (60 AML-patient marrow samples) or DNR retention (51 AML-patient
marrows). Similarly, CsA/Crem or Crem alone caused significant (P < .01)
enhancement of the cytotoxicity of DNR in 36 AML blast cell specimens. The degree
of enhancement of accumulation/retention or cytotoxicity by CsA/Crem was
approximately equivalent to that obtained with Crem alone. These studies indicate
that Crem can reverse an MDR phenotype in patient AML blast cells.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 8118035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Feb 15;91(4):1210-3.

The cAMP-regulated transcription factor CREB interacts with a component of the
TFIID complex.

Ferreri K(1), Gill G, Montminy M.

Author information: 
(1)Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology, Salk Institute, La Jolla,
CA 92037.

cAMP regulates the expression of a number of genes through the protein kinase
A-mediated phosphorylation of CREB at Ser-133. The effects of Ser-133
phosphorylation appear to be primarily transmitted through a modulatory
kinase-inducible domain in CREB that functions cooperatively with a 120-amino
acid glutamine-rich region (Q2) to stimulate transcription. Indeed, the
kinase-inducible domain activity alone is not sufficient to sustain a
transcriptional response as illustrated by the CREM family of repressors, which
contain the kinase-inducible domain but lack the Q2 region. Here we demonstrate
that Q2 functions as a potent constitutive activator in vitro. The transcription 
factor TFIID fraction supports transcriptional activation by Q2, although the
"TATA" binding protein alone does not, suggesting that other components of the
TFIID complex mediate the response to CREB Q2. In fact, Q2 associates with the
TATA binding protein-associated factor dTAFII110. As the transcriptionally
inactive CREM alpha and beta proteins lack sequences in Q2 that are necessary for
binding dTAFII110, our results suggest that these proteins may repress
transcription because they are unable to interact with the basal transcription
complex.

PMCID: PMC43126
PMID: 7906413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Oncogene. 1994 Feb;9(2):463-8.

DNA bending by transcription factors CREM and CREB.

de Groot RP(1), Delmas V, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes, CNRS, U184 de l'INSERM,
Faculté de Médecine, Institut de Chimie Biologique, Strasbourg, France.

DNA bending is postulated to be a major determinant of gene expression and has
been shown to be specifically induced by some regulatory proteins with
DNA-binding properties. Here we show that nuclear factors which naturally bind to
CREs (cAMP-responsive elements) are able to induce bending in the sequences
flanking this recognition site. In our assays we used a permutated binding
site/gel retardation assay and bacterially generated nuclear factors. We have
been studying the cAMP-responsive-element modulator (CREM) gene, which encodes
both repressors (CREM alpha, beta and gamma) and an activator (CREM tau) of
cAMP-responsive transcription by alternative splicing. In addition, two
alternative DNA-binding domains can be encoded in different CREM isoforms. No
differences in induction of DNA bending by the CREM proteins with the two DNA
binding domains were detected. The activator CREB induced DNA bending in a
fashion similar to CREM. Importantly, we show that phosphorylation of CREM or
CREB alters their mobilities in a regular gel shift assay as well as enhances the
angle of DNA bending induced by these proteins.

PMID: 8290258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Biochem. 1994 Feb;115(2):298-303.

Novel isoforms of human cyclic AMP-responsive element modulator (hCREM) mRNA.

Fujimoto T(1), Fujisawa J, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Tokyo.

The cyclic AMP-response element (CRE), a transcriptional enhancer, is regulated
by CREB (CRE-binding protein) which is the leucine zipper protein phosphorylated 
by protein kinase A in response to cAMP signal. The highly homologous protein
CREM (CRE-modulator) is thought to modulate CREB-stimulated transcription, and is
also involved in transcriptional control during spermatogenesis. In this paper,
we report two types of cDNAs of human CREM (hCREM), type 1 and type 2; type 1 is 
a group of human counterparts of the mouse CREM alpha and type 2 is a novel form 
having a distinct 5' exon which is unrelated to any species of the CREB and CREM 
isoforms so far described. This unique 5' region of type 2 hCREM may suggest its 
independent expression from type 1 CREM. The specific 5' region of type 2 hCREM
consisted of 88 bp, containing an initiation codon for translation, but no
possible phosphorylation site, suggesting different roles from type 1 CREM. Both 
type 1 and 2 hCREMs are expressed in lymphoid and non-lymphoid cell lines. Their 
excess expression by transfection induced suppression of cAMP-mediated activation
of transcription, suggesting their negative regulation of CRE-mediated
transcription.

PMID: 8206879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Biol Chem. 1993 Dec 15;268(35):26482-93.

The transcription of a mammalian voltage-gated potassium channel is regulated by 
cAMP in a cell-specific manner.

Mori Y(1), Matsubara H, Folco E, Siegel A, Koren G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115.

The transcript of Kv1.5, a Shaker-like delayed rectifier K+ channel cloned in our
laboratory, is regulated in both tissue and developmentally specific manners. In 
this study we characterized the 5'-flanking region of the Kv1.5 gene. The gene
lacks a canonical TATA box, has several transcription start sites, and the
5'-noncoding sequence is intronless. A cAMP response element (CRE) consensus
signal was identified in the 5'-noncoding region. cAMP regulates the expression
of Kv1.5 gene in a cell-specific manner. In primary cardiac cells, cAMP induces a
6-fold increase in the steady state levels of Kv1.5 transcript. However, in GH3
cells cAMP induces a 5-6-fold decrease in steady state levels of Kv1.5
transcript. The half-life of Kv1.5 transcript is 37 min and is not affected by
cAMP. Nuclear run-on experiments show that in GH3 cells, cAMP reduces the
transcription rate of Kv1.5 gene. Transient transfection assays using 5'-deletion
mutations of Kv1.5 5'-flanking sequences revealed that the CRE located at +636
can confer the cAMP inducibility to Kv1.5 reporter gene constructs and binds to
CRE-binding protein (CREB) and CRE modulator protein (CREM) in electromobility
gel shift assays. Furthermore, KCl-induced depolarization can increase the steady
state levels of Kv1.5 transcript in primary atrial cells and decrease it in GH3
cells. We conclude that cAMP and depolarization play an important role in
regulating K+ channel expression and thus may induce long term effects on the
pattern of electrical activity of excitable cells.

PMID: 8253777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Cell. 1993 Dec 3;75(5):875-86.

Inducibility and negative autoregulation of CREM: an alternative promoter directs
the expression of ICER, an early response repressor.

Molina CA(1), Foulkes NS, Lalli E, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes, Institut National de la
Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Strasbourg, France.

cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) expression is tissue specific and
developmentally regulated. Here we report that CREM is unique within the family
of cAMP-responsive promoter element (CRE)-binding factors since it is inducible
by activation of the cAMP signaling pathway. The kinetic of expression is
characteristic of an early response gene. The induction is transient and cell
specific, does not involve increased transcript stability, and does not require
protein synthesis. Significantly, the subsequent decline in CREM expression
requires de novo protein synthesis. The induced transcript encodes a novel
repressor, inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER), and is generated from an
alternative intronic promoter. A cluster of four CREs in this promoter directs
cAMP inducibility. ICER binds to these elements and thereby represses the
activity of its own promoter, thus constituting a negative autoregulatory loop.

PMID: 8252624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Biochem Soc Trans. 1993 Nov;21(4):912-7.

Nuclear response to cyclic AMP: central role of transcription factor CREM
(cyclic-AMP-responsive-element modulator).

Lalli E(1), Lee JS, Masquilier D, Schlotter F, Foulkes NS, Molina CA,
Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes, CNRS, U184 de l'INSERM,
Faculté de Médecine, Institut de Chimie Biologique, Strasbourg, France.

PMID: 8132092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Mol Endocrinol. 1993 Nov;7(11):1502-14.

Induction of CREM activator proteins in spermatids: down-stream targets and
implications for haploid germ cell differentiation.

Delmas V(1), van der Hoorn F, Mellström B, Jégou B, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes, U-184 de l'INSERM,
Faculté de Medecine, Institut de Chimie Biologique, Strasbourg, France.

The cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) gene encodes a family of
transcriptional regulators that bind to promoter sequences activated by increased
intracellular cAMP levels. Both activators and repressors are generated by
alternative splicing and alternative translational initiation. During the
development of male germ cells, there is a switch in the transcripts generated by
CREM. Specifically, from the prophase of meiosis, there is an increase in the
CREM tau activator transcript. Here we present results showing that expression of
the CREM activator protein is restricted to postmeiotic germ cells. We show that 
CREM tau is efficiently phosphorylated at a serine residue at position 117 by the
protein kinase-A endogenous to germ cells, indicating that it constitutes a
natural target of the adenylyl cyclase pathway during spermatogenesis.
Phosphorylation of serine-117 turns CREM tau into a powerful activator. The rise 
in CREM tau protein coincides with the transcriptional activation of several
genes. We show that CREM tau efficiently binds to CREs present in the promoters
of these genes, suggesting that they could constitute down-stream targets of
CREM. We have analyzed in more detail the regulation of one of these genes, the
male germ cell-specific RT7. The RT7 promoter is cAMP inducible and activated by 
CREM tau in transfection assays. The RT7 promoter is efficiently transcribed in
vitro with nuclear extracts from seminiferous tubules. CREM-specific antibodies
block RT7 in vitro transcription, implicating a role for CREM tau in a cascade of
transcriptional events during spermatogenesis.

PMID: 8114765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Mol Endocrinol. 1993 Nov;7(11):1495-50.

Phosphorylation and negative regulation of the transcriptional activator CREM by 
p34cdc2.

de Groot RP(1), Derua R, Goris J, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, U-184 INSERM, Faculté de Médecine, Institut de Chimie
Biologique, Strasbourg, France.

Transcription factors that bind to cAMP-responsive elements (CREs) regulate the
expression of target genes in response to activation of the adenylyl cyclase
pathway. It is generally thought that activation is obtained through direct
phosphorylation by the cAMP-dependent protein kinase-A. We have isolated the gene
CRE modulator (CREM), which encodes multiple members of the CRE-binding protein
family, by cell-specific alternative splicing. Various isoforms have been
characterized, encoding both repressors (CREM alpha, -beta, and -gamma) as well
as activators (CREM tau). Here we show that the function of the activator CREM
tau is regulated by the p34cdc2 kinase. Multiple serine and threonine residues
are phosphorylated in vivo as well as in vitro by p34cdc2. Although there is no
effect of p34cdc2-mediated phosphorylation on CREM tau DNA binding, we observed a
dramatic effect on the trans-regulatory function. Coexpression of a
constitutively active p34cdc2 mutant shows that the trans-activation potential of
CREM tau is strongly reduced by p34cdc2. This represents the first example of
negative regulation of a transcription factor of this class by p34cdc2.

PMID: 8114763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Cell Growth Differ. 1993 Nov;4(11):931-7.

Human CREM gene: evolutionary conservation, chromosomal localization, and
inducibility of the transcript.

Masquilier D(1), Foulkes NS, Mattei MG, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale
(INSERM), Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

The CREM (cyclic AMP-responsive element modulator) gene encodes multiple
regulators of the cyclic AMP transcriptional response. CREM expression has been
linked with several key physiological aspects of neuroendocrine pathways. We
investigated the conservation of CREM during evolution. Here, we show
conservation of CREM sequences in the pig, humans, the chicken, the lemur, and
Xenopus. We have also determined the chromosomal localization of the CREM and
CREB genes both in the mouse and in humans. We cloned the full human CREM
complementary DNA sequence and demonstrate that it has a high degree of sequence 
identity with the mouse gene. Finally, we show the conservation of CREM cyclic
AMP transcriptional inducibility in humans and establish that the induced
transcripts correspond to the mouse ICER products.

PMID: 7916662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. EMBO J. 1993 Oct;12(10):3903-11.

Multiple and cooperative phosphorylation events regulate the CREM activator
function.

de Groot RP(1), den Hertog J, Vandenheede JR, Goris J, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes, CNRS, U184 de l'INSERM,
Faculté de Médecine, Institut de Chimie Biologique, Strasbourg, France.

Phosphorylation is one of the major mechanisms by which the activity of
transcription factors can be regulated. We have investigated the role of
phosphorylation in the regulation of the transcription factor CREM. We show that 
the CREM tau activator is phosphorylated on multiple serine and threonine
residues in vivo. Stimulation of various signal transduction pathways by
forskolin, TPA or Ca2+ ionophore leads to enhanced phosphorylation of serine 117,
concomitant with an increase in the transactivation potential of CREM tau. We
have identified multiple kinases that can also phosphorylate S117 in vitro.
Moreover, we show that casein kinase I and II cooperatively phosphorylate CREM
tau on multiple residues, eliciting enhanced DNA binding. Cooperative
phosphorylation is also observed with other kinases. These results show that the 
activity of CREM tau is regulated by multiple phosphorylation events, suggesting 
that CREM could be considered as a nuclear effector where signalling pathways may
converge and/or cross-talk.

PMCID: PMC413673
PMID: 8404858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Nature. 1993 Sep 23;365(6444):314-20.

Adrenergic signals direct rhythmic expression of transcriptional repressor CREM
in the pineal gland.

Stehle JH(1), Foulkes NS, Molina CA, Simonneaux V, Pévet P, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 1332, Université Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France.

Comment in
    Nature. 1993 Sep 23;365(6444):299-300.

Transcription factor CREM appears to play a key physiological and developmental
role within the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. This axis is modulated by
the pineal hormone melatonin, whose production is in turn driven by the
endogenous clock. There is striking circadian fluctuation of a novel CREM
isoform, ICER, which is expressed at high levels during the night. ICER is
generated from an alternative, intronic promoter and functions as a powerful
repressor of cyclic AMP-induced transcription. Rhythmic adrenergic signals
originated by the clock direct ICER expression by stimulation of the cAMP signal 
transduction pathway.

PMID: 8397338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Nature. 1993 Sep 23;365(6444):299-300.

Gene regulation. Circadian clocks à la CREM.

Takahashi JS.

Comment on
    Nature. 1993 Sep 23;365(6444):314-20.

PMID: 8397337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Sep 11;21(18):4166-73.

In vitro phosphorylation studies of a conserved region of the transcription
factor ATF1.

Masson N(1), John J, Lee KA.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund, Clare Hall Laboratories, South Mimms, Herts,
UK.

A large family of mammalian transcription factors including multiple variants of 
CREB, CREM and ATF1 have been implicated in signal transduction by cAMP and other
cellular pathways. Although the roles of some members of the family have been
characterised the function of ATF1 is poorly understood. We have identified one
or more key serine residues that are required for a phosphorylation-induced
conformational change in ATF1. The critical serines map to a putative
transcriptional activation domain of ATF1 and affect the stability of ATF1
DNA-binding. Intriguingly phosphorylation is modulated by ATF1 homodimerization
and by ATF1 binding to DNA. One of the key serine residues required for ATF1
phosphorylation is not conserved in CREB and CREM suggesting that it is likely to
determine some specialised function of ATF1.

PMCID: PMC310045
PMID: 8414969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Oncogene. 1993 Sep;8(9):2391-7.

A trans-activator Tax of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 binds to NF-kappa B
p50 and serum response factor (SRF) and associates with enhancer DNAs of the
NF-kappa B site and CArG box.

Suzuki T(1), Hirai H, Fujisawa J, Fujita T, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Tokyo, Japan.

A transcriptional activator of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1)
activates at least three distinct enhancers: the viral 21-bp enhancer, the
NF-kappa B binding site of the IL-2R alpha gene and the CArG box of the c-fos
gene. To understand the mechanisms of Tax transactivations of the NF-kappa B
enhancer and CArG box, the interactions of Tax protein with their binding factors
were analysed. Using a DNA affinity precipitation (DNAP) assay, we found here
that Tax associates with the DNA sequences of the NF-kappa B site and CArG box.
These Tax associations with enhancers were observed only in the presence of a
nuclear factor(s) and were equal to the activating capacities of Tax mutants. To 
identify the nuclear factor(s), we defined conditions under which no Tax binding 
to the NF-kappa B binding site and CArG box was detected with a nuclear extract
of 293T cells. Under these conditions, transfections with cDNAs of the NF-kappa B
p50 and serum response factor (SRF) produced a factor(s) that mediated Tax
binding to the NF-kappa B site and the CArG box respectively. Furthermore,
purified Tax protein interacted with purified NF-kappa B p50 and purified SRF,
indicating their direct bindings. These observations indicate that Tax protein
associates with enhancer sequences of the NF-kappa B site and CArG box through
NF-kappa B p50 and SRF respectively. Previously we demonstrated that Tax
interacts with CREB and CREM proteins that bind to the 21-bp enhancer DNA. These 
results together suggest that indirect binding of Tax to DNA through each
enhancer binding protein is a general mechanism for Tax transactivation of
transcription.

PMID: 8361755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Nature. 1993 Aug 26;364(6440):821-4.

Protein-kinase-A-dependent activator in transcription factor CREB reveals new
role for CREM repressors.

Brindle P(1), Linke S, Montminy M.

Author information: 
(1)Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology, Salk Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037.

Hormonally induced increases in cyclic AMP levels induce phosphorylation of the
transcription factor CREB at a serine residue at position 133 by protein kinase A
(ref. 1), enhancing its ability to activate transcription without affecting its
intracellular location or DNA-binding activity. This effect is dependent on a
60-amino-acid region of CREB that contains Ser133 and is termed the
kinase-inducible domain (KID)2, which also occurs in the CREB-related CREM-alpha 
and -beta proteins, although these are transcriptional repressors. Here we show
that the KID domain confers a cAMP-inducible increase on the activity of the Q2
activation domain from CREB and the acidic activation domains from the yeast
proteins GAL4 and GCN4. Remarkably, it retains this ability even when attached to
a separate polypeptide bound to an adjacent site in the promoter. KID may
therefore be the first of a new class of conditional activators that work through
other promoter-bound factors to stimulate gene expression in response to hormonal
stimuli.

PMID: 8102791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Clin Oncol. 1993 Apr;11(4):630-7.

Combined continuous infusion etoposide with high-dose cyclophosphamide for
refractory neuroblastoma: a phase II study from the Société Française d'Oncologie
Pédiatrique.

Méresse V(1), Vassal G, Michon J, De Cervens C, Courbon B, Rubie H, Perel Y,
Landman J, Chastagnier P, De Valck C, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pédiatrie, Institut Gustave-Roussy, Villejuif, France.

PURPOSE: Patients older than 1 year with stage IV neuroblastoma who fail to
achieve complete remission (CRem) have a particularly poor long-term prognosis.
In an attempt to improve the outcome of these refractory patients, we tested a
new drug combination.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Twenty-nine children with advanced neuroblastoma (27 stage 
IV and two stage III) were entered onto this phase II study. All were refractory 
to conventional chemotherapy and had measurable disease at the time of the trial.
The regimen was a combination of high-dose cyclophosphamide (2 g/m2/d) on days 2,
3, and 4, and etoposide (VP16; 50 mg/m2/d) by continuous intravenous (IV)
infusion on days 1 to 5. A pharmacokinetic study of VP16 was conducted in eight
patients to determine whether the goal of persistent plasma levels between 1 and 
5 micrograms/mL was achieved.
RESULTS: Patients received a median of two courses, for a total of 58 courses.
The median interval between each course was 32 days. In the 28 assessable
patients, the overall response rate was 43%, with one CRem and 11 partial
remissions (PRems). No life-threatening complication was observed in these
heavily pretreated patients. The median duration of neutropenia (< 5 x 10(9)/L)
was 14 days, and that of thrombocytopenia (< 50 x 10(9)/L) was 11 days. The
overall incidence of sepsis was 27%. Gastrointestinal toxicity was frequent, but 
mild. Electrolyte disturbance with antidiuretic hormone (ADH)-like syndrome
occurred in eight courses, but resolved rapidly. Grade > or = 2 hemorrhagic
cystitis was observed in three courses. No cardiac toxicity was observed. There
were no treatment-related deaths. Pharmacokinetic analysis showed that mean
steady-state plasma levels (Css) of VP16 were greater than 1 microgram/mL during 
all the courses.
CONCLUSION: This new drug combination appears to be effective in advanced
neuroblastoma. Its toxicity remains manageable, with no life-threatening
complications. Further evaluation in patients with less-advanced disease is
warranted.

PMID: 8478658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Neuron. 1993 Apr;10(4):655-65.

Transcriptional response to cAMP in brain: specific distribution and induction of
CREM antagonists.

Mellström B(1), Naranjo JR, Foulkes NS, Lafarga M, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Consejo Superior Investigaciones Cientificas, Madrid, Spain.

Changes in cAMP levels are often associated with the modulation of neuronal
function. The CREM gene encodes both antagonists and activators of the
cAMP-dependent transcriptional response by alternative splicing. CREM transcripts
in rat brain show a characteristic pattern of expression, being specific for the 
inner layer of the cerebral cortex, anterior thalamus, hippocampus, and
hypothalamus. Strikingly, the CREM transcripts correspond to the antagonist
isoforms in these areas, suggesting a down-regulatory role for CREM in brain; in 
contrast, the expression of CREM tau and CREB activators is more diffuse and
generalized. In the supraoptic nucleus, CREM expression is induced after osmotic 
stimulus. Importantly, this demonstrates physiological inducibility of CREM,
which is novel within the CRE/ATF family.

PMID: 8386526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Nature. 1993 Mar 18;362(6417):264-7.

Pituitary hormone FSH directs the CREM functional switch during spermatogenesis.

Foulkes NS(1), Schlotter F, Pévet P, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes du CNRS, U184 de l'INSERM,
Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

The CREM (cyclic AMP-responsive element modulator) gene encodes multiple
regulators of the cAMP-transcriptional response by alternative splicing. A
developmental switch in CREM expression occurs during spermatogenesis, whereby
CREM function is converted from an antagonist to an activator (CREM tau; ref. 2) 
which accumulates to extremely high levels from the premeiotic spermatocyte stage
onwards. To define the physiological mechanisms controlling the CREM
developmental switch, we have hypophysectomized rats and observed the extinction 
of CREM tau expression in testis, thereby demonstrating a central role of the
pituitary-hypothalamic axis. We then used the seasonal-dependent modulation of
spermatogenesis in hamsters to dissect the hormonal programme controlling this
developmental process. By this approach, combined with direct administration of
pituitary-derived hormones, we have established that follicle-stimulating hormone
(FSH) is responsible for the CREM switch. FSH appears to regulate CREM expression
by alternative polyadenylation, which results in a dramatic enhancement of
transcript stability.

PMID: 7681549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. EMBO J. 1993 Mar;12(3):1179-91.

The functional versatility of CREM is determined by its modular structure.

Laoide BM(1), Foulkes NS, Schlotter F, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes du CNRS, U184 de l'INSERM,
Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

The CREM gene (cAMP-responsive element modulator) generates both activators and
repressors of cAMP-induced transcription by alternative splicing. We determined
the exon structure of the CREM gene and have identified new isoforms. We show
that CREM isoforms with different structural characteristics are generated by the
shuffling of exons to produce proteins with various combinations of functional
domains. CREM proteins bind efficiently to CREs and here we demonstrate that the 
various isoforms heterodimerize in vivo with each other and with CREB. The two
alternative DNA binding domains of CREM, which are differentially spliced in the 
various isoforms, show distinct binding efficiencies, while CREM alpha/CREB
heterodimers exhibit stronger binding than CREM beta/CREB heterodimers to a
consensus CRE in vitro. We identify the protein domains involved in activation
function and find that the phosphorylation domain and a single glutamine-rich
domain are sufficient for activation. A minimal CREM repressor, containing only
the b-Zip motif, efficiently antagonizes cAMP-induced transcription. In addition,
phosphorylation may reduce repressor function, as a CREM beta mutant carrying a
mutation of the serine phosphoacceptor site (CREM beta 68) represses more
efficiently than the wild-type CREM beta.

PMCID: PMC413321
PMID: 8458330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Dec;12(12):5394-405.

ACR1, a yeast ATF/CREB repressor.

Vincent AC(1), Struhl K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115.

Members of the mammalian ATF/CREB family of transcription factors, which are
associated with regulation by cyclic AMP and viral oncogenes, bind common DNA
sequences (consensus TGACGTCA) via a bZIP domain. In the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, ATF/CREB-like sequences confer either repression or activation of
transcription, depending on the promoter context. By isolating mutations that
alleviate the repression mediated by ATF/CREB sites, we define a new yeast gene, 
ACR1, which encodes an ATF/CREB transcriptional repressor. ACR1 contains a bZIP
domain that is necessary for homodimer formation and specific DNA binding to an
ATF/CREB site. Within the bZIP domain, ACR1 most strongly resembles the mammalian
cyclic AMP-responsive transcriptional regulators CREB and CREM; it is less
similar to GCN4 and YAP1, two previously described yeast bZIP transcriptional
activators that recognize the related AP-1 sequence (consensus TGACTCA).
Interestingly, deletion of the ACR1 gene causes increased transcription through
ATF/CREB sites that does not depend on GCN4 or YAP1. Moreover, extracts from acr1
deletion strains contain one or more ATF/CREB-like DNA-binding activities. These 
genetic and biochemical observations suggest that S. cerevisiae contains a family
of ATF/CREB proteins that function as transcriptional repressors or activators.

PMCID: PMC360477
PMID: 1448073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Nov 25;20(22):6106.

Cyclic AMP response element binding protein CREB and modulator protein CREM are
products of distinct genes.

Meyer TE(1), Habener JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, Boston.

PMCID: PMC334485
PMID: 1461747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Biol Chem. 1992 Nov 5;267(31):22460-6.

Transcriptional cross-talk: nuclear factors CREM and CREB bind to AP-1 sites and 
inhibit activation by Jun.

Masquilier D(1), Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes, U184 de l'Institut
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Faculté de Médécine,
Strasbourg, France.

The proteins Fos and Jun dimerize to constitute the transcription factor AP-1
which is known to respond to treatment with phorbol esters. AP-1 binds to
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-responsive elements (TREs) palindromic
sequences. cAMP-responsive elements (CREs) are very similar to TREs and
CRE-binding proteins are similar in structure to Fos and Jun. Thus, the two main 
signal transduction pathways have closely related nuclear effectors which could
possibly overlap and/or cross-talk. The gene CRE modulator (CREM) encodes both
antagonists and an activator of the cAMP transcriptional response by alternative 
splicing. In this report we show that CREM antagonists are able to block the
transcriptional activation elicited by c-Jun. The mechanism by which this
repression is obtained does not require heterodimerization between CREM and the
Fos and/or Jun proteins. In contrast, we show that both CREM and CRE-binding
proteins (CREB) are able to bind TREs and therefore compete with c-Jun for this
site. Removal of the phosphorylation domain in CREM does not affect the
down-regulatory function. We also show that c-Fos does not affect the inhibitory 
function of CREM on c-Jun and that the transcriptional activation elicited by the
other members of the jun family (JunB, JunD, and v-Jun) is also down-regulated by
CREM.

PMID: 1429597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Int J Oncol. 1992 Aug;1(3):373-85.

Cyclic amp-responsive gene-transcription in cellular proliferation and
transformation.

Mirossay L(1), Chastre E, Empereur S, Gespach C.

Author information: 
(1)HOP ST ANTOINE,INSERM,U55,F-75571 PARIS 12,FRANCE.

The proteins binding the cAMP responsive elements constitute a family of
transcription factors (e.g. CREB 327/341, ATF, HB16, CREM) which operate as
dimers and regulate positively and negatively gene expression upon interaction
with the cAMP responsive motifs CRE/ATF. These proteins regulate transcription
after cAMP- dependent phosphorylation (CREB), or interaction with the adenovirus 
E1A oncoprotein (ATF-2). Subtle modulation might be further attained by the
cross-talk between the different signal-transduction pathways and the
heterodimerization of different classes of transcription factors. The CREB/ATF
transcription factors therefore exert a pleiotropic action during the integration
of extra/intra cellular signals in the resulting adaptation of cellular
responses. Dysregulation might be associated with pathological situations related
to the uncontrolled cell proliferation, oncogenic progression and metastasis.

PMID: 21584557  [PubMed]


159. J Biol Chem. 1992 Jun 25;267(18):12876-84.

Somatostatin gene upstream enhancer element activated by a protein complex
consisting of CREB, Isl-1-like, and alpha-CBF-like transcription factors.

Vallejo M(1), Penchuk L, Habener JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston 02114.

The expression of the genes encoding the hormones glucagon, insulin,
somatostatin, and pancreatic polypeptide in the endocrine islets of the pancreas 
is regulated in a cell-specific manner, defining four distinct cellular
phenotypes (A-, B-, D-, and F-cells, respectively). Binding of nuclear proteins
to cognate DNA sequences within cis-acting regulatory elements mediates the
transcriptional events that result in the cell-specific activation or repression 
of gene expression. In a parallel study, we describe the functional properties of
the SMS-UE, a pancreatic islet D-cell specific enhancer element that regulates
the expression of the somatostatin gene and contains two interdependent domains, 
A and B. In the studies described herein, we have characterized the nuclear
proteins that recognize the SMS-UE. Domain A of the SMS-UE is a DNA enhancer
sequence that is identical to that bound by the ubiquitously distributed CCAAT
box-binding protein alpha-CBF, a transcription factor that regulates the
expression of the human chorionic gonadotrophin alpha-subunit gene. The B-domain,
on the other hand, binds an islet cell-specific protein with characteristics
similar to those of Isl-1, a transcriptional activator protein that binds to the 
E2 enhancer of the rat insulin-1 gene. In addition, the SMS-UE binds
transcription factor CREB but not CREM, the close homolog of CREB, on a site
adjacent to, or overlapping, the 3' end of domain B. We show that the
carboxyl-terminal bZIP domain of CREB binds to the cAMP response element of the
somatostatin gene but is not sufficient for binding to the SMS-UE, and we present
evidence suggesting that CREB.SMS-UE binding requires stabilization by a region
of the protein located within the transactivation domain.

PMID: 1352292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 May 15;89(10):4226-30.

Alternative usage of initiation codons in mRNA encoding the
cAMP-responsive-element modulator generates regulators with opposite functions.

Delmas V(1), Laoide BM, Masquilier D, de Groot RP, Foulkes NS, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire De Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes, U184 Institut National de
la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Faculté de Medecine, Strasbourg, France.

The cAMP-responsive-element modulator (CREM) gene encodes both antagonists (CREM 
alpha/beta/gamma) and an activator (CREM tau) of cAMP-responsive transcription by
alternative splicing. In adult mouse brain a predominant 21-kDa protein, not
corresponding to any previously characterized transcript, is detected with
specific CREM antibodies. A developmental switch occurs in brain as expression
changes at birth from CREM alpha/beta to the 21-kDa protein. We show that the
21-kDa protein corresponds to S-CREM (short CREM), a protein produced by the use 
of an internal AUG initiation codon in the CREM tau transcript. S-CREM shares
with the other CREM proteins the basic DNA-binding and leucine-zipper
dimerization domain. S-CREM functions as a transcriptional repressor of
cAMP-induced transcription. Thus, two proteins with opposite functions are
generated by alternative translation using two AUG codons within the same reading
frame.

PMCID: PMC49054
PMID: 1584756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. EMBO J. 1992 Apr;11(4):1503-12.

Multiple mRNA isoforms of the transcription activator protein CREB: generation by
alternative splicing and specific expression in primary spermatocytes.

Ruppert S(1), Cole TJ, Boshart M, Schmid E, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center, Institute of Cell and Tumor Biology,
Heidelberg.

We have characterized cDNA clones representing mouse CREB (cyclic AMP responsive 
element binding protein) mRNA isoforms. These include CREB delta and CREB alpha, 
of which the rat and human homologues have been previously identified. Both
encode proteins with CRE-binding activity and identical transactivation
potential. The additional CREB mRNA isoforms potentially encode CREB related
proteins. From the structural organization of the mouse CREB gene we conclude
that the multiple transcripts are generated by alternative splicing. Furthermore 
we show that specific CREB mRNA isoforms are expressed at a high level in the
adult testis. Expression of these isoforms is induced after commencement of
spermatogenesis. In situ hybridization suggests that this expression occurs
predominantly in the primary spermatocytes. Comparison of the CREB gene with the 
recently isolated CREM (cAMP responsive element modulator) cDNAs illustrates that
the two genes have arisen by gene duplication and have diverged to encode
transcriptional activators and repressors of the cAMP signal transduction
pathway.

PMCID: PMC556599
PMID: 1532935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Nature. 1992 Jan 2;355(6355):80-4.

Developmental switch of CREM function during spermatogenesis: from antagonist to 
activator.

Foulkes NS(1), Mellström B, Benusiglio E, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes du CNRS, Strasbourg,
France.

Mammalian spermatogenesis consists of a series of complex developmental processes
controlled by the pituitary-hypothalamic axis. This flow of biochemical
information is directly regulated by the adenylate cyclase signal transduction
pathway. We have previously described the CREM (cyclic AMP-responsive element
modulator) gene which generates, by cell-specific splicing, alternative
antagonists of the cAMP transcriptional response. Here we report the expression
of a novel CREM isoform (CREM tau) in adult testis. CREM tau differs from the
previously characterized CREM antagonists by the coordinate insertion of two
glutamine-rich domains that confer transcriptional activation function. During
spermatogenesis there was an abrupt switch in CREM expression. In premeiotic germ
cells CREM is expressed at low amounts in the antagonist form. Subsequently, from
the pachytene spermatocyte stage onwards, a splicing event generates exclusively 
the CREM tau activator, which accumulates in extremely high amounts. This
splicing-dependent reversal in CREM function represents an important example of
developmental modulation in gene expression.

PMID: 1370576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Crit Rev Oncog. 1992;3(4):321-38.

Signal transduction and gene control: the cAMP pathway.

Borrelli E(1), Montmayeur JP, Foulkes NS, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes, CNRS, U184 INSERM,
Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

The transcriptional activity of a gene can be regulated by a multitude of
trans-acting factors that interact with specific cis-acting elements, mostly
located in the promoter regions. The function of transcription factors is
modulated by intracellular signal transduction pathways, which are activated by
specific ligands binding to the appropriate membrane receptors. Here we discuss
the links between the activation of the adenylyl cyclase pathway and the
transcriptional response of cAMP-inducible genes that is achieved by the
interplay of a multitude of nuclear transcription factors such as CREB and CREM.

PMID: 1329990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Jun 15;88(12):5448-52.

Transcriptional antagonist cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM)
down-regulates c-fos cAMP-induced expression.

Foulkes NS(1), Laoide BM, Schlotter F, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes du Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, Unité 184, de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

Protooncogene c-fos is induced by activation of adenylate cyclase through the
major cAMP-responsive element (CRE) centered at position -60 of the promoter.
cAMP induction is followed by a rapid decrease in transcriptional rate,
reminiscent of down-regulation after serum stimulation. Fos protein is known to
negatively autoregulate serum-induced transcription of c-fos promoter, but
whether Fos is responsible for down-regulation of cAMP-induced transcription is
unclear. Here we show that Fos is unable to down-regulate CRE-mediated
activation. We present evidence that the transcriptional antagonist CRE modulator
(CREM) can bind to c-fos CRE and heterodimerize with activator CRE-binding
protein, thereby blocking cAMP induction. Furthermore, expression of antisense
CREM enhances c-fos basal and cAMP-induced transcription. CREM does not
antagonize serum-induced transcription; therefore, we conclude that
down-regulation of c-fos is exerted by different effectors, depending upon which 
signal transduction pathway is activated. We speculate that, by its c-fos
down-regulatory function, CREM may act as an antioncogene.

PMCID: PMC51890
PMID: 1647033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Cell. 1991 Feb 22;64(4):739-49.

CREM gene: use of alternative DNA-binding domains generates multiple antagonists 
of cAMP-induced transcription.

Foulkes NS(1), Borrelli E, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes du CNRS, Faculté de
Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

We isolated a gene from a mouse pituitary cDNA library that encodes a protein
highly homologous to nuclear factor CREB, an activator of cAMP-responsive
promoter elements (CREs). We demonstrate that while CREB is expressed uniformly
in several cell types, this gene, termed CREM, shows cell-specific expression.
CREM has a remarkable organization, since down-stream of the stop codon there is 
a second, out-of-frame DNA-binding domain. Using PCR and RNAase protection
analysis, we have identified three mRNA isoforms that appear to be obtained by
differential cell-specific splicing. Sequencing of the isoforms demonstrated
alternative usage of the two DNA-binding domains. CREM proteins reveal the same
efficiency and specificity of binding to CRE sequences as CREB, but in contrast
to CREB, CREM acts as a down-regulator of cAMP-induced transcription.

PMID: 1847666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Ren Fail. 1989;11(1):3-15.

Influence of the rate of infusion on cyclosporine nephrotoxicity in the rat.

Finn WF(1), McCormack AJ, Sullivan BA, Hak LJ, Clark RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina School of Medicine,
Chapel Hill 27599.

The effect of the rate of infusion of single and multiple doses of cyclosporine
(CsA) on renal function was evaluated in Sprague-Dawley rats. CsA was dissolved
in cremophore (Crem) or Tween 80 (Tween) and infused over consecutive 10-min
periods at doses of 10, 20, 30 and 40 mg/kg. CsA-Crem and CsA-Tween produced
similar and progressive changes in MAP, RBF, and RVR. By the end of the infusion,
the mean values (% of control) of MAP (122 +/- 16% and 131 +/- 22%), RBF (56 +/- 
11% and 66 +/- 20%), and RVR (222 +/- 38% and 232 +/- 134%) were significantly
different from their respective preinfusion values. Infusion of Crem alone
resulted in renal vasodilation at low doses and renal vasoconstriction at high
doses. Vasoconstriction was not produced by infusion of Tween alone. In addition,
animals were treated with vehicle alone (Gp 1), CsA 10 mg/kg/day by injection (Gp
2), or CsA 20 mg/kg/day by i.v. infusion over 4 hr (Gp 3), and were studied at 1 
week. Systemic toxicity was greater with the 4-hr infusion as judged by an
increase in MAP. The mean values of MAP were 107 +/- 8 (Gp 1), 101 +/- 13 (Gp 2),
and 135 +/- 5 mm Hg (Gp 3; p less than 0.05). However, renal function was less
severely affected with the 4-hr infusion. The mean values of CIn were 434 +/- 99 
(Gp 1), 298 +/- 101 (Gp 2; p less than 0.05), and 425 +/- 114 microL/min/100 g BW
(Gp 3); and the mean values for RBF were 2.72 +/- 0.74 (Gp 1), 2.08 +/- 0.17 (Gp 
2; p less than 0.05), and 3.35 +/- 0.61 mL/min/100 g BW (Gp 3), respectively.
Microangiograms showed marked abnormalities in the intrarenal perfusion pattern
in the rats injected with CsA, 10 mg/kg BW. In rats infused over 4 hr with CsA,
20 mg/kg BW, the microangiographic pattern was normal. These studies demonstrate 
that the acute hemodynamic effects of CsA are directly related to the rate of
infusion. Furthermore, the renal toxicity which follows repetitive injection of
CsA can be minimized or avoided by administering CsA as a slow infusion. In
addition to the total dose administered, the rate of infusion is an important
determinant of nephrotoxicity.

PMID: 2772285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


