
1. Anatol J Cardiol. 2015 Nov 25. doi: 10.5152/AnatolJCardiol.2015.6454. [Epub ahead
of print]

Fragmented QRS frequency in patients with cardiac syndrome X.

Damar IH(1), Altunkas F(2), Çelik A(2), Koç F(2), Karayakali M(2), Karaman K(2), 
Arisoy A(2), Ceyhan K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine, Gaziosmanpasa University,
Tokat-Turkey. faltunkas@yahoo.com. (2)Department of Cardiology, Faculty of
Medicine, Gaziosmanpasa University, Tokat-Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: Cardiac syndrome X (CSX) is characterised by typical exertional chest 
pain, a positive response to exercise testing, and a normal coronary angiography.
The relationship of CSX with myocardial fibrosis and ischemia has been clearly
demonstrated in previous studies. In addition, fragmented QRS (fQRS) has been
reported in the literature as an indicator of myocardial fibrosis. The aim of
this study was to investigate the frequency of fQRS in patients with CSX.
METHODS: This prospective case-control study included 37 patients (CSX group)
with typical complaints of angina, ischemia on an exercise test, and normal
coronary arteries as detected by angiography and 47 patients (control group) with
normal coronary arteries. Echocardiographic examinations were performed according
to the recommendations of the American Society of Echocardiography. Continuous
variables were expressed as mean±standard deviation (SD), and the qualitative
variables were expressed as a percentage or ratio. Data were compared
statistically with Shapiro-Wilk test, Student's t-test, Mann-Whitney U,
chi-square and Fisher exact test.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference between the CRX and control groups
with respect to basic characteristics such as age and sex. fQRS and the frequency
of its presentation with stable angina pectoris at the clinic were significantly 
higher in the CSX group than in the control group (p values: 0.001 and <0.001,
respectively).
CONCLUSION: A close follow-up would be useful in CSX patients in whom fQRS is
detected in an electrocardiogram (ECG) because of the association between fQRS
and poor prognosis with respect to the prevention of late complications. We
believe that the presence of fQRS in the ECG aids in the diagnosis of CSX in
clinical practice and in the recognition of this group of patients.

PMID: 27004708  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Exp Eye Res. 2016 Mar 15. pii: S0014-4835(16)30045-8. doi:
10.1016/j.exer.2016.03.015. [Epub ahead of print]

Molecular genetics of cone-rod dystrophy in Chinese patients: new data from 61
probands and mutation overview of 163 probands.

Huang L(1), Xiao X(1), Li S(1), Jia X(1), Wang P(1), Sun W(1), Xu Y(1), Xin W(1),
Guo X(1), Zhang Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510060, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of
Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou
510060, China. Electronic address: zhangqji@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Cone-rod dystrophy (CORD) is a common form of inherited retinal degeneration.
Previously, we have conducted serial mutational analysis in probands with CORD
either by Sanger sequencing or whole exome sequencing (WES). In the current
study, variants in all genes from RetNet were selected from the whole exome
sequencing data of 108 CORD probands (including 61 probands reported here for the
first time) and were analyzed by multistep bioinformatics analysis, followed by
Sanger sequencing and segregation validation. Data from the previous studies and 
new data from this study (163 probands in total) were summarized to provide an
overview of the molecular genetics of CORD. The following potentially pathogenic 
mutations were identified in 93 of the 163 (57.1%) probands: CNGA3 (32.5%), ABCA4
(3.8%), ALMS1 (3.1%), GUCY2D (3.1%), CACNA1F (2.5%), CRX (1.8%), PDE6C (1.8%),
CNGB3 (1.8%), GUCA1A (1.2%), UNC119 (0.6%), RPGRIP1 (1.2%), RDH12 (0.6%), KCNV2
(0.6%), C21orf2 (0.6%), CEP290 (0.6%), USH2A (0.6%) and SNRNP200 (0.6%). The 17
genes with mutations included 12 known CORD genes and five genes (ALMS1, RDH12,
CEP290, USH2A, and SNRNP200) associated with other forms of retinal degeneration.
Mutations in CNGA3 is most common in this cohort. This is a systematic molecular 
genetic analysis of Chinese patients with CORD.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26992781  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Mol Vis. 2016 Feb 20;22:150-60. eCollection 2016.

Next-generation sequencing-based comprehensive molecular analysis of 43 Japanese 
patients with cone and cone-rod dystrophies.

Oishi M(1), Oishi A(1), Gotoh N(2), Ogino K(1), Higasa K(2), Iida K(3), Makiyama 
Y(1), Morooka S(1), Matsuda F(2), Yoshimura N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (2)Center for Genomic Medicine, Kyoto
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (3)Medical Research Support
Center, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

PURPOSE: To investigate the efficacy of targeted exome sequencing for mutational 
screening of Japanese patients with cone dystrophy (CD) or cone-rod dystrophy
(CRD).
METHODS: DNA samples from 43 Japanese patients with CD or CRD were sequenced
using an exome-sequencing panel targeting all 193 known inherited eye disease
genes and next-generation sequencing methodologies. Subsequently, candidate
variants were screened using systematic data analyses, and their potential
pathogenicity was assessed using distinct filtering approaches, which included
the frequency of the variants in normal populations, in silico prediction tools, 
and cosegregation.
RESULTS: Causative mutations were detected in 12 patients with CD or CRD (27.9%).
In total, 14 distinct mutations were identified in the genes ABCA4, CDHR1, CRB1, 
CRX, GUCY2D, KCNV2, PROM1, PRPH2, and RDH5, including four novel mutations,
c.3050+1G>A in ABCA4, c.386A>G in CDHR1, c.652+1_652+4del in CRB1, and c.454G>A
in KCNV2. Moreover, a putative pathogenic mutation was identified in RGS9BP, a
gene recognized as the source of bradyopsia.
CONCLUSIONS: Targeted exome sequencing effectively identified causative mutations
in Japanese patients with CD or CRD. The results confirmed the heterogeneity of
the genes responsible for CD and CRD in Japanese populations, as well as the
efficacy of targeted exome sequencing-based screening of patients with inherited 
retinal degeneration.

PMCID: PMC4764614
PMID: 26957898  [PubMed - in process]


4. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 18;6:21307. doi: 10.1038/srep21307.

Autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa with homozygous rhodopsin mutation E150K
and non-coding cis-regulatory variants in CRX-binding regions of SAMD7.

Van Schil K(1), Karlstetter M(2), Aslanidis A(2), Dannhausen K(2), Azam M(3),
Qamar R(3,)(4,)(5), Leroy BP(1,)(6,)(7), Depasse F(8), Langmann T(2), De Baere
E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital,
Ghent, Belgium. (2)Laboratory for Experimental Immunology of the Eye, Department 
of Ophthalmology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. (3)Department of
Biosciences, COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(4)Al-Nafees Medical College &Hospital, Isra University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(5)Pakistan Academy of Sciences, Islamabad, Pakistan. (6)Department of
Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. (7)Division of
Ophthalmology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, USA.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, Brugmann University Hospital, Brussels, Belgium.

The aim of this study was to unravel the molecular pathogenesis of an unusual
retinitis pigmentosa (RP) phenotype observed in a Turkish consanguineous family. 
Homozygosity mapping revealed two candidate genes, SAMD7 and RHO. A homozygous
RHO mutation c.448G<U+2009>><U+2009>A, p.E150K was found in two affected siblings, while no
coding SAMD7 mutations were identified. Interestingly, four non-coding homozygous
variants were found in two SAMD7 genomic regions relevant for binding of the
retinal transcription factor CRX (CRX-bound regions, CBRs) in these affected
siblings. Three variants are located in a promoter CBR termed CBR1, while the
fourth is located more downstream in CBR2. Transcriptional activity of these
variants was assessed by luciferase assays and electroporation of mouse retinal
explants with reporter constructs of wild-type and variant SAMD7 CBRs. The
combined CBR2/CBR1 variant construct showed significantly decreased SAMD7
reporter activity compared to the wild-type sequence, suggesting a cis-regulatory
effect on SAMD7 expression. As Samd7 is a recently identified Crx-regulated
transcriptional repressor in retina, we hypothesize that these SAMD7 variants
might contribute to the retinal phenotype observed here, characterized by
unusual, recognizable pigment deposits, differing from the classic spicular
intraretinal pigmentation observed in other individuals homozygous for p.E150K,
and typically associated with RP in general.

PMCID: PMC4758057
PMID: 26887858  [PubMed - in process]


5. Int J Ophthalmol. 2015 Dec 18;8(6):1112-7. doi:
10.3980/j.issn.2222-3959.2015.06.06. eCollection 2015.

A novel CRX mutation by whole-exome sequencing in an autosomal dominant cone-rod 
dystrophy pedigree.

Lu QK(1), Zhao N(1), Lv YS(2), Gong WK(1), Wang HY(1), Tong QH(1), Lai XM(1), Liu
RR(2), Fang MY(3), Zhang JG(3), Du ZF(2), Zhang XN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmology Center, Yinzhou People's Hospital, Yinzhou Hospital Affiliated
to Medical School of Ningbo University, Ningbo 315040, Zhejiang Province, China. 
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Medical Genetics, Research Center for Molecular
Medicine, Institute of Cell Biology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine,
Hangzhou 310058, Zhejiang Province, China. (3)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083,
Guangdong Province, China.

AIM: To identify the disease-causing gene mutation in a Chinese pedigree with
autosomal dominant cone-rod dystrophy (adCORD).
METHODS: A southern Chinese adCORD pedigree including 9 affected individuals was 
studied. Whole-exome sequencing (WES), coupling the Agilent whole-exome capture
system to the Illumina HiSeq 2000 DNA sequencing platform was used to search the 
specific gene mutation in 3 affected family members and 1 unaffected member.
After a suggested variant was found through the data analysis, the putative
mutation was validated by Sanger DNA sequencing of samples from all available
family members.
RESULTS: The results of both WES and Sanger sequencing revealed a novel nonsense 
mutation c.C766T (p.Q256X) within exon 5 of CRX gene which was pathogenic for
adCORD in this family. The mutation could affect photoreceptor-specific gene
expression with a dominant-negative effect and resulted in loss of the OTX tail, 
thus the mutant protein occupies the CRX-binding site in target promoters without
establishing an interaction and, consequently, may block transactivation.
CONCLUSION: All modes of Mendelian inheritance in CORD have been observed, and
genetic heterogeneity is a hallmark of CORD. Therefore, conventional genetic
diagnosis of CORD would be time-consuming and labor-intensive. Our study
indicated the robustness and cost-effectiveness of WES in the genetic diagnosis
of CORD.

PMCID: PMC4651873
PMID: 26682157  [PubMed]


6. Acta Biomater. 2016 Feb;31:61-70. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2015.11.028. Epub 2015
Nov 24.

Decellularized retinal matrix: Natural platforms for human retinal progenitor
cell culture.

Kundu J(1), Michaelson A(2), Talbot K(3), Baranov P(4), Young MJ(5), Carrier
RL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Northeastern University, 360 Huntington
Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA; The Schepens Eye Research Institute, Massachusetts
Eye and Ear, Harvard Medical School, 20 Staniford Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA. 
Electronic address: j.kundu@neu.edu. (2)Department of Chemical Engineering,
Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic
address: malachad@gmail.com. (3)Department of Chemical Engineering, Northeastern 
University, 360 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address:
talbot.kristen@gmail.com. (4)The Schepens Eye Research Institute, Massachusetts
Eye and Ear, Harvard Medical School, 20 Staniford Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA. 
Electronic address: petr.baranov@schepens.harvard.edu. (5)The Schepens Eye
Research Institute, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Harvard Medical School, 20
Staniford Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA. Electronic address:
michael.young@schepens.harvard.edu. (6)Department of Chemical Engineering,
Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic
address: rebecca@coe.neu.edu.

Tissue decellularization strategies have enabled engineering of scaffolds that
preserve native extracellular matrix (ECM) structure and composition. In this
study, we developed decellularized retina (decell-retina) thin films. We
hypothesized that these films, mimicking the retina niche, would promote human
retinal progenitor cell (hRPC) attachment, proliferation and differentiation.
Retinas isolated from bovine eyes were decellularized using 1% w/v sodium dodecyl
sulfate (SDS) and pepsin digested. The resulting decell-retina was biochemically 
assayed for composition and cast dried to develop thin films. Attachment,
viability, morphology, proliferation and gene expression of hRPC cultured on the 
films were studied in vitro. Biochemical analyses of decell-retina compared to
native retina indicated the bulk of DNA (94%) was removed, while the majority of 
sulfated GAGs (55%), collagen (83%), hyaluronic acid (87%), and key growth
factors were retained. The decell-retina films supported hRPC attachment and
growth, with cell number increasing 1.5-fold over a week. RT-PCR analysis
revealed hRPC expression of rhodopsin, rod outer membrane, neural retina-specific
leucine zipper neural and cone-rod homeobox gene on decell-retina films,
indicating photoreceptor development. In conclusion, novel decell-retina films
show promise as potential substrates for culture and/or transplantation of
retinal progenitor cells to treat retinal degenerative disorders.STATEMENT OF
SIGNIFICANCE: In this study, we report the development of a novel biomaterial,
based on decellularized retina (decell-retina) that mimics the retina niche and
promotes human retinal progenitor cell (hRPC) attachment, proliferation and
differentiation. We estimated, for the first time, the amounts of collagen I,
GAGs and HA present in native retina, as well as the decell-retina. We
demonstrated that retinas can be decellularized using ionic detergents and can be
processed into mechanically stable thin films, which can act as substrates for
culturing hRPCs. Rhodopsin, ROM1, NRL and CRX gene expression on the
decell-retina films indicated photoreceptor development from RPCs. These results 
support the potential of decell-retina as a cell delivery platform to treat and
manage retinal degenerative disease like AMD.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26621699  [PubMed - in process]


7. Stem Cells. 2016 Feb;34(2):311-21. doi: 10.1002/stem.2240. Epub 2015 Nov 26.

Using Zinc Finger Nuclease Technology to Generate CRX-Reporter Human Embryonic
Stem Cells as a Tool to Identify and Study the Emergence of Photoreceptors
Precursors During Pluripotent Stem Cell Differentiation.

Collin J(1), Mellough CB(1), Dorgau B(1), Przyborski S(2), Moreno-Gimeno I(3),
Lako M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle, United
Kingdom. (2)School of Biological Sciences, Durham University, Durham, United
Kingdom. (3)Centro de Investigacion Principe Felipe, Valencia, Spain.

The purpose of this study was to generate human embryonic stem cell (hESC) lines 
harboring the green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter at the endogenous loci of 
the Cone-Rod Homeobox (CRX) gene, a key transcription factor in retinal
development. Zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs) designed to cleave in the 3' UTR of CRX
were transfected into hESCs along with a donor construct containing homology to
the target region, eGFP reporter, and a puromycin selection cassette. Following
selection, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and sequencing analysis of antibiotic 
resistant clones indicated targeted integration of the reporter cassette at the
3' of the CRX gene, generating a CRX-GFP fusion. Further analysis of a clone
exhibiting homozygote integration of the GFP reporter was conducted suggesting
genomic stability was preserved and no other copies of the targeting cassette
were inserted elsewhere within the genome. This clone was selected for
differentiation towards the retinal lineage. Immunocytochemistry of sections
obtained from embryoid bodies and quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR of GFP
positive and negative subpopulations purified by fluorescence activated cell
sorting during the differentiation indicated a significant correlation between
GFP and endogenous CRX expression. Furthermore, GFP expression was found in
photoreceptor precursors emerging during hESC differentiation, but not in the
retinal pigmented epithelium, retinal ganglion cells, or neurons of the
developing inner nuclear layer. Together our data demonstrate the successful
application of ZFN technology to generate CRX-GFP labeled hESC lines, which can
be used to study and isolate photoreceptor precursors during hESC
differentiation. Stem Cells 2016;34:311-321.

© 2015 The Authors STEM CELLS published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of
AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26608863  [PubMed - in process]


8. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2015 Oct;56(11):6714-23. doi: 10.1167/iovs.15-17364.

Enriched Cultures of Retinal Cells From BJNhem20 Human Embryonic Stem Cell Line
of Indian Origin.

Mariappan I(1), Maddileti S(1), Joseph P(1), Siamwala JH(2), Vauhini V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sudhakar and Sreekanth Ravi Stem Cell Biology Laboratory Brien Holden Eye
Research Centre, Champalimaud Translational Centre for Eye Research, Hyderabad
Eye Research Foundation, L V Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, India. (2)Sudhakar 
and Sreekanth Ravi Stem Cell Biology Laboratory Brien Holden Eye Research Centre,
Champalimaud Translational Centre for Eye Research, Hyderabad Eye Research
Foundation, L V Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, India 2University of California,
San Die.

PURPOSE: To test the retinal differentiation potential and to establish an
optimized protocol for enriching retinal cells from an Indian origin, human
embryonic stem cell (hESC) line, BJNhem20.
METHODS: The BJNhem20 cells were cultured and expanded under feeder-free culture 
conditions. Differentiation was initiated by embryoid body (EB) formation and
were cultured on Matrigel in neural induction medium (NIM) for 1 week and further
maintained in retinal differentiation medium (RDM). After 1 month, the
neuro-retinal progenitor clusters located at the center of pigmented retinal
patches were picked and cultured as suspended neurospheres in RDM for 3 days and 
subsequently on Matrigel in neuro-retinal medium. The mildly pigmented, immature 
retinal pigmented epithelial (RPE) cells were picked separately and cultured on
Matrigel in RPE medium (RPEM). After 1 week, the confluent neuro-retinal and RPE 
cultures were maintained in RDM for 2 to 3 months and characterized by
immunofluorescence and RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The BJNhem20 cells efficiently differentiated into both neuro-retinal
and RPE cells. The early retinal progenitors expressed Nestin, GFAP, Pax6, Rx,
MitfA, Chx10, and Otx2. Neuro-retinal cells expressed the neural markers, Map2,
ß-III tubulin, acetylated tubulin and photoreceptor-specific markers, Crx,
rhodopsin, recoverin, calbindin, PKC, NeuroD1, RLBP1, rhodopsin kinase, PDE6A,
and PDE6C. Mature RPE cells developed intense pigmentation within 3 months and
showed ZO-1 and Phalloidin staining at cell-cell junctions and expressed RPE65,
tyrosinase, bestrophin1, Mertk, and displayed phagocytic activity.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms the retinal differentiation potential of
BJNhem20 cells and describes an optimized protocol to generate enriched
populations of neuro-retinal and RPE cells.

PMID: 26567782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Control Release. 2016 Feb 10;223:64-74. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.11.006.
Epub 2015 Nov 6.

PEG modified liposomes containing CRX-601 adjuvant in combination with
methylglycol chitosan enhance the murine sublingual immune response to influenza 
vaccination.

Oberoi HS(1), Yorgensen YM(1), Morasse A(2), Evans JT(1), Burkhart DJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)GSK Vaccines, 553 Old Corvallis Road, Hamilton, MT 59840, USA. (2)GSK
Vaccines, 525 Boulevard Cartier, Laval, QC H7V 3S8, Canada. (3)GSK Vaccines, 553 
Old Corvallis Road, Hamilton, MT 59840, USA. Electronic address:
david.j.burkhart@gsk.com.

The mucosa is the primary point of entry for pathogens making it an important
vaccination site to produce a protective mucosal immune response. While the
sublingual (SL) mucosa presents several barriers to vaccine penetration, its
unique anatomy and physiology makes it one of the best options for mucosal
vaccination. Efficient and directed delivery of adjuvants and antigens to
appropriate immune mediators in the SL tissue will aid in development of
effective SL vaccines against infectious diseases. Herein we demonstrate a robust
immune response against influenza antigens co-delivered sublingually with
engineered liposomes carrying the synthetic Toll-like receptor-4 agonist,
CRX-601. Liposome modification with PEG copolymers (Pluronics), phospholipid-PEG 
conjugates and chitosan were evaluated for their ability to generate an immune
response in a SL murine influenza vaccine model. Phospholipid-PEG conjugates were
more effective than Pluronic copolymers in generating stable, surface neutral
liposomes. SL vaccination with surface modified liposomes carrying CRX-601
adjuvant generated significant improvements in flu-specific responses compared
with unmodified liposomes. Furthermore, the coating of modified liposomes with
methylglycol chitosan produced the most effective flu-specific immune response.
These results demonstrate efficient SL vaccine delivery utilizing a combination
of a muco-adhesive and surface neutral liposomes to achieve a robust mucosal and 
systemic immune response.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4729458 [Available on 2017-02-10]
PMID: 26551346  [PubMed - in process]


10. Inorg Chem. 2015 Oct 19;54(20):9790-801. doi: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.5b01505. Epub
2015 Oct 2.

Magnetic Transitions in Iron Porphyrin Halides by Inelastic Neutron Scattering
and Ab Initio Studies of Zero-Field Splittings.

Stavretis SE(1), Atanasov M(2,)(3), Podlesnyak AA(4), Hunter SC(1), Neese F(2),
Xue ZL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The University of Tennessee , Knoxville, Tennessee
37996, United States. (2)Max Planck Institute for Chemical Energy Conversion ,
Stiftstraße 34-36, D-45470 Mülheim an der Ruhr, Germany. (3)Institute of General 
and Inorganic Chemistry, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences , 1113 Sofia, Bulgaria.
(4)Quantum Condensed Matter Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory , Oak Ridge, 
Tennessee 37831, United States.

Zero-field splitting (ZFS) parameters of nondeuterated metalloporphyrins
[Fe(TPP)X] (X = F, Br, I; H2TPP = tetraphenylporphyrin) have been directly
determined by inelastic neutron scattering (INS). The ZFS values are D = 4.49(9) 
cm<U+207B>¹ for tetragonal polycrystalline [Fe(TPP)F], and D = 8.8(2) cm<U+207B>¹, E = 0.1(2)
cm<U+207B>¹ and D = 13.4(6) cm<U+207B>¹, E = 0.3(6) cm<U+207B>¹ for monoclinic polycrystalline
[Fe(TPP)Br] and [Fe(TPP)I], respectively. Along with our recent report of the ZFS
value of D = 6.33(8) cm<U+207B>¹ for tetragonal polycrystalline [Fe(TPP)Cl], these data 
provide a rare, complete determination of ZFS parameters in a metalloporphyrin
halide series. The electronic structure of [Fe(TPP)X] (X = F, Cl, Br, I) has been
studied by multireference ab initio methods: the complete active space
self-consistent field (CASSCF) and the N-electron valence perturbation theory
(NEVPT2) with the aim of exploring the origin of the large and positive
zero-field splitting D of the 6A1 ground state. D was calculated from wave
functions of the electronic multiplets spanned by the d5 configuration of Fe(III)
along with spinorbit coupling accounted for by quasi degenerate perturbation
theory. Results reproduce trends of D from inelastic neutron scattering data
increasing in the order from F, Cl, Br, to I. A mapping of energy eigenvalues and
eigenfunctions of the S = 3/2 excited states on ligand field theory was used to
characterize the s- and p-antibonding effects decreasing from F to I. This is in 
agreement with similar results deduced from ab initio calculations on CrX6³<U+207B>
complexes and also with the spectrochemical series showing a decrease of the
ligand field in the same directions. A correlation is found between the increase 
of D and decrease of the p- and s-antibonding energies e(<U+03BB>)(X) (<U+03BB> = s, p) in the 
series from X = F to I. Analysis of this correlation using second-order
perturbation theory expressions in terms of angular overlap parameters
rationalizes the experimentally deduced trend. D parameters from CASSCF and
NEVPT2 results have been calibrated against those from the INS data, yielding a
predictive power of these approaches. Methods to improve the quantitative
agreement between ab initio calculated and experimental D and spectroscopic
transitions for high-spin Fe(III) complexes are proposed.

PMID: 26428688  [PubMed - in process]


11. Genesis. 2015 Nov;53(11):685-94. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22903. Epub 2015 Oct 23.

Comprehensive interactome of Otx2 in the adult mouse neural retina.

Fant B(1), Samuel A(1), Audebert S(2), Couzon A(3), El Nagar S(1), Billon N(1),
Lamonerie T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut De Biologie Valrose, University of Nice Sophia Antipolis, UFR
Sciences, CNRS, UMR7277, Inserm, U1091, Nice, F-06108, France. (2)Centre De
Recherche En Cancérologie De Marseille, INSERM U1068/Institut Paoli-Calmettes,
13273 Marseille CEDEX 9, France. (3)AniRA-PBES, SFR BioSciences Gerland,
UMS3444/US8, ENS De Lyon, Lyon, 69007, France.

The Otx2 homeodomain transcription factor exerts multiple functions in specific
developmental contexts, probably through the regulation of different sets of
genes. Protein partners of Otx2 have been shown to modulate its activity.
Therefore, the Otx2 interactome may play a key role in selecting a precise
target-gene repertoire, hence determining its function in a specific tissue. To
address the nature of Otx2 interactome, we generated a new recombinant
Otx2(CTAP-tag) mouse line, designed for protein complexes purification. We
validated this mouse line by establishing the Otx2 interactome in the adult
neural retina. In this tissue, Otx2 is thought to have overlapping function with 
its paralog Crx. Our analysis revealed that, in contrary to Crx, Otx2 did not
develop interactions with proteins that are known to regulate phototransduction
genes but showed specific partnership with factors associated with retinal
development. The relationship between Otx2 and Crx in the neural retina should
therefore be considered as complementarity rather than redundancy. Furthermore,
study of the Otx2 interactome revealed strong associations with RNA processing
and translation machineries, suggesting unexpected roles for Otx2 in the
regulation of selected target genes all along the transcription/translation
pathway. The Otx2(CTAP-tag) line, therefore, appears suitable for a systematic
approach to Otx2 protein-protein interactions. genesis 53:685-694, 2015. © 2015
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26426291  [PubMed - in process]


12. Transl Vis Sci Technol. 2015 Sep 22;4(5):6. eCollection 2015.

The Effect of Transient Local Anti-inflammatory Treatment on the Survival of Pig 
Retinal Progenitor Cell Allotransplants.

Abud M(1), Baranov P(2), Hicks C(3), Patel S(3), Lieppman B(2), Regatieri C(4),
Sinden J(3), Isaac D(5), Avila M(5), Young M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Schepens Eye Research Institute, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, an affiliate of
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA ; Federal University of Goias, Goiania,
Brazil. (2)Schepens Eye Research Institute, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, an
affiliate of Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (3)ReNeuron, UK. (4)Federal
University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil. (5)Federal University of Goias,
Goiania, Brazil.

PURPOSE: The development of photoreceptor replacement therapy for retinal
degenerative disorders requires the identification of the optimal cell source and
immunosuppressive regimen in a large animal model. Allotransplants are not
acutely rejected in swine subretinal space, although it is not known if survival 
can be improved with immunosuppression. Here we investigated the survival and
integration of expanded pig retinal progenitor cells (pRPCs) in normal recipients
with and without transient anti-inflammatory suppression.
METHODS: pRPCs were derived from the neural retina of E60 GFP transgenic pigs,
expanded for six passages, characterized, and transplanted into the subretinal
space of 12 pigs. Six recipients received a single intravitreal injection of
rapamycin and dexamethasone.
RESULTS: pRPCs expressed the photoreceptor development genes Sox2, Pax6, Lhx2,
Crx, Nrl, and Recoverin in vitro. Transplanted cells were identified in 9 out of 
12 recipients 4 weeks after the injection. pRPCs integrated primarily into the
photoreceptor inner segment layer and outer nuclear layer with single cells
present in the inner nuclear layer. Donor cells remained recoverin-positive and
acquired rhodopsin. We did not observe any signs of graft proliferation. The
immunosuppression did not affect the survival or distribution of grafts. No
macrophage infiltration or loss of retinal structure was observed in either
group.
CONCLUSIONS: Local immunosuppression with rapamycin and dexamethasone does not
improve the outcome of pRPC allotransplantation into the subretinal space.
TRANSLATIONAL RELEVANCE: Survival and integration of pRPC together with the lack 
of graft proliferation suggests that allogeneic RPC transplantation without
transient immunosuppression is a favorable approach for photoreceptor cell
replacement.

PMCID: PMC4585327
PMID: 26425402  [PubMed]


13. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 Dec;15(6):568-74. doi:
10.1097/ACI.0000000000000212.

Toll-like receptors as targets for allergen immunotherapy.

Aryan Z(1), Rezaei N.

Author information: 
(1)aStudents' Scientific Research Center bResearch Center for Immunodeficiencies,
Pediatrics Center of Excellence, Children's Medical Center cDepartment of
Immunology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences dUniversal 
Scientific Education and Research Network (USERN), Tehran, Iran.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are novel and promising targets for
allergen immunotherapy. Bench studies suggest that TLR agonists reduce Th2
responses and ameliorate airway hyper-responsiveness. In addition, clinical
trials are at initial phases to evaluate the safety and efficacy of TLR agonists 
for the allergen immunotherapy of patients with allergic rhinitis and asthma.
(Figure is included in full-text article.)
RECENT FINDINGS: To date, two allergy vaccine-containing TLR agonists have been
investigated in clinical trials; Pollinex Quattro and AIC. The former contains
monophosphoryl lipid, a TLR4 agonist and the latter contains, CpG motifs
activating the TLR9 cascade. Preseasonal subcutaneous injection of both of these 
allergy vaccines has been safe and efficacious in control of nasal symptoms of
patients with allergic rhinitis. CRX-675 (a TLR4 agonist), AZD8848 (a TLR7
agonist), VTX-1463 (a TLR8 agonist) and 1018 ISS and QbG10 (TLR9 agonists) are
currently in clinical development for allergic rhinitis and asthma.
SUMMARY: TLR agonists herald promising results for allergen immunotherapy of
patients with allergic rhinitis and asthma. Future research should be directed at
utilizing these agents for immunotherapy of food allergy (for instance, peanut
allergy) as well.

PMID: 26418475  [PubMed - in process]


14. Int J Oncol. 2015 Nov;47(5):1703-10. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3179. Epub 2015 Sep
23.

OTX2 is a therapeutic target for retinoblastoma and may function as a common
factor between C-MYC, CRX, and phosphorylated RB pathways.

Li J(1), Di C(1), Jing J(1), Di Q(1), Nakhla J(1), Adamson DC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Preston Robert Tisch Brain Tumor Center, Duke Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.

The homeobox transcription factor orthodenticle homeobox 2 (OTX2) plays a
critical role in very early neurogenesis, but can become oncogenic when
aberrantly expressed later in life. We previously discovered its novel oncogenic 
role in the malignant childhood brain tumor medulloblastoma and hypothesize an
oncogenic role in retinoblastoma. Primary retinoblastoma tumors and cell lines
were analyzed by quantitative-PCR, immunoblotting and immunohistochemistry for
OTX2. The effect of modulating OTX2 expression on tumorigenesis was tested
pharmacologically and by siRNA. A lentiviral shRNA-engineered vector was used for
conditional knockdown studies on tumor growth in vivo. A luciferase reporter
assay was used to analyze ATRA's effect on OTX2's promoter. In this study on
retinoblastoma, OTX2 was frequently amplified and/or overexpressed in primary
tumors and cell lines. Knockdown of OTX2 expression by siRNA or pharmacologic
inhibition by all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) repressed OTX2 expression and cell
proliferation and significantly decreased tumor growth in vivo. Loss of OTX2
expression also resulted in decreased expression of C-MYC and CRX, genes
previously implicated in retinoblastoma tumorigenesis. Loss of OTX2 expression
increased the phosphorylation of RB, a potential mechanism of modulating cell
proliferation. Aberrant expression of OTX2 may contribute to the development of
retinoblastoma. OTX2 may serve as a common transcription factor that interlinks
multiple tumor-driving pathways. These results also show that OTX2 can be
genetically and pharmacologically targeted, providing an exciting new therapeutic
option that may be less toxic and more efficacious than current treatments.

PMID: 26397460  [PubMed - in process]


15. Vaccine. 2015 Oct 26;33(43):5845-53. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.08.086. Epub
2015 Sep 21.

Methylglycol chitosan and a synthetic TLR4 agonist enhance immune responses to
influenza vaccine administered sublingually.

Spinner JL(1), Oberoi HS(2), Yorgensen YM(3), Poirier DS(4), Burkhart DJ(1),
Plante M(5), Evans JT(6).

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline Vaccines, 553 Old Corvallis Road, Hamilton, MT 59840, USA.
(2)1910 Country Drive Apartment 202, Grayslake, IL 60030, USA. (3)3067 Bugli
Lane, Stevensville, MT 59870, USA. (4)GlaxoSmithKline Vaccines, 525 Cartier
Ouest, Laval, QC, Canada H7V 3S8. (5)Neomed Institute, 7171 Frederick Banting,
Montreal, QC, Canada H4S 1Z9. (6)GlaxoSmithKline Vaccines, 553 Old Corvallis
Road, Hamilton, MT 59840, USA. Electronic address: jay.t.evans@gsk.com.

Influenza is a vaccine-preventable contagious respiratory illness caused by
influenza (flu) viruses which can lead to hospitalization and sometimes even
death. Current flu vaccines delivered intramuscularly (IM) or intradermally (ID) 
are less effective at eliciting protective mucosal immune responses and vaccines 
delivered intranasally (IN) possess potential safety concerns. Sublingual (SL)
vaccination is a promising alternative route for vaccine delivery which has been 
indicated as safe and effective at inducing protective immune responses in both
systemic and mucosal compartments. We evaluated the efficacy of methylglycol
chitosan (MGC) and a synthetic toll-like receptor 4 agonist (CRX-601), alone or
in combination, for improving systemic and mucosal immune responses to a
monovalent detergent-split flu virus vaccine delivered SL. SL vaccination of mice
with split-flu vaccine formulated with either MGC or CRX-601 resulted in specific
serum IgG and mucosal IgA titers that were significantly greater than titers from
non-adjuvanted vaccination and equivalent to or greater than titers in mice
vaccinated IM. Our results demonstrate that SL vaccination utilizing MGC or
CRX-601 as adjuvants is a viable alternative route of vaccination for flu which
can elicit systemic immune responses equivalent to or greater than IM vaccination
with the added benefit of stimulating a robust specific mucosal immune response.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4609623 [Available on 2016-10-26]
PMID: 26392012  [PubMed - in process]


16. Genome Biol. 2015 Sep 1;16:171. doi: 10.1186/s13059-015-0732-z.

Graded gene expression changes determine phenotype severity in mouse models of
CRX-associated retinopathies.

Ruzycki PA(1,)(2), Tran NM(1,)(2,)(3), Kefalov VJ(1), Kolesnikov AV(1), Chen
S(4,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University School 
of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA. (2)Molecular Genetics and Genomics Graduate
Program, Division of Biology & Biomedical Sciences, Washington University School 
of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA. (3)Current address: Department of Molecular
and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, NW 335.30, 52 Oxford St, Cambridge, MA,
02138, USA. (4)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington
University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA. chen@vision.wustl.edu.
(5)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine,
Saint Louis, MO, USA. chen@vision.wustl.edu. (6)Molecular Genetics and Genomics
Graduate Program, Division of Biology & Biomedical Sciences, Washington
University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA. chen@vision.wustl.edu.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the cone-rod-homeobox protein CRX are typically
associated with dominant blinding retinopathies with variable age of onset and
severity. Five well-characterized mouse models carrying different Crx mutations
show a wide range of disease phenotypes. To determine if the phenotype
variability correlates with distinct changes in CRX target gene expression, we
perform RNA-seq analyses on three of these models and compare the results with
published data.
RESULTS: Despite dramatic phenotypic differences between the three models tested,
graded expression changes in shared sets of genes are detected. Phenotype
severity correlates with the down-regulation of genes encoding key rod and cone
phototransduction proteins. Interestingly, in increasingly severe mouse models,
the transcription of many rod-enriched genes decreases decrementally, whereas
that of cone-enriched genes increases incrementally. Unlike down-regulated genes,
which show a high degree of CRX binding and dynamic epigenetic profiles in normal
retinas, the up-regulated cone-enriched genes do not correlate with direct
activity of CRX, but instead likely reflect a change in rod cell-fate integrity. 
Furthermore, these analyses describe the impact of minor gene expression changes 
on the phenotype, as two mutants showed marginally distinguishable expression
patterns but huge phenotypic differences, including distinct mechanisms of
retinal degeneration.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results implicate a threshold effect of gene expression level on
photoreceptor function and survival, highlight the importance of CRX in
photoreceptor subtype development and maintenance, and provide a molecular basis 
for phenotype variability in CRX-associated retinopathies.

PMCID: PMC4556057
PMID: 26324254  [PubMed - in process]


17. Mol Vis. 2015 Aug 18;21:857-70. eCollection 2015.

New COL6A6 variant detected by whole-exome sequencing is linked to break points
in intron 4 and 3'-UTR, deleting exon 5 of RHO, and causing adRP.

de Sousa Dias M(1), Hernan I(1), Delás B(2), Pascual B(1), Borràs E(1), Gamundi
MJ(1), Mañé B(1), Fernández-San José P(3), Ayuso C(3), Carballo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Unit, Hospital of Terrassa, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Ophthalmology Service, Hospital of Terrassa Barcelona, Spain. (3)Department of
Genetics, IIS-Jimenez Diaz Foundation (IIS-FJD), Madrid, Spain ; Centre for
Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain.

PURPOSE: This study aimed to test a newly devised cost-effective multiplex PCR
assay for the molecular diagnosis of autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa
(adRP), as well as the use of whole-exome sequencing (WES) to detect
disease-causing mutations in adRP.
METHODS: Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes of index
patients with adRP and their affected and unaffected family members. We used a
newly devised multiplex PCR assay capable of amplifying the genetic loci of RHO, 
PRPH2, RP1, PRPF3, PRPF8, PRPF31, IMPDH1, NRL, CRX, KLHL7, and NR2E3 to
molecularly diagnose 18 index patients with adRP. We also performed WES in
affected and unaffected members of four families with adRP in whom a
disease-causing mutation was previously not found.
RESULTS: We identified five previously reported mutations (p.Arg677X in the RP1
gene, p.Asp133Val and p.Arg195Leu in the PRPH2 gene, and p.Pro171Leu and
p.Pro215Leu in the RHO gene) and one novel mutation (p.Val345Gly in the RHO gene)
representing 33% detection of causative mutations in our adRP cohort. Comparative
WES analysis showed a new variant (p.Gly103Arg in the COL6A6 gene) that
segregated with the disease in one family with adRP. As this variant was linked
with the RHO locus, we sequenced the complete RHO gene, which revealed a deletion
in intron 4 that encompassed all of exon 5 and 28 bp of the 3'-untranslated
region (UTR).
CONCLUSIONS: The novel multiplex PCR assay with next-generation sequencing (NGS) 
proved effective for detecting most of the adRP-causing mutations. A WES approach
led to identification of a deletion in RHO through detection of a new linked
variant in COL6A6. No pathogenic variants were identified in the remaining three 
families. Moreover, NGS and WES were inefficient for detecting the complete
deletion of exon 5 in the RHO gene in one family with adRP. Carriers of this
deletion showed variable clinical status, and two of these carriers had not
previously been diagnosed with RP.

PMCID: PMC4539015
PMID: 26321861  [PubMed - in process]


18. Eur J Trauma Emerg Surg. 2015 Aug 29. [Epub ahead of print]

Minimally invasive implantation of a novel flexible intramedullary nail in
patients with displaced midshaft clavicle fractures.

Calbiyik M(1), Zehir S, Ipek D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Hitit University Corum Education and Research
Hospital, Camlik St No. 2, Corum, Turkey, muratcalbiyik19@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: We report our initial experiences with use of a new technique we
developed for implantation of Sonoma Crx intramedullary rod in patients with
displaced clavicle fractures.
METHODS: A total of 35 patients (mean age 41.82 ± 13.65, male:female
ratio = 21:14) having Robinson Types 1b, 2b and 3b displaced midshaft fractures
with >2 cm clavicle shortening were included into the study. A single small
incision (~1 cm) was made over the anteromedial aspect of the involved clavicle
and an appropriate sized intramedullary nail was inserted in reverse (mirror)
configuration of that has been suggested by the manufacturer. Functional
assessment was made using Constant shoulder and disability of the arm shoulder
and hand scoring.
RESULTS: Mean time of operation was 51.20 ± 10.56 min and mean time of
fluoroscopy was 2.33 ± 1.12 min. One patient had implant failure 2 months after
the operation and was revised to a new implant. Superficial or deep wound
infection, hematoma, neurovascular complication, substance irritation or implant 
failure did not occur. Follow-up ranged from 12 to 45 months (mean
28.5 ± 9.95 months). At the latest follow-up, mean Constant shoulder score was
93.14 ± 4.06 (ranging from 84.00 to 100.00) and mean disability of the arm
shoulder and hand score was 3.68 ± 1.73 (ranging from 0.0 to 6.80).
CONCLUSION: The technique we described herein provided successful procedural
outcomes, eliminated the need for deep dissection of the fracture site and
reduced the operation time. Further study on larger populations is warranted to
confirm these findings.

PMID: 26319056  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Aug 23. [Epub ahead of print]

LSD1-Mediated Demethylation of H3K4me2 Is Required for the Transition from Late
Progenitor to Differentiated Mouse Rod Photoreceptor.

Popova EY(1), Pinzon-Guzman C, Salzberg AC, Zhang SS, Barnstable CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neural and Behavioral Sciences, Penn State University College of
Medicine, 500 University Drive, Hershey, PA, 17033, USA.

Epigenetic modifiers can work in concert with transcription factors to control
the transition of cells from proliferating progenitors into quiescent terminally 
differentiated cells. This transition involves changes in histone methylation and
one of the key regulators of this is the H3K4me2/1 histone demethylase LSD1.
Here, we show that the highest expression of LSD1 occurs in postmitotic retinal
cells during the peak period of rod photoreceptor differentiation.
Pharmacological inhibition of LSD1 in retinal explants cultured from PN1 to PN8
had three major effects. It prevented the normal decrease in expression of genes 
associated with progenitor function, it blocked rod photoreceptor development,
and it increased expression of genes associated with other retinal cell types.
The maintained expression of progenitor genes was associated with a maintained
level of H3K4me2 over the gene and its promoter. Among the genes whose expression
was maintained was Hes1, a repressor known to block rod photoreceptor
development. The inhibition of rod photoreceptor gene expression occurred in
spite of the normal expression of transcription factors CRX and NRL, and the
normal accumulation of H3K4me2 marks over the promoter and gene body. We suggest 
that LSD1 acts in concert with a series of nuclear receptors to modify chromatin 
structure and repress progenitor genes as well as to inhibit ectopic patterns of 
gene expression in the differentiating postmitotic retinal cells.

PMID: 26298666  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


20. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Dec 1;24(23):2778-95. doi: 10.1089/scd.2015.0144. Epub 2015 
Sep 10.

Characterization of Three-Dimensional Retinal Tissue Derived from Human Embryonic
Stem Cells in Adherent Monolayer Cultures.

Singh RK(1), Mallela RK(1), Cornuet PK(1), Reifler AN(2), Chervenak AP(2), West
MD(3), Wong KY(2), Nasonkin IO(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Ophthalmology, Louis J. Fox Center for Vision Restoration,
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center , Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (2)2
Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Michigan , Ann
Arbor, Michigan. (3)3 BioTime, Inc. , Alameda, California.

Stem cell-based therapy of retinal degenerative conditions is a promising
modality to treat blindness, but requires new strategies to improve the number of
functionally integrating cells. Grafting semidifferentiated retinal tissue rather
than progenitors allows preservation of tissue structure and connectivity in
retinal grafts, mandatory for vision restoration. Using human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs), we derived retinal tissue growing in adherent conditions
consisting of conjoined neural retina and retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells 
and evaluated cell fate determination and maturation in this tissue. We found
that deriving such tissue in adherent conditions robustly induces all eye field
genes (RX, PAX6, LHX2, SIX3, SIX6) and produces four layers of pure populations
of retinal cells: RPE (expressing NHERF1, EZRIN, RPE65, DCT, TYR, TYRP, MITF,
PMEL), early photoreceptors (PRs) (coexpressing CRX and RCVRN), inner nuclear
layer neurons (expressing CALB2), and retinal ganglion cells [RGCs, expressing
BRN3B and Neurofilament (NF) 200]. Furthermore, we found that retinal progenitors
divide at the apical side of the hESC-derived retinal tissue (next to the RPE
layer) and then migrate toward the basal side, similar to that found during
embryonic retinogenesis. We detected synaptogenesis in hESC-derived retinal
tissue, and found neurons containing many synaptophysin-positive boutons within
the RGC and PR layers. We also observed long NF200-positive axons projected by
RGCs toward the apical side. Whole-cell recordings demonstrated that putative
amacrine and/or ganglion cells exhibited electrophysiological responses
reminiscent of those in normal retinal neurons. These responses included
voltage-gated Na(+) and K(+) currents, depolarization-induced spiking, and
responses to neurotransmitter receptor agonists. Differentiation in adherent
conditions allows generation of long and flexible pieces of 3D retinal tissue
suitable for isolating transplantable slices of tissue for retinal replacement
therapies.

PMCID: PMC4653822 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26283078  [PubMed - in process]


21. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2015 Aug;56(9):5299-308. doi: 10.1167/iovs.15-16585.

Characterization of an Early-Onset, Autosomal Recessive, Progressive Retinal
Degeneration in Bengal Cats.

Ofri R(1), Reilly CM(2), Maggs DJ(3), Fitzgerald PG(4), Shilo-Benjamini Y(5),
Good KL(3), Grahn RA(6), Splawski DD(6), Lyons LA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Koret School of Veterinary Medicine, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of California-Davis, Davis, California, United States.
(3)Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of California-Davis, Davis, California, United States.
(4)Department of Cell Biology and Human Anatomy, School of Medicine, University
of California-Davis, Davis, California, United States. (5)Koret School of
Veterinary Medicine, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel 3Department of
Surgical and Radiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
California-Davis, Davis, California, United States. (6)Department of Population
Health and Reproduction, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
California-Davis, Davis, California, United States. (7)Department of Population
Health and Reproduction, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
California-Davis, Davis, California, United States 6Department of Veterinary
Medicine and Surgery, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Missouri-Columb.

PURPOSE: A form of retinal degeneration suspected to be hereditary was discovered
in a family of Bengal cats. A breeding colony was established to characterize
disease progression clinically, electrophysiologically, and morphologically, and 
to investigate the mode of inheritance.
METHODS: Affected and related cats were donated by owners for breeding trials and
pedigree analysis. Kittens from test and complementation breedings underwent
ophthalmic and neuro-ophthalmic examinations and ERG, and globes were evaluated
using light microscopy.
RESULTS: Pedigree analysis, along with test and complementation breedings,
indicated autosomal recessive inheritance and suggested that this disease is
nonallelic to a retinal degeneration found in Persian cats. Mutation analysis
confirmed the disease is not caused by CEP290 or CRX variants found predominantly
in Abyssinian and Siamese cats. Ophthalmoscopic signs of retinal degeneration
were noted at 9 weeks of age and became more noticeable over the next 4 months.
Visual deficits were behaviorally evident by 1 year of age. Electroretinogram
demonstrated reduced rod and cone function at 7 and 9 weeks of age, respectively.
Rod responses were mostly extinguished at 14 weeks of age; cone responses were
minimal by 26 weeks. Histologic degeneration was first observed at 8 weeks,
evidenced by reduced photoreceptor numbers, then rapid deterioration of the
photoreceptor layer and, subsequently, severe outer retinal degeneration.
CONCLUSIONS: A recessively inherited primary photoreceptor degeneration was
characterized in the Bengal cat. The disease is characterized by early onset,
with histologic, ophthalmoscopic, and electrophysiological signs evident by 2
months of age, and rapid progression to blindness.

PMCID: PMC4539567
PMID: 26258614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Stem Cells. 2015 Dec;33(12):3504-18. doi: 10.1002/stem.2122. Epub 2015 Aug 14.

Transcriptome Dynamics of Developing Photoreceptors in Three-Dimensional Retina
Cultures Recapitulates Temporal Sequence of Human Cone and Rod Differentiation
Revealing Cell Surface Markers and Gene Networks.

Kaewkhaw R(1,)(2), Kaya KD(1), Brooks M(1), Homma K(1,)(3), Zou J(4,)(5),
Chaitankar V(1), Rao M(4,)(6), Swaroop A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology-Neurodegeneration & Repair Laboratory, National Eye Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. (2)Research Center,
Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. 
(3)Department of Physiology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Center for
Regenerative Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(5)iPSC Core, Center for Molecular Medicine, National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. (6)The New York Stem Cell Foundation Research
Institute, New York, NY 10023.

The derivation of three-dimensional (3D) stratified neural retina from
pluripotent stem cells has permitted investigations of human photoreceptors. We
have generated a H9 human embryonic stem cell subclone that carries a green
fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter under the control of the promoter of cone-rod 
homeobox (CRX), an established marker of postmitotic photoreceptor precursors.
The CRXp-GFP reporter replicates endogenous CRX expression in vitro when the H9
subclone is induced to form self-organizing 3D retina-like tissue. At day 37,
CRX+ photoreceptors appear in the basal or middle part of neural retina and
migrate to apical side by day 67. Temporal and spatial patterns of retinal cell
type markers recapitulate the predicted sequence of development. Cone gene
expression is concomitant with CRX, whereas rod differentiation factor neural
retina leucine zipper protein (NRL) is first observed at day 67. At day 90,
robust expression of NRL and its target nuclear receptor NR2E3 is evident in many
CRX+ cells, while minimal S-opsin and no rhodopsin or L/M-opsin is present. The
transcriptome profile, by RNA-seq, of developing human photoreceptors is
remarkably concordant with mRNA and immunohistochemistry data available for human
fetal retina although many targets of CRX, including phototransduction genes,
exhibit a significant delay in expression. We report on temporal changes in gene 
signatures, including expression of cell surface markers and transcription
factors; these expression changes should assist in isolation of photoreceptors at
distinct stages of differentiation and in delineating coexpression networks. Our 
studies establish the first global expression database of developing human
photoreceptors, providing a reference map for functional studies in retinal
cultures. Stem Cells 2015;33:3504-3518.

© 2015 This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public domain in the 
USA. STEM CELLS published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press 
AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4713319 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26235913  [PubMed - in process]


23. Nat Commun. 2015 Jul 7;6:7434. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8434.

Giant anisotropic magnetoresistance in a quantum anomalous Hall insulator.

Kandala A(1), Richardella A(1), Kempinger S(1), Liu CX(1), Samarth N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802-6300, USA.

When a three-dimensional ferromagnetic topological insulator thin film is
magnetized out-of-plane, conduction ideally occurs through dissipationless,
one-dimensional (1D) chiral states that are characterized by a quantized,
zero-field Hall conductance. The recent realization of this phenomenon, the
quantum anomalous Hall effect, provides a conceptually new platform for studies
of 1D transport, distinct from the traditionally studied quantum Hall effects
that arise from Landau level formation. An important question arises in this
context: how do these 1D edge states evolve as the magnetization is changed from 
out-of-plane to in-plane? We examine this question by studying the
field-tilt-driven crossover from predominantly edge-state transport to diffusive 
transport in Crx(Bi,Sb)(2-x)Te3 thin films. This crossover manifests itself in a 
giant, electrically tunable anisotropic magnetoresistance that we explain by
employing a Landauer-Büttiker formalism. Our methodology provides a powerful
means of quantifying dissipative effects in temperature and chemical potential
regimes far from perfect quantization.

PMCID: PMC4507013
PMID: 26151318  [PubMed]


24. Microvasc Res. 2015 Sep;101:33-7. doi: 10.1016/j.mvr.2015.06.004. Epub 2015 Jun
24.

Experimental TLR4 inhibition improves intestinal microcirculation in endotoxemic 
rats.

Zhou J(1), Soltow M(2), Zimmermann K(2), Pavlovic D(2), Johnston B(3), Lehmann
C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesia, Dalhousie University, 5850 College St., Halifax, B3H
4R2 Nova Scotia, Canada; Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Dalhousie
University, 5850 College St., Halifax, B3H 4R2 Nova Scotia, Canada. (2)Department
of Anesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University,
Loefflerstr. 23, 17475 Greifswald, Germany. (3)Department of Microbiology &
Immunology, Dalhousie University, 5850 College St., Halifax, B3H 4R2 Nova Scotia,
Canada. (4)Department of Anesthesia, Dalhousie University, 5850 College St.,
Halifax, B3H 4R2 Nova Scotia, Canada; Department of Microbiology & Immunology,
Dalhousie University, 5850 College St., Halifax, B3H 4R2 Nova Scotia, Canada.
Electronic address: chlehmann@mac.com.

INTRODUCTION: Toll like receptor 4 (TLR4) represents a critical cellular link for
endotoxin-induced pathology. The aim of this study was to evaluate the potential 
role of TLR4 inhibition on the intestinal microcirculation during experimental
endotoxemia.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The intestinal microcirculation was studied by intravital 
microscopy in four groups of Lewis rats (n=10 per group): healthy controls (CON
group), endotoxemic animals (15mg/kg lipopolysaccharide, LPS group), endotoxemic 
animals treated with a TLR4 antagonist (1mg/kg CRX-526, LPS+CRX526 group), and
controls treated with CRX-526 (C-CRX526 group). Plasma samples were obtained for 
cytokine measurements at the end of the experiments.
RESULTS: Endotoxemia significantly increased leukocyte adhesion in intestinal
submucosal venules (e.g., V1 venules: CON 20.4±6.5n/mm(2), LPS 237.5±36.2n/mm(2),
p<0.05) and reduced capillary perfusion of the intestinal wall (e.g.,
longitudinal muscular layer: CON 112.5±5.9cm/cm(2), LPS 71.3±11.0cm/cm(2),
p<0.05) at 2h. TLR4 inhibition significantly reduced endotoxemia-associated
leukocyte adhesion (V1 venules: 104.3±7.8n/mm(2)) and improved capillary
perfusion (longitudinal muscular layer: 111.0±12.3cm/cm(2)). Cytokine release was
not significantly affected.
CONCLUSIONS: The TLR4 pathway may be a target in clinical Gram-negative sepsis
since administration of the TLR4 antagonist CRX-526 improved intestinal
microcirculation parameters in experimental endotoxemia.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26116862  [PubMed - in process]


25. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Aug;35(15):2583-96. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00048-15. Epub 2015 May 
18.

Rax Homeoprotein Regulates Photoreceptor Cell Maturation and Survival in
Association with Crx in the Postnatal Mouse Retina.

Irie S(1), Sanuki R(2), Muranishi Y(2), Kato K(2), Chaya T(2), Furukawa T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute for Protein
Research, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan Japan Science and Technology
Agency, Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology, Suita, Osaka, Japan
Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (2)Laboratory for
Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute for Protein Research, Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka, Japan Japan Science and Technology Agency, Core
Research for Evolutional Science and Technology, Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Laboratory for Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute for Protein
Research, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan Japan Science and Technology
Agency, Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology, Suita, Osaka, Japan
takahisa.furukawa@protein.osaka-u.ac.jp.

The Rax homeobox gene plays essential roles in multiple processes of vertebrate
retina development. Many vertebrate species possess Rax and Rax2 genes, and
different functions have been suggested. In contrast, mice contain a single Rax
gene, and its functional roles in late retinal development are still unclear. To 
clarify mouse Rax function in postnatal photoreceptor development and
maintenance, we generated conditional knockout mice in which Rax in maturing or
mature photoreceptor cells was inactivated by tamoxifen treatment (Rax iCKO
mice). When Rax was inactivated in postnatal Rax iCKO mice, developing
photoreceptor cells showed a significant decrease in the level of the expression 
of rod and cone photoreceptor genes and mature adult photoreceptors exhibited a
specific decrease in cone cell numbers. In luciferase assays, we found that Rax
and Crx cooperatively transactivate Rhodopsin and cone opsin promoters and that
an optimum Rax expression level to transactivate photoreceptor gene expression
exists. Furthermore, Rax and Crx colocalized in maturing photoreceptor cells, and
their coimmunoprecipitation was observed in cultured cells. Taken together, these
results suggest that Rax plays essential roles in the maturation of both cones
and rods and in the survival of cones by regulating photoreceptor gene expression
with Crx in the postnatal mouse retina.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4524118
PMID: 25986607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2015 Aug;118:133-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2015.04.026.
Epub 2015 May 4.

PCB1254 exposure contributes to the abnormalities of optomotor responses and
influence of the photoreceptor cell development in zebrafish larvae.

Zhang X(1), Hong Q(2), Yang L(2), Zhang M(3), Guo X(1), Chi X(4), Tong M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nanjing Medical University, NO.140, Hanzhong Road,
Nanjing 210029, China; Department of Pediatrics, Nanjing Maternity and Child
Health Care Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, NO.123, Tianfei Road, Mochou 
Street, Nanjing 210004, China. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Nanjing Maternity and
Child Health Care Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, NO.123, Tianfei Road,
Mochou Street, Nanjing 210004, China. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Nanjing
Medical University, NO.140, Hanzhong Road, Nanjing 210029, China. (4)Department
of Pediatrics, Nanjing Medical University, NO.140, Hanzhong Road, Nanjing 210029,
China; Department of Pediatrics, Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital
of Nanjing Medical University, NO.123, Tianfei Road, Mochou Street, Nanjing
210004, China. Electronic address: chixia2001@njmu.edu.com. (5)Department of
Pediatrics, Nanjing Medical University, NO.140, Hanzhong Road, Nanjing 210029,
China; Department of Pediatrics, Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital
of Nanjing Medical University, NO.123, Tianfei Road, Mochou Street, Nanjing
210004, China. Electronic address: meilingtong111@126.com.

Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), a group of highly toxic environmental
pollutants, have been report to influence the visual system development in
children. However, the underlying mechanism is unclear. The study was aim to
investigate the effects of continuous PCBs exposure on optomotor response (OMR)
and retinal photoreceptor cell development-related gene expression in zebrafish
larvae. The fertilized zebrafish embryos were exposed to PCBs at concentrations
of 0.125, 0.25, 0.5, and 1mg/L until 7 days post-fertilization. Control groups
with blank and 0.01% methanol were also prepared. OMR test was used to detect the
visual behavior. The mRNA expression of the CRX, RHO, SWS1, and SWS2 was assessed
by the Quantitative Real-Time PCR. The OMR test showed that the visual behavior
of the larvae was most sensitive when the grating spatial frequency was 0.20LP/mm
and the moving speed was 25cm/s. Moreover, the proportion of positively swimming 
fish was significantly reduced in the 0.5 and 1mg/L PCB1254 treatment group
(P<0.05) compared with the controls. In addition, the expression of SWS2 was
significantly down-regulated in all PCB1254 treatment groups (P<0.05), whereas
the decreased expression of the CRX, RHO and SWS1 was found in the 0.5 and 1mg/L 
PCB1254 groups (P<0.05). This is the first report to demonstrate that continue
exposure of zebrafish larvae to PCBs causes photoreceptor cell
development-related gene expression changes that lead to OMR behavioral
alterations. Analysis of these visual behavioral paradigms may be useful in
predicting the adverse effects of toxicants on visual function in fish.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25938693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2015 Jul;133(7):805-12. doi: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2015.0900.

Association of Cone-Rod Homeobox Transcription Factor Messenger RNA With
Pediatric Metastatic Retinoblastoma.

Torbidoni AV(1), Laurent VE(1), Sampor C(1), Ottaviani D(1), Vazquez V(2), Gabri 
MR(3), Rossi J(4), de Dávila MT(2), Alonso C(1), Alonso DF(3), Chantada GL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology-Oncology Service, Pediatric Hospital, Servicios de Atención Médica 
Integral para la Comunidad, Professor Dr. Juan P. Garrahan, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. (2)Pathology Service, Pediatric Hospital Servicios de Atención Médica 
Integral para la Comunidad Professor Dr. Juan P. Garrahan, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. (3)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Quilmes National University, Bernal,
Argentina. (4)Immunology Service, Pediatric Hospital Servicios de Atención Médica
Integral para la Comunidad Professor Dr. Juan P. Garrahan, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

IMPORTANCE: Disseminated retinoblastoma is usually fatal. Identification of small
amounts (minimal dissemination [MD]) of tumor cells in extraocular sites might be
a tool for designing appropriate treatments.
OBJECTIVE: To test cone-rod homeobox (CRX) transcription factor as a
lineage-specific molecular marker for metastatic retinoblastoma and for
evaluation of MD.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: In a prospective cohort design study, we
evaluated CRX messenger RNA (mRNA) by retrotranscription followed by real-time
polymerase chain reaction as a diagnostic test in samples obtained from bone
marrow, peripheral blood, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) at diagnosis, after
induction chemotherapy, and during follow-up. The study was conducted from June
30, 2008, to June 30, 2014. Seventeen retinoblastoma primary tumors, 2
retinoblastoma cell lines, and 47 samples of bone marrow from other cancers
(controls) were studied. Seventeen patients with metastatic retinoblastoma (9 at 
diagnosis, 8 at relapse; age range: 18-41 months) were included.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Detection of CRX mRNA as a marker for metastatic
retinoblastoma and MD in bone marrow and CSF and its correlation with clinical
findings.
RESULTS: Cone-rod homeobox mRNA was expressed in all tumors (relative expression 
levels range, 8.1<U+2009>×<U+2009>10-5 to 5.6) and cell lines. In control samples, there was no
amplification of CRX; only the housekeeping gene (GAPDH) demonstrated
amplification. Bone marrow metastatic cells showed expression of CRX mRNA in all 
9 children presenting with metastasis at the diagnosis (relative expression
levels, 6.0<U+2009>×<U+2009>10-5 to 0.67). After induction chemotherapy, no evidence of MD of
tumor cells was seen in any of the 8 responding children since only GAPDH showed 
amplification. In the CSF of children who had a metastatic relapse, CRX mRNA
detection was positive in 2 patients in whom no conclusive results were reached
by immunocytology for disialoganglioside GD2. Minimal dissemination in the CSF
was associated with a clinical relapse in 2 cases. No concomitant MD was evident 
in the bone marrow in any case.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: These data suggest that CRX mRNA is a novel marker for
retinoblastoma at extraocular sites. In this study among patients with bone
marrow metastasis, there was a quick, complete, and sustained molecular response 
after induction chemotherapy. In all patients with secondary metastasis, CSF
relapse occurred independently from the bone marrow, suggesting a sanctuary site.

PMID: 25928893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Neuron. 2015 Apr 8;86(1):7-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.03.057.

Gene regulation: it matters who you hang out with.

Masuda T(1), Berlinicke CA(1), Zack DJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wilmer Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
21231, USA. (2)Wilmer Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. Electronic address: donzack@gmail.com.

Comment on
    Neuron. 2015 Apr 8;86(1):247-63.

How broadly expressed transcription factors contribute to tissue-specific gene
expression is not well understood. Andzelm, Cherry et al. (2015) demonstrate that
myocyte enhancer factor 2D (MEF2D) binds and activates retina-specific regulatory
regions by cooperative interaction with the tissue-specific transcription factor 
CRX.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25856477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Neuron. 2015 Apr 8;86(1):247-63. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.02.038. Epub 2015 Mar
19.

MEF2D drives photoreceptor development through a genome-wide competition for
tissue-specific enhancers.

Andzelm MM(1), Cherry TJ(1), Harmin DA(1), Boeke AC(1), Lee C(1), Hemberg M(2),
Pawlyk B(3), Malik AN(1), Flavell SW(1), Sandberg MA(3), Raviola E(1), Greenberg 
ME(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, 220 Longwood Avenue,
Boston MA 02115, USA. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, Boston Children's Hospital,
300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Berman-Gund Laboratory For the
Study of Retinal Degenerations, Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical
School, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (4)Department
of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, 220 Longwood Avenue, Boston MA 02115,
USA. Electronic address: michael_greenberg@hms.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2015 Apr 8;86(1):7-9.

Organismal development requires the precise coordination of genetic programs to
regulate cell fate and function. MEF2 transcription factors (TFs) play essential 
roles in this process but how these broadly expressed factors contribute to the
generation of specific cell types during development is poorly understood. Here
we show that despite being expressed in virtually all mammalian tissues, in the
retina MEF2D binds to retina-specific enhancers and controls photoreceptor cell
development. MEF2D achieves specificity by cooperating with a retina-specific
factor CRX, which recruits MEF2D away from canonical MEF2 binding sites and
redirects it to retina-specific enhancers that lack the consensus MEF2-binding
sequence. Once bound to retina-specific enhancers, MEF2D and CRX co-activate the 
expression of photoreceptor-specific genes that are critical for retinal
function. These findings demonstrate that broadly expressed TFs acquire specific 
functions through competitive recruitment to enhancers by tissue-specific TFs and
through selective activation of these enhancers to regulate tissue-specific
genes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4393375 [Available on 2016-04-08]
PMID: 25801704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Genes Cells. 2015 May;20(5):408-26. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12233. Epub 2015 Mar 11.

Mef2d is essential for the maturation and integrity of retinal photoreceptor and 
bipolar cells.

Omori Y(1), Kitamura T, Yoshida S, Kuwahara R, Chaya T, Irie S, Furukawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute for Protein
Research, Osaka University, 3-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan; JST,
CREST, 3-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.

Mef2 transcription factors play a crucial role in cardiac and skeletal muscle
differentiation. We found that Mef2d is highly expressed in the mouse retina and 
its loss causes photoreceptor degeneration similar to that observed in human
retinitis pigmentosa patients. Electroretinograms (ERGs) were severely impaired
in Mef2d-/- mice. Immunohistochemistry showed that photoreceptor and bipolar cell
synapse protein levels severely decreased in the Mef2d-/- retina. Expression
profiling by microarray analysis showed that Mef2d is required for the expression
of various genes in photoreceptor and bipolar cells, including cone arrestin,
Guca1b, Pde6h and Cacna1s, which encode outer segment and synapse proteins. We
also observed that Mef2d synergistically activates the cone arrestin (Arr3)
promoter with Crx, suggesting that functional cooperation between Mef2d and Crx
is important for photoreceptor cell gene regulation. Taken together, our results 
show that Mef2d is essential for photoreceptor and bipolar cell gene expression, 
either independently or cooperatively with Crx.

© 2015 Institution for Protein Research. Genes to Cells published by Wiley
Publishing Asia Pty Ltd and the Molecular Biology Society of Japan.

PMID: 25757744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Chemphyschem. 2015 May 18;16(7):1352-5. doi: 10.1002/cphc.201402905. Epub 2015
Feb 25.

Interim anatase coating layer stabilizes rutile@Crx Oy photoanode for
visible-light-driven water oxidation.

Zhuang H(1,)(2), Miao J(2), Huang H(1), Long J(3), Zhang Y(1), Yang H(2), He
S(1), Yang Y(2), Wang X(4), Liu B(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, School of
Chemistry, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350116 (P.R. China). (2)School of Chemical
and Biomedical Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 2 Nanyang Drive,
Singapore 637459 (Singapore). (3)State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy
and Environment, School of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350116 (P.R.
China). jllong@fzu.edu.cn. (4)State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy
and Environment, School of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350116 (P.R.
China). xwang@fzu.edu.cn. (5)School of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University, 2 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637459 (Singapore). 
liubin@ntu.edu.sg.

Ternary core-shell heterostructured rutile@anatase@Crx Oy nanorod arrays were
elaborately designed as photoanodes for efficient photoelectrochemical water
splitting under visible-light illumination. The four-fold enhanced and stabilized
visible-light photocurrent highlights the unique role of the interim anatase
layer in accelerating the interfacial charge transfer from the Crx Oy chromophore
to rutile nanorods.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25712145  [PubMed - in process]


32. Hum Mutat. 2015 Jun;36(6):599-610. doi: 10.1002/humu.22775. Epub 2015 Apr 27.

Differential dimerization of variants linked to enhanced S-cone sensitivity
syndrome (ESCS) located in the NR2E3 ligand-binding domain.

von Alpen D(1,)(2), Tran HV(3), Guex N(4), Venturini G(1), Munier FL(3),
Schorderet DF(1,)(2,)(3), Haider NB(5), Escher P(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)IRO-Institute for Research in Ophthalmology, Sion, Switzerland. (2)EPFL-Ecole 
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. (3)Jules-Gonin Eye
Hospital, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. (4)Swiss Institute of
Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland. (5)Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard
Medical School, Schepens Eye Research Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.

NR2E3 encodes the photoreceptor-specific nuclear hormone receptor that acts as a 
repressor of cone-specific gene expression in rod photoreceptors, and as an
activator of several rod-specific genes. Recessive variants located in the
ligand-binding domain (LBD) of NR2E3 cause enhanced short wavelength sensitive-
(S-) cone syndrome (ESCS), a retinal degeneration characterized by an excess of
S-cones and non-functional rods. We analyzed the dimerization properties of NR2E3
and the effect of disease-causing LBD missense variants by bioluminescence
resonance energy transfer (BRET(2) ) protein interaction assays. Homodimerization
was not affected in presence of p.A256V, p.R039G, p.R311Q, and p.R334G variants, 
but abolished in presence of p.L263P, p.L336P, p.L353V, p.R385P, and p.M407K
variants. Homology modeling predicted structural changes induced by NR2E3 LBD
variants. NR2E3 LBD variants did not affect interaction with CRX, but with NRL
and rev-erba/NR1D1. CRX and NRL heterodimerized more efficiently together, than
did either with NR2E3. NR2E3 did not heterodimerize with TLX/NR2E1 and
RXRa/NR2C1. The identification of a new compound heterozygous patient with
detectable rod function, who expressed solely the p.A256V variant protein,
suggests a correlation between LBD variants able to form functional NR2E3 dimers 
and atypical mild forms of ESCS with residual rod function.

© 2015 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMID: 25703721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Apr;61:115-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2015.02.007.
Epub 2015 Feb 16.

Inherited Retinal Dystrophies: the role of gene expression regulators.

Karali M(1), Banfi S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute for Genetics and Medicine, via Campi Flegrei 34, 80078
Pozzuoli, NA, Italy. (2)Telethon Institute for Genetics and Medicine, via Campi
Flegrei 34, 80078 Pozzuoli, NA, Italy; Medical Genetics, Department of
Biochemistry, Biophysics and General Pathology, Second University of Naples, via 
Luigi De Crecchio 7, 80138 Naples, Italy. Electronic address: banfi@tigem.it.

Inherited Retinal Dystrophies (IRDs) are a clinically and genetically
heterogeneous group of rare disorders characterized by a significant impairment
in retinal function and vision. More than 150 genes have been associated with
retinal dystrophies and the genetic overlap among different IRDs renders
diagnosis and prognosis challenging. In this In Focus article, we give a summary 
on the pathogenic role of gene expression regulators in IRDs. Emphasis is given
on key transcription factors that participate to regulatory gene networks
controlling photoreceptor specification and maintenance, and their possible
relevance as therapeutic targets. The increasing knowledge on the composition and
function of these transcriptional regulatory networks indicates that intervening 
on transcription factors may be instrumental for a more effective treatment of
some forms of IRDs, although the development of appropriate molecular tools to
target them remains a formidable challenge.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25697419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Mol Vis. 2015 Jan 20;21:61-87. eCollection 2015.

Gene expression changes during retinal development and rod specification.

Mansergh FC(1), Carrigan M(1), Hokamp K(1), Farrar GJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Smurfit Institute of Genetics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland.

PURPOSE: Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) typically results from individual mutations in
any one of >70 genes that cause rod photoreceptor cells to degenerate
prematurely, eventually resulting in blindness. Gene therapies targeting
individual RP genes have shown efficacy at clinical trial; however, these
therapies require the surviving photoreceptor cells to be viable and functional, 
and may be economically feasible for only the more commonly mutated genes. An
alternative potential treatment strategy, particularly for late stage disease,
may involve stem cell transplants into the photoreceptor layer of the retina. Rod
progenitors from postnatal mouse retinas can be transplanted and can form
photoreceptors in recipient adult retinas; optimal numbers of transplantable
cells are obtained from postnatal day 3-5 (P3-5) retinas. These cells can also be
expanded in culture; however, this results in the loss of photoreceptor
potential. Gene expression differences between postnatal retinas, cultured
retinal progenitor cells (RPCs), and rod photoreceptor precursors were
investigated to identify gene expression patterns involved in the specification
of rod photoreceptors.
METHODS: Microarrays were used to investigate differences in gene expression
between cultured RPCs that have lost photoreceptor potential, P1 retinas, and
fresh P5 retinas that contain significant numbers of transplantable
photoreceptors. Additionally, fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) sorted
Rho-eGFP-expressing rod photoreceptor precursors were compared with
Rho-eGFP-negative cells from the same P5 retinas. Differential expression was
confirmed with quantitative polymerase chain reaction (q-PCR).
RESULTS: Analysis of the microarray data sets, including the use of t-distributed
stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) to identify expression pattern neighbors of
key photoreceptor specific genes, resulted in the identification of 636 genes
differentially regulated during rod specification. Forty-four of these genes when
mutated have previously been found to cause retinal disease. Although gene
function in other tissues may be known, the retinal function of approximately 61%
of the gene list is as yet undetermined. Many of these genes' promoters contain
binding sites for the key photoreceptor transcription factors Crx and Nr2e3;
moreover, the genomic clustering of differentially regulated genes appears to be 
non-random.
CONCLUSIONS: This study aids in understanding gene expression differences between
rod photoreceptor progenitors versus cultured RPCs that have lost photoreceptor
potential. The results provide insights into rod photoreceptor development and
should expedite the development of cell-based treatments for RP. Furthermore, the
data set includes a large number of retinopathy genes; less-well-characterized
genes within this data set are a resource for those seeking to identify novel
retinopathy genes in patients with RP (GEO accession: GSE59201).

PMCID: PMC4301594
PMID: 25678762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. PLoS One. 2015 Jan 30;10(1):e0116171. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116171.
eCollection 2015.

Induction of ectopic retina-like tissue by transgenic expression of neurogenin.

Yan RT(1), He L(1), Zhan W(1), Wang SZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Alabama at Birmingham School of
Medicine, Birmingham, Alabama, United States of America.

Degeneration of retinal neurons is an underlying cause of several major types of 
blinding diseases, and effective therapies remain to be developed. The
suppositive strategy of repopulating a degenerative retina with new cells
generated onsite faces serious challenges, because the mammalian retina seems to 
lack the ability to regenerate itself or replace its lost neurons. We
investigated the possibility of using a transcriptional factor with proneural
activities to reprogram ocular tissue with regenerative capability to give rise
to retinal cells. Transgenic mice were generated with DNA constructs that
targeted the expression in the retinal pigment epithelium of proneural gene
neurogenin1 from the promoter of Bestrophin1, or neurogenin3 from RPE65 promoter.
Here we report the presence of ectopic retina-like tissue in some of the
transgenic mice, young and aged. The ectopic retina-like tissue contained cells
positive for photoreceptor proteins Crx, recoverin, red opsin, and rhodopsin, and
cells positive for proteins that label other types of retinal neurons, including 
AP2a and Pax6 for amacrine cells, Otx2 for bipolar cells, and Brn3A for ganglion 
cells. The retina-like tissue often co-existed with darkly pigmented tissue
positive for RPE proteins: cytokeratin 18, Otx2, and RPE65. The ectopic
retina-like tissue was detected in the subretinal space, including two retinae
co-existing in the same eye, and/or in the optic nerve or in the vicinity of the 
optic nerve head. On rare occasions, it was detected in the choroid and in the
vicinity of the ciliary body. The presence of ectopic retina-like tissue in the
transgenic mouse supports the possibility of inducing retinal regeneration in the
mammalian eyes through gene-directed reprograming.

PMCID: PMC4312083
PMID: 25635399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Feb 3;112(5):1316-21. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1424322112. Epub 2015 Jan 20.

Imaging Dirac-mass disorder from magnetic dopant atoms in the ferromagnetic
topological insulator Crx(Bi0.1Sb0.9)2-xTe3.

Lee I(1), Kim CK(1), Lee J(2), Billinge SJ(3), Zhong R(4), Schneeloch JA(5), Liu 
T(6), Valla T(1), Tranquada JM(1), Gu G(1), Davis JC(7).

Author information: 
(1)Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science Department, Brookhaven National
Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973; (2)Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science
Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973; Department of
Physics and Astronomy, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea; Center
for Correlated Electron Systems, Institute for Basic Science, Seoul 151-742,
Korea; (3)Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science Department, Brookhaven
National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973; Department of Applied Physics and Applied
Mathematics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027; (4)Condensed Matter Physics
and Materials Science Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY
11973; Materials Science and Engineering Department and. (5)Condensed Matter
Physics and Materials Science Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, 
NY 11973; Department of Physics and Astronomy, Stony Brook University, Stony
Brook, NY 11794; (6)Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science Department,
Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973; School of Chemical Engineering
and Environment, North University of China, Shanxi 030051, China; (7)Condensed
Matter Physics and Materials Science Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, 
Upton, NY 11973; Laboratory of Atomic and Solid State Physics, Department of
Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853; School of Physics and Astronomy,
University of St. Andrews, Fife KY16 9SS, Scotland; and Kavli Institute at
Cornell for Nanoscale Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853
jcseamusdavis@gmail.com.

To achieve and use the most exotic electronic phenomena predicted for the surface
states of 3D topological insulators (TIs), it is necessary to open a "Dirac-mass 
gap" in their spectrum by breaking time-reversal symmetry. Use of magnetic dopant
atoms to generate a ferromagnetic state is the most widely applied approach.
However, it is unknown how the spatial arrangements of the magnetic dopant atoms 
influence the Dirac-mass gap at the atomic scale or, conversely, whether the
ferromagnetic interactions between dopant atoms are influenced by the topological
surface states. Here we image the locations of the magnetic (Cr) dopant atoms in 
the ferromagnetic TI Cr0.08(Bi0.1Sb0.9)1.92Te3. Simultaneous visualization of the
Dirac-mass gap <U+0394>(r) reveals its intense disorder, which we demonstrate is
directly related to fluctuations in n(r), the Cr atom areal density in the
termination layer. We find the relationship of surface-state Fermi wavevectors to
the anisotropic structure of <U+0394>(r) not inconsistent with predictions for surface
ferromagnetism mediated by those states. Moreover, despite the intense Dirac-mass
disorder, the anticipated relationship [Formula: see text] is confirmed
throughout and exhibits an electron-dopant interaction energy J* = 145 meV·nm(2).
These observations reveal how magnetic dopant atoms actually generate the TI mass
gap locally and that, to achieve the novel physics expected of time-reversal
symmetry breaking TI materials, control of the resulting Dirac-mass gap disorder 
will be essential.

PMCID: PMC4321315
PMID: 25605947  [PubMed]


37. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2014;18(24):3834-43.

The TLR4/NF-<U+03BA>B signaling pathway mediates the growth of colon cancer.

Huang HY(1), Zhang ZJ, Cao CB, Wang N, Liu FF, Peng JQ, Ren XJ, Qian J.

Author information: 
(1)Suizhou Central Hospital, Suizhou Hospital Affiliated to Hubei Pharmaceutical 
College, Zengdu District, Suizhou, Hubei Province, China. qianjin7601@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: We studied the involvement of the TLR4/NF-<U+03BA>B pathway in the growth of 
colon cancer using human colon cancer specimens, human colon cancer SW620 cell
line, and nude mouse xenograft model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Tissue samples were surgically harvested. The human colon 
cancer SW620 cell line was pre-treated with the TLR4 inhibitor CRX-526 and
stimulated with LPS. The nude mouse xenograft model was established by
subcutaneous injection of SW620 cells with or without CRX-526, the TLR4
inhibitor. The study outcomes were mRNA and protein expressions of TLR4 and NF-<U+03BA>B
p65 in specimens of colon cancer and adjacent normal tissue, SW620 cell line, and
xenografts. In addition, we studied production of interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-8 in 
culture supernatants of LPS-stimulated SW620 cells.
RESULTS: Both mRNA and protein expressions of TLR4 and NF-<U+03BA>B in colon cancer
specimens were higher than those in the adjacent normal tissue. LPS up-regulated 
expression of TLR4 and NF-<U+03BA>B, and stimulated production of IL-6 and IL-8 in SW620
cells. These effects were attenuated by CRX-526. TLR4 inhibition was also
effective in the nude mouse xenograft model, as tumor sizes were significantly
smaller, and expressions of TLR4 and NF-<U+03BA>B significantly lower, in the mice
treated with CRX-526.
CONCLUSIONS: The TLR4/NF-<U+03BA>B signaling pathway is activated in colon cancer,
causing production of IL-6 and IL-8, and, thereby, tumor growth and
metastasization. Inhibition of TLR4 attenuates up-regulation of NF-<U+03BA>B and
inhibits tumor growth.

PMID: 25555874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2015 Feb 1;25(3):547-53. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2014.12.024.
Epub 2014 Dec 17.

Characterization of TRIF selectivity in the AGP class of lipid A mimetics: role
of secondary lipid chains.

Khalaf JK(1), Bowen WS(2), Bazin HG(1), Ryter KT(1), Livesay MT(1), Ward JR(1),
Evans JT(1), Johnson DA(3).

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline Vaccines, 553 Old Corvallis Road, Hamilton, MT 59840, USA.
(2)Institute for Cellular Therapeutics, University of Louisville School of
Medicine, Donald E. Baxter Biomedical Research Building, 570 South Preston
Street, Louisville, KY 40202, USA. (3)GlaxoSmithKline Vaccines, 553 Old Corvallis
Road, Hamilton, MT 59840, USA. Electronic address: david.a.johnson@gsk.com.

TLR4 agonists that favor TRIF-dependent signaling and the induction of type 1
interferons may have potential as vaccine adjuvants with reduced toxicity.
CRX-547 (4), a member of the aminoalkyl glucosaminide 4-phosphate (AGP) class of 
lipid A mimetics possessing three (R)-3-decanoyloxytetradecanoyl groups and
d-relative configuration in the aglycon, selectively reduces MyD88-dependent
signaling resulting in TRIF-selective signaling, whereas the corresponding
secondary ether lipid 6a containing (R)-3-decyloxytetradecanoyl groups does not. 
In order to determine which secondary acyl groups are important for the reduction
in MyD88-dependent signaling activity of 4, the six possible ester/ether hybrid
derivatives of 4 and 6a were synthesized and evaluated for their ability to
induce NF-<U+03BA>B in a HEK293 cell reporter assay. An (R)-3-decanoyloxytetradecanoyl
group on the 3-position of the d-glucosamine unit was found to be indispensable
for maintaining low NF-<U+03BA>B activity irrespective of the substitutions (decyl or
decanoyl) on the other two secondary positions. These results suggest that the
carbonyl group of the 3-secondary lipid chain may impede homodimerization and/or 
conformational changes in the TLR4-MD2 complex necessary for MyD88 binding and
pro-inflammatory cytokine induction.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4330088
PMID: 25553892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg. 2015 Mar;135(3):339-44. doi: 10.1007/s00402-014-2142-1. 
Epub 2015 Jan 1.

Comparison of novel intramedullary nailing with mini-invasive plating in surgical
fixation of displaced midshaft clavicle fractures.

Zehir S(1), Zehir R, Sahin E, Çalbiyik M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Faculty of Medicine, Hitit
University, Çamlik Street No: 2, Bahçelievler District, Çorum, Turkey,
sinanzehir@yahoo.com.

INTRODUCTION: This prospective randomized pilot study sought to determine whether
fixation with Sonoma CRx intramedullary pin is a comparable alternative to
minimally invasive plating fixation in patients with displaced clavicle
fractures.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 45 consecutive patients (Robinson class B1 or
B2) were randomly allocated into two groups; intramedullary pin (IMP) group
(n = 24, mean age; 33.17 ± 8.60 years, 14 males 58.3 %) received Sonoma CRx
Collarbone pin (Sonoma, USA) whereas locking midshaft superior plating (MIPPO)
group (n = 21, 32.38 ± 8.41 years, 12 males) patients received minimally invasive
locking midshaft superior plating (Acumed, USA). Patients were followed up with a
mean time of 11.82 ± 4.22 and 14.45 ± 6.43 months, respectively. Functional
status, as the primary outcome measure, was assessed using quick disability of
the arm, shoulder and hand (DASH) scores.
RESULTS: Mean time of operation and mean time of fluoroscopy were significantly
shorter in the IMP group than those in MIPPO group (p < 0.001 and p = 0.03,
respectively). Time of hospital stay was significantly shorter in IMP group
(p < 0.001). Complications were rare in the early postoperative period. Time
until bony union was significantly shorter in IMP group. Mean quick DASH scores
were not significantly different between two groups. Implant failure occurred in 
one patient from each group. Cosmetic dissatisfaction was more common in MIPPO
group.
CONCLUSION: Given the shorter operative times and better cosmetic appearance,
Sonoma CRx intramedullary pin may be an alternative to minimally invasive
plating. Further safety studies are warranted.

PMID: 25552396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Roum Arch Microbiol Immunol. 2014 Jan-Jun;73(1-2):5-8.

Escherichia coli ST131 causing invasive infections in Romanian patients--a threat
we can no longer ignore.

Usein CR, Condei M, Cristea D, Ciontea SA, Tatu-Chitoiu D, Cristea V, Straut M.

Escherichia coli sequence type ST131 is a major pandemic clonal group of
drug-resistant extraintestinal pathogenic E. coli (ExPEC) involved in
community-onset and healthcare-associated infections. Thus far, its presence in
our area has been paid little attention. This is a preliminary study intended to 
detect ST131 among 87 clinical isolates retrieved from a larger and unpublished
E. coli collection. The study isolates originated from various specimens
associated with invasive infections (blood, deep surgical wounds/abscesses,
tracheal aspirates, pleural fluid, cerebrospinal fluid, and peritoneal fluid) and
were collected between 2010 and 2014. Based on the main inclusion criteria,
resistance to extended-spectrum cephalosporins (ESCs) and/or fluoroquinolones
(FQs), the isolates were distributed in three categories: isolates with
resistance to FQs (20 isolates), to ESCs (8 isolates), and to FQs and ESCs (59
isolates), respectively. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) -based assays were
performed to determine the major phylogenetic groups, to predict the MLST ST131
status, and to detect the bla(CTX-M) content of the ESC-resistant isolates.
Overall, the studied isolates derived from phylogenetic groups B2 (42 isolates), 
A (30 isolates), B1 (11 isolates), and D (4 isolates). Thirty-five isolates,
originating from blood (26 isolates), deep wounds (6 isolates), tracheal
aspirates (2 isolates), and cerebrospinal fluid (1 isolate), were identified as
members of O25b:H4 ST131. Most of them displayed resistance to both ESCs and FQs 
and harboured group 1 bla(CRX-M) genes. The emergence of ST131 in our region can 
no longer be ignored. Focused attention to this lineage could reduce
infection-related morbidity and antibiotic resistance.

PMID: 25518564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Diagn Pathol. 2014 Dec 11;9:180. doi: 10.1186/s13000-014-0180-1.

p16(INK4a) expression in retinoblastoma: a marker of differentiation grade.

Liu Y(1), Zhong X(2), Wan S(3), Zhang W(4), Lin J(5), Zhang P(6), Li Y(7).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-Sen University, 54 S Xianlie Rd, Guangzhou, 510060, China. haiyuely@qq.com.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-Sen University, 54 S Xianlie Rd, Guangzhou, 510060, China.
xiufengzhong@gmail.com. (3)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan
Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-Sen University, 54 S Xianlie Rd, Guangzhou, 510060,
China. 476215924@qq.com. (4)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan
Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-Sen University, 54 S Xianlie Rd, Guangzhou, 510060,
China. 83228130@qq.com. (5)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan
Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-Sen University, 54 S Xianlie Rd, Guangzhou, 510060,
China. jianxianl65@hotmail.com. (6)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology,
Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-Sen University, 54 S Xianlie Rd, Guangzhou, 
510060, China. pingz-412@yahoo.com. (7)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology,
Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-Sen University, 54 S Xianlie Rd, Guangzhou, 
510060, China. yongpingli1961@aliyun.com.cn.

BACKGROUND: The tumor suppressor protein p16(INK4a) has been extensively studied 
in many tumors with very different results, ranging from its loss to its clear
overexpression, which may be associated with degree of tumor differentiation and 
prognosis. However, its expression remains unclear in human retinoblastoma (RB), 
a common malignant tumor of retina in childhood. The aim of this study was to
explore the expression pattern of p16(INK4a) in RB, and the correlation between
p16(INK4a) expression and histopathological features of RB.
METHODS: Sixty-five cases of RB were retrospectively analyzed. Paraffin-embedded 
blocks were retrieved from the archives of ocular pathology department at
Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center of Sun Yat-sen University, China. Serial sections
were cut and subjected to hematoxylin and eosin staining. Immunohistochemical
staining was further done with antibodies p16(INK4a), CRX and Ki67. The
correlation of p16 (INK4a) expression with CRX and Ki67 and clinicopathological
features of RB were analyzed.
RESULTS: RB tumor histologically consists of various differentiation components
including undifferentiated (UD) cells, Homer-Wright rosettes (HWR) or
Flexner-Winterstein rosettes (FWR) and fleurettes characteristic of photoreceptor
differentiation or Retinocytoma (RC). p16(INK4a) expression was negative in both 
fleurette region and the residual retinal tissue adjacent to the tumor, weakly to
moderately positive in FWR, strongly positive in both HWR and UD region. However,
CRX had the reverse expression patterns in comparison with p16(INK4a). It was
strongly positive in photoreceptor cells within the residual retina and
fleurettes, but weakly to moderately positive in UD area. Together with Ki67
staining, high p16(INK4a) expression was associated with poor histological
differentiation of RB tumors, which had higher risk features with the optic nerve
invasion and uveal invasion.
CONCLUSIONS: p16(INK4a) expression increased with the decreasing level of cell
differentiation of RBs. RB tumors extensively expressing p16(INK4a) tended to
have higher risk features with poor prognosis. This study suggested that
p16(INK4a) would be a valuable molecular marker of RB to distinguish its
histological phenotypes and to serve as a predictor of its prognosis.
VIRTUAL SLIDES: The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/13000_2014_180.

PMCID: PMC4300043
PMID: 25499675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mol Vis. 2014 Nov 4;20:1527-44. eCollection 2014.

Different effects of valproic acid on photoreceptor loss in Rd1 and Rd10 retinal 
degeneration mice.

Mitton KP(1), Guzman AE(1), Deshpande M(1), Byrd D(1), DeLooff C(1), Mkoyan K(1),
Zlojutro P(1), Wallace A(1), Metcalf B(1), Laux K(1), Sotzen J(1), Tran T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Control of Gene Expression Laboratory and Pediatric Retinal Research
Laboratory, Eye Research Institute, Oakland University, Rochester, MI.

PURPOSE: The histone-deacetylase inhibitor activity of valproic acid (VPA) was
discovered after VPA's adoption as an anticonvulsant. This generated speculation 
for VPA's potential to increase the expression of neuroprotective genes. Clinical
trials for retinitis pigmentosa (RP) are currently active, testing VPA's
potential to reduce photoreceptor loss; however, we lack information regarding
the effects of VPA on available mammalian models of retinal degeneration, nor do 
we know if retinal gene expression is perturbed by VPA in a predictable way.
Thus, we examined the effects of systemic VPA on neurotrophic factor and
Nrl-related gene expression in the mouse retina and compared VPA's effects on the
rate of photoreceptor loss in two strains of mice, Pde6b(rd1/rd1) and
Pde6b(rd10/rd10) .
METHODS: The expression of Bdnf, Gdnf, Cntf, and Fgf2 was measured by
quantitative PCR after single and multiple doses of VPA (intraperitoneal) in
wild-type and Pde6b(rd1/rd1) mice. Pde6b(rd1/rd1) mice were treated with daily
doses of VPA during the period of rapid photoreceptor loss. Pde6b(rd10/rd10) mice
were also treated with systemic VPA to compare in a partial loss-of-function
model. Retinal morphology was assessed by virtual microscopy or spectral-domain
optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT). Full-field and focal electroretinography
(ERG) analysis were employed with Pde6b(rd10/rd10) mice to measure retinal
function.
RESULTS: In wild-type postnatal mice, a single VPA dose increased the expression 
of Bdnf and Gdnf in the neural retina after 18 h, while the expression of Cntf
was reduced by 70%. Daily dosing of wild-type mice from postnatal day P17 to P28 
resulted in smaller increases in Bdnf and Gdnf expression, normal Cntf
expression, and reduced Fgf2 expression (25%). Nrl gene expression was decreased 
by 50%, while Crx gene expression was not affected. Rod-specific expression of
Mef2c and Nr2e3 was decreased substantially by VPA treatment, while Rhodopsin and
Pde6b gene expression was normal at P28. Daily injections with VPA (P9-P21)
dramatically slowed the loss of rod photoreceptors in Pde6b(rd1/rd1) mice. At age
P21, VPA-treated mice had several extra rows of rod photoreceptor nuclei compared
to PBS-injected littermates. Dosing started later (P14) or dosing every second
day also rescued photoreceptors. In contrast, systemic VPA treatment of
Pde6b(rd10/rd10) mice (P17-P28) reduced visual function that correlated with a
slight increase in photoreceptor loss. Treating Pde6b(rd10/rd10) mice earlier
(P9-P21) also failed to rescue photoreceptors. Treating wild-type mice earlier
(P9-P21) reduced the number of photoreceptors in VPA-treated mice by 20% compared
to PBS-treated animals.
CONCLUSIONS: A single systemic dose of VPA can change retinal neurotrophic factor
and rod-specific gene expression in the immature retina. Daily VPA treatment from
P17 to P28 can also alter gene expression in the mature neural retina. While
daily treatment with VPA could significantly reduce photoreceptor loss in the rd1
model, VPA treatment slightly accelerated photoreceptor loss in the rd10 model.
The apparent rescue of photoreceptors in the rd1 model was not the result of
producing more photoreceptors before degeneration. In fact, daily systemic VPA
was toxic to wild-type photoreceptors when started at P9. However, the effective 
treatment period for Pde6b(rd1/rd1) mice (P9-P21) has significant overlap with
the photoreceptor maturation period, which complicates the use of the rd1 model
for testing of VPA's efficacy. In contrast, VPA treatment started after P17 did
not cause photoreceptor loss in wild-type mice. Thus, the acceleration of
photoreceptor loss in the rd10 model may be more relevant where both
photoreceptor loss and VPA treatment (P17-P28) started when the central retina
was mature.

PMCID: PMC4225157
PMID: 25489226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Ecol Evol. 2014 Sep;4(18):3583-95. doi: 10.1002/ece3.1189. Epub 2014 Sep 2.

Variation in clutch size in relation to nest size in birds.

Møller AP(1), Adriaensen F(2), Artemyev A(3), Banbura J(4), Barba E(5), Biard
C(6), Blondel J(7), Bouslama Z(8), Bouvier JC(9), Camprodon J(10), Cecere F(11), 
Charmantier A(12), Charter M(13), Cichon M(14), Cusimano C(15), Czeszczewik
D(16), Demeyrier V(12), Doligez B(17), Doutrelant C(12), Dubiec A(18), Eens
M(19), Eeva T(20), Faivre B(21), Ferns PN(22), Forsman JT(23), García-Del-Rey
E(24), Goldshtein A(25), Goodenough AE(26), Gosler AG(27), Gózdz I(28), Grégoire 
A(29), Gustafsson L(30), Hartley IR(31), Heeb P(32), Hinsley SA(33), Isenmann
P(12), Jacob S(34), Järvinen A(35), Jukaitis R(36), Korpimäki E(37), Krams
I(38), Laaksonen T(37), Leclercq B(39), Lehikoinen E(37), Loukola O(40), Lundberg
A(41), Mainwaring MC(42), Mänd R(43), Massa B(15), Mazgajski TD(44), Merino
S(45), Mitrus C(46), Mönkkönen M(47), Morales-Fernaz J(48), Morin X(49), Nager
RG(50), Nilsson JÅ(51), Nilsson SG(52), Norte AC(53), Orell M(54), Perret P(12), 
Pimentel CS(55), Pinxten R(56), Priedniece I(57), Quidoz MC(12), Reme V(58),
Richner H(59), Robles H(60), Rytkönen S(61), Senar JC(62), Seppänen JT(63), da
Silva LP(64), Slagsvold T(65), Solonen T(66), Sorace A(67), Stenning MJ(68),
Török J(69), Tryjanowski P(70), van Noordwijk AJ(71), von Numers M(72),
Walankiewicz W(73), Lambrechts MM(12).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Ecologie, Systematique et Evolution, UMR 8079 CNRS-Université
Paris-Sud XI-AgroParisTech Batiment 362 Université Paris-Sud XI, Orsay Cedex,
F-91405, France. (2)Evolutionary Ecology Group, Department of Biology, University
of Antwerp Campus CGB, Antwerp, B-2020, Belgium. (3)Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Karelian Research Centre, Instition of Biology Petrozavodsk, 185610, Russia.
(4)Department of Experimental Zoology & Evolutionary Biology, University of Lodz 
Banacha 12/16, Lodz, 90-237, Poland. (5)Terrestrial Vertebrates Research Unit
"Cavanilles", Institute of Biodiversity and Evolutionary Biology, University of
Valencia C/Catedrático José Beltran 2, Paterna, E-46980, Spain. (6)Laboratoire
Ecologie-Evolution, UMR 7625, Equipe Ecophysiologie Evolutive - Evolutionary
Ecophysiology Research Group, Université Pierre et Marie Curie - UPMC 7 quai
Saint Bernard, case 237, Paris Cedex 05, F-75252, France. (7)Centre d'Ecologie
Fonctionnelle et Evolutive, CEFE UMR 5175 Campus CNRS, 1919 route de Mende,
Montpellier Cedex 5, F-34293, France. (8)Research Laboratory "Ecology of
Terrestrial and Aquatic Systems", University Badji Mokhtar Annaba, Algeria.
(9)INRA, UR 1115, Plantes et Systèmes de culture Horticoles Avignon, F-84000,
France. (10)Àrea de Biodiversitat, Grup de Biologia de la Conservació, Centre
Tecnològic Forestal de Catalunya Carretera de St. Llorenç de Morunys, km. 2,
Solsona, E-25280, Spain. (11)Strada Bine 1424, Acquanegra sul Chiese (MM),
I-46011, Italy. (12)Centre d'Ecologie Fonctionnelle et Evolutive, CEFE UMR 5175
Campus CNRS, 1919 route de Mende, Montpellier Cedex 5 F-34293, France.
(13)University of Haifa Haifa, Israel ; Society for the Protection of Nature,
University of Lausanne Lausanne, Switzerland. (14)Institution of Environment
Science, Jagiellonian University Krakow, Poland. (15)Stazione Inanellamento c/o
Dipartimento SEN-FIMIZO, Università di Palermo Palermo, Italy. (16)Department of 
Zoology, Siedlce University of Natural Sciences and Humanities Prusa 12, Siedlce,
PL-08-110, Poland. (17)Univ Lyon 1, Department of Biometry & Evolutionary
Biology, CNRS UMR 5558 Villeurbanne, F-69622, France. (18)Museum and Institute of
Zoology, Polish Academy of Sciences Wilcza 64, Warsaw, PL-00-679, Poland.
(19)Campus Drie Eiken, Department of Biology (Ethology) Building C, Antwerp
(Wilrijk), B-2610, Belgium. (20)Section of Ecology, Department of Biology,
University of Turku Turku, FI-20014, Finland. (21)Université de Bourgogne, UMR
CNRS 5561, BioGéoSciences 6 Boulevard Gabriel, Dijon, F-21000, France. (22)School
of Bioscience, Cardiff University Cardiff, CF10 3AX, UK. (23)Department of
Biology, University of Oulu Oulu, FIN-90014, Finland. (24)Departamento de
Ecología, Facultad de Biología, Universidad de La Laguna La Laguna, E-38260,
Spain. (25)University of Haifa Haifa, Israel. (26)Department of Natural and
Social Sciences, University of Gloucestershire Gloucestershire, GL50 4AZ, U.K.
(27)Department of Zoology, Edward Grey Institute of Field Ornithology & Institute
of Human Sciences South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PS, U.K. (28)Museum and
Institute of Zoology, Polish Academy of Sciences Wilcza 64, Warszawa, PL-00-679, 
Poland. (29)Centre d'Ecologie Fonctionnelle et Evolutive, CEFE UMR 5175 Campus
CNRS, et Université de Montpellier II, 1919 route de Mende, Montpellier Cedex 5, 
F-34293, France. (30)Department of Animal Ecology, Evolutionary Biology Centre,
Uppsala University Uppsala, SE-75236, Sweden. (31)Lancaster Environment Centre,
Lancaster University Lancaster, LA1 4YQ, U.K. (32)Laboratoire Évolution &
Diversité Biologique, UPS Toulouse III, Bât 4R1, salle 122 118 route de Narbonne,
Toulouse, F-31062, France. (33)CEH Wallingford Maclean Building, Crowmarsh
Gifford, Oxfordshire, OX10 8BB, U.K. (34)Laboratoire Évolution & Diversité
Biologique, UPS Toulouse III, Bât 4R1, salle 122 118 route de Narbonne, Toulouse 
F-31062, France. (35)University of Helsinki Kilpisjarvi Biological Station,
P.O.Box 17, Helsinki, FIN-00014, Finland. (36)Institute of Ecology of Nature
Research Centre Akademijos 2, Vilnius, LT-08412, Lithuania. (37)Section of
Ecology, Department of Biology, University of Turku Turku FI-20014, Finland.
(38)Institute of Ecology & Earth Sciences, University Tartu Tartu, EE-51014,
Estonia. (39)Crx. St. Pierre 6 rue Morcueil, Fleurey Sur Ouche, F-21410, France. 
(40)Department of Biology, University of Oulu Oulu, FI-90014, Finland.
(41)Department of Ecology & Evolution, Uppsala University Uppsala, S-75236,
Sweden. (42)Lancaster Environment Centre, Lancaster University Lancaster LA1 4YQ,
U.K. (43)Department of Zoology, Institute of Ecology and Earth Sciences,
University of Tartu 46 Vanemuise Str., Tartu, EE-51014, Estonia. (44)Museum and
Institute of Zoology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Wilcza 64 Warszawa PL-00-679,
Poland. (45)Departamento de Ecología Evolutiva Museo Nacional de Ciencias
Naturales, Agencia Estatal Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, CSIC 
C/José Gutiérrez Abascal 2, Madrid, E-28002, Spain. (46)Department of Zoology,
Rzeszów University Zelwerowicza 4, Rzeszów, PL-35-601, Poland. (47)Department of 
Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Jyväskylä POB 35, Jyväskylä,
FIN-40014, Finland ; Centre d'Ecologie Fonctionelle & Evolutive, CNRS 1919 Route 
de Mende, Montpellier, France. (48)Ecología Evolutiva, Museo Nacional de Ciencias
Naturales (CSIC) José Gutiérrez Abascal 2, Madrid, E-28006, Spain. (49)Centre
d'Ecologie Fonctionnelle et Evolutive, Campus CNRS 1919 route de Mende,
Montpellier Cedex 5, F-34293, France. (50)Institute of Biodiversity, Animal
Health & Comparative Medicine, University of Glasgow Graham Kerr Building,
Glasgow, G12 8QQ, U.K. (51)Ecology Building, Animal Ecology, Lund University
Lund, SE-223 62, Sweden. (52)Department of Biology, Biodiversity, Lund University
Ecology Building, Lund, SE-223 62, Sweden. (53)Department of Life Sciences,
Institute of Marine Research, University of Coimbra Apartado 3046, Coimbra,
PT-3001-401, Portugal. (54)Department of Biology, University of Oulu P.O. Box
3000, Oulu, FIN-90014, Finland. (55)Centro de Estudos Florestais, Instituto
Superior de Agronomia, University of Lisbon Lisbon, 1349-017, Portugal.
(56)Campus Drie Eiken, Department of Biology (Ethology), Building C Antwerp
(Wilrijk) B-2610, Belgium. (57)Latvian Fund for Nature Dzirnavu Street 73-2,
Riga, LV-1011, Latvia. (58)Laboratory of Ornithology, Department of Zoology,
Palacky University Olomouc, CZ-77146, Czech Republic. (59)Institute of Ecology & 
Evolution (IEE), University of Bern Bern, CH-3012, Switzerland. (60)Falculty of
Sciences, Evolutionary Ecology Group (GIBE), University of A Coruña Campus
Zapateira, A Coruña, E-15008, Spain ; Evolutionary Ecology Group (EVECO),
Department of Biology, University of Antwerp Middelheimcampus, Groenenborgerlaan 
171, Antwerp, B-2020, Belgium. (61)Department of Biology, University of Oulu P.
O. Box 3000, Oulu, FIN-90014, Finland. (62)Unidad Asociada CSIC de Ecología
Evolutiva y de la Conducta, Nat-Museu de Ciències Naturals de Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain. (63)Department of Biological and Environmental Science,
University of Jyväskylä Jyväskylä, Finland. (64)Department Life Science, IMAR
CMA, University Coimbra Coimbra, PT-3004517, Portugal. (65)Department of Biology,
University of Oslo Oslo, Norway. (66)Luontotutkimus Solonen Oy Neitsytsaarentie
7b B 147, Helsinki, FIN-00960, Finland. (67)SROPU Via R. Crippa 60, Rome, Italy. 
(68)School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex Brighton, Sussex, BN1 9QG, U.K.
(69)Behavioral Ecology Group, Department of Systematic Zoology & Ecology, Eötvös 
Lorand University Budapest, H-1117, Hungary. (70)Institute of Zoology, Poznan
University of Life Sciences Wojska Polskiego 71 C, Poznan, PL-60-625, Poland.
(71)Netherlands Institute of Ecology (NIOO-KNAW) Doevendaalsesteg, 10,
Wageningen, NL-6708 BP, the Netherlands. (72)Environmental and Marine Biology,
Åbo Akademi University Artillerigatan 6, Biocity, Åbo, FI-20520, Finland.
(73)Department of Zoology, Siedlce University of Natural Sciences and Humanities,
Prusa 12 Siedlce PL-08-110, Poland.

Nests are structures built to support and protect eggs and/or offspring from
predators, parasites, and adverse weather conditions. Nests are mainly
constructed prior to egg laying, meaning that parent birds must make decisions
about nest site choice and nest building behavior before the start of egg-laying.
Parent birds should be selected to choose nest sites and to build optimally sized
nests, yet our current understanding of clutch size-nest size relationships is
limited to small-scale studies performed over short time periods. Here, we
quantified the relationship between clutch size and nest size, using an
exhaustive database of 116 slope estimates based on 17,472 nests of 21 species of
hole and non-hole-nesting birds. There was a significant, positive relationship
between clutch size and the base area of the nest box or the nest, and this
relationship did not differ significantly between open nesting and hole-nesting
species. The slope of the relationship showed significant intraspecific and
interspecific heterogeneity among four species of secondary hole-nesting species,
but also among all 116 slope estimates. The estimated relationship between clutch
size and nest box base area in study sites with more than a single size of nest
box was not significantly different from the relationship using studies with only
a single size of nest box. The slope of the relationship between clutch size and 
nest base area in different species of birds was significantly negatively related
to minimum base area, and less so to maximum base area in a given study. These
findings are consistent with the hypothesis that bird species have a general
reaction norm reflecting the relationship between nest size and clutch size.
Further, they suggest that scientists may influence the clutch size decisions of 
hole-nesting birds through the provisioning of nest boxes of varying sizes.

PMCID: PMC4224533
PMID: 25478150  [PubMed]


44. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 17;9(11):e112175. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112175.
eCollection 2014.

Differentiation of retinal ganglion cells and photoreceptor precursors from mouse
induced pluripotent stem cells carrying an Atoh7/Math5 lineage reporter.

Xie BB(1), Zhang XM(2), Hashimoto T(2), Tien AH(2), Chen A(2), Ge J(1), Yang
XJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Zhong-Shan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhuo, China.
(2)Jules Stein Eye Institute, University of California Los Angeles, California,
United States of America. (3)Jules Stein Eye Institute, University of California 
Los Angeles, California, United States of America; Molecular Biology Institute,
University of California Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

The neural retina is a critical component of the visual system, which provides
the majority of sensory input in humans. Various retinal degenerative diseases
can result in the permanent loss of retinal neurons, especially the light-sensing
photoreceptors and the centrally projecting retinal ganglion cells (RGCs). The
replenishment of lost RGCs and the repair of optic nerve damage are particularly 
challenging, as both RGC specification and their subsequent axonal growth and
projection involve complex and precise regulation. To explore the developmental
potential of pluripotent stem cell-derived neural progenitors, we have
established mouse iPS cells that allow cell lineage tracing of progenitors that
have expressed Atoh7/Math5, a bHLH transcription factor required for RGC
production. These Atoh7 lineage reporter iPS cells encode Cre to replace one copy
of the endogenous Atoh7 gene and a Cre-dependent YFP reporter in the ROSA locus. 
In addition, they express pluripotent markers and are capable of generating
teratomas in vivo. Under anterior neural induction and neurogenic conditions in
vitro, the Atoh7-Cre/ROSA-YFP iPS cells differentiate into neurons that
co-express various RGC markers and YFP, indicating that these neurons are derived
from Atoh7-expressing progenitors. Consistent with previous in vivo cell lineage 
studies, the Atoh7-Cre/ROSA-YFP iPS cells also give rise to a subset of
Crx-positive photoreceptor precursors. Furthermore, inhibition of Notch signaling
in the iPSC cultures results in a significant increase of YFP-positive RGCs and
photoreceptor precursors. Together, these results show that Atoh7-Cre/ROSA-YFP
iPS cells can be used to monitor the development and survival of RGCs and
photoreceptors from pluripotent stem cells.

PMCID: PMC4234374
PMID: 25401462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Neurosci. 2014 Nov 12;34(46):15356-68. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2089-14.2014.

The transcription factor GTF2IRD1 regulates the topology and function of
photoreceptors by modulating photoreceptor gene expression across the retina.

Masuda T(1), Zhang X(2), Berlinicke C(1), Wan J(1), Yerrabelli A(1), Conner
EA(3), Kjellstrom S(4), Bush R(4), Thorgeirsson SS(3), Swaroop A(5), Chen S(6),
Zack DJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Wilmer Institute, Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231. (2)Departments of Ophthalmology and
Visual Sciences, and. (3)Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892. (4)Translational Research in Retinal and Macular
Degeneration, National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.
(5)Neurobiology-Neurodegeneration and Repair Laboratory, National Eye Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892. (6)Departments of
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, and Developmental Biology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri 63110. (7)Department of
Ophthalmology, Wilmer Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21231, Departments of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Neuroscience, Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, and Institut de la Vision, University Pierre
and Marie Curie, Paris 75012, France dzack@jhmi.edu.

The mechanisms that specify photoreceptor cell-fate determination, especially as 
regards to short-wave-sensitive (S) versus medium-wave-sensitive (M) cone
identity, and maintain their nature and function, are not fully understood. Here 
we report the importance of general transcription factor II-I repeat
domain-containing protein 1 (GTF2IRD1) in maintaining M cone cell identity and
function as well as rod function. In the mouse, GTF2IRD1 is expressed in
cell-fate determined photoreceptors at postnatal day 10. GTF2IRD1 binds to
enhancer and promoter regions in the mouse rhodopsin, M- and S-opsin genes, but
regulates their expression differentially. Through interaction with the
transcription factors CRX and thyroid hormone receptor ß 2, it enhances M-opsin
expression, whereas it suppresses S-opsin expression; and with CRX and NRL, it
enhances rhodopsin expression. In an apparent paradox, although GTF2IRD1 is
widely expressed in multiple cell types across the retina, knock-out of GTF2IRD1 
alters the retinal expression of only a limited number of annotated genes.
Interestingly, however, the null mutation leads to altered topology of cone opsin
expression in the retina, with aberrant S-opsin overexpression and M-opsin
underexpression in M cones. Gtf2ird1-null mice also demonstrate abnormal M cone
and rod electrophysiological responses. These findings suggest an important role 
for GTF2IRD1 in regulating the level and topology of rod and cone gene
expression, and in maintaining normal retinal function.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/3415356-13$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4228138
PMID: 25392503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Tissue Eng. 2014 Oct 1;5:2041731414554139. doi: 10.1177/2041731414554139.
eCollection 2014.

Interphotoreceptor matrix-poly(<U+03F5>-caprolactone) composite scaffolds for human
photoreceptor differentiation.

Baranov P(1), Michaelson A(2), Kundu J(2), Carrier RL(2), Young M(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Schepens Eye Research Institute, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (2)Department of Chemical Engineering,
Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA.

Tissue engineering has been widely applied in different areas of regenerative
medicine, including retinal regeneration. Typically, artificial biopolymers
require additional surface modification (e.g. with
arginine-glycine-aspartate-containing peptides or adsorption of protein, such as 
fibronectin), before cell seeding. Here, we describe an alternative approach for 
scaffold design: the manufacture of hybrid interphotoreceptor matrix-poly
(<U+03F5>-caprolactone) scaffolds, in which the insoluble extracellular matrix of the
retina is incorporated into a biodegradable polymer well suited for
transplantation. The incorporation of interphotoreceptor matrix did not change
the topography of polycaprolactone film, although it led to a slight increase in 
hydrophilic properties (water contact angle measurements). This hybrid scaffold
provided sufficient stimuli for human retinal progenitor cell adhesion and
inhibited proliferation, leading to differentiation toward photoreceptor cells
(expression of Crx, Nrl, rhodopsin, ROM1). This scaffold may be used for
transplantation of retinal progenitor cells and their progeny to treat retinal
degenerative disorders.

PMCID: PMC4221930
PMID: 25383176  [PubMed]


47. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Sep 30;55(10):6934-44. doi:
10.1167/iovs.14-14715.

The phenotypic variability of retinal dystrophies associated with mutations in
CRX, with report of a novel macular dystrophy phenotype.

Hull S(1), Arno G(1), Plagnol V(2), Chamney S(3), Russell-Eggitt I(4), Thompson
D(4), Ramsden SC(5), Black GC(5), Robson A(1), Holder GE(1), Moore AT(6), Webster
AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Inherited Eye Diseases, UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom
Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom. (2)University College London
Genetics Institute, London, United Kingdom. (3)Ophthalmology Department, Royal
Victoria Hospital, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast, United Kingdom.
(4)Ophthalmology Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Trust,
London, United Kingdom. (5)Genetic Medicine, Manchester Academic Health Science
Centre, University of Manchester, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom. (6)Inherited Eye Diseases, UCL
Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom Moorfields Eye Hospital,
London, United Kingdom Ophthalmology Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital for
Children NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: To present a detailed phenotypic and molecular study of a series of 18
patients from 11 families with retinal dystrophies consequent on mutations in the
cone-rod homeobox (CRX) gene and to report a novel phenotype.
METHODS: Families were ascertained from a tertiary clinic in the United Kingdom
and enrolled into retinal dystrophy studies investigating the phenotype and
molecular basis of inherited retinal disease. Eleven patients were ascertained
from the study cohorts and a further seven from investigation of affected
relatives. Detailed phenotyping included electrodiagnostic testing and retinal
imaging. Bidirectional Sanger sequencing of all exons and intron-exon boundaries 
of CRX was performed on all 18 reported patients and segregation confirmed in
available relatives.
RESULTS: Based on clinical characteristics and electrophysiology, four patients
had Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA), two had rod-cone dystrophy (RCD), five had 
cone-rod dystrophy (CORD), one had cone dystrophy (COD), and six had macular
dystrophy with different phenotypes observed within 5 of 11 families. The macular
dystrophy patients presented between 35 to 50 years of age and had visual
acuities at last review ranging from 0.2 to 1.5 logMAR (20/32 to 20/630 Snellen).
All 18 patients were heterozygous for a mutation in CRX with seven novel
mutations identified. There was no evident association between age of onset and
position or type of CRX mutation. De novo mutations were confirmed in three
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in CRX demonstrate significant phenotypic heterogeneity
both between and within pedigrees. A novel, adult-onset, macular dystrophy
phenotype is characterized, further extending our knowledge of the etiology of
dominant macular dystrophies.

Copyright 2014 The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, Inc.

PMID: 25270190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Am J Ophthalmol. 2014 Dec;158(6):1275-1296.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2014.08.036.
Epub 2014 Aug 28.

New insights into the development of infantile intraocular medulloepithelioma.

Jakobiec FA(1), Trief D(2), Rashid A(3), Rose MF(4), Minckler D(5), Vanderveen
D(6), Mukai S(7).

Author information: 
(1)David G. Cogan Laboratory of Ophthalmic Pathology, Massachusetts Eye and Ear
Infirmary, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts. Electronic address:
Fred_Jakobiec@meei.harvard.edu. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts. (3)David G. Cogan Laboratory of Ophthalmic
Pathology, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston, Massachusetts; Department
of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (4)Department of
Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. (5)Department of 
Ophthalmology, University of California Medical School, Irvine, California.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts;
Department of Ophthalmology, Children's Refractive Service, Children's Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts. (7)Retina Service, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary,
Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts.

PURPOSE: To define the maturational sequence of 3 infantile intraocular
medulloepitheliomas.
DESIGN: Retrospective clinicohistopathologic and immunohistochemical study.
METHODS: Immunoreactivity of paraffin sections for CRX (cone-rod homebox
transcription factor) and NeuN (biomarker for neuronal differentiation) were
investigated together with other biomarkers, including S100, glial fibrillary
acidic protein, epithelial membrane antigen, and various cytokeratins.
RESULTS: Three infants (aged 1, 6, and 8 months) had iris neovascularization, 2
had anterior ciliary body tumors, and 1 a posterior tumor associated with a
retinochoroidal coloboma. Each tumor displayed a premedullary monolayer of
cuboidal epithelium that was S100(+), NeuN(-), and CRX(-) and that transitioned
into a multilaminar medullary epithelium forming neurotubules with adluminal
cells that were CRX(+). NeuN first appeared in ablumenal neurotubular cells in 1 
tumor and was also discovered among neuroblast-appearing cells in another. The
third tumor associated with a coloboma was CRX(-) and NeuN(-).
CONCLUSIONS: A simple premedullary epithelial monolayer appears to be the
fundamental source for the tumor and its multilaminar medullary epithelium.
CRX(+) and NeuN(+) cells within the multilayered medullary layer approximate
expression patterns similar to those found in retinal development and
differentiation. Discovery of these biomarkers in the neoplastic ciliary
epithelium in a small number of tumors indicates preliminarily that the most
anterior layers of the optic cup have a retained retinal and neuroglial
differentiation potentiality. The third case was CRX(-) and NeuN(-) and possibly 
arose from embryonic pigment epithelium at the edge of the retinochoroidal
coloboma. These immunohistochemical findings offer histogenetic and potential
diagnostic insights.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25174896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. G3 (Bethesda). 2014 Aug 4;4(10):1825-35. doi: 10.1534/g3.114.011262.

Sensory rewiring in an echolocator: genome-wide modification of retinogenic and
auditory genes in the bat Myotis davidii.

Hudson NJ(1), Baker ML(2), Hart NS(3), Wynne JW(2), Gu Q(4), Huang Z(5), Zhang
G(5), Ingham AB(6), Wang L(7), Reverter A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Computational and Systems Biology, CSIRO Agriculture Flagship, Queensland
Bioscience Precinct, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia nick.hudson@csiro.au.
(2)Australian Animal Health Laboratory, CSIRO Biosecurity Flagship, Geelong,
Victoria, Australia. (3)School of Animal Biology and the Oceans Institute,
University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA 6009, Western Australia, Australia. 
(4)College of Information Sciences and Technology, Donghua University, Shanghai
201620, China Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, South Kensington,
London SW7 2AZ, England. (5)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, 518083, China.
(6)Computational and Systems Biology, CSIRO Agriculture Flagship, Queensland
Bioscience Precinct, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. (7)Australian Animal Health
Laboratory, CSIRO Biosecurity Flagship, Geelong, Victoria, Australia Program in
Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore.

Bats comprise 20% of all mammalian species and display a number of
characteristics, including true flight, echolocation, and a heightened ability to
resist viral load that uniquely position this group for comparative genomic
studies. Here we searched for evidence of genomic variation consistent with
sensory rewiring through bat evolution. We focused on two species with divergent 
sensory preferences. Myotis davidii is a bat species that echolocates and
possesses dim- but not daylight-adapted vision whereas the black flying fox
(Pteropus alecto) has highly developed day vision but does not echolocate. Using 
the naked mole rat as a reference, we found five functional genes (CYP1A2, RBP3, 
GUCY2F, CRYBB1, and GRK7) encoding visual proteins that have degenerated into
pseudogenes in M. davidii but not P. alecto. In a second approach genome-wide
codon usage bias (CUB) was compared between the two bat species. This CUB ranking
systematically enriched for vision-related (CLN8, RD3, IKZF1, LAMC3, CRX, SOX8,
VAX2, HPS1, RHO, PRPH2, and SOX9) and hearing-related (TPRN, TMIE, SLC52A3, OTOF,
WFS1, SOD1, TBX18, MAP1A, OTOS, GPX1, and USH1G) machinery in M. davidii but not 
P. alecto. All vision and hearing genes selectively enriched in M. davidii for
which orthologs could be identified also were more biased in the echolocating M. 
lucifugus than the nonecholocating P. vampyrus. We suggest that the existence of 
codon bias in vision- and hearing-related genes in a species that has evolved
echolocation implies CUB is part of evolution's toolkit to rewire sensory
systems. We propose that the two genetic changes (pseudogene formation and CUB)
collectively paint a picture of that incorporates a combination of destruction
and gain-of-function. Together, they help explain how natural selection has
reduced physiological costs associated with the development of a smaller eye
poorly adapted to day vision but that also contribute to enhanced dim light
vision and the hearing adaptations consonant with echolocation.

Copyright © 2014 Hudson et al.

PMCID: PMC4199690
PMID: 25096539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Jul 31;55(9):5510-21. doi: 10.1167/iovs.14-14359.

Molecular diagnostic testing by eyeGENE: analysis of patients with hereditary
retinal dystrophy phenotypes involving central vision loss.

Alapati A(1), Goetz K(2), Suk J(1), Navani M(1), Al-Tarouti A(3), Jayasundera
T(3), Tumminia SJ(4), Lee P(1), Ayyagari R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shiley Eye Center, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, California,
United States. (2)Ophthalmic Genetics and Visual Function Branch, National Eye
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States.
(3)W. K. Kellogg Eye Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United 
States. (4)Office of the Director, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States.

PURPOSE: To analyze the genetic test results of probands referred to eyeGENE with
a diagnosis of hereditary maculopathy.
METHODS: Patients with Best macular dystrophy (BMD), Doyne honeycomb retinal
dystrophy (DHRD), Sorsby fundus dystrophy (SFD), or late-onset retinal
degeneration (LORD) were screened for mutations in BEST1, EFEMP1, TIMP3, and
CTRP5, respectively. Patients with pattern dystrophy (PD) were screened for
mutations in PRPH2, BEST1, ELOVL4, CTRP5, and ABCA4; patients with cone-rod
dystrophy (CRD) were screened for mutations in CRX, ABCA4, PRPH2, ELOVL4, and the
c.2513G>A p.Arg838His variant in GUCY2D. Mutation analysis was performed by
dideoxy sequencing. Impact of novel variants was evaluated using the
computational tool PolyPhen.
RESULTS: Among the 213 unrelated patients, 38 had BMD, 26 DHRD, 74 PD, 8 SFD, 6
LORD, and 54 CRD; six had both PD and BMD, and one had no specific clinical
diagnosis. BEST1 variants were identified in 25 BMD patients, five with novel
variants of unknown significance (VUS). Among the five patients with VUS, one was
diagnosed with both BMD and PD. A novel EFEMP1 variant was identified in one DHRD
patient. TIMP3 novel variants were found in two SFD patients, PRPH2 variants in
14 PD patients, ABCA4 variants in four PD patients, and p.Arg838His GUCY2D
mutation in six patients diagnosed with dominant CRD; one patient additionally
had a CRX VUS. ABCA4 mutations were identified in 15 patients with recessive CRD.
CONCLUSIONS: Of the 213 samples, 55 patients (26%) had known causative mutations,
and 13 (6%) patients had a VUS that was possibly pathogenic. Overall, selective
screening for mutations in BEST1, PRPH2, and ABCA4 would likely yield the highest
success rate in identifying the genetic basis for macular dystrophy phenotypes.
Because of the overlap in phenotypes between BMD and PD, it would be beneficial
to screen genes associated with both diseases.

Copyright 2014 The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4152151
PMID: 25082885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Vet Ophthalmol. 2014 Sep;17(5):385-8. doi: 10.1111/vop.12192. Epub 2014 Jul 4.

Altered fundus appearance resulting from autofluorescence imaging with the
confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscope (cSLO) in cats.

Occelli LM(1), Petersen-Jones SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Michigan State University, 736 Wilson Road, D-208, East Lansing, MI, 48824, USA.

PURPOSE: This paper is to report that imaging the tapetal fundus of cats with the
488 nm laser of the Spectralis(®) HRA+OCT (Heidelberg Engineering Inc.,
Heidelberg, Germany) can result in a pale appearance of the imaged area.
ANIMALS STUDIED AND PROCEDURES: Wild-type and Rdy kittens (CRX mutant
heterozygotes-CRX(Rdy+/-) ) (8-20 weeks of age) and adult cats (1-4 years of age)
were imaged by confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscope (cSLO) and spectral domain 
optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) using the Spectralis(®) HRA+OCT. Color
fundus photography (RetCam II(®) , Clarity Medical Systems, Inc., Pleasanton, CA)
was performed after imaging using the Spectralis(®) HRA+OCT.
RESULTS: Following retinal cSLO imaging using the 488 nm laser (autofluorescence 
imaging) in both wild-type kittens and adult cats, the imaged region appeared
paler than the adjacent retina that had not been imaged. This change was probably
due to retinal bleaching and was fully reversible. Imaging CRX(Rdy+/-) kittens or
adults, which had very reduced levels of visual pigments, did not induce the
altered fundus appearance.
CONCLUSIONS: Those using autofluorescence imaging by cSLO should be aware that it
can induce a characteristic pale appearance of the tapetal fundus in the imaged
area of normal cats.

© 2014 American College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists.

PMID: 24995729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Shoulder Elbow Surg. 2015 Jan;24(1):e1-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jse.2014.04.018. Epub 
2014 Jun 18.

The treatment of clavicular shaft fractures with an innovative locked
intramedullary device.

King PR(1), Ikram A(1), Lamberts RP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Orthopaedic Surgery, Department of Surgical Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Tygerberg, South Africa.
(2)Division of Orthopaedic Surgery, Department of Surgical Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Tygerberg, South Africa.
Electronic address: rplam@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Displaced and shortened clavicular shaft fractures can be treated by 
intramedullary fixation; however, hardware migration and soft tissue irritation
at the insertion site have complicated its use. The aim of this study was to
determine whether the new Sonoma CRx intramedullary device (Sonoma Orthopedic
Products Inc, Santa Rosa, CA, USA) could be used successfully to treat displaced 
and shortened clavicular shaft fractures and restore the functional capacity of
shoulder without the development of secondary complications.
METHODS: Displaced and shortened clavicular shaft fractures in 47 consecutive
patients were treated with the CRx device. Incision size was captured during the 
surgical procedure. The union rate was evaluated postoperatively. Shoulder
function was assessed by Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) score,
the Constant Shoulder Score, and a range of motion score. Patients were assessed 
after 3 to 6 months (group I), 6 to 9 months (group II), or 9 to 12 months (group
III) postoperatively.
RESULTS: Union was achieved in all patients at the time of review, without any
incidence of hardware migration. Postoperative complications developed in 3
patients, comprising infection in 1 and hardware failure in 2. No differences
among the groups were found for the DASH score (P = .33), Constant Shoulder Score
(P = .38), and range of motion score (P = .96). The DASH, Constant Shoulder, and 
range of motion scores were similar to other successful treatment options, such
as plating.
CONCLUSION: The Sonoma CRx is a good alternative device to treat displaced and
shortened clavicular shaft fractures and restore the functional capacity of the
shoulder. Future research should focus on when nailing and plating should be used
to treat clavicular shaft fractures most optimally.

Copyright © 2015 Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery Board of Trustees.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24950947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 May 22;2(6):853-65. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.04.010.
eCollection 2014.

Derivation of traceable and transplantable photoreceptors from mouse embryonic
stem cells.

Decembrini S(1), Koch U(2), Radtke F(2), Moulin A(3), Arsenijevic Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Lausanne, Jules-Gonin Eye Hospital,
FAA, Unit of Gene Therapy & Stem Cell Biology, Avenue de France 15, 1004
Lausanne, Switzerland. (2)École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Institut
Suisse de Recherche Expérimentale sur le Cancer, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Lausanne, Jules-Gonin Eye Hospital,
FAA, Eye Pathology Laboratory, Avenue de France 15, 1004 Lausanne, Switzerland.

Retinal degenerative diseases resulting in the loss of photoreceptors are one of 
the major causes of blindness. Photoreceptor replacement therapy is a promising
treatment because the transplantation of retina-derived photoreceptors can be
applied now to different murine retinopathies to restore visual function. To have
an unlimited source of photoreceptors, we derived a transgenic embryonic stem
cell (ESC) line in which the Crx-GFP transgene is expressed in photoreceptors and
assessed the capacity of a 3D culture protocol to produce integration-competent
photoreceptors. This culture system allows the production of a large number of
photoreceptors recapitulating the in vivo development. After transplantation,
integrated cells showed the typical morphology of mature rods bearing external
segments and ribbon synapses. We conclude that a 3D protocol coupled with ESCs
provides a safe and renewable source of photoreceptors displaying a development
and transplantation competence comparable to photoreceptors from age-matched
retinas.

PMCID: PMC4050344
PMID: 24936471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Dev Dyn. 2014 Oct;243(10):1153-66. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24151. Epub 2014 Jun 27.

Mechanisms of blindness: animal models provide insight into distinct
CRX-associated retinopathies.

Tran NM(1), Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University School 
of Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri.

BACKGROUND: The homeodomain transcription factor CRX is a crucial regulator of
mammalian photoreceptor gene expression. Mutations in the human CRX gene are
associated with dominant inherited retinopathies Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP),
Cone-Rod Dystrophy (CoRD), and Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA), of varying
severity. In vitro and in vivo assessment of mutant CRX proteins have revealed
pathogenic mechanisms for several mutations, but no comprehensive
mutation-disease correlation has yet been reported.
RESULTS: Here we describe four different classes of disease-causing CRX
mutations, characterized by mutation type, pathogenetic mechanism, and the
molecular activity of the mutant protein: (1) hypomorphic missense mutations with
reduced DNA binding, (2) antimorphic missense mutations with variable DNA
binding, (3) antimorphic frameshift/nonsense mutations with intact DNA binding,
and (4) antimorphic frameshift mutations with reduced DNA binding. Mammalian
models representing three of these classes have been characterized.
CONCLUSIONS: Models carrying Class I mutations display a mild dominant retinal
phenotype and recessive LCA, while models carrying Class III and IV mutations
display characteristically distinct dominant LCA phenotypes. These animal models 
also reveal unexpected pathogenic mechanisms underlying CRX-associated
retinopathies. The complexity of genotype-phenotype correlation for
CRX-associated diseases highlights the value of developing comprehensive
"true-to-disease" animal models for understanding pathologic mechanisms and
testing novel therapeutic approaches.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4177283
PMID: 24888636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Endocrinology. 2014 Aug;155(8):2966-75. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1232. Epub 2014 May 
30.

Circadian dynamics of the cone-rod homeobox (CRX) transcription factor in the rat
pineal gland and its role in regulation of arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase
(AANAT).

Rohde K(1), Rovsing L, Ho AK, Møller M, Rath MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology (K.R., L.R., M.M., M.F.R.),
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark; and Department of Physiology (K.R., A.K.H.), Faculty of Medicine and
Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2H7.

The cone-rod homeobox (Crx) gene encodes a transcription factor in the retina and
pineal gland. Crx deficiency influences the pineal transcriptome, including a
reduced expression of arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (Aanat), a key enzyme in
nocturnal pineal melatonin production. However, previous functional studies on
pineal Crx have been performed in melatonin-deficient mice. In this study, we
have investigated the role of Crx in the melatonin-proficient rat pineal gland.
The current study shows that pineal Crx transcript levels exhibit a circadian
rhythm with a peak in the middle of the night, which is transferred into daily
changes in CRX protein. The study further shows that the sympathetic innervation 
of the pineal gland controls the Crx rhythm. By use of adenovirus-mediated short 
hairpin RNA gene knockdown targeting Crx mRNA in primary rat pinealocyte cell
culture, we here show that intact levels of Crx mRNA are required to obtain high 
levels of Aanat expression, whereas overexpression of Crx induces Aanat
transcription in vitro. This regulatory function of Crx is further supported by
circadian analysis of Aanat in the pineal gland of the Crx-knockout mouse. Our
data indicate that the rhythmic nature of pineal CRX protein may directly
modulate the daily profile of Aanat expression by inducing nighttime expression
of this enzyme, thus facilitating nocturnal melatonin synthesis in addition to
its role in ensuring a correct tissue distribution of Aanat expression.

PMID: 24877634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:946075. doi: 10.1155/2014/946075. Epub 2014 Apr 30.

Homeobox genes and melatonin synthesis: regulatory roles of the cone-rod homeobox
transcription factor in the rodent pineal gland.

Rohde K(1), Møller M(1), Rath MF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, Faculty of Health and Medical
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Rigshospitalet 6102, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100
Copenhagen, Denmark.

Nocturnal synthesis of melatonin in the pineal gland is controlled by a circadian
rhythm in arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (AANAT) enzyme activity. In the
rodent, Aanat gene expression displays a marked circadian rhythm; release of
norepinephrine in the gland at night causes a cAMP-based induction of Aanat
transcription. However, additional transcriptional control mechanisms exist.
Homeobox genes, which are generally known to encode transcription factors
controlling developmental processes, are also expressed in the mature rodent
pineal gland. Among these, the cone-rod homeobox (CRX) transcription factor is
believed to control pineal-specific Aanat expression. Based on recent advances in
our understanding of Crx in the rodent pineal gland, we here suggest that
homeobox genes play a role in adult pineal physiology both by ensuring
pineal-specific Aanat expression and by facilitating cAMP response element-based 
circadian melatonin production.

PMCID: PMC4022116
PMID: 24877149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Cell Tissue Res. 2014 Oct;358(1):239-48. doi: 10.1007/s00441-014-1910-0. Epub
2014 May 28.

Photic stimulation of the suprachiasmatic nucleus via the non-visual optic
system. A gene expression study in the blind Crx-/- mouse.

Rovsing L(1), Møller M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, Faculty of Health and Medical
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Rigshospitalet 6102, Blegdamsvej 9, 2200,
Copenhagen, Denmark, lrovsing@sund.ku.dk.

The visual system of vertebrates consists of an image-forming and a
non-image-forming optic system; the image-forming optic system involves the
classic photoreceptors, the rods and cones, whereas the non-image-forming optic
system involves the melanopsin-containing retinal ganglion cells. Both optic
systems make direct neuroanatomical connections to the suprachiasmatic nucleus
(SCN) in the hypothalamus in which the biological clock of vertebrates is
located. The rhythmic output from SCN neurons is entrained by light via the
retina and the retinohypothalamic tract. The response of exposure to light during
the subjective night is an immediate expression of several early response genes
in the SCN. We show, by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, that
the amount of melanopsin mRNA in the retinal ganglion cells is preserved in the
blind Crx(-/-) mouse with degenerated classic photoreceptors. At zeitgeber time
16, the Crx(-/-) and wild-type mice were exposed to 1 h of light. This resulted
in a strong up-regulation of the immediate early genes Nr4a1, Erg, and Rrad in
the SCN of both genotypes. Light stimulation during the subjective night resulted
in a strong up-regulation of c-fos in both genotypes with a significantly higher 
up-regulation in the blind Crx(-/-) mouse. Expression of Grp and Vip, the genes
for two classic peptides located in the SCN, was not influenced by light
stimulation. The data strongly indicate the involvement of the melanopsin-based
non-visual optic system in the regulation of immediate early genes in the SCN.

PMID: 24865246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. PLoS One. 2014 May 14;9(5):e97365. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097365. eCollection
2014.

The Hippo pathway controls a switch between retinal progenitor cell proliferation
and photoreceptor cell differentiation in zebrafish.

Asaoka Y(1), Hata S(1), Namae M(1), Furutani-Seiki M(2), Nishina H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Medical Research
Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Centre for
Regenerative Medicine, Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of
Bath, Claverton Down, Bath, United Kingdom.

The precise regulation of numbers and types of neurons through control of cell
cycle exit and terminal differentiation is an essential aspect of neurogenesis.
The Hippo signaling pathway has recently been identified as playing a crucial
role in promoting cell cycle exit and terminal differentiation in multiple types 
of stem cells, including in retinal progenitor cells. When Hippo signaling is
activated, the core Mst1/2 kinases activate the Lats1/2 kinases, which in turn
phosphorylate and inhibit the transcriptional cofactor Yap. During mouse
retinogenesis, overexpression of Yap prolongs progenitor cell proliferation,
whereas inhibition of Yap decreases this proliferation and promotes retinal cell 
differentiation. However, to date, it remains unknown how the Hippo pathway
affects the differentiation of distinct neuronal cell types such as photoreceptor
cells. In this study, we investigated whether Hippo signaling regulates
retinogenesis during early zebrafish development. Knockdown of zebrafish mst2
induced early embryonic defects, including altered retinal pigmentation and
morphogenesis. Similar abnormal retinal phenotypes were observed in zebrafish
embryos injected with a constitutively active form of yap [(yap (5SA)]. Loss of
Yap's TEAD-binding domain, two WW domains, or transcription activation domain
attenuated the retinal abnormalities induced by yap (5SA), indicating that all of
these domains contribute to normal retinal development. Remarkably, yap
(5SA)-expressing zebrafish embryos displayed decreased expression of
transcription factors such as otx5 and crx, which orchestrate photoreceptor cell 
differentiation by activating the expression of rhodopsin and other photoreceptor
cell genes. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that Rx1 is a novel
interacting partner of Yap that regulates photoreceptor cell differentiation. Our
results suggest that Yap suppresses the differentiation of photoreceptor cells
from retinal progenitor cells by repressing Rx1-mediated transactivation of
photoreceptor cell genes during zebrafish retinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4020862
PMID: 24828882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;801:185-90. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-3209-8_24.

FAM161A, a novel centrosomal-ciliary protein implicated in autosomal recessive
retinitis pigmentosa.

Zach F(1), Stöhr H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Regensburg, Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 
11, 93053, Regensburg, Germany, frank.zach@klinik.uni-regensburg.de.

Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is an inherited disease of the retina leading to vision
impairment due to progressive photoreceptor cell death. Homozygous and compound
heterozygous null mutations in the CRX-regulated FAM161A gene of unknown function
were identified as a cause for autosomal recessive RP (RP28) in patients from
India, Germany, Israel, the Palestinian territories, and the USA. The FAM161A
protein has been found to be localized to the connecting cilium, the basal body, 
and the adjacent centriole in mammalian photoreceptors and was also present in
synaptic layers and ganglion cells of the retina. In addition, FAM161A was shown 
to be part of microtubule-organizing centers in cultured cells and associates
with the intracellular microtubule network. Moreover, FAM161A directly binds to
microtubules and increases the acetylation of a-tubulin. An evolutionary highly
conserved, C-terminal protein domain (UPF0564) of FAM161A was shown to mediate
microtubule association, homo- and heterotypic interaction among
UPF0564-containing proteins and binding to several ciliopathy-associated
proteins. In summary, FAM161A is a novel centrosomal-ciliary protein that likely 
is implicated in the regulation of microtubule-based cellular processes in the
retina.

PMID: 24664697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;801:31-41. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-3209-8_5.

RETINA-specific expression of Kcnv2 is controlled by cone-rod homeobox (Crx) and 
neural retina leucine zipper (Nrl).

Aslanidis A(1), Karlstetter M, Walczak Y, Jägle H, Langmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9,
50931, Cologne, Germany.

Cone dystrophy with supernormal rod response (CDSRR) is an autosomal recessive
disorder that leads to progressive retinal degeneration with a distinct
electroretinogram (ERG) phenotype. CDSRR patients show reduced sensitivity to dim
light, augmented response to suprathreshold light and reduced response to
flicker. The disorder is caused by mutations in the KCNV2 gene, which encodes the
Kv11.1 subunit of a voltage-gated potassium channel. Here, we studied the
retina-specific expression and cis-regulatory activity of the murine Kcnv2 gene
using electroporation of explanted retinas. Using qRT-PCR profiling of early
postnatal retinas, we showed that Kcnv2 expression increased towards P14, which
marks the beginning of visual activity in mice. In vivo electroporation of
GFP-Kcnv2 expressing plasmids revealed that Kv11.1 localizes to the inner segment
membranes of adult P21 photoreceptors. Using bioinformatic prediction and
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), we identified two Crx binding sites (CBS)
and one Nrl binding site (NBS) in the Kcnv2 promoter. Reporter electroporation of
the wild type promoter region induced strong DsRed expression, indicating high
regulatory activity, whereas shRNA-mediated knockdown of Crx and Nrl resulted in 
reduced Kcnv2 promoter activity and low endogenous Kcnv2 mRNA expression in the
retina. Site-directed mutagenesis of the CBS and NBS demonstrated that CBS2 is
crucial for Kcnv2 promoter activity. We conclude that nucleotide changes in
evolutionary conserved CBS could impact retina-specific expression levels of
Kcnv2.

PMID: 24664678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;801:3-8. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-3209-8_1.

Cell type-specific epigenetic signatures accompany late stages of mouse retina
development.

Popova EY(1), Barnstable CJ, Zhang SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neural and Behavioral Sciences, Pennsylvania State University
College of Medicine, 17033, Hershey, PA, USA, eyp1@psu.edu.

We have used ChIP-seq to map the distribution of two important histone H3
modifications, H3K4me2 and H3K27me3, over the whole genome at multiple time
points during late mouse retina development. We merged these data with our
previous retina developmental expression profiles and show that there are several
epigenetic signatures specific for different functional groups of genes. The main
conclusion from our study is that epigenetic signatures defined by H3K4me2 and
H3K27me3 can distinguish cell-type specific genes from widespread transcripts and
may be reflective of cell specificity during retina maturation. Rod
photoreceptor-specific genes have a striking signature, a de novo accumulation of
H3K4me2 and a complete absence of H3K27me3. We were able to use this signature in
an unbiased search of the whole genome and identified essentially all the known
rod photoreceptor genes as well as a group of novel genes that have a high
probability of being rod photoreceptor specific. Comparison of our genome-wide
chromatin signature maps with available data sets for Polymerase-II (Pol-II) and 
CRX binding sites and DNase1 Hypersensitive Sites (DHS) for retina shows great
agreement. Because our approach is not dependent on high levels of gene
expression, it provides a new way of identifying cell type-specific genes,
particularly genes that may be involved in retinal diseases.

PMID: 24664674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Opt Express. 2014 Mar 10;22(5):5693-730. doi: 10.1364/OE.22.005693.

Analytical and experimental performance evaluation of an integrated Si-photonic
balanced coherent receiver in a colorless scenario.

Morsy-Osman M, Chagnon M, Xu X, Zhuge Q, Poulin M, Painchaud Y, Pelletier M,
Paquet C, Plant DV.

We study analytically and experimentally the performance limits of a Si-photonic 
(SiP) balanced coherent receiver (CRx) co-packaged with transimpedance amplifiers
(TIAs) in a colorless WDM scheme. Firstly, the CRx architecture is depicted and
characterization results are presented. Secondly, an analytical expression for
the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) at the CRx output is rigorously developed and
various noise sources in the context of colorless reception are outlined.
Thirdly, we study experimentally the system-level CRx performance in colorless
reception of 16 × 112 Gbps PDM-QPSK WDM channels. Using a 15.5 dBm local
oscillator (LO) power, error free transmissions over 4800 and 4160 km at received
powers of -3 and -21 dBm per channel, respectively, were achieved in a fully
colorless and preamplifierless reception. Next, a set of measurements on one of
the center WDM channels is performed where the LO power, received signal power,
distance, and number of channels presented to the CRx are swept to evaluate the
performance limits of colorless reception. Results reveal that the LO beating
with optical noise incoming with the signal is a dominant noise source regardless
of received signal power. In the high received signal power regime (~0
dBm/channel), the self-beat noise from out-of-band (OOB) channels is an
additional major noise source especially for small LO-to-signal power ratio,
short reach and large number of OOB channels. For example, at a received signal
power of 0 dBm/channel after 1600 km transmission, the SNR difference between the
fully filtered and colorless scenarios, where 1 and 16 channels are passed to the
CRx respectively, grows from 0.5 to 3.3 dB as the LO power changes from 12 to 0
dBm. For low received power (~-12 dBm/channel), the effect of OOB channels
becomes minor while the receiver shot and thermal noises become more significant.
We identify the common mode rejection ratio (CMRR) and sensitivity as the two
important CRx specifications that impact the performance at high and low received
signal power regimes, respectively. Finally, an excellent match between
experimental and analytical SNRs is proven after the derived SNR model is fitted 
to the experimental data in a least-squares sense. The model is then used to
predict that the CRx can operate colorlessly for a fully populated WDM spectrum
with 80 channels provided that the LO-to-signal power ratio is properly set.

PMID: 24663910  [PubMed]


63. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 18;9(2):e89110. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089110. eCollection
2014.

Otx2 ChIP-seq reveals unique and redundant functions in the mature mouse retina.

Samuel A(1), Housset M(1), Fant B(1), Lamonerie T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Valrose, University of Nice Sophia Antipolis, CNRS
UMR7277, Inserm U1091, Nice, France.

During mouse retinal development and into adulthood, the transcription factor
Otx2 is expressed in pigment epithelium, photoreceptors and bipolar cells. In the
mature retina, Otx2 ablation causes photoreceptor degeneration through a
non-cell-autonomous mechanism involving Otx2 function in the supporting RPE.
Surprisingly, photoreceptor survival does not require Otx2 expression in the
neural retina, where the related Crx homeobox gene, a major regulator of
photoreceptor development, is also expressed. To get a deeper view of mouse Otx2 
activities in the neural retina, we performed chromatin-immunoprecipitation
followed by massively parallel sequencing (ChIP-seq) on Otx2. Using two
independent ChIP-seq assays, we identified consistent sets of Otx2-bound
cis-regulatory elements. Comparison with our previous RPE-specific Otx2 ChIP-seq 
data shows that Otx2 occupies different functional domains of the genome in RPE
cells and in neural retina cells and regulates mostly different sets of genes. To
assess the potential redundancy of Otx2 and Crx, we compared our data with Crx
ChIP-seq data. While Crx genome occupancy markedly differs from Otx2 genome
occupancy in the RPE, it largely overlaps that of Otx2 in the neural retina.
Thus, in accordance with its essential role in the RPE and its non-essential role
in the neural retina, Otx2 regulates different gene sets in the RPE and the
neural retina, and shares an important part of its repertoire with Crx in the
neural retina. Overall, this study provides a better understanding of
gene-regulatory networks controlling photoreceptor homeostasis and disease.

PMCID: PMC3928427
PMID: 24558479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2014 Mar-Apr;17(2):85-8. doi: 10.2350/13-06-1346-OA.1. Epub
2014 Feb 20.

Is CRX protein a useful marker in differential diagnosis of tumors of the pineal 
region?

Manila A(1), Mariangela N, Libero L, Francesca G, Romana BF, Felice G.

Author information: 
(1)1 <U+2009> Department of Radiological, Oncological and Anatomo-Pathological Sciences,
Sapienza University Viale Regina Elena 324, 00161 Rome, Italy.

The cone-rod homeobox (CRX) is a gene that belongs to the member of the
orthodenticle homeobox (Otx) family, with important function in development and
differentiation of retinal and pineal cells. Moreover, CRX appears to be
specifically expressed in pineal tumors and retinoblastomas. We performed an
immunohistochemical study on 91 pediatric and adult central nervous system
tumors, plus 2 normal brain samples. Our results demonstrated that CRX is
expressed not only in pineal parenchymal tumors and retinoblastoma, but also in a
some medulloblastomas and supratentorial primitive neuroectodermal tumors. None
of the glial tumors screened were positive for CRX. In conclusion, CRX could be
useful in surgical neuropathology for the differential diagnosis of pineal region
tumors, in particular to discriminate pineal tumors from glial tumors.

PMID: 24555912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. PLoS Genet. 2014 Feb 6;10(2):e1004111. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004111.
eCollection 2014.

Mechanistically distinct mouse models for CRX-associated retinopathy.

Tran NM(1), Zhang A(2), Zhang X(3), Huecker JB(3), Hennig AK(3), Chen S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Ph.D. program in Molecular Genetics and Genomics, Washington University in
Saint Louis, Saint Louis, Missouri, United States of America. (2)College of Arts 
& Sciences, Washington University in Saint Louis, Saint Louis, Missouri, United
States of America. (3)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington
University in Saint Louis, Saint Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(4)Ph.D. program in Molecular Genetics and Genomics, Washington University in
Saint Louis, Saint Louis, Missouri, United States of America ; Department of
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University in Saint Louis, Saint
Louis, Missouri, United States of America ; Department of Developmental Biology, 
Washington University in Saint Louis, Saint Louis, Missouri, United States of
America.

Cone-rod homeobox (CRX) protein is a "paired-like" homeodomain transcription
factor that is essential for regulating rod and cone photoreceptor transcription.
Mutations in human CRX are associated with the dominant retinopathies Retinitis
Pigmentosa (RP), Cone-Rod Dystrophy (CoRD) and Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA), 
with variable severity. Heterozygous Crx Knock-Out (KO) mice ("+/-") have normal 
vision as adults and fail to model the dominant human disease. To investigate how
different mutant CRX proteins produce distinct disease pathologies, we generated 
two Crx Knock-IN (K-IN) mouse models: Crx(E168d2) ("E168d2") and Crx(R90W)
("R90W"). E168d2 mice carry a frameshift mutation in the CRX activation domain,
Glu168del2, which is associated with severe dominant CoRD or LCA in humans. R90W 
mice carry a substitution mutation in the CRX homeodomain, Arg90Trp, which is
associated with dominant mild late-onset CoRD and recessive LCA. As seen in human
patients, heterozygous E168d2 ("E168d2/+") but not R90W ("R90W/+") mice show
severely impaired retinal function, while mice homozygous for either mutation are
blind and undergo rapid photoreceptor degeneration. E168d2/+ mice also display
abnormal rod/cone morphology, greater impairment of CRX target gene expression
than R90W/+ or +/- mice, and undergo progressive photoreceptor degeneration.
Surprisingly, E168d2/+ mice express more mutant CRX protein than wild-type CRX.
E168d2neo/+, a subline of E168d2 with reduced mutant allele expression, displays 
a much milder retinal phenotype, demonstrating the impact of Crx expression level
on disease severity. Both CRX([E168d2]) and CRX([R90W]) proteins fail to activate
transcription in vitro, but CRX([E168d2]) interferes more strongly with the
function of wild type (WT) CRX, supporting an antimorphic mechanism. E168d2 and
R90W are mechanistically distinct mouse models for CRX-associated disease that
will allow the elucidation of molecular mechanisms and testing of novel
therapeutic approaches for different forms of CRX-associated disease.

PMCID: PMC3916252
PMID: 24516401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. BMC Mol Biol. 2014 Feb 6;15:4. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-15-4.

Cooperative activation of Xenopus rhodopsin transcription by paired-like
transcription factors.

Reks SE, McIlvain V, Zhuo X, Knox BE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neuroscience & Physiology, Ophthalmology and Biochemistry &
Molecular Biology, State University of New York Upstate Medical University,
Syracuse, NY 13210, USA. knoxb@upstate.edu.

BACKGROUND: In vertebrates, rod photoreceptor-specific gene expression is
regulated by the large Maf and Pax-like transcription factors, Nrl/LNrl and
Crx/Otx5. The ubiquitous occurrence of their target DNA binding sites throughout 
rod-specific gene promoters suggests that multiple transcription factor
interactions within the promoter are functionally important. Cooperative action
by these transcription factors activates rod-specific genes such as rhodopsin.
However, a quantitative mechanistic explanation of transcriptional rate
determinants is lacking.
RESULTS: We investigated the contributions of various paired-like transcription
factors and their cognate cis-elements to rhodopsin gene activation using
cultured cells to quantify activity. The Xenopus rhodopsin promoter (XOP) has a
bipartite structure, with ~200 bp proximal to the start site (RPP) coordinating
cooperative activation by Nrl/LNrl-Crx/Otx5 and the adjacent 5300 bp upstream
sequence increasing the overall expression level. The synergistic activation by
Nrl/LNrl-Crx/Otx5 also occurred when XOP was stably integrated into the genome.
We determined that Crx/Otx5 synergistically activated transcription independently
and additively through the two Pax-like cis-elements, BAT1 and Ret4, but not
through Ret1. Other Pax-like family members, Rax1 and Rax2, do not
synergistically activate XOP transcription with Nrl/LNrl and/or Crx/Otx5; rather 
they act as co-activators via the Ret1 cis-element.
CONCLUSIONS: We have provided a quantitative model of cooperative transcriptional
activation of the rhodopsin promoter through interaction of Crx/Otx5 with
Nrl/LNrl at two paired-like cis-elements proximal to the NRE and TATA binding
site. Further, we have shown that Rax genes act in cooperation with Crx/Otx5 with
Nrl/LNrl as co-activators of rhodopsin transcription.

PMCID: PMC3937059
PMID: 24499263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2014 Mar;3(3):323-33. doi: 10.5966/sctm.2013-0112. Epub
2014 Jan 29.

Transplantation of photoreceptors derived from human Muller glia restore rod
function in the P23H rat.

Jayaram H(1), Jones MF, Eastlake K, Cottrill PB, Becker S, Wiseman J, Khaw PT,
Limb GA.

Author information: 
(1)Ocular Biology & Therapeutics, UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United 
Kingdom; NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for Ophthalmology, UCL Institute of
Ophthalmology & Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, United
Kingdom.

Müller glia possess stem cell characteristics that have been recognized to be
responsible for the regeneration of injured retina in fish and amphibians.
Although these cells are present in the adult human eye, they are not known to
regenerate human retina in vivo. Human Müller glia with stem cell characteristics
(hMSCs) can acquire phenotypic and genotypic characteristics of rod
photoreceptors in vitro, suggesting that they may have potential for use in
transplantation strategies to treat human photoreceptor degenerations. Much work 
has been undertaken in rodents using various sources of allogeneic stem cells to 
restore photoreceptor function, but the effect of human Müller glia-derived
photoreceptors in the restoration of rod photoreceptor function has not been
investigated. This study aimed to differentiate hMSCs into photoreceptor cells by
stimulation with growth and differentiation factors in vitro to upregulate gene
and protein expression of CRX, NR2E3, and rhodopsin and various phototransduction
markers associated with rod photoreceptor development and function and to examine
the effect of subretinal transplantation of these cells into the P23H rat, a
model of primary photoreceptor degeneration. Following transplantation,
hMSC-derived photoreceptor cells migrated and integrated into the outer nuclear
layer of the degenerated retinas and led to significant improvement in rod
photoreceptor function as shown by an increase in a-wave amplitude and slope
using scotopic flash electroretinography. These observations suggest that hMSCs
can be regarded as a cell source for development of cell-replacement therapies to
treat human photoreceptor degenerations and may also offer potential for the
development of autologous transplantation.

PMCID: PMC3952927
PMID: 24477073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Jan;10(1):e1003875. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003875. Epub
2014 Jan 23.

Intranasal vaccination promotes detrimental Th17-mediated immunity against
influenza infection.

Maroof A(1), Yorgensen YM(1), Li Y(1), Evans JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline Vaccines, Hamilton, Montana, United States of America.

Influenza disease is a global health issue that causes significant morbidity and 
mortality through seasonal epidemics. Currently, inactivated influenza virus
vaccines given intramuscularly or live attenuated influenza virus vaccines
administered intranasally are the only approved options for vaccination against
influenza virus in humans. We evaluated the efficacy of a synthetic toll-like
receptor 4 agonist CRX-601 as an adjuvant for enhancing vaccine-induced
protection against influenza infection. Intranasal administration of CRX-601
adjuvant combined with detergent split-influenza antigen (A/Uruguay/716/2007
(H3N2)) generated strong local and systemic immunity against co-administered
influenza antigens while exhibiting high efficacy against two heterotypic
influenza challenges. Intranasal vaccination with CRX-601 adjuvanted vaccines
promoted antigen-specific IgG and IgA antibody responses and the generation of
polyfunctional antigen-specific Th17 cells (CD4(+)IL-17A(+)TNFa(+)). Following
challenge with influenza virus, vaccinated mice transiently exhibited increased
weight loss and morbidity during early stages of disease but eventually
controlled infection. This disease exacerbation following influenza infection in 
vaccinated mice was dependent on both the route of vaccination and the addition
of the adjuvant. Neutralization of IL-17A confirmed a detrimental role for this
cytokine during influenza infection. The expansion of vaccine-primed Th17 cells
during influenza infection was also accompanied by an augmented lung neutrophilic
response, which was partially responsible for mediating the increased morbidity. 
This discovery is of significance in the field of vaccinology, as it highlights
the importance of both route of vaccination and adjuvant selection in vaccine
development.

PMCID: PMC3900655
PMID: 24465206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Genes Cells. 2014 Mar;19(3):198-208. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12127. Epub 2014 Jan 24.

Derivation of human differential photoreceptor cells from adult human dermal
fibroblasts by defined combinations of CRX, RAX, OTX2 and NEUROD.

Seko Y(1), Azuma N, Ishii T, Komuta Y, Miyamoto K, Miyagawa Y, Kaneda M, Umezawa 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Visual Functions Section, Department of Rehabilitation for Sensory Functions, 
Research Institute, National Rehabilitation Center for Persons with Disabilities,
Tokorozawa, Saitama, 359-8555, Japan; Department of Reproductive Biology, Center 
for Regenerative Medicine, National Institute for Child Health and Development,
Okura, Setagaya, Tokyo, 157-8535, Japan.

Redirecting differentiation of somatic cells by over-expression of transcription 
factors is a promising approach for regenerative medicine, elucidation of
pathogenesis and development of new therapies. We have previously defined a
transcription factor combination, that is, CRX, RAX and NEUROD, that can generate
photosensitive photoreceptor cells from human iris cells. Here, we show that
human dermal fibroblasts are differentiated to photoreceptor cells by the same
transcription factor combination as human iris cells. Transduction of a
combination of the CRX, RAX and NEUROD genes up-regulated expression of the
photoreceptor-specific genes, recoverin, blue opsin and PDE6C, in all three
strains of human dermal fibroblasts that were tested. Additional OTX2 gene
transduction increased up-regulation of the photoreceptor-specific genes blue
opsin, recoverin, S-antigen, CNGB3 and PDE6C. Global gene expression data by
microarray analysis further showed that photoreceptor-related functional genes
were significantly increased in induced photoreceptor cells. Functional analysis,
that is, patch-clamp recordings, clearly revealed that induced photoreceptor
cells from fibroblasts responded to light. Both the NRL gene and the NR2E3 gene
were endogenously up-regulated in induced photoreceptor cells, implying that
exogenous CRX, RAX, OTX2 and NEUROD, but not NRL, are sufficient to generate rod 
photoreceptor cells.

© 2014 The Authors Genes to Cells © 2014 by the Molecular Biology Society of
Japan and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4237506
PMID: 24456169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Clin Invest. 2014 Feb;124(2):631-43. doi: 10.1172/JCI72722. Epub 2014 Jan 2.

OTX2 loss causes rod differentiation defect in CRX-associated congenital
blindness.

Roger JE, Hiriyanna A, Gotoh N, Hao H, Cheng DF, Ratnapriya R, Kautzmann MA,
Chang B, Swaroop A.

Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) encompasses a set of early-onset blinding
diseases that are characterized by vision loss, involuntary eye movement, and
nonrecordable electroretinogram (ERG). At least 19 genes are associated with LCA,
which is typically recessive; however, mutations in homeodomain transcription
factor CRX lead to an autosomal dominant form of LCA. The mechanism of
CRX-associated LCA is not understood. Here, we identified a spontaneous mouse
mutant with a frameshift mutation in Crx (CrxRip). We determined that CrxRip is a
dominant mutation that results in congenital blindness with nonrecordable
response by ERG and arrested photoreceptor differentiation with no associated
degeneration. Expression of LCA-associated dominant CRX frameshift mutations in
mouse retina mimicked the CrxRip phenotype, which was rescued by overexpression
of WT CRX. Whole-transcriptome profiling using deep RNA sequencing revealed
progressive and complete loss of rod differentiation factor NRL in CrxRip
retinas. Expression of NRL partially restored rod development in CrxRip/+ mice.
We show that the binding of homeobox transcription factor OTX2 at the Nrl
promoter was obliterated in CrxRip mice and ectopic expression of OTX2 rescued
the rod differentiation defect. Together, our data indicate that OTX2 maintains
Nrl expression in developing rods to consolidate rod fate. Our studies provide
insights into CRX mutation-associated congenital blindness and should assist in
therapeutic design.

PMCID: PMC3904630
PMID: 24382353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Apr 15;23(8):2132-44. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt609. Epub 2013 Dec 
2.

The transcription-splicing protein NonO/p54nrb and three NonO-interacting
proteins bind to distal enhancer region and augment rhodopsin expression.

Yadav SP(1), Hao H, Yang HJ, Kautzmann MA, Brooks M, Nellissery J, Klocke B,
Seifert M, Swaroop A.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology-Neurodegeneration and Repair Laboratory, National Eye Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Phototransduction machinery in vertebrate photoreceptors is contained within the 
membrane discs of outer segments. Daily renewal of 10% of photoreceptor outer
segments requires stringent control of gene expression. Rhodopsin constitutes
over 90% of the protein in rod discs, and its altered expression or transport is 
associated with photoreceptor dysfunction and/or death. Two cis-regulatory
sequences have been identified upstream of the rhodopsin transcription start
site. While the proximal promoter binds to specific transcription factors,
including NRL and CRX, the rhodopsin enhancer region (RER) reportedly contributes
to precise and high-level expression of rhodopsin in vivo. Here, we report the
identification of RER-bound proteins by mass spectrometry. We validate the
binding of NonO (p54(nrb)), a protein implicated in coupling transcription to
splicing, and three NonO-interacting proteins-hnRNP M, Ywhaz and Ppp1ca. NonO and
its interactors can activate rhodopsin promoter in HEK293 cells and function
synergistically with NRL and CRX. DNA-binding domain of NonO is critical for
rhodopsin promoter activation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by deep
sequencing (ChIP-seq) analysis demonstrates high occupancy of NonO at rhodopsin
and a subset of phototransduction genes. Furthermore, shRNA knockdown of NonO in 
mouse retina leads to loss of rhodopsin expression and rod cell death, which can 
be partially rescued by a C-terminal NonO construct. RNA-seq analysis of the NonO
shRNA-treated retina revealed splicing defects and altered expression of genes,
specifically those associated with phototransduction. Our studies identify an
important contribution of NonO and its interacting modulator proteins in
enhancing rod-specific gene expression and controlling rod homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3959818
PMID: 24301678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Hazard Mater. 2014 Jan 15;264:490-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2013.09.058. Epub
2013 Oct 1.

Synthesis, characterization and stability of Cr(III) and Fe(III) hydroxides.

Papassiopi N(1), Vaxevanidou K(1), Christou C(1), Karagianni E(1), Antipas GS(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Mining Engineering and Metallurgy, National Technical University of 
Athens, Zografou Campus, Athens 15780, Greece. (2)School of Mining Engineering
and Metallurgy, National Technical University of Athens, Zografou Campus, Athens 
15780, Greece. Electronic address: gantipas@metal.ntua.gr.

Chromium is a common contaminant of soils and aquifers and constitutes a major
environmental problem. In nature, chromium usually exists in the form of two
oxidation states, trivalent, Cr(III), which is relatively innocuous for biota and
for the aquatic environment, and hexavalent, Cr(VI) which is toxic, carcinogenic 
and very soluble. Accordingly, the majority of wastewater and groundwater
treatment technologies, include a stage where Cr(VI) is reduced to Cr(III), in
order to remove chromium from the aqueous phase and bind the element in the form 
of environmentally stable solid compounds. In the absence of iron the final
product is typically of the form Cr(OH)3·xH2O whereas in the presence of iron the
precipitate is a mixed Fe(1-x)Crx(OH)3 phase. In this study, we report on the
synthesis, characterisation and stability of mixed (Fex,Cr1-x)(OH)3 hydroxides as
compared to the stability of Cr(OH)3. We established that the plain Cr(III)
hydroxide, abiding to the approximate molecular formula Cr(OH)3·3H2O, was
crystalline, highly soluble, i.e. unstable, with a tendency to transform into the
stable amorphous hydroxide Cr(OH)3(am) phase. Mixed Fe0.75Cr0.25(OH)3 hydroxides 
were found to be of the ferrihydrite structure, Fe(OH)3, and we correlated their 
solubility to that of a solid solution formed by plain ferrihydrite and the
amorphous Cr(III) hydroxide. Both our experimental results and thermodynamic
calculations indicated that mixed Fe(III)-Cr(III) hydroxides are more effective
enhancers of groundwater quality, in comparison to the plain amorphous or
crystalline Cr(III) hydroxides, the latter found to have a solubility typically
higher than 50µg/l (maximum EU permitted Cr level in drinking water), while the
amorphous Cr(OH)3(am) phase was within the drinking water threshold in the range 
5.7<pH<11. In comparison, the mixed Fe0.75Cr0.25(OH)3 hydroxides studied were of 
extended stability in the 4.8<pH<13.5 range.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24238809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Orthopedics. 2013 Nov;36(11):e1450-3. doi: 10.3928/01477447-20131021-31.

Early postoperative failure of a new intramedullary fixation device for midshaft 
clavicle fractures.

Wilson DJ, Weaver DL, Balog TP, Arrington ED.

Comment in
    Orthopedics. 2014 Feb;37(2):76.
    Orthopedics. 2014 Feb;37(2):76.

The Sonoma CRx device (Sonoma Orthopedic Products, Santa Rosa, California) is a
recently introduced intramedullary device with a flexible shaft that becomes
rigid once actuated to allow deployment within the sigmoidal contour of the
clavicular shaft. Medial intramedullary cortical purchase is obtained by grippers
and lateral purchase through a locking bicortical buttressing screw. This article
describes 2 cases of early hardware failure using this device. In both cases,
early postoperative radiographs demonstrate adequate initial fracture reduction
and implant position. Both patients sustained repeat injuries, one under low
physiologic load and the other after returning to mixed martial arts 4 months
postoperatively. Implant failure was noted after reinjury in both cases. Complete
healing and full return to function was documented for both patients at 2 years. 
Proper patient selection and counseling regarding the limitations of this
intramedullary fixation device are important. Biomechanical comparison of this
implant to plate fixation under physiologic loads of combined axial compression
and torsion may shed light on differences in fixation stability.

Copyright 2013, SLACK Incorporated.

PMID: 24200452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Behav Brain Res. 2014 Jan 1;258:1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2013.10.020. Epub 2013
Oct 17.

Behavioral analyses of visually impaired Crx knockout mice revealed sensory
compensation in exploratory activities on elevated platforms.

Iura Y(1), Udo H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 
812-8581, Japan.

Visual perception is important for acquiring spatial information in many animals,
and loss of vision often causes devastating effects on their survival. However,
it may be compensated to some extent by utilizing other intact sensory
modalities. The cone-rod homeobox (Crx) gene plays a key role in development of
photoreceptor cells, but behavioral consequences of the gene deletion have not
been well characterized. In this study, we analyzed homozygous knockout
(Crx(-/-)) mice by comparing with heterozygous knockout (Crx(+/-)) mice as
controls. We first checked their vision with three different behavioral paradigms
of the glass table visual recognition test, the light-dark transition test, and
the Barnes maze test with a visual cue, all of which indicated that Crx(-/-) mice
were blind while Crx(+/-) mice were sighted. In the fear conditioning test,
Crx(-/-) mice were able to acquire both contextual and cued memory using
non-visual information. Crx(-/-) mice showed normal thigmotaxis, but the
exploratory activities were significantly increased. In the elevated plus maze
test, it was unexpected that Crx(-/-) mice rarely fell down from the narrow
platform. There was no reduction in their moving speeds and the moving distance
was rather increased in Crx(-/-) mice. Such behaviors were not affected by
trimming their whiskers. However, attachment of earplugs significantly reduced
their exploratory activities. In summary, these data suggest that Crx(-/-) mice
were behaviorally blind but were able to learn and recognize external environment
utilizing non-visual information, as exemplified by sensory compensation in
exploratory activities on elevated platforms.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24140563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Neurosci Lett. 2013 Nov 27;556:140-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.10.005. Epub
2013 Oct 11.

Upregulation of SOX9 in Glial (Müller) cells in retinal light damage of rats.

Wang X(1), Fan J, Zhang M, Ni Y, Xu G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences and Key Laboratory of Myopia
of State Health Ministry, Eye and ENT Hospital, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan
University, Shanghai 200031, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Visual Impairment 
and Restoration, Fudan University, Shanghai 200031, China.

Recent evidence suggests that SOX9 [sex-determining region Y (SRY) box 9], a
transcription factor, plays a pivotal role in acquired diseases, revealing its
importance in roles beyond development. However, whether SOX9, which is one of
the key regulators of retinal Müller cell development, also participates in the
pathological process of retinal degenerative diseases remains unknown. In the
present study, we hypothesized that SOX9 was upregulated in Müller cells in
retinal degeneration. Retinal light damage (LD) was used as a model for retinal
degeneration. On day 3, 7, 14, 21, and 28 after LD in adult Sprague Dawley (SD)
rats, the spatial distribution of SOX9 in the retina was observed by
immunohistochemistry; the expression levels of SOX9 were measured by real-time
PCR and Western blot analysis. Moreover, type 1 collagen (COL1) and cone-rod
homeobox (CRX) protein levels, which are two downstream targets of SOX9, were
also assessed by Western blot analysis. Colabeling for SOX9 and glutamine
synthetase (GS), a specific Müller cell maker, indicated that SOX9 was expressed 
in the Müller cell nucleus in both control and LD groups. Significantly enhanced 
SOX9 expression was observed as early as day 3 after LD, and it persisted for at 
least 28 days. COL1 and CRX protein levels also increased after LD. Our study
demonstrates the involvement of SOX9 in acquired retinal degeneration triggered
by LD, which might provide novel insights into possible molecular mechanisms that
would account for the involvement of Müller cells in retinal degenerative
diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24120428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2013;2013:1627-31. doi:
10.1109/EMBC.2013.6609828.

Electrical stimulation via a biocompatible conductive polymer directs retinal
progenitor cell differentiation.

Saigal R, Cimetta E, Tandon N, Zhou J, Langer R, Young M, Vunjak-Novakovic G,
Redenti S.

The goal of this study was to simulate in vitro the spontaneous electrical wave
activity associated with retinal development and investigate if such
biometrically designed signals can enhance differentiation of mouse retinal
progenitor cells (mRPC). To this end, we cultured cells on an electroconductive
transplantable polymer, polypyrrole (PPy) and measured gene expression and
morphology of the cells. Custom-made 8-well cell culture chambers were designed
to accommodate PPy deposited onto indium tin oxide-coated (ITO) glass slides,
with precise control of the PPy film thickness. mRPCs were isolated from
post-natal day 1 (P1) green fluorescent protein positive (GFP+) mice, expanded,
seeded onto PPY films, allowed to adhere for 24 hours, and then subjected to
electrical stimulation (100 µA pulse trains, 5 s in duration, once per minute)
for 4 days. Cultured cells and non-stimulated controls were processed for
immunostaining and confocal analysis, and for RNA extraction and quantitative
PCR. Stimulated cells expressed significantly higher levels of the early
photoreceptor marker cone-rod homebox (CRX, the earliest known marker of
photoreceptor identity), and protein kinase-C (PKC), and significantly lower
levels of the glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). Consistently, stimulated
cells developed pronounced neuronal morphologies with significantly longer
dendritic processes and larger cell bodies than non-stimulated controls. Taken
together, the experimental evidence shows that the application of an electrical
stimulation designed based on retinal development can be implemented to direct
and enhance retinal differentiation of mRPCs, suggesting a role for biomimetic
electrical stimulation in directing progenitor cells toward neural fates.

PMCID: PMC4480863
PMID: 24110015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Ophthalmic Genet. 2015 Jun;36(2):156-9. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2013.838273. Epub
2013 Oct 4.

Autosomal-dominant Leber Congenital Amaurosis Caused by a Heterozygous CRX
Mutation in a Father and Son.

Arcot Sadagopan K(1), Battista R, Keep RB, Capasso JE, Levin AV.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Ophthalmology and Ocular Genetics, Wills Eye Institute ,
Philadelphia, PA , USA and.

BACKGROUND: Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) is most often an autosomal recessive
disorder. We report a father and son with autosomal dominant LCA due to a
mutation in the CRX gene.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: DNA screening using an allele specific assay of 90 of the 
most common LCA-causing variations in the coding sequences of AIPL1, CEP290,
CRB1, CRX, GUCY2D, RDH12 and RPE65 was performed on the father. Automated DNA
sequencing of his son examining exon 3 of the CRX gene was subsequently
performed.
RESULTS: Both father and son have a heterozygous single base pair deletion of an 
adenine at codon 153 in the coding sequence of the CRX gene resulting in a
frameshift mutation.
CONCLUSION: Mutations involving the CRX gene may demonstrate an autosomal
dominant inheritance pattern for LCA.

PMID: 24093488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 17;8(9):e74712. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074712. eCollection
2013.

A degenerative retinal process in HIV-associated non-infectious retinopathy.

Kozak I(1), Sasik R, Freeman WR, Sprague LJ, Gomez ML, Cheng L, El-Emam S, Mojana
F, Bartsch DU, Bosten J, Ayyagari R, Hardiman G.

Author information: 
(1)Jacobs Retina Center at the Shiley Eye Center, University of California San
Diego, Department of Ophthalmology, La Jolla, California, United States of
America.

HIV retinopathy is the most common non-infectious complication in the eyes of
HIV-positive individuals. Oncotic lesions in the retinal nerve fiber layer,
referred to as cotton wool spots (CWS), and intraretinal (IR) hemorrhages are
frequently observed but are not unique to this pathology. HIV-positive patients
have impaired color vision and contrast sensitivity, which worsens with age.
Evidence of inner-retinal lesions and damage have been documented
ophthalmoscopically, however their long term structural effect has not been
investigated. It has been hypothesized that they may be partially responsible for
loss of visual function and visual field. In this study we utilized clinical
data, retinal imaging and transcriptomics approaches to comprehensively
interrogate non-infectious HIV retinopathy. The methods employed encompassed
clinical examinations, fundus photography, indirect ophthalmoscopy,
Farmsworth-Munsell 100 hue discrimination testing and Illumina BeadChip analyses.
Here we show that changes in the outer retina, specifically in the retinal
pigment epithelium (RPE) and photoreceptor outer segments (POS) contribute to
vision changes in non-infectious HIV retinopathy. We find that in HIV-positive
retinae there is an induction of rhodopsin and other transcripts (including
PDE6A, PDE6B, PDE6G, CNGA1, CNGB1, CRX, NRL) involved in visual transduction, as 
well as structural components of the rod photoreceptors (ABCA4 and ROM1). This is
consistent with an increased rate of renewal of rod outer segments induced via
increased phagocytosis by HIV-infected RPE previously reported in culture.
Cone-specific transcripts (OPN1SW, OPN1LW, PDE6C, PDE6H and GRK7) are uniformly
downregulated in HIV positive retina, likely due to a partial loss of cone
photoreceptors. Active cotton wool spots and intraretinal hemorrhages (IRH) may
not affect photoreceptors directly and the interaction of photoreceptors with the
aging RPE may be the key to the progressive vision changes in HIV-positive
patients.

PMCID: PMC3775801
PMID: 24069333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 16;8(9):e73172. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073172. eCollection
2013.

Mutational screening of LCA genes emphasizing RPE65 in South Indian cohort of
patients.

Verma A(1), Perumalsamy V, Shetty S, Kulm M, Sundaresan P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dr. G. Venkataswamy Eye Research Institute, Aravind
Medical Research Foundation, Aravind Eye Hospital, Madurai, Tamil Nadu, India.

BACKGROUND: Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) is the most severe form of inherited
retinal visual impairment in children. So far, mutations in more than 20 genes
have been known to cause LCA and among them, RPE65 is a suitable candidate for
gene therapy. The mutational screenings of RPE65 and other LCA genes are
requisite in support of emerging gene specific therapy for LCA. Therefore, we
have carried out a comprehensive LCA genes screening using a combined approach of
direct sequencing and DNA microarray based Asper chip analysis.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Thirty clinically diagnosed index LCA cases from 
Southern India were screened for coding and flanking intronic regions of RPE65
through direct sequencing. Among thirty, 25 cases excluded from RPE65 mutations
were subjected to Asper chip analysis, testing 784 known pathogenic variations in
15 major LCA genes. In RPE65 screening, four different pathogenic variations
including two novel (c.361insT & c.939T>A) and two known (c.394G>A & c.361delT)
mutations were identified in five index cases. In the chip analysis, seven known 
pathogenic mutations were identified in six index cases, involving genes GUCY2D, 
RPGRIP1, AIPL1, CRX and IQCB1. Overall, 11 out of 30 LCA cases (36.6%) revealed
pathogenic variations with the involvement of RPE65 (16.6%), GUCY2D (10%),
RPGRIP1 (3.3%), AIPL1 (3.3%) and CRX & IQCB1 (3.3%).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our study suggests that such combined screening
approach is productive and cost-effective for mutation detection and can be
applied in Indian LCA cohort for molecular diagnosis and genetic counselling.

PMCID: PMC3774716
PMID: 24066033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Mech Dev. 2013 Nov-Dec;130(11-12):628-39. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2013.09.002. Epub
2013 Sep 20.

Identification and evolution of molecular domains involved in differentiating the
cement gland-promoting activity of Otx proteins in Xenopus laevis.

Mancini P(1), Castelli M, Vignali R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia, Unità di Biologia Cellulare e dello Sviluppo, SS 12 
Abetone e Brennero 4, 56127 Pisa, Italy.

Otx genes are a class of vertebrate homeobox genes, homologous to the
orthodenticle gene of Drosophila melanogaster, that play a crucial role in
anterior embryo patterning and sensory organ formation. In the frog, Xenopus
laevis, at least three members of this class have been isolated: otx1, otx2 and
otx5 (crx); they are involved in regulating both shared and differential
processes during frog development. In particular, while otx2 and otx5 are both
capable to promote cement gland (CG) formation, otx1 is not. We performed a
molecular dissection of Otx5 and Otx1 proteins to characterize the functional
parts of the proteins that make them differently able to promote CG formation. We
show that a CG promoting domain (CGPD) is localized at the Otx5 C-terminus, and
is bipartite: CGPD1 (aa210-255) is the most effective domain, while CGPD2
(aa177-209) has a lower activity. A histidine stretch disrupts CGPD1 continuity
in Otx1 determining its loss of CG promoting activity; this histidine-rich region
acts as an actively CG repressing domain. Another Otx1 specific domain, a
serine-rich stretch, may also be involved in repressing Otx1 potential to trigger
CG formation, though at a much lower level. This is the first evidence that these
domains, specific of the Otx1 orthology group, play a role during development in 
differentiating Otx1 action compared to other Otx family members. We discuss the 
potential implications of their appearance in light of the evolution of Otx
functional activities.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24056062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Ophthalmic Genet. 2015 Mar;36(1):21-6. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2013.827219. Epub
2013 Sep 3.

De novo mutations in the cone-rod homeobox gene associated with leber congenital 
amaurosis in Chinese patients.

Zou X(1), Yao F, Liang X, Xu F, Li H, Sui R, Dong F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and.

BACKGROUND: The cone-rod homeobox (CRX) gene plays an important role in
photoreceptor development. Recently, mutant alleles of the CRX gene have been
associated with autosomal dominant Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) and cone-rod 
dystrophy. The purpose of this study was to analyze the CRX mutations in a cohort
of Chinese patients with LCA or early-onset severe retinal dystrophy (EOSRD) and 
to provide the clinical features of these patients.
METHODS: Patients with LCA or EOSRD were enrolled from 2003 to 2012. Detailed
ocular examinations including optical coherence tomography (OCT) and standardized
electrophysiology were performed. Genomic DNA was isolated with standard methods 
of genetic diagnosis. All three exons of CRX were amplified with PCR and screened
for mutations through direct DNA sequencing. A total of 200 unrelated healthy
Chinese subjects were screened to exclude nonpathogenic polymorphisms.
Offspring-parent relationship was tested to confirm de novo mutation.
RESULTS: A total of 109 probands from 109 unrelated families were selected for
mutation screening of the CRX gene. Two individuals with LCA were confirmed to
carry de novo CRX mutations c.421delT (p.Ser141Pro fsX46) and c.571delT
(p.Tyr191Met fsX3), respectively. The daughter of Case 1 also carried the same
CRX mutation (c.421delT) and had LCA symptoms. Pigmentary retinopathy in the
peripheral retina and macular atrophy were observed in the two probands. Macular 
atrophy without normal lamination structure was the retina phenotype under OCT.
CONCLUSIONS: Two de novo mutations in CRX were found in Chinese patients with
LCA. The CRX mutation might create a dominantly inherited trait.

PMID: 24001014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Gene. 2013 Nov 10;530(2):215-21. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.08.033. Epub 2013 Aug
23.

Identification and characterization of novel alternative splice variants of human
SAMD11.

Jin G(1), Long C, Liu W, Tang Y, Zhu Y, Zhou X, Ai Y, Zhang Q, Shen H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Sterile alpha motif domain-containing 11 (SAMD11) is evolutionarily conserved
from zebrafish to human. Mouse Samd11 is predominantly expressed in developing
retinal photoreceptors and the adult pineal gland, and its transcription is
directly regulated by the cone-rod homeodomain protein Crx. However, there has
been little research on human SAMD11. To investigate the function of human
SAMD11, we first cloned its coding sequence (CDS) and identified up to 45 novel
alternative splice variants (ASVs). Mouse Samd11 ASVs were also identified by
aligning the mouse Samd11 expressed sequence tags (ESTs) with the annotated
sequence. However, the range of expression and transcriptional regulation of
SAMD11 differs between human and mouse. Human SAMD11 was found to be widely
expressed in many cell lines and ocular tissues and its transcription was not
regulated by CRX, OTX2 or NR2E3 proteins. Furthermore, functional analysis
indicated that human SAMD11 could promote cell proliferation slightly. In
conclusion, this study elucidated the basic characteristics of human SAMD11 and
revealed that, although the occurrence of alternative splicing of SAMD11 was
conserved, the function of SAMD11 may vary in different species.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23978614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Oncol Rep. 2013 Nov;30(5):2399-410. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2691. Epub 2013 Aug 22.

microRNA-18b is upregulated in breast cancer and modulates genes involved in cell
migration.

Fonseca-Sanchéz MA(1), Pérez-Plasencia C, Fernández-Retana J, Arechaga-Ocampo E, 
Marchat LA, Rodríguez-Cuevas S, Bautista-Piña V, Arellano-Anaya ZE, Flores-Pérez 
A, Diaz-Chávez J, López-Camarillo C.

Author information: 
(1)Oncogenomics and Cancer Proteomics Laboratory, Genomics Sciences Program,
Autonomous University of Mexico City, Mexico City, Mexico.

microRNAs are small non-coding RNAs of ~22 nucleotides that function at
post-transcriptional level as negative regulators of gene expression. Aberrant
expression of microRNAs could promote uncontrolled proliferation, migration and
invasion of human cancer cells. In this study, we analyzed the expression of
microRNA-18b (miR-18b) in breast cancer cell lines and in a set of clinical
specimens. Our results showed that miR-18b was upregulated in four out of five
breast cancer cell lines and also in breast tumors. In order to identify
potential gene targets, we carried out transcriptional profiling of MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells that ectopically expressed miR-18b. Our results showed that
263 genes were significantly modulated in miR-18b-deficient cells (fold
change >1.5; P=0.05). We found that knock-down of miR-18b induced the
upregulation of 55 olfactory receptor (OR) genes and nine genes (NLRP7, KLK3,
OLFM3, POSTN, MAGED4B, KIR3DL3, CRX, SEMG1 and CEACAM5) with key roles in cell
migration and metastasis. Consistently, we found that ectopic inhibition of
miR-18b suppressed the migration of two breast cancer cell models in vitro. In
conclusion, we have uncovered genes directly or indirectly modulated by miR-18b
which may represent potential therapeutic targets in breast cancer. Our data also
pointed out a role of miR-18b in migration of breast cancer cells.

PMID: 23970382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 26;8(7):e69721. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069721. Print 2013.

Transcription coactivators p300 and CBP are necessary for photoreceptor-specific 
chromatin organization and gene expression.

Hennig AK(1), Peng GH, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

Rod and cone photoreceptor neurons in the mammalian retina possess specialized
cellular architecture and functional features for converting light to a neuronal 
signal. Establishing and maintaining these characteristics requires appropriate
expression of a specific set of genes, which is tightly regulated by a network of
photoreceptor transcription factors centered on the cone-rod homeobox protein
CRX. CRX recruits transcription coactivators p300 and CBP to acetylate
promoter-bound histones and activate transcription of target genes. To further
elucidate the role of these two coactivators, we conditionally knocked out Ep300 
and/or CrebBP in differentiating rods or cones, using opsin-driven Cre
recombinase. Knockout of either factor alone exerted minimal effects, but loss of
both factors severely disrupted target cell morphology and function: the unique
nuclear chromatin organization seen in mouse rods was reversed, accompanied by
redistribution of nuclear territories associated with repressive and active
histone marks. Transcription of many genes including CRX targets was severely
impaired, correlating with reduced histone H3/H4 acetylation (the products of
p300/CBP) on target gene promoters. Interestingly, the presence of a single
wild-type allele of either coactivator prevented many of these defects, with
Ep300 more effective than Cbp. These results suggest that p300 and CBP play
essential roles in maintaining photoreceptor-specific structure, function and
gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3724885
PMID: 23922782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 29;8(7):e68776. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068776. Print 2013.

QTL analysis of dietary obesity in C57BL/6byj X 129P3/J F2 mice: diet- and
sex-dependent effects.

Lin C(1), Theodorides ML, McDaniel AH, Tordoff MG, Zhang Q, Li X, Bosak N,
Bachmanov AA, Reed DR.

Author information: 
(1)Monell Chemical Senses Center, Philadelphia Pennsylvania, USA.

Obesity is a heritable trait caused by complex interactions between genes and
environment, including diet. Gene-by-diet interactions are difficult to study in 
humans because the human diet is hard to control. Here, we used mice to study
dietary obesity genes, by four methods. First, we bred 213 F2 mice from strains
that are susceptible [C57BL/6ByJ (B6)] or resistant [129P3/J (129)] to dietary
obesity. Percent body fat was assessed after mice ate low-energy diet and again
after the same mice ate high-energy diet for 8 weeks. Linkage analyses identified
QTLs associated with dietary obesity. Three methods were used to filter candidate
genes within the QTL regions: (a) association mapping was conducted using >40
strains; (b) differential gene expression and (c) comparison of genomic DNA
sequence, using two strains closely related to the progenitor strains from
Experiment 1. The QTL effects depended on whether the mice were male or female or
which diet they were recently fed. After feeding a low-energy diet, percent body 
fat was linked to chr 7 (LOD=3.42). After feeding a high-energy diet, percent
body fat was linked to chr 9 (Obq5; LOD=3.88), chr 12 (Obq34; LOD=3.88), and chr 
17 (LOD=4.56). The Chr 7 and 12 QTLs were sex dependent and all QTL were
diet-dependent. The combination of filtering methods highlighted seven candidate 
genes within the QTL locus boundaries: Crx, Dmpk, Ahr, Mrpl28, Glo1, Tubb5, and
Mut. However, these filtering methods have limitations so gene identification
will require alternative strategies, such as the construction of congenics with
very small donor regions.

PMCID: PMC3726688
PMID: 23922663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. PLoS Genet. 2013 Jun;9(6):e1003555. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003555. Epub 2013 
Jun 20.

Distinct and atypical intrinsic and extrinsic cell death pathways between
photoreceptor cell types upon specific ablation of Ranbp2 in cone photoreceptors.

Cho KI(1), Haque M, Wang J, Yu M, Hao Y, Qiu S, Pillai IC, Peachey NS, Ferreira
PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.

Non-autonomous cell-death is a cardinal feature of the disintegration of neural
networks in neurodegenerative diseases, but the molecular bases of this process
are poorly understood. The neural retina comprises a mosaic of rod and cone
photoreceptors. Cone and rod photoreceptors degenerate upon rod-specific
expression of heterogeneous mutations in functionally distinct genes, whereas
cone-specific mutations are thought to cause only cone demise. Here we show that 
conditional ablation in cone photoreceptors of Ran-binding protein-2 (Ranbp2), a 
cell context-dependent pleiotropic protein linked to neuroprotection, familial
necrotic encephalopathies, acute transverse myelitis and tumor-suppression,
promotes early electrophysiological deficits, subcellular erosive destruction and
non-apoptotic death of cones, whereas rod photoreceptors undergo cone-dependent
non-autonomous apoptosis. Cone-specific Ranbp2 ablation causes the temporal
activation of a cone-intrinsic molecular cascade highlighted by the early
activation of metalloproteinase 11/stromelysin-3 and up-regulation of Crx and
CoREST, followed by the down-modulation of cone-specific phototransduction genes,
transient up-regulation of regulatory/survival genes and activation of caspase-7 
without apoptosis. Conversely, PARP1+ -apoptotic rods develop upon sequential
activation of caspase-9 and caspase-3 and loss of membrane permeability. Rod
photoreceptor demise ceases upon cone degeneration. These findings reveal novel
roles of Ranbp2 in the modulation of intrinsic and extrinsic cell death
mechanisms and pathways. They also unveil a novel spatiotemporal paradigm of
progression of neurodegeneration upon cell-specific genetic damage whereby a cone
to rod non-autonomous death pathway with intrinsically distinct cell-type death
manifestations is triggered by cell-specific loss of Ranbp2. Finally, this study 
casts new light onto cell-death mechanisms that may be shared by human
dystrophies with distinct retinal spatial signatures as well as with other
etiologically distinct neurodegenerative disorders.

PMCID: PMC3688534
PMID: 23818861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jul 16;110(29):11952-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1307449110. Epub 2013 Jul 1.

Massively parallel in vivo enhancer assay reveals that highly local features
determine the cis-regulatory function of ChIP-seq peaks.

White MA(1), Myers CA, Corbo JC, Cohen BA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genome Sciences and Systems Biology, Department of Genetics,
Washington University in St Louis School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63108, USA.

Transcription factors (TFs) recognize short sequence motifs that are present in
millions of copies in large eukaryotic genomes. TFsmust distinguish their target 
binding sites from a vast genomic excess of spurious motif occurrences; however, 
it is unclear whether functional sites are distinguished from nonfunctional
motifs by local primary sequence features or by the larger genomic context in
which motifs reside. We used a massively parallel enhancer assay in living mouse 
retinas to compare 1,300 sequences bound in the genome by the photoreceptor
transcription factor Cone-rod homeobox (Crx), to 3,000 control sequences. We
found that very short sequences bound in the genome by Crx activated
transcription at high levels, whereas unbound genomic regions with equal numbers 
of Crx motifs did not activate above background levels, even when liberated from 
their larger genomic context. High local GC content strongly distinguishes bound 
motifs from unbound motifs across the entire genome. Our results show that the
cis-regulatory potential of TF-bound DNA is determined largely by highly local
sequence features and not by genomic context.

PMCID: PMC3718143
PMID: 23818646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Comp Neurol. 2013 Dec 1;521(17):4061-74. doi: 10.1002/cne.23390.

Hypothalamic neurosecretory and circadian vasopressinergic neuronal systems in
the blind cone-rod homeobox knockout mouse (Crx-/-) and the 129sv wild-type
mouse.

Rovsing L(1), Rath MF, Møller M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, Faculty of Health and Medical
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Panum Institute, 2200, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Vasopressin (AVP) is both a neuroendocrine hormone located in magnocellular
neurosecretory neurons of the hypothalamus of mammals but also a
neurotransmitter/neuromodulator in the parvocellular suprachiasmatic nucleus
(SCN). The SCN is the endogenous clock of the brain and exhibits a prominent
circadian AVP rhythm. We have in this study of the brown 129sv mouse and the
visual blind cone-rod homeobox gene knock out mouse (Crx(-/-) ) with degeneration
of the retinal rods and cones, but a preserved non-image forming optic system,
studied the temporal Avp expression in both the neurosecretory magnocellular and 
parvocellular vasopressinergic systems in both genotypes. We here present a
detailed mapping of all classical hypothalamopituitary and accessory
magnocellular nuclei and neurons in the hypothalamus by use of
immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization in both genotypes.
Semiquantitative in situ hybridization revealed a very high expression of Avp
mRNA in all the magnocellular nuclei compared with a much lower level in the
parvocellular suprachiasmatic nucleus. In a series of mice killed every 4 hours, 
the Avp mRNA expression in the SCN showed a significant daily rhythm with a
zenith at late day time and nadir during the dark in both the Crx(-/-) and the
wild type mouse. None of the magnocellular neurosecretory neurons exhibited a
diurnal vasopressin expression. Light stimulation of both genotypes during the
dark period did not change the Avp expression in the SCN. This shows that Avp
expression in the mouse SCN is independent of Crx-regulated photoreceptor
systems.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23784879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Dev Biol. 2013 Aug 15;380(2):157-71. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.05.021. Epub 2013 
Jun 4.

Insulinoma-associated 1a (Insm1a) is required for photoreceptor differentiation
in the zebrafish retina.

Forbes-Osborne MA(1), Wilson SG, Morris AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506-0225, USA.

The zinc-finger transcription factor insulinoma-associated 1 (Insm1, previously
IA-1) is expressed in the developing nervous and neuroendocrine systems, and is
required for cell type specific differentiation. Expression of Insm1 is largely
absent in the adult, although it is present in neurogenic regions of the adult
brain and zebrafish retina. While expression of Insm1 has also been observed in
the embryonic retina of numerous vertebrate species, its function during retinal 
development has remained unexplored. Here, we demonstrate that in the developing 
zebrafish retina, insm1a is required for photoreceptor differentiation.
Insm1a-deficient embryos were microphthalmic and displayed defects in rod and
cone photoreceptor differentiation. Rod photoreceptor cells were more sensitive
to loss of insm1a expression than were cone photoreceptor cells. Additionally, we
provide evidence that insm1a regulates cell cycle progression of retinoblasts,
and functions upstream of the bHLH transcription factors ath5/atoh7 and neurod,
and the photoreceptor specification genes crx and nr2e3. Finally, we show that
insm1a is negatively regulated by Notch-Delta signaling. Taken together, our data
demonstrate that Insm1 influences neuronal subtype differentiation during retinal
development.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3703496
PMID: 23747542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Mol Vis. 2013 May 30;19:1178-87. Print 2013.

Photoreceptor-like cells from reprogramming cultured mammalian RPE cells.

Yan RT(1), Li X, Huang J, Guidry C, Wang SZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Alabama at Birmingham School of
Medicine, Alabama, USA.

PURPOSE: Previous studies showed that chick retinal pigment epithelium (RPE)
cells can be reprogrammed by a specific gene to take on the path of photoreceptor
differentiation. In this study, we tested whether this reprogramming scheme could
be applied to mammalian RPE cells.
METHODS: Human RPE cell lines ARPE-19, a spontaneously transformed line of RPE
cells derived from a 19-year-old person, and hTERT-RPE1, a
telomerase-immortalized RPE cell line derived from a 1-year-old person, were
commercially obtained and cultured as recommended. Primary RPE cell cultures were
established using RPE isolated from 3- to 6-month-old pig and postnatal day 5
mouse. Cultured cells were transduced with a virus expressing neuroD, neurogenin1
(ngn1), or ngn3, basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) genes previously identified as
capable of inducing RPE-to-photoreceptor reprogramming in the chick system.
Alternatively, cells in the culture were transfected chemically or physically
through electroporation with vector DNA expressing one of the three genes. The
cultures were then analyzed for RPE-to-photoreceptor reprogramming with in situ
hybridization and/or immunostaining for photoreceptor gene expression.
RESULTS: Both hTERT-RPE1 and ARPE-19 cultures gave rise to cells bearing markers 
of photoreceptors after transduction or transfection with vehicles expressing
neuroD or ngn1. The new cells expressed genes encoding photoreceptor proteins,
including interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein IRBP), recoverin, retinal
cone arrestin 3, transducin a-subunit, Cone-rod homeobox protein (Crx), and red
opsin. They displayed morphologies resembling differentiating photoreceptor
cells. In primary porcine and mouse RPE cell cultures, transduction with lenti
virus (Lvx-IRES-ZsGreen1) expressing ngn1 or ngn3 resulted in the emergence of
ZsGreen1+ cells that exhibited morphologies reminiscent of differentiating
photoreceptor cells. Immunochemistry showed that some ZsGreen1+ cells were
positive for neural marker microtubule-associated protein 2 (Map2) and
photoreceptor hallmark proteins red opsin and rhodopsin.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that cells in human RPE cell lines and in
primary cultures of porcine and mouse RPE respond to gene-induced reprogramming
by giving rise to photoreceptor-like cells. The responsiveness of primary RPE
cells, especially those from porcine cells, enhances the biologic feasibility of 
exploring RPE-to-photoreceptor reprogramming for in situ mammalian photoreceptor 
replacement without cell transplantation.

PMCID: PMC3669535
PMID: 23734087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2013 Jul-Aug;38:92-103. doi: 10.1016/j.ntt.2013.05.006.
Epub 2013 May 25.

Ethanol inhibits retinal and CNS differentiation due to failure of cell cycle
exit via an apoptosis-independent pathway.

Chung HY(1), Chang CT, Young HW, Hu SP, Tzou WS, Hu CH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, National Taiwan Ocean University,
Keelung, Taiwan.

Alcohol exposure during embryogenesis results in a variety of developmental
disorders. Here, we demonstrate that continuous exposure to 1.5% ethanol causes
substantial apoptosis and abrogated retinal and CNS development in zebrafish
embryos. Chronic exposure to ethanol for 24h before hatching also induces
apoptosis and retinal disorder. After the 2-day post-fertilization (dpf) stage,
chronic exposure to ethanol continued to induce apoptosis, but did not block
retinal differentiation. Although continuous ethanol exposure induces substantial
accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and increases p53 expression,
depletion of p53 did not eliminate ethanol-induced apoptosis. On the other hand, 
sequestering ROS with the antioxidant reagent N-acetylcysteine (NAC) successfully
inhibited ethanol-associated apoptosis, suggesting that the ethanol-induced cell 
death primarily results from ROS accumulation. Continuous ethanol treatment of
embryos reduced expression of the mature neural and photoreceptor markers
elavl3/huC, rho, and crx; in addition, expression of the neural and retinal
progenitor markers ascl1b and pax6b was maintained at the undifferentiated stage,
indicating that retinal and CNS neural progenitor cells failed to undergo further
differentiation. Moreover, ethanol treatment enhanced BrdU incorporation, histone
H3 phosphorylation, and pcna expression in neural progenitor cells, thereby
maintaining a high rate of proliferation. Ethanol treatment also resulted in
sustained transcription of ccnd1/cyclin D1 and ccne/cyclin E throughout
development in neural progenitor cells, without an appropriate increase of
cdkn1b/p27 and cdkn1c/p57 expression, suggesting that these cells failed to exit 
from the cell cycle. Although NAC was able to mitigate ethanol-mediated
apoptosis, it was unable to ameliorate the defects in visual and CNS neural
differentiation, suggesting that abrogated neural development in ethanol-exposed 
embryos is unlikely to arise from excessive apoptosis. In conclusion, we
demonstrate that the pathological effect of ethanol on zebrafish embryos is
partially attributable to cell death and inhibition of visual and CNS neuron
differentiation. Excessive apoptosis largely results from the accumulation of
ROS, whereas abrogated neural development is caused by failure of cell cycle
arrest, which in turn prevents a successful transition from proliferation to
differentiation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23714372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013 Jun 26;54(6):4351-7. doi: 10.1167/iovs.13-11606.

Comprehensive mutation analysis by whole-exome sequencing in 41 Chinese families 
with Leber congenital amaurosis.

Chen Y(1), Zhang Q, Shen T, Xiao X, Li S, Guan L, Zhang J, Zhu Z, Yin Y, Wang P, 
Guo X, Wang J, Zhang Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

PURPOSE: Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) is a genetically heterogeneous disease 
with, to date, 19 identified causative genes. Our aim was to evaluate the
mutations in all 19 genes in Chinese families with LCA.
METHODS: LCA patients from 41 unrelated Chinese families were enrolled, including
25 previously unanalyzed families and 16 families screened previously by Sanger
sequencing, but with no identified mutations. Genetic variations were screened by
whole-exome sequencing and then validated using Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: A total of 41 variants predicted to affect protein coding or splicing
was detected by whole-exome sequencing, and 40 were confirmed by Sanger
sequencing. Bioinformatic and segregation analyses revealed 22 potentially
pathogenic variants (17 novel) in 15 probands, comprised of 3 of 16 previously
analyzed families and 12 of 25 (48%) previously unanalyzed families. In the
latter 12 families, mutations were found in CEP290 (three probands); GUCY2D (two 
probands); and CRB1, CRX, RPE65, IQCB1, LCA5, TULP1, and IMPDH1 (one proband
each). Based on the results from 87 previously analyzed probands and 25 new
cases, GUCY2D, CRB1, RPGRIP1, CEP290, and CRX were the five most frequently
mutated genes, which was similar to the results from studies in Caucasian
subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Whole-exome sequencing detected mutations in the 19 known LCA genes 
in approximately half of Chinese families with LCA. These results, together with 
our previous results, demonstrate the spectrum and frequency of mutations of the 
19 genes responsible for LCA in Han Chinese individuals. Whole-exome sequencing
is an efficient method for detecting mutations in highly heterogeneous hereditary
diseases. Chinese Abstract.

PMID: 23661368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 30;8(4):e63205. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063205. Print 2013.

Ablation of C/EBP homologous protein does not protect T17M RHO mice from retinal 
degeneration.

Nashine S(1), Bhootada Y, Lewin AS, Gorbatyuk M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of North Texas Health
Science Center, Fort Worth, Texas, United States of America.

Despite the proposed link between ablation of the CHOP protein and delay of the
onset of ER stress-mediated disorders including diabetes, Alzheimer Disease, and 
cardiac hypertrophy, the role of CHOP protein in photoreceptor cell death
associated with Autosomal Dominant Retinitis Pigmentosa (ADRP) has not been
investigated. T17M RHO transgenic mice carry a mutated human rhodopsin transgene,
the expression of which in retina leads to protein misfolding, activation of UPR 
and progressive retinal degeneration. The purpose of this study is to investigate
the role of CHOP protein in T17M RHO retina. Wild-type, CHOP-/-, T17M RHO and
T17M RHO CHOP-/-mice were used in the study. Evaluation of the impact of CHOP
ablation was performed using electroretinography (ERG), spectral-domain optical
coherence tomography (SD-OCT), quantitative Real-Time PCR (qRT-PCR) and western
blot analysis. Dark-adapted ERG analysis demonstrated that by 1 month, the T17M
RHO CHOP-/- mice had a 70% reduction of the a-wave amplitude compared to the T17M
RHO mice. The loss of function in T17M RHO CHOP-/- photoreceptors was associated 
with a 22-24% decline in the thickness of the outer nuclear layer. These mice had
significant reduction in the expression of transcription factors, Crx and Nrl,
and also in mouse Rho, and human RHO. The reduction was associated with an 8-fold
elevation of the UPR marker, p-eIf2a protein and 30% down-regulation of sXbp1
protein. In addition, the histone deacetylase 1 (Hdac1) protein was 2-fold
elevated in the T17M RHO CHOP-/- retina. The ablation of CHOP led to a reduction 
in the expression of photoreceptor-specific transcriptional factors, and both
endogenous and exogenous RHO mRNA. Thus, despite its role in promoting apoptosis,
CHOP protects rod photoreceptors carrying an ADRP mutation.

PMCID: PMC3640035
PMID: 23646198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Mol Biol Evol. 2013 Jul;30(7):1527-43. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mst079. Epub 2013 Apr 
23.

Evolution of the eye transcriptome under constant darkness in Sinocyclocheilus
cavefish.

Meng F(1), Braasch I, Phillips JB, Lin X, Titus T, Zhang C, Postlethwait JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2013 Oct;30(10):2367.

In adaptating to perpetual darkness, cave species gradually lose eyes and body
pigmentation and evolve alternatives for exploring their environments. Although
troglodyte features evolved independently many times in cavefish, we do not yet
know whether independent evolution of these characters involves common genetic
mechanisms. Surface-dwelling and many cave-dwelling species make the freshwater
teleost genus Sinocyclocheilus an excellent model for studying the evolution of
adaptations to life in constant darkness. We compared the mature retinal
histology of surface and cave species in Sinocyclocheilus and found that adult
cavefish showed a reduction in the number and length of photoreceptor cells. To
identify genes and genetic pathways that evolved in constant darkness, we used
RNA-seq to compare eyes of surface and cave species. De novo transcriptome
assemblies were developed for both species, and contigs were annotated with gene 
ontology. Results from cave-dwelling Sinocyclocheilus revealed reduced
transcription of phototransduction and other genes important for retinal
function. In contrast to the blind Mexican tetra cavefish Astyanax mexicanus, our
results on morphologies and gene expression suggest that evolved retinal
reduction in cave-dwelling Sinocyclocheilus occurs in a lens-independent fashion 
by the reduced proliferation and downregulation of transcriptional factors shown 
to have direct roles in retinal development and maintenance, including cone-rod
homeobox (crx) and Wnt pathway members. These results show that the independent
evolution of retinal degeneration in cavefish can occur by different
developmental genetic mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3684860
PMID: 23612715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e60633. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060633. Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Sterile alpha motif containing 7 (samd7) is a novel crx-regulated transcriptional
repressor in the retina.

Hlawatsch J(1), Karlstetter M, Aslanidis A, Lückoff A, Walczak Y, Plank M, Böck
J, Langmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.

Inherited retinal diseases are mainly caused by mutations in genes that are
highly expressed in photoreceptors of the retina. The majority of these genes is 
under the control of the transcription factor Cone rod homeobox (Crx), that acts 
as a master transcription factor in photoreceptors. Using a genome-wide chromatin
immunoprecipitation dataset that highlights all potential in vivo targets of Crx,
we have identified a novel sterile alpha motif (SAM) domain containing protein,
Samd7. mRNA Expression of Samd7 was confined to the late postnatal and adult
mouse retina as well as the pineal gland. Using immunohistochemistry and Western 
blot, we could detect Samd7 protein in the outer nuclear layer of adult mouse
retina. Ectopic over-expression in HEK293 cells demonstrated that Samd7 resides
in the cytoplasm as well as the nucleus. In vitro electroporation of fluorescent 
reporters into living mouse retinal cultures revealed that transcription of the
Samd7 gene depends on evolutionary conserved Crx motifs located in the first
intron enhancer. Moreover, Crx knock-down with shRNA strongly reduced Samd7
reporter activity and endogenous Samd7 protein, indicating that Crx is required
for retinal expression of Samd7. Finally, using co-transfections in luciferase
reporter assays we found that Samd7 interferes with Crx-dependent transcription. 
Samd7 suppressed luciferase activity from a reporter plasmid with five Crx
consensus repeats in a dose dependent manner and reduced Crx-mediated
transactivation of regulatory sequences in the retinoschisin gene and the Samd7
gene itself. Taken together, we have identified a novel retinal SAM domain
protein, Samd7, which could act as a transcriptional repressor involved in
fine-tuning of Crx-regulated gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3615016
PMID: 23565263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mol Vis. 2013;19:654-64. Epub 2013 Mar 21.

Detection of novel mutations that cause autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa
in candidate genes by long-range PCR amplification and next-generation
sequencing.

de Sousa Dias M(1), Hernan I, Pascual B, Borràs E, Mañé B, Gamundi MJ, Carballo
M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Unit, Hospital of Terrassa, Barcelona, Spain.

PURPOSE: To devise an effective method for detecting mutations in 12 genes (CA4, 
CRX, IMPDH1, NR2E3, RP9, PRPF3, PRPF8, PRPF31, PRPH2, RHO, RP1, and TOPORS)
commonly associated with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (adRP) that
account for more than 95% of known mutations.
METHODS: We used long-range PCR (LR-PCR) amplification and next-generation
sequencing (NGS) performed in a GS Junior 454 benchtop sequencing platform.
Twenty LR-PCR fragments, between 3,000 and 10,000 bp, containing all coding exons
and flanking regions of the 12 genes, were obtained from DNA samples of patients 
with adRP. Sequencing libraries were prepared with an enzymatic (Fragmentase
technology) method.
RESULTS: Complete coverage of the coding and flanking sequences of the 12 genes
assayed was obtained with NGS, with an average sequence depth of 380× (ranging
from 128× to 1,077×). Five previous known mutations in the adRP genes were
detected with a sequence variation percentage between 35% and 65%. We also
performed a parallel sequence analysis of four samples, three of them new
patients with index adRP, in which two novel mutations were detected in RHO
(p.Asn73del) and PRPF31 (p.Ile109del).
CONCLUSIONS: The results demonstrate that genomic LR-PCR amplification together
with NGS is an effective method for analyzing individual patient samples for
mutations in a monogenic heterogeneous disease such as adRP. This approach proved
effective for the parallel analysis of adRP and has been introduced as routine.
Additionally, this approach could be extended to other heterogeneous genetic
diseases.

PMCID: PMC3611935
PMID: 23559859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Hum Mutat. 2013 Jun;34(6):853-9. doi: 10.1002/humu.22317. Epub 2013 Apr 12.

Prioritization of retinal disease genes: an integrative approach.

Wagner AH(1), Taylor KR, DeLuca AP, Casavant TL, Mullins RF, Stone EM, Scheetz
TE, Braun TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa
52242, USA. alex-wagner@uiowa.edu

The discovery of novel disease-associated variations in genes is often a daunting
task in highly heterogeneous disease classes. We seek a generalizable algorithm
that integrates multiple publicly available genomic data sources in a
machine-learning model for the prioritization of candidates identified in
patients with retinal disease. To approach this problem, we generate a set of
feature vectors from publicly available microarray, RNA-seq, and ChIP-seq
datasets of biological relevance to retinal disease, to observe patterns in gene 
expression specificity among tissues of the body and the eye, in addition to
photoreceptor-specific signals by the CRX transcription factor. Using these
features, we describe a novel algorithm, positive and unlabeled learning for
prioritization (PULP). This article compares several popular supervised learning 
techniques as the regression function for PULP. The results demonstrate a highly 
significant enrichment for previously characterized disease genes using a
logistic regression method. Finally, a comparison of PULP with the popular gene
prioritization tool ENDEAVOUR shows superior prioritization of retinal disease
genes from previous studies. The java source code, compiled binary, assembled
feature vectors, and instructions are available online at
https://github.com/ahwagner/PULP.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4509594
PMID: 23508994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Stem Cells. 2013 Jun;31(6):1149-59. doi: 10.1002/stem.1372.

Developing rods transplanted into the degenerating retina of Crx-knockout mice
exhibit neural activity similar to native photoreceptors.

Homma K(1), Okamoto S, Mandai M, Gotoh N, Rajasimha HK, Chang YS, Chen S, Li W,
Cogliati T, Swaroop A, Takahashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Retinal Regeneration, Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN, 
Kobe, Japan. kohei.homma@nih.gov

Replacement of dysfunctional or dying photoreceptors offers a promising approach 
for retinal neurodegenerative diseases, including age-related macular
degeneration and retinitis pigmentosa. Several studies have demonstrated the
integration and differentiation of developing rod photoreceptors when
transplanted in wild-type or degenerating retina; however, the physiology and
function of the donor cells are not adequately defined. Here, we describe the
physiological properties of developing rod photoreceptors that are tagged with
green fluorescent protein (GFP) driven by the promoter of rod differentiation
factor, Nrl. GFP-tagged developing rods show Ca(2 +) responses and rectifier
outward currents that are smaller than those observed in fully developed
photoreceptors, suggesting their immature developmental state. These immature
rods also exhibit hyperpolarization-activated current (Ih ) induced by the
activation of hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels.
When transplanted into the subretinal space of wild-type or retinal degeneration 
mice, GFP-tagged developing rods can integrate into the photoreceptor outer
nuclear layer in wild-type mouse retina and exhibit Ca(2 +) responses and
membrane current comparable to native rod photoreceptors. A proportion of grafted
rods develop rhodopsin-positive outer segment-like structures within 2 weeks
after transplantation into the retina of Crx-knockout mice and produce rectifier 
outward current and Ih upon membrane depolarization and hyperpolarization.
GFP-positive rods derived from induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells also display 
similar membrane current Ih as native developing rod photoreceptors, express
rod-specific phototransduction genes, and HCN-1 channels. We conclude that
Nrl-promoter-driven GFP-tagged donor photoreceptors exhibit physiological
characteristics of rods and that iPS cell-derived rods in vitro may provide a
renewable source for cell-replacement therapy.

Copyright © 2013 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4540234
PMID: 23495178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Kidney Int. 2013 May;83(5):887-900. doi: 10.1038/ki.2013.11. Epub 2013 Feb 20.

The TLR4 antagonist CRX-526 protects against advanced diabetic nephropathy.

Lin M(1), Yiu WH, Li RX, Wu HJ, Wong DW, Chan LY, Leung JC, Lai KN, Tang SC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong,
Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong.

We recently showed that Toll-like receptor (TLR) TLR4 was overexpressed in the
human diabetic kidney, which could promote tubular inflammation. Here we explored
whether the TLR4 antagonist, CRX-526, has therapeutic potential to attenuate
renal injuries and slow the progression of advanced diabetic nephropathy in
wild-type and endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) knockout mice. In the
latter, the endogenous TLR4 ligand, high-mobility group box 1, was upregulated
more than in wild-type animals. Four weeks after streptozotocin induction of
diabetes, mice were injected with either CRX-526 or vehicle for 8 weeks. CRX-526 
significantly reduced albuminuria and blood urea nitrogen without altering blood 
glucose and systolic blood pressure in diabetic mice. Glomerular hypertrophy,
glomerulosclerosis, and tubulointerstitial injury were attenuated by CRX-526,
which was associated with decreased chemokine (C-C motif) ligand (CCL)-2,
osteopontin, CCL-5 overexpression, subsequent macrophage infiltration, and
collagen deposition. These effects were associated with inhibition of TGF-ß
overexpression and NF-<U+03BA>B activation. In vitro, CRX-526 inhibited high
glucose-induced osteopontin upregulation and NF-<U+03BA>B nuclear translocation in
cultured human proximal tubular epithelial cells. Thus, we provided evidence that
inhibition of TLR4 with the synthetic antagonist CRX-526 conferred renoprotective
effects in eNOS knockout diabetic mice with advanced diabetic nephropathy.

PMID: 23423259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Neurosci Lett. 2013 Apr 29;541:43-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.12.055. Epub 2013
Feb 8.

Mesenchymal stem cells from trabecular meshwork become photoreceptor-like cells
on amniotic membrane.

Nadri S(1), Yazdani S, Arefian E, Gohari Z, Eslaminejad MB, Kazemi B, Soleimani
M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering Department, Faculty of Medicine,
Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Stem cell therapy is a promising approach for treatment of degenerative retinal
disorders such as retinitis pigmentosa (RP) and age-related macular degeneration 
(AMD). In this study, human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) were isolated from the 
trabecular meshwork (TM), the major functional tissue of the anterior chamber
angle in the eye, were characterized and differentiated into photoreceptor cells 
on amniotic membrane (AM). After isolation of trabecular meshwork and culture of 
the stromal segment of this tissue, fibroblast-like cells (CD105(+), CD90(+),
CD44(+), CD166(+) cells) capable of differentiation toward mesenchymal and
photoreceptor lineages were obtained. The isolated cells were seeded on amniotic 
membrane and were treated with induction medium. Immunocytochemistry and
quantitative real time RT-PCR (qPCR) were used to detect expression of
photoreceptor genes such as rhodopsin, recoverin, CRX, and peripherin; and the
bipolar cell marker protein kinase C alpha (PKC-alpha). As a result,
immunocytochemistry revealed that the differentiated TMMSCs expressed rhodopsin, 
CRX and PKC proteins. qPCR showed the expression of rhodopsin (rod like
photoreceptor-specific marker), and CRX genes were significantly higher in TMMSCs
differentiated on AM than those differentiated on tissue culture polystyrene
(TCPS). In conclusion, our findings suggested that a combination of TMMSCs (as a 
new source) and basement membrane support from AM might be a suitable source of
cells for subretinal transplantation in regenerative therapy for retinal
disorders such as AMD and RP.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23403103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Tissue Eng Part C Methods. 2013 Oct;19(10):755-64. doi:
10.1089/ten.TEC.2012.0524. Epub 2013 Mar 15.

Differentiation of human embryonic stem cells using size-controlled embryoid
bodies and negative cell selection in the production of photoreceptor precursor
cells.

Yanai A(1), Laver CR, Joe AW, Viringipurampeer IA, Wang X, Gregory-Evans CY,
Gregory-Evans K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Faculty of Medicine,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

We proposed to optimize the retinal differentiation protocols for human embryonic
stem cells (hESCs) by improving cell handling. To improve efficiency, we first
focused on the production of just one retinal precursor cell type (photoreceptor 
precursor cells [PPCs]) rather than the production of a range of retinal cells.
Combining information from a number of previous studies, in particular the use of
a feeder-free culture medium and taurine plus triiodothyronine supplements, we
then assessed the values of using size-controlled embryoid bodies (EBs) and
negative cell selection (to remove residual embryonic antigen-4-positive hESCs). 
Using size-controlled 1000 cell EBs, significant improvements were made, in that 
78% CRX+ve PPCs could be produced in just 17 days. This could be increased to 93%
PPCs through the added step of negative cell selection. Improved efficiency of
PPC production will help in efforts to undertake shorter and larger preclinical
studies as a prelude to future clinical trials.

PMCID: PMC3751206
PMID: 23363370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Stem Cells. 2013 May;31(5):966-78. doi: 10.1002/stem.1339.

Hypoxia increases the yield of photoreceptors differentiating from mouse
embryonic stem cells and improves the modeling of retinogenesis in vitro.

Garita-Hernández M(1), Diaz-Corrales F, Lukovic D, González-Guede I, Diez-Lloret 
A, Valdés-Sánchez ML, Massalini S, Erceg S, Bhattacharya SS.

Author information: 
(1)CABIMER (Centro Andaluz de Biología Molecular y Medicina Regenerativa), Avda. 
Americo Vespucio s/n, Parque Científico y Tecnológico Cartuja, Sevilla, Spain.

Retinitis pigmentosa (RP), a genetically heterogeneous group of diseases together
with age-related macular degeneration (AMD), are the leading causes of permanent 
blindness and are characterized by the progressive dysfunction and death of the
light sensing photoreceptors of the retina. Due to the limited regeneration
capacity of the mammalian retina, the scientific community has invested
significantly in trying to obtain retinal progenitor cells from embryonic stem
cells (ESC). These represent an unlimited source of retinal cells, but it has not
yet been possible to achieve specific populations, such as photoreceptors,
efficiently enough to allow them to be used safely in the future as cell therapy 
of RP or AMD. In this study, we generated a high yield of photoreceptors from
directed differentiation of mouse ESC (mESC) by recapitulating crucial phases of 
retinal development. We present a new protocol of differentiation, involving
hypoxia and taking into account extrinsic and intrinsic cues. These include
niche-specific conditions as well as the manipulation of the signaling pathways
involved in retinal development. Our results show that hypoxia promotes and
improves the differentiation of mESC toward photoreceptors. Different populations
of retinal cells are increased in number under the hypoxic conditions applied,
such as Crx-positive cells, S-Opsin-positive cells, and double positive cells for
Rhodopsin and Recoverin, as shown by immunofluorescence analysis. For the first
time, this manuscript reports the high efficiency of differentiation in vivo and 
the expression of mature rod photoreceptor markers in a large number of
differentiated cells, transplanted in the subretinal space of wild-type mice.

Copyright © 2013 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23362204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54146. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054146. Epub 2013 Jan 15.

Tropisms of AAV for subretinal delivery to the neonatal mouse retina and its
application for in vivo rescue of developmental photoreceptor disorders.

Watanabe S(1), Sanuki R, Ueno S, Koyasu T, Hasegawa T, Furukawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute for Protein
Research, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Adeno-associated virus (AAV) is well established as a vehicle for in 
vivo gene transfer into the mammalian retina. This virus is promising not only
for gene therapy of retinal diseases, but also for in vivo functional analysis of
retinal genes. Previous reports have shown that AAV can infect various cell types
in the developing mouse retina. However, AAV tropism in the developing retina has
not yet been examined in detail.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We subretinally delivered seven AAV serotypes
(AAV2/1, 2/2, 2/5, 2/8, 2/9, 2/10, and 2/11) of AAV-CAG-mCherry into P0 mouse
retinas, and quantitatively evaluated the tropisms of each serotype by its
infecting degree in retinal cells. After subretinal injection of AAV into
postnatal day 0 (P0) mouse retinas, various retinal cell types were efficiently
transduced with different AAVs. Photoreceptor cells were efficiently transduced
with AAV2/5. Retinal cells, except for bipolar and Müller glial cells, were
efficiently transduced with AAV2/9. Horizontal and/or ganglion cells were
efficiently transduced with AAV2/1, AAV2/2, AAV2/8, AAV2/9 and AAV2/10. To
confirm the usefulness of AAV-mediated gene transfer into the P0 mouse retina, we
performed AAV-mediated rescue of the Cone-rod homeobox gene knockout (Crx KO)
mouse, which exhibits an outer segment formation defect, flat electroretinogram
(ERG) responses, and photoreceptor degeneration. We injected an AAV expressing
Crx under the control of the Crx 2kb promoter into the neonatal Crx KO retina. We
showed that AAV mediated-Crx expression significantly decreased the abnormalities
of the Crx KO retina.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: In the current study, we report suitable AAV tropisms
for delivery into the developing mouse retina. Using AAV2/5 in photoreceptor
cells, we demonstrated the possibility of gene replacement for the developmental 
disorder and subsequent degeneration of retinal photoreceptors caused by the
absence of Crx.

PMCID: PMC3545928
PMID: 23335994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2013 May;21(3):248-53. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3182649dad.

CRX/OTX3: a useful marker in the differential diagnosis of tumors of the pineal
region and indicator of photoreceptor differentiation in medulloblastomas and
atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors.

Gielen GH(1), Gessi M, Denkhaus D, Pietsch T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, University of Bonn Medical Center, Bonn, Germany.

CRX (OTX3) is a transcription factor of the OTX homeobox family, whose expression
and function is essential for the development and differentiation of retinal and 
pineal cells. Among human cancers, CRX seems to be selectively expressed only by 
retinoblastomas and pineal tumors. In our immunohistochemical analysis, performed
on 89 primary and metastatic central nervous system tumors, we found that CRX is 
strongly expressed by normal pineal tissue as well as by pineal parenchymal
tumors. Other than pineal tumors, we observed CRX positivity not only in a few
medulloblastomas but also in atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors and in small cell 
lung carcinoma metastasis, in which photoreceptor differentiation has not been
reported so far. In conclusion, CRX could represent a potential routine
immunohistochemical marker in surgical neuropathology for the differential
diagnosis of tumors of the pineal region. However, owing to the significant
percentage of negative cells in some pineal tumors of our series, CRX negativity 
does not definitively rule out the diagnosis of a pineal parenchymal tumor,
particularly in case of small biopsy specimens.

PMID: 23235340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Neurosci. 2012 Dec 5;32(49):17658-70. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1869-12.2012.

G9a histone methyltransferase activity in retinal progenitors is essential for
proper differentiation and survival of mouse retinal cells.

Katoh K(1), Yamazaki R, Onishi A, Sanuki R, Furukawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute for Protein
Research, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

In vertebrate retinal development, various transcription factors are known to
execute essential activities in gene regulation. Although epigenetic modification
is considered to play a pivotal role in retinal development, the exact in vivo
role of epigenetic regulation is still poorly understood. We observed that G9a
histone methyltransferase, which methylates histone H3 at lysine 9 (H3K9), is
substantially expressed in the mouse retina throughout development. To address in
vivo G9a function in the mouse retina, we ablated G9a in retinal progenitor cells
by conditional gene knock-out (G9a Dkk3 CKO). The G9a Dkk3 CKO retina exhibited
severe morphological defects, including photoreceptor rosette formation, a
partial loss of the outer nuclear layer, elevated cell death, and persistent cell
proliferation. Progenitor cell-related genes, including several cyclins, Hes1,
Chx10, and Lhx2, are methylated on histone H3K9 in the wild-type retina, but they
were defective in H3K9 methylation and improperly upregulated at late
developmental stages in the G9a Dkk3 CKO retina. Notably, conditional depletion
of G9a in postmitotic photoreceptor precursors (G9a Crx CKO) led to the
development of an almost normal retina, indicating that G9a activity mainly in
retinal progenitor cells, but not in photoreceptor precursors, is essential for
normal terminal differentiation of and survival of the retina. Our results
suggest that proper epigenetic marks in progenitor cells are important for
subsequent appropriate terminal differentiation and survival of retinal cells by 
repressing progenitor cell-related genes in differentiating retinal cells.

PMID: 23223288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Immunology. 2013 Apr;138(4):361-9. doi: 10.1111/imm.12043.

The neonatal susceptibility window for inhalant allergen sensitization in the
atopically predisposed canine asthma model.

Royer CM(1), Rudolph K, Barrett EG.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Immunology and Asthma Program, Lovelace Respiratory Research
Institute, Albuquerque, NM 87108, USA.

Allergic asthma often begins in early life and, although many risk factors have
been enumerated, the specific factors that initiate disease progression in an
individual remain unclear. Using our dog model of early life allergen inhalation,
we tested the hypothesis that the atopically biased neonatal immune system would 
exhibit tolerance to ragweed if allowed to mature normally before exposure or
artificially through innate immune stimulation with early life exposure. Dogs
were subjected to a series of inhalational ragweed exposures from 1 to 20 weeks
old, with or without inhalation of a Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) agonist
(CRX-527), or from 13 to 31 weeks old. Serum allergen-specific antibody response 
was assessed at 4, 8 and 20 weeks after the last sensitizing exposure. At 24 or
35 weeks old, airway hyper-responsiveness to methacholine and ragweed challenges 
and pulmonary inflammation by bronchoalveolar lavage were tested 1 and 4 days
after ragweed challenge at 28 or 39 weeks old. Allergen-free immune maturation
resulted in no airway hyper-responsiveness and very little ragweed-specific IgE
relative to the control group, but eosinophilia developed upon ragweed challenge.
TLR4 agonism yielded no airway hyper-responsiveness, but a strong airway
neutrophilia developed upon ragweed challenge. Our data indicate that an atopic
predisposition creates a critical window in which allergen exposure can lead to
an asthmatic phenotype. Allergen-free immune maturation may lead to allergen
tolerance. TLR4 agonism before early life allergen exposure may abrogate the
development of allergen-specific bronchonconstriction, but allergen-specific
pulmonary inflammation remains a strong concern.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3719946
PMID: 23181409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Methods Mol Biol. 2013;935:311-28. doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-080-9_22.

Double chromatin immunoprecipitation: analysis of target co-occupancy of retinal 
transcription factors.

Peng GH(1), Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.

Combinatorial binding of transcription factors (TFs) and cofactors to specific
regulatory regions of target genes in vivo is an important mechanism of
transcriptional regulation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) is a powerful
technique to detect protein binding to specific regions of target genes in vivo. 
However, conventional ChIP analysis for individual factors (single ChIP) does not
provide information on co-occupancy of two interacting TFs on target genes, even 
if both bind to the same chromatin regions. Double ChIP analysis involves
sequential (double) immunoprecipitation of two chromatin-binding proteins and can
be used to study co-occupancy of two or more factors on specific regions of the
same DNA allele. Furthermore, by including a cell type-specific protein in
double-ChIP, target co-occupancy in a specific cell type can be studied even if
the other partner is more widely expressed. In this chapter, we describe a
detailed protocol for double ChIP analysis in mouse retinas. Using the
rod-specific transcription factor NR2E3 and the cone/rod homeobox protein CRX as 
examples, we show that NR2E3 and CRX are co-enriched on the promoter of active
Rho and Rbp3 genes in rods, but are present to a much lesser degree on the
promoters of silent cone opsin genes. These results suggest a new mechanism by
which rod and cone genes are differentially regulated by these transcription
factors in rod photoreceptors.

PMID: 23150378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Stem Cells. 2013 Feb;31(2):408-14. doi: 10.1002/stem.1268.

Brief report: self-organizing neuroepithelium from human pluripotent stem cells
facilitates derivation of photoreceptors.

Boucherie C(1), Mukherjee S, Henckaerts E, Thrasher AJ, Sowden JC, Ali RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United
Kingdom.

Retinitis pigmentosa, other inherited retinal diseases, and age-related macular
degeneration lead to untreatable blindness because of the loss of photoreceptors.
We have recently shown that transplantation of mouse photoreceptors can result in
improved vision. It is therefore timely to develop protocols for efficient
derivation of photoreceptors from human pluripotent stem (hPS) cells. Current
methods for photoreceptor derivation from hPS cells require long periods of
culture and are rather inefficient. Here, we report that formation of a transient
self-organized neuroepithelium from human embryonic stem cells cultured together 
with extracellular matrix is sufficient to induce a rapid conversion into retinal
progenitors in 5 days. These retinal progenitors have the ability to
differentiate very efficiently into Crx(+) photoreceptor precursors after only 10
days and subsequently acquire rod photoreceptor identity within 4 weeks. Directed
differentiation into photoreceptors using this protocol is also possible with
human-induced pluripotent stem (hiPS) cells, facilitating the use of
patient-specific hiPS cell lines for regenerative medicine and disease modeling.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23132794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2012;76(11):2124-8. Epub 2012 Nov 7.

In vivo and in vitro studies on the absorption characteristics of ß-cryptoxanthin
in the intestine.

Takaishi N(1), Satsu H, Takayanagi K, Mukai K, Shimizu M.

Author information: 
(1)R&D Center, UNITIKA Ltd., 23 Kozakura, Uji, Kyoto 611-0021, Japan.

ß-Cryptoxanthin (ß-CRX) is a carotenoid abundantly present in the Satsuma
mandarin (Citrus unshiu Marc.), one of the most popular fruits in Japan, and it
is reported to have several health benefits. Although it is thought to have
higher bioavailability than other carotenoids, the usual daily intake is small,
and a good method to improve its bioavailability is needed. Hence we studied the 
effect of emulsification on the absorption characteristics of ß-CRX in the
intestine. Human trials showed that its serum transfer efficiency was
statistically higher in the emulsified formulation than in fresh Satsuma mandarin
juice. Caco-2 permeability studies indicated that emulsifiers preferentially
accelerate the absorption of the non-esterified form of ß-CRX, suggesting that
emulsification is more effective for free ß-CRX. This information might be useful
to improve the efficiency of ß-CRX serum transfer, as well as to increase the
health benefits of ß-CRX.

PMID: 23132588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Adv Gerontol. 2012;25(2):232-8.

[Molecular-cellular mechanisms of retina pathology development in people of
various age].

[Article in Russian]

Proniaeva VE, Lin'kova NS, Trofimova SV, D'iakonov MM.

The review considers the molecular-cellular mechanisms of retina pathology in
people of various age. Dysfunction of retinal cells (retinal pigment epithelium, 
photoreceptors, neurons) causes the development of age-related macular
degeneration, retinal ischemia and a variety of hereditary diseases. This is the 
description of involvement of genes and signaling molecules in the dysfunction of
retinal cell types. It is established that a breach of RPE65 gene expression
leads to age-related macular degeneration, retinitis pigmentosa and Leber's
congenital amaurosis. Mutations in the CRX gene are the cause of progressive
states such as cone-rod dystrophy. In addition, more than 100 mutations in RHO
have been identified, leading to different variants of retinitis pigmentosa. The 
involvement of TGF-(beta2 in the formation of retinal cells and the regulation of
secretion of vascular endothelial growth factor VEGF, which synthesis is
increased by ischemic lesions of the retina, is described.

PMID: 23130512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Strahlenther Onkol. 2012 Nov;188(11):1020-4. doi: 10.1007/s00066-012-0163-7.

Large mediastinal tumor mass as a prognostic factor in Hodgkin's lymphoma. Is the
definition on the basis of a chest radiograph in the era of CT obsolete?

Kriz J(1), Mueller RP, Mueller H, Kuhnert G, Engert A, Kobe C, Haverkamp U, Eich 
HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Muenster, Albert-Schweitzer
Campus 1, Gebäude 1 A, 48419, Muenster, Germany.

PURPOSE: The risk factor "large mediastinal tumor mass" is an internationally
accepted unfavorable prognostic factor in the staging of Hodgkin's lymphoma (HL).
The definition of this risk factor varies considerably between large cooperative 
study groups. The purpose of the present analysis was to determine to which
degree data obtained from chest radiograph (CRX) give the same results as those
from CT scans (CT).
METHODS: A total of 145 de novo HL patients in early unfavorable and advanced
stages were included in this study. A total of 94 patients had a large
mediastinal tumor mass according to the guidelines of the German Hodgkin Study
Group (GHSG), while 51 had mediastinal lymph node involvement only. The size of
mediastinal involvement and the thoracic diameter were measured on CRX and CT.
Agreement between CRX and CT was determined by sensitivity and specificity
analysis as well as descriptive statistics and correlations.
RESULTS: The correlation of the diameters on CRX with those of CT was 0.95 for
the tumor size and 0.77 for the thoracic diameter. The diagnostic decision-large 
mediastinal mass or not-correlated with 0.81 between CRX and CT and was identical
in 90.3% of cases. The sensitivity was 0.87 and the specificity 0.96 for CRX,
which is considered the current standard.
CONCLUSION: The results show that there is a high agreement between the
measurements of CRX and CT. Diagnosis of a large mediastinal mass disagreed in
10% of patients. Since the correct diagnosis of this risk factor is decisive for 
the adequate multimodal treatment choice, CRX should not be omitted.

PMID: 23053141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Neurosci. 2012 Sep 19;32(38):13010-21.

Loss of retinoschisin (RS1) cell surface protein in maturing mouse rod
photoreceptors elevates the luminance threshold for light-driven translocation of
transducin but not arrestin.

Ziccardi L(1), Vijayasarathy C, Bush RA, Sieving PA.

Author information: 
(1)G B Bietti Foundation, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico,
00198 Rome, Italy.

Loss of retinoschisin (RS1) in Rs1 knock-out (Rs1-KO) retina produces a
post-photoreceptor phenotype similar to X-linked retinoschisis in young males.
However, Rs1 is expressed strongly in photoreceptors, and Rs1-KO mice have early 
reduction in the electroretinogram a-wave. We examined light-activated transducin
and arrestin translocation in young Rs1-KO mice as a marker for functional
abnormalities in maturing rod photoreceptors. We found a progressive reduction in
luminance threshold for transducin translocation in wild-type (WT) retinas
between postnatal days P18 and P60. At P21, the threshold in Rs1-KO retinas was
10-fold higher than WT, but it decreased to <2.5-fold higher by P60.
Light-activated arrestin translocation and re-translocation of transducin in the 
dark were not affected. Rs1-KO rod outer segment (ROS) length was significantly
shorter than WT at P21 but was comparable with WT at P60. These findings
suggested a delay in the structural and functional maturation of Rs1-KO ROS.
Consistent with this, transcription factors CRX and NRL, which are fundamental to
maturation of rod protein expression, were reduced in ROS of Rs1-KO mice at P21
but not at P60. Expression of transducin was 15-30% lower in P21 Rs1-KO ROS and
transducin GTPase hydrolysis was nearly twofold faster, reflecting a 1.7- to
2.5-fold increase in RGS9 (regulator of G-protein signaling) level. Transduction 
protein expression and activity levels were similar to WT at P60. Transducin
translocation threshold elevation indicates photoreceptor functional
abnormalities in young Rs1-KO mice. Rapid reduction in threshold coupled with
age-related changes in transduction protein levels and transcription factor
expression are consistent with delayed maturation of Rs1-KO photoreceptors.

PMCID: PMC3752084
PMID: 22993419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Oct 5;426(4):498-503. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.08.110. Epub 2012 Aug 30.

CRX variants in cone-rod dystrophy and mutation overview.

Huang L(1), Xiao X, Li S, Jia X, Wang P, Guo X, Zhang Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510060, China.

Mutations in the cone-rod homeobox gene (CRX) are associated with cone-rod
dystrophy (CORD), Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA), and, in rare cases, retinitis
pigmentosa (RP). In this study, three variations were detected in 3 of 130
families with CORD, including two novel mutations, c.239A>G (p.Glu80Gly) and
c.362C>T (p.Ala121Val). So far, 49 mutations in CRX were reported, affecting
about 2.35% of LCA, 4.76% of CORD, and 0.80% of RP. These mutations can be
classified as missense (38.78%), nonsense (4.08%), deletion (36.73%), insertion
(16.33%), and indel (4.08%). They distributed in the three coding exons without
mutation hot spots. No clear genotype-phenotype correlation could be established 
so far.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22960069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Aug;36(8):1165-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182601d84.

Immunohistochemical expression of CRX in extracranial malignant small round cell 
tumors.

Terry J(1), Calicchio ML, Rodriguez-Galindo C, Perez-Atayde AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Children's Hospital Boston, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Tumor-specific immunohistochemical markers are valuable in the differential
diagnosis of malignant small round cell tumors (MSRCTs). The cone-rod
homeobox-containing gene (CRX) is a transcription factor that is preferentially
expressed in retinal photoreceptor cells. It has been shown that the CRX antibody
is a good immunohistochemical marker to differentiate retinoblastoma from other
intracranial MSRCTs. Outside of the central nervous system, however, the
usefulness of CRX immunohistochemistry in establishing a diagnosis of metastatic 
retinoblastoma is uncertain, as the expression of CRX in primitive
neuroectodermal tumor/Ewing sarcoma (PNET/ES), neuroblastoma, and other MSRCTs is
unknown. Archival specimens from resections, core biopsies, and bone marrow
biopsies of 41 neuroblastomas, 24 PNET/ES, 19 embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas, 17
alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas, 17 Wilms tumors, 14 desmoplastic small round cell
tumors, 20 medulloblastomas, 9 pineal tumors, 17 melanocytic tumors (compound and
Spitz nevi), and 8 retinoblastomas were immunostained for CRX. All
retinoblastomas had strong diffuse nuclear immunoreactivity for CRX; 8 of the 20 
medulloblastomas showed strong nuclear immunoreactivity either in occasional
clusters of tumor cells or in rare single scattered tumor cells; 3 of the 9
pineal tumors showed strong nuclear immunoreactivity in approximately 40% to 50% 
of the tumor cells. Neuroblastomas, PNET/ES, embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas,
alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas, Wilms tumors, desmoplastic small round cell tumors,
and melanocytic tumors were all negative. Scant nonspecific cytoplasmic staining 
was observed in some tumors, mostly PNET/ES. These findings suggest that CRX is a
useful marker to discriminate metastatic retinoblastoma from other, more common, 
MSRCTs of childhood.

PMID: 22790857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Neurochem. 2012 Oct;123(1):44-59. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2012.07870.x. Epub
2012 Aug 16.

NeuroD1 is required for survival of photoreceptors but not pinealocytes: results 
from targeted gene deletion studies.

Ochocinska MJ(1), Muñoz EM, Veleri S, Weller JL, Coon SL, Pozdeyev N, Iuvone PM, 
Goebbels S, Furukawa T, Klein DC.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Neuroendocrinology, Program in Developmental Endocrinology and
Genetics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

NeuroD1 encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor involved in the
development of neural and endocrine structures, including the retina and pineal
gland. To determine the effect of NeuroD1 knockout in these tissues, a Cre/loxP
recombination strategy was used to target a NeuroD1 floxed gene and generate
NeuroD1 conditional knockout (cKO) mice. Tissue specificity was conferred using
Cre recombinase expressed under the control of the promoter of Crx, which is
selectively expressed in the pineal gland and retina. At 2 months of age, NeuroD1
cKO retinas have a dramatic reduction in rod- and cone-driven electroretinograms 
and contain shortened and disorganized outer segments; by 4 months, NeuroD1 cKO
retinas are devoid of photoreceptors. In contrast, the NeuroD1 cKO pineal gland
appears histologically normal. Microarray analysis of 2-month-old NeuroD1 cKO
retina and pineal gland identified a subset of genes that were affected
2-100-fold; in addition, a small group of genes exhibit altered differential
night/day expression. Included in the down-regulated genes are Aipl1, which is
necessary to prevent retinal degeneration, and Ankrd33, whose protein product is 
selectively expressed in the outer segments. These findings suggest that NeuroD1 
may act through Aipl1 and other genes to maintain photoreceptor homeostasis.

Published 2012. This article is a US Government work and is in the public domain 
in the USA.

PMCID: PMC3441145
PMID: 22784109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Dev Biol. 2012 Aug 15;368(2):214-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.05.005. Epub 2012 
May 15.

Pushing the envelope of retinal ganglion cell genesis: context dependent function
of Math5 (Atoh7).

Prasov L(1), Glaser T.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Human Genetics and Internal Medicine, University of Michigan,
2047 BSRB, Box 2200, 109 Zina Pitcher Place, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.

The basic-helix-loop helix factor Math5 (Atoh7) is required for retinal ganglion 
cell (RGC) development. However, only 10% of Math5-expressing cells adopt the RGC
fate, and most become photoreceptors. In principle, Math5 may actively bias
progenitors towards RGC fate or passively confer competence to respond to
instructive factors. To distinguish these mechanisms, we misexpressed Math5 in a 
wide population of precursors using a Crx BAC or 2.4 kb promoter, and followed
cell fates with Cre recombinase. In mice, the Crx cone-rod homeobox gene and
Math5 are expressed shortly after cell cycle exit, in temporally distinct, but
overlapping populations of neurogenic cells that give rise to 85% and 3% of the
adult retina, respectively. The Crx>Math5 transgenes did not stimulate RGC fate
or alter the timing of RGC births. Likewise, retroviral Math5 overexpression in
retinal explants did not bias progenitors towards the RGC fate or induce cell
cycle exit. The Crx>Math5 transgene did reduce the abundance of early-born
(E15.5) photoreceptors two-fold, suggesting a limited cell fate shift.
Nonetheless, retinal histology was grossly normal, despite widespread persistent 
Math5 expression. In an RGC-deficient (Math5 knockout) environment, Crx>Math5
partially rescued RGC and optic nerve development, but the temporal envelope of
RGC births was not extended. The number of early-born RGCs (before E13) remained 
very low, and this was correlated with axon pathfinding defects and cell death.
Together, these results suggest that Math5 is not sufficient to stimulate RGC
fate. Our findings highlight the robust homeostatic mechanisms, and role of
pioneering neurons in RGC development.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3402631
PMID: 22609278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Mol Vis. 2012;18:1068-73. Epub 2012 Apr 27.

Corneal crosslinking with genipin, comparison with UV-riboflavin in ex-vivo
model.

Avila MY(1), Gerena VA, Navia JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Nacional de
Colombia, Bogota DC, Colombia. myavilac@unal.edu.co

PURPOSE: To investigate the efficacy and safety of Genipin and UV-riboflavin
crosslinking (UV-CLX) in corneal crosslinking.
METHODS: Porcine eyes were separated in groups for each crosslinker, genipin
0.25% UV-CLX (clinical crosslinking procedure), glutaraldehyde 0.1% (gold
standard crosslinker), and control eyes. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was
continuously monitored by a pressure sensor cannulated to the anterior chamber
and the volume was changed. The changes in ocular pressure as a function of
change of the ocular volume were evaluated. Ocular rigidity was calculated as the
exponential of polynomial quadratic fit. Endothelial damage was evaluated in a
viability assay with alizarin red staining as the changes in cell counts.
RESULTS: Significant changes in IOP were observed in the globes were the cornea
was stiffened with genipin and UV-CLX treatment (volume 200 µl: Genipin 19.4
mmHg, UVCRX 18.8 mmHg, glutaraldehide 23.9 mmHg, versus control 14.7 mmHg, and
400 µl genipin 31.5 mmHg, UV-CLX 26.0 mmHg, glutaraldehide 37.3 mmHg versus
control 18.7 mmHg). The mean ocular ridigity coefficient was genipin 0.0078
mmHg/µl, UV-CLX 0.0065 mmHg/µl, glutaraldehide 0.0092 mmHg/µl, and 0.0046 mmHg/µl
for control eyes. Endothelial cell damage was 5.9±1.8% (control), 10.3±1.7%
(UV-CLX), 9.4±1.5% (Genipin 0.25%), and 40.1±6.2% (glutaraldehide). Some granules
were observed in the UV-CLX group. Reduction of keratocites was observed in the
UV CRX crosslinking.
CONCLUSIONS: Corneal crosslinking was similar between UV-CLX and genipin with
minimal toxicity to endothelial cells. Stiffened corneas by any method induced
substancially higher IOP elevation when ocular volume is increased.

PMCID: PMC3351405
PMID: 22605919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012 Jun 20;53(7):3792-800. doi: 10.1167/iovs.11-9235.

ER stress is involved in T17M rhodopsin-induced retinal degeneration.

Kunte MM(1), Choudhury S, Manheim JF, Shinde VM, Miura M, Chiodo VA, Hauswirth
WW, Gorbatyuk OS, Gorbatyuk MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of North Texas Health
Science Center, Fort Worth, Texas, USA.

PURPOSE: The human rhodopsin (Rho) mutation T17M leads to autosomal dominant
retinitis pigmentosa (adRP). The goal of our study was to elucidate the role of
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in retinal degeneration in hT17M Rho mice and
identify potential candidates for adRP gene therapy.
METHODS: We used transgenic mice expressing the ER stress-activated indicator
(ERAI) and hT17M Rho to evaluate the activation of ER stress responses.
Quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) was used to analyze changes in
the expression of 30 unfolded protein response (UPR)-associated genes at P12, 15,
18, 21, and 25. The cytosolic fraction of hT17M Rho retinal cells was used to
measure the release of cytochrome C and apoptotic inducing factor-1 (AIF1) by
Western blotting. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) analysis was performed for
1-month-old hT17M Rho mice.
RESULTS: hT17M Rho was localized in the outer nuclear layer (ONL) of
T17M(+/-)ERAI(+/-) photoreceptors as well as C57BL/6 retinas injected with
AAV-hT17M Rho-GFP. In P15 hT17M Rho retinas, we observed an up-regulation of UPR 
genes (Atf4, Eif2a, Xbp1, Bip, Canx, and Hsp90), autophagy genes and proapoptotic
Bcl2 genes. OCT, and the downregulation of Nrl and Crx gene expression confirmed 
that cell death occurs in 55% of photoreceptors via the up-regulation of
caspase-3 and caspase-12, and the release of AIF1 from the mitochondria.
CONCLUSIONS: The ER stress response is involved in retinal degeneration in hT17M 
Rho mice. The final demise of photoreceptors occurs via apoptosis involving ER
stress-associated and mitochondria-induced caspase activation. We identified
Atg5, Atg7, Bax, Bid, Bik, and Noxa as potential therapeutic targets for adRP
treatment.

PMCID: PMC3390184
PMID: 22589437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Stem Cells. 2012 Jul;30(7):1424-35. doi: 10.1002/stem.1123.

Defining the integration capacity of embryonic stem cell-derived photoreceptor
precursors.

West EL(1), Gonzalez-Cordero A, Hippert C, Osakada F, Martinez-Barbera JP,
Pearson RA, Sowden JC, Takahashi M, Ali RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College
London, United Kingdom.

Retinal degeneration is a leading cause of irreversible blindness in the
developed world. Differentiation of retinal cells, including photoreceptors, from
both mouse and human embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs), potentially provide a renewable source of cells for retinal
transplantation. Previously, we have shown both the functional integration of
transplanted rod photoreceptor precursors, isolated from the postnatal retina, in
the adult murine retina, and photoreceptor cell generation by stepwise treatment 
of ESCs with defined factors. In this study, we assessed the extent to which this
protocol recapitulates retinal development and also evaluated differentiation and
integration of ESC-derived retinal cells following transplantation using our
established procedures. Optimized retinal differentiation via isolation of
Rax.GFP retinal progenitors recreated a retinal niche and increased the yield of 
Crx(+) and Rhodopsin(+) photoreceptors. Rod birth peaked at day 20 of culture and
expression of the early photoreceptor markers Crx and Nrl increased until day 28.
Nrl levels were low in ESC-derived populations compared with developing retinae. 
Transplantation of early stage retinal cultures produced large tumors, which were
avoided by prolonged retinal differentiation (up to day 28) prior to
transplantation. Integrated mature photoreceptors were not observed in the adult 
retina, even when more than 60% of transplanted ESC-derived cells expressed Crx. 
We conclude that exclusion of proliferative cells from ESC-derived cultures is
essential for effective transplantation. Despite showing expression profiles
characteristic of immature photoreceptors, the ESC-derived precursors generated
using this protocol did not display transplantation competence equivalent to
precursors from the postnatal retina.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3580313
PMID: 22570183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Genetika. 2012 Jan;48(1):125-9.

Gene mapping and mutation screening in candidate genes in a Chinese family of
autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa.

Xiang F(1), Yan M, Song G, Zheng F.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Diagnosis, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071
China.

We wanted to find the gene defect in a Chinese pedigree with autosomal dominant
form of retinitis pigmentosa (ADRP). A small Chinese family with retinitis
pigmentosa was collected. The genetic analysis of the family suggested an
autosomal dominant pattern. Microsatellite (STR) markers tightly linked to
candidate genes for ADRP were selected for linkage analysis. We got a maximum LOD
score of 0.87 between markers D19S210 and D19S418. Precursor mRNA-processing
factor (PRPF) 31, 3, 8, rhodopsin (RHO), peripherin 2 (PRPH2 or RDS), rod outer
segment protein 1 (ROM1), neural retina leucine zipper (NRL), cone-rod
homeobox-containing (CRX), inosine-5-prime-monophosphate dehydrogenase, type I
(IMPDH1) and retinitis pigmentosa 1 (RPI) were amplified by polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) and screened by direct sequencing. One new sequence variation was 
found. It was the missence mutation c.148G > C (D50H) occurred in exon 1 of RDS
gene which existed in all the effected individuals and one unaffected family
member. The DNA sequence variation didn't cosegregate with the RP disease. We
considered this transition was one new polymorphism which we speculate involved
in the pathogenesis of ADRP and increased the risk of ADRP. Further study should 
be conducted to confirm the causative gene of this family.

PMID: 22567862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35611. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035611. Epub 2012 Apr 25.

Derivation of human differential photoreceptor-like cells from the iris by
defined combinations of CRX, RX and NEUROD.

Seko Y(1), Azuma N, Kaneda M, Nakatani K, Miyagawa Y, Noshiro Y, Kurokawa R,
Okano H, Umezawa A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Biology, Center for Regenerative Medicine, National
Institute for Child Health and Development, Okura, Setagaya, Japan.

Examples of direct differentiation by defined transcription factors have been
provided for beta-cells, cardiomyocytes and neurons. In the human visual system, 
there are four kinds of photoreceptors in the retina. Neural retina and
iris-pigmented epithelium (IPE) share a common developmental origin, leading us
to test whether human iris cells could differentiate to retinal neurons. We here 
define the transcription factor combinations that can determine human
photoreceptor cell fate. Expression of rhodopsin, blue opsin and green/red opsin 
in induced photoreceptor cells were dependent on combinations of transcription
factors: A combination of CRX and NEUROD induced rhodopsin and blue opsin, but
did not induce green opsin; a combination of CRX and RX induced blue opsin and
green/red opsin, but did not induce rhodopsin. Phototransduction-related genes as
well as opsin genes were up-regulated in those cells. Functional analysis; i.e.
patch clamp recordings, clearly revealed that generated photoreceptor cells,
induced by CRX, RX and NEUROD, responded to light. The response was an inward
current instead of the typical outward current. These data suggest that
photosensitive photoreceptor cells can be generated by combinations of
transcription factors. The combination of CRX and RX generate immature
photoreceptors: and additional NEUROD promotes maturation. These findings
contribute substantially to a major advance toward eventual cell-based therapy
for retinal degenerative diseases.

PMCID: PMC3338414
PMID: 22558175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012 Jun;32(6):1366-71. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.248021. Epub 2012 Apr 19.

Intense physiological light upregulates vascular endothelial growth factor and
enhances choroidal neovascularization via peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor <U+03B3> coactivator-1a in mice.

Ueta T(1), Inoue T, Yuda K, Furukawa T, Yanagi Y, Tamaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Tokyo School of Medicine, 7-3-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. ueta-tky@umin.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: Toxicity of intense light to facilitate the development of neovascular
age-related macular degeneration has been a health concern although the mechanism
remains unclear.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Effects of intense, but within physiological range, light on
retinal pigment epithelium, a major pathogenic origin of age-related macular
degeneration were studied in mice. Intense physiological light upregulated
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression in retinal pigment
epithelium, independent of circadian rhythm, which resulted in enhancement of
choroidal neovascularization. In rd1/rd1 mice or Crx(-/-) mice that do not
possess outer segment structure, light exposure did not induce VEGF, indicating
that VEGF upregulation by light depended on increased outer segment phagocytosis 
by retinal pigment epithelium. In retinal pigment epithelium cells phagocytosing 
increased amount of outer segment, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>
coactivator-1a (PGC-1a) not hypoxia-inducible factor-1a was induced, leading to
VEGF upregulation. The VEGF upregulation and choroidal neovascularization
enhancement were abrogated in PGC-1a(-/-) mice and estrogen-related
receptor-a(-/-) mice, indicating the involvement of PGC-1a/estrogen-related
receptor-a pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: Intense physiological light is involved in choroidal
neovascularization through excess outer segment phagocytosis and VEGF
upregulation mediated by PGC-1a in vivo.

PMID: 22516064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Neurosci. 2012 Apr 18;32(16):5426-39. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0194-12.2012.

Spontaneous activity promotes synapse formation in a cell-type-dependent manner
in the developing retina.

Soto F(1), Ma X, Cecil JL, Vo BQ, Culican SM, Kerschensteiner D.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences and Anatomy and Neurobiology,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Spontaneous activity is thought to regulate synaptogenesis in many parts of the
developing nervous system. In vivo evidence for this regulation, however, is
scarce and comes almost exclusively from experiments in which normal activity was
reduced or blocked completely. Thus, whether spontaneous activity itself promotes
synaptogenesis or plays a purely permissive role remains uncertain. In addition, 
how activity influences synapse dynamics to shape connectivity and whether its
effects among neurons are uniform or cell-type-dependent is unclear. In mice
lacking the cone-rod homeobox gene (Crx), photoreceptors fail to establish normal
connections with bipolar cells (BCs). Here, we find that retinal ganglion cells
(RGCs) in Crx<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice become rhythmically hyperactive around the time of eye
opening as a result of increased spontaneous glutamate release from BCs. This
elevated neurotransmission enhances synaptogenesis between BCs and RGCs, without 
altering the overall circuit architecture. Using live imaging, we discover that
spontaneous activity selectively regulates the rate of synapse formation, not
elimination, in this circuit. Reconstructions of the connectivity patterns of
three BC types with a shared RGC target further revealed that neurotransmission
specifically promotes the formation of multisynaptic appositions from one BC type
without affecting the maintenance or elimination of connections from the other
two. Although hyperactivity in Crx<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice persists, synapse numbers do not
increase beyond 4 weeks of age, suggesting closure of a critical period for
synaptic refinement in the inner retina. Interestingly, despite their
hyperactivity, RGC axons maintain normal eye-specific territories and
cell-type-specific layers in the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus.

PMCID: PMC3353326
PMID: 22514306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(4):e1002649. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002649. Epub 2012 Apr 
12.

Transcriptional regulation of rod photoreceptor homeostasis revealed by in vivo
NRL targetome analysis.

Hao H(1), Kim DS, Klocke B, Johnson KR, Cui K, Gotoh N, Zang C, Gregorski J,
Gieser L, Peng W, Fann Y, Seifert M, Zhao K, Swaroop A.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology-Neurodegeneration and Repair Laboratory, National Eye Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

A stringent control of homeostasis is critical for functional maintenance and
survival of neurons. In the mammalian retina, the basic motif leucine zipper
transcription factor NRL determines rod versus cone photoreceptor cell fate and
activates the expression of many rod-specific genes. Here, we report an
integrated analysis of NRL-centered gene regulatory network by coupling chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-Seq) data from
Illumina and ABI platforms with global expression profiling and in vivo knockdown
studies. We identified approximately 300 direct NRL target genes. Of these, 22
NRL targets are associated with human retinal dystrophies, whereas 95 mapped to
regions of as yet uncloned retinal disease loci. In silico analysis of NRL
ChIP-Seq peak sequences revealed an enrichment of distinct sets of transcription 
factor binding sites. Specifically, we discovered that genes involved in
photoreceptor function include binding sites for both NRL and homeodomain protein
CRX. Evaluation of 26 ChIP-Seq regions validated their enhancer functions in
reporter assays. In vivo knockdown of 16 NRL target genes resulted in death or
abnormal morphology of rod photoreceptors, suggesting their importance in
maintaining retinal function. We also identified histone demethylase Kdm5b as a
novel secondary node in NRL transcriptional hierarchy. Exon array analysis of
flow-sorted photoreceptors in which Kdm5b was knocked down by shRNA indicated its
role in regulating rod-expressed genes. Our studies identify candidate genes for 
retinal dystrophies, define cis-regulatory module(s) for photoreceptor-expressed 
genes and provide a framework for decoding transcriptional regulatory networks
that dictate rod homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3325202
PMID: 22511886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34564. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034564. Epub 2012 Apr 11.

Multiple episodes of convergence in genes of the dim light vision pathway in
bats.

Shen YY(1), Lim BK, Liu HQ, Liu J, Irwin DM, Zhang YP.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.

The molecular basis of the evolution of phenotypic characters is very complex and
is poorly understood with few examples documenting the roles of multiple genes.
Considering that a single gene cannot fully explain the convergence of phenotypic
characters, we choose to study the convergent evolution of rod vision in two
divergent bats from a network perspective. The Old World fruit bats
(Pteropodidae) are non-echolocating and have binocular vision, whereas the
sheath-tailed bats (Emballonuridae) are echolocating and have monocular vision;
however, they both have relatively large eyes and rely more on rod vision to find
food and navigate in the night. We found that the genes CRX, which plays an
essential role in the differentiation of photoreceptor cells, SAG, which is
involved in the desensitization of the photoactivated transduction cascade, and
the photoreceptor gene RH, which is directly responsible for the perception of
dim light, have undergone parallel sequence evolution in two divergent lineages
of bats with larger eyes (Pteropodidae and Emballonuroidea). The multiple
convergent events in the network of genes essential for rod vision is a rare
phenomenon that illustrates the importance of investigating pathways and networks
in the evolution of the molecular basis of phenotypic convergence.

PMCID: PMC3324491
PMID: 22509324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Gene. 2012 May 25;500(1):148-50. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.03.014. Epub 2012 Mar
27.

Polymorphisms of angiotensin II type 1 receptor gene and those of angiotensinogen
point at culprit artery in ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction.

Konopka A(1), Szperl M, Piotrowski W, Stepinska J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cardiology, Warszawa, Poland. akonopka@ikard.pl

The aim of the study was to determine whether the presence of angiotensin II type
1 receptor 1166A/C gene polymorphism and two polymorphisms of angiotensinogen,
namely Met235Thr and Thr174Met, pointed at the culprit artery in patients with
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI).METHODS: The AGTR1 1166A/C
polymorphism and two AGT gene polymorphisms, Met235Thr and Thr174Met, were
assessed in 100 patients with STEMI.
RESULTS: The odds ratio (OR) of circumflex artery (CRX) responsible for STEMI was
3.49 (95% CI: 1.1-10.8, p<0.05) for MetThr genotype for AGT Met235Thr gene and
4.54 (95% CI: 1.5-14.2, p<0.01) for ThrMet genotype for AGT Thr174Met gene.
Homozygous ThrThr genotype for AGT Thr174Met gene reduced OR of CRX as culprit
artery in STEMI (OR=0.29, 95% CI: 0.1-0.9, p<0.05). However, the highest OR that 
increased up to 13.71 (95% CI: 1.58-119.3) was shown in case of right coronary
artery and C/C genotype for AGTR1 1166A/C gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Polymorphism of AGTR1 1166A/C gene can point at the right coronary
artery as infarct-related artery in STEMI. Polymorphisms of AGT Met235Thr and AGT
Thr174Met genes are able to mark increased or reduced odds ratio of circumflex
artery as culprit artery in STEMI.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22475523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Crit Care. 2012 Feb 17;16(1):R30. doi: 10.1186/cc11201.

Early recognition of the 2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1) pneumonia by chest
ultrasound.

Testa A(1), Soldati G, Copetti R, Giannuzzi R, Portale G, Gentiloni-Silveri N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, A, Gemelli University Hospital, Rome, Italy.
americotesta@gmail.com

INTRODUCTION: The clinical picture of the pandemic influenza A (H1N1)v ranges
from a self-limiting afebrile infection to a rapidly progressive pneumonia.
Prompt diagnosis and well-timed treatment are recommended. Chest radiography
(CRx) often fails to detect the early interstitial stage. The aim of this study
was to evaluate the role of bedside chest ultrasonography (US) in the early
management of the 2009 influenza A (H1N1)v infection.
METHODS: 98 patients who arrived in the Emergency Department complaining of
influenza-like symptoms were enrolled in the study. Patients not displaying
symptoms of acute respiratory distress were discharged without further
investigations. Among patients with clinical suggestion of a community-acquired
pneumonia, cases encountering other diagnoses or comorbidities were excluded from
the study. Clinical history, laboratory tests, CRx, and computed tomography (CT) 
scan, if indicated, contributed to define the diagnosis of pneumonia in the
remaining patients. Chest US was performed by an emergency physician, looking for
presence of interstitial syndrome, alveolar consolidation, pleural line
abnormalities, and pleural effusion, in 34 patients with a final diagnosis of
pneumonia, in 16 having normal initial CRx, and in 33 without pneumonia, as
controls.
RESULTS: Chest US was carried out without discomfort in all subjects, requiring a
relatively short time (9 minutes; range, 7 to 13 minutes). An abnormal US pattern
was detected in 32 of 34 patients with pneumonia (94.1%). A prevalent US pattern 
of interstitial syndrome was depicted in 15 of 16 patients with normal initial
CRx, of whom 10 (62.5%) had a final diagnosis of viral (H1N1) pneumonia. Patients
with pneumonia and abnormal initial CRx, of whom only four had a final diagnosis 
of viral (H1N1) pneumonia (22.2%; P<0.05), mainly displayed an US pattern of
alveolar consolidation. Finally, a positive US pattern of interstitial syndrome
was found in five of 33 controls (15.1%). False negatives were found in two
(5.9%) of 34 cases, and false positives, in five (15.1%) of 33 cases, with
sensitivity of 94.1%, specificity of 84.8%, positive predictive value of 86.5%,
and negative predictive value of 93.3%.
CONCLUSIONS: Bedside chest US represents an effective tool for diagnosing
pneumonia in the Emergency Department. It can accurately provide early-stage
detection of patients with (H1N1)v pneumonia having an initial normal CRx. Its
routine integration into their clinical management is proposed.

PMCID: PMC3396276
PMID: 22340202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Sci Signal. 2012 Feb 14;5(211):ra13. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2001963.

Selective TRIF-dependent signaling by a synthetic toll-like receptor 4 agonist.

Bowen WS(1), Minns LA, Johnson DA, Mitchell TC, Hutton MM, Evans JT.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals, 553 Old Corvallis Road, Hamilton, MT 59840, USA.

In response to ligand binding to the Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) and myeloid
differentiation-2 (MD-2) receptor complex, two major signaling pathways are
activated that involve different adaptor proteins. One pathway depends on myeloid
differentiation marker 88 (MyD88), which elicits proinflammatory responses,
whereas the other depends on Toll-IL-1 receptor (TIR) domain-containing adaptor
inducing interferon-ß (TRIF), which elicits type I interferon production. Here,
we showed that the TLR4 agonist and vaccine adjuvant CRX-547, a member of the
aminoalkyl glucosaminide 4-phosphate (AGP) class of synthetic lipid A mimetics,
displayed TRIF-selective signaling in human cells, which was dependent on a minor
structural modification to the carboxyl bioisostere corresponding to the
1-phosphate group on most lipid A types. CRX-547 stimulated little or no
activation of MyD88-dependent signaling molecules or cytokines, whereas its
ability to activate the TRIF-dependent pathway was similar to that of a
structurally related inflammatory AGP and of lipopolysaccharide from Salmonella
minnesota. This TRIF-selective signaling response resulted in the production of
substantially less of the proinflammatory mediators that are associated with
MyD88 signaling, thereby potentially reducing toxicity and improving the
therapeutic index of this synthetic TLR4 agonist and vaccine adjuvant.

PMCID: PMC3684200
PMID: 22337809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc. 2012 Apr;89:317-21. doi:
10.1016/j.saa.2012.01.002. Epub 2012 Jan 9.

Spectrophotometric complexation of cephalosporins with palladium (II) chloride in
aqueous and non-aqueous solvents.

Bagheri Gh A(1), Yosefi rad A, Rezvani M, Roshanzamir S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Center Tehran Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Tehran, Iran. azbagheri@gmail.com

The complexation reaction of cephalosporins namely cefotaxime (CTX), cefuroxime
(CRX), and cefazolin (CEFAZ) with palladium (II) ions have been studied in water 
and DMF in 25 °C by the spectrophotometric methods. The method is based on the
formation of yellow to yellowish brown complex between palladium (II) chloride
and the investigated cephalosporins in the presence of sodium lauryl sulfate
(SLS) as surfactant. The complexation process was optimized in terms of pH,
temperature and contact time. The stoichiometry of all the complexes was found to
be 2:1 (metal ion/ligand) for CTX, CRX, and 1:2 for CEFAZ. The stoichiometry of
palladium (II)-cephalosporins was estimated by mole ratio and continuous
variation methods and emphasized by the KINFIT program. These drugs could be
determined by measuring the absorbance of each complex at its specific <U+03BB>max. The 
results obtained are in good agreement with those obtained using the official
methods. The proposed method was successfully applied for the determination of
these compounds in their dosage forms.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22286057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Neurosci Lett. 2012 Feb 16;509(2):116-20. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.12.055. Epub
2012 Jan 3.

Establishment of retinal progenitor cell clones by transfection with Pax6 gene of
mouse induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells.

Suzuki N(1), Shimizu J, Takai K, Arimitsu N, Ueda Y, Takada E, Hirotsu C, Suzuki 
T, Fujiwara N, Tadokoro M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, St. Marianna University School of Medicine,
Kawasaki, Japan. n3suzuki@marianna-u.ac.jp

We previously reported that transfection of Pax6 gene which regulated early
events in eye development into mouse ES cells brought about their differentiation
into retinal progenitors. Here, we attempted to establish cloned retinal
progenitors which had ability to further differentiate into photoreceptor like
cells by transfecting mouse induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells with Pax6 gene. 
Undifferentiated iPS cells were transfected with Pax6 cDNA, followed by selection
with G418. After limiting dilution culture, we selected cloned Pax6-transfected
cells, which simultaneously expressed mRNAs of Nestin, Musashi1, Six3 and Chx10
for further characterization. We obtained totally 8 clonally expanding
Pax6-transfected cells. They started to express mRNAs of Brn3b, Cone-rod homeobox
(Crx), pkc, CD73, rhodopsin and the <U+03B3>-subunit of rod cGMP phosphodiesterase
(PDE<U+03B3>). Flow cytometric analysis revealed that almost half of the cells were
CD73+, a marker of photoreceptor precursors. Western blotting confirmed
cytoplasmic protein expression of rhodopsin. High KCl stimulation increased free 
Ca influx into the cells on Ca(2+) imaging. iPS cells transfected with Pax6 gene,
followed by subsequent limiting dilution culture became retinal progenitors
including photoreceptor like cells. The cloned cell lines may be useful for
analyzing differentiation requirement of retinal progenitors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22230895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Neurosci. 2011 Dec 14;31(50):18606-17. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2578-11.2011.

Specific protein kinase C isoforms are required for rod photoreceptor
differentiation.

Pinzon-Guzman C(1), Zhang SS, Barnstable CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neural and Behavioral Sciences, Pennsylvania State University
College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033-2255, USA.

The protein kinase C (PKC) family of enzymes regulates cell physiology through
phosphorylation of serine and threonine residues of many proteins in most cell
types. Here we identify PKC-ß1 and PKC-<U+03B3> as isoforms that are essential for rod
photoreceptor differentiation in mouse retinas. Using ex vivo retinal explants,
we found that phorbol ester 12-myristate 13-acetate and insulin-like growth
factor 1 (IGF1) induced rod differentiation, as defined by opsin or Crx
expression, in a PKC-dependent manner days ahead of rod development in untreated 
explants. PKC-ß1 and PKC-<U+03B3> were colocalized with proliferating cell nuclear
antigen (PCNA)- and STAT3-positive progenitors through the later differentiation 
period. Pharmacological or genetic inhibition of either isoform resulted in a
partial reduction in the appearance of rods, whereas removing both isoforms
resulted in their complete absence. Furthermore, a significant decline of STAT3
tyrosine phosphorylation was observed by activation of PKC, while inhibition of
PKC resulted in an increase of phosphorylated STAT3 along with a delayed cell
cycle exit of progenitors with prolonged PCNA expression. In adult retinas, IGF1 
activates PI-3 kinase (PI3K), but in neonatal retinas its action is identical to 
the action of an PI3K inhibitor. These data unveil a novel signaling cascade that
coordinates and regulates rod differentiation through specific PKC isoforms in
mammals.

PMCID: PMC3256583
PMID: 22171059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Front Neurol. 2011 Nov 23;2:67. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2011.00067. eCollection 2011.

Prevention of Adiposity by the Oral Administration of ß-Cryptoxanthin.

Takayanagi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development Center, Unitika Ltd. Uji, Kyoto, Japan.

ß-Cryptoxanthin (ß-CRX) is a carotenoid found in human blood. It is specifically 
rich in Satsuma mandarin (Citrus unshiu Marc.) but very little in other fruits or
vegetables. Several reports indicate the health promoting benefits of ß-CRX. As
we had reported visceral fat reduction on mildly obese male by the oral
administration of ß-CRX, a detailed mechanism has not been identified. To
identify the mechanism, obese model mouse, TSOD was used in the present study.
Oral administration of ß-CRX repressed body weight, abdominal adipose tissue
weight, and serum lipid concentrations on TSOD mice. The outstanding observation 
is the significant repression of adipocyte hypertrophy. DNA microarray analysis
strongly indicates that the oral administration of ß-CRX represses the
inflammatory cytokine secretion and improves the lipid metabolism and the energy 
consumption. It also suggests these effects are partly mediated by PPAR-a, not
only lipid metabolism and adipocyte differentiation control but possibly internal
circadian clock modulation.

PMCID: PMC3222848
PMID: 22131983  [PubMed]


133. Dev Dyn. 2012 Jan;241(1):215-28. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22782. Epub 2011 Nov 23.

OTX2 and CRX rescue overlapping and photoreceptor-specific functions in the
Drosophila eye.

Terrell D(1), Xie B, Workman M, Mahato S, Zelhof A, Gebelein B, Cook T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Ophthalmology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

BACKGROUND: Otd-related transcription factors are evolutionarily conserved to
control anterior patterning and neurogenesis. In humans, two such factors, OTX2
and CRX, are expressed in all photoreceptors from early specification through
adulthood and associate with several photoreceptor-specific retinopathies. It is 
not well understood how these factors function independently vs. redundantly, or 
how specific mutations lead to different disease outcomes. It is also unclear how
OTX1 and OTX2 functionally overlap during other aspects of neurogenesis and
ocular development. Drosophila encodes a single Otd factor that has multiple
functions during eye development. Using the Drosophila eye as a model, we tested 
the ability of the human OTX1, OTX2, and CRX genes, as well as several
disease-associated CRX alleles, to rescue the different functions of Otd.
RESULTS: Our results indicate the following: OTX2 and CRX display overlapping,
yet distinct subfunctions of Otd during photoreceptor differentiation; CRX
disease alleles can be functionally distinguished based on their rescue
properties; and all three factors are able to rescue rhabdomeric photoreceptor
morphogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings have important implications for understanding how Otx
proteins have subfunctionalized during evolution, and cement Drosophila as an
effective tool to unravel the molecular bases of photoreceptor pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3444242
PMID: 22113834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Agric Food Chem. 2011 Dec 14;59(23):12342-51. doi: 10.1021/jf202821u. Epub 2011
Nov 15.

Mechanism of visceral fat reduction in Tsumura Suzuki obese, diabetes (TSOD) mice
orally administered ß-cryptoxanthin from Satsuma mandarin oranges (Citrus unshiu 
Marc).

Takayanagi K(1), Morimoto S, Shirakura Y, Mukai K, Sugiyama T, Tokuji Y, Ohnishi 
M.

Author information: 
(1)R&D Center, UNITIKA Ltd., 23 Uji-Kozakura, Uji, Kyoto 611-0021, Japan.

The carotenoid ß-cryptoxanthin (ß-CRX) is abundant in Satsuma mandarins (Citrus
unshiu Marc). Several studies have shown a relationship between Satsuma mandarin 
consumption and a low risk of several diseases, for example, diabetes, gout, and 
hypertension, suggesting ß-CRX involvement in disease prevention. We investigated
the effect of ß-CRX on mildly obese males. ß-CRX administration reduced visceral 
adipose tissue, body weight, and abdominal circumference. However, the detailed
mechanism by which ß-CRX mediates these changes remains unknown. To identify this
mechanism, we used an obese model mouse (TSOD). Oral ß-CRX administration
repressed body weight, abdominal adipose tissue weight, and serum lipid
concentrations in TSOD; these results are identical to previous human trial
results. ß-CRX administration significantly repressed adipocyte hypertrophy. Gene
expression analysis strongly indicated that ß-CRX can alter cytokine secretion
and cell proliferation. These results suggest that ß-CRX derived from Satsuma
mandarins can help prevent obesity by repressing hypertrophy of abdominal
adipocytes.

PMID: 22085304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Oct 25;108(43):17821-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1109209108. Epub 2011 Oct 17.

Active opsin loci adopt intrachromosomal loops that depend on the photoreceptor
transcription factor network.

Peng GH(1), Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Rod and cone opsin genes are expressed in a mutually exclusive manner in their
respective photoreceptor subtypes in the mammalian retina. Previous transgenic
mouse studies showed that functional interactions between the distal enhancer and
proximal promoter of rhodopsin and long/medium-wavelength (L/M) opsin genes are
essential for regulating their cell-type-specific transcription. We have used
chromosomal conformation capture assays in mouse retinas to investigate the
molecular mechanism responsible for this interaction. Here we show that each
opsin gene forms intrachromosomal loops in the appropriate photoreceptor subtype,
while maintaining a linear configuration in other cell types where it is silent. 
The enhancer forms physical contacts not only with the promoter but also with the
coding regions of each opsin locus. ChIP assays showed that cell-type-specific
target binding by three key photoreceptor transcription factors-cone--rod
homeobox (CRX), neural retina leucine zipper (NRL), and nuclear receptor
subfamily 2, group E, member 3 (NR2E3)--is required for the appropriate local
chromosomal organization and transcription of rod and cone opsins. Similar
correlations between chromosomal loops and active transcription of opsin genes
were also observed in human photoreceptors. Furthermore, quantitative chromosomal
conformation capture on human retinas from two male donors showed that the L/M
enhancer locus control region (LCR) loops with either the L or M promoter in a
near 3:1 ratio, supporting distance-dependent competition between L and M for
LCR. Altogether, our results suggest that the photoreceptor transcription factor 
network cooperatively regulates the chromosomal organization of target genes to
precisely control photoreceptor subtype-specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3203788
PMID: 22006320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Clin Genet. 2012 Nov;82(5):446-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01796.x. Epub
2011 Nov 2.

Novel p.M96T variant of NRL and shRNA-based suppression and replacement of NRL
mutants associated with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa.

Hernan I(1), Gamundi MJ, Borràs E, Maseras M, García-Sandoval B, Blanco-Kelly F, 
Ayuso C, Carballo M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Unit Ophthalmology Service, Hospital de Terrassa, Terrassa,
Barcelona, Spain.

Mutations in the gene encoding the transcription factor neural retina leucine
zipper (NRL) are known to cause autosomal dominant (adRP) or recessive (arRP)
retinitis pigmentosa (RP). In an adRP Spanish family, we detected a novel
sequence variation (c.287T>C) in the NRL gene that results in the p.M96T protein 
change. A functional test of the ability of NRL, in conjunction with cone-rod
homeobox (CRX), to transactivate a human rhodopsin (RHO) promoter was used to
evaluate the pathogenic mechanisms of NRL. We found upregulation of the RHO
promoter by p.M96T protein similar to that shown by other missense NRL mutations 
that cause adRP. Affected RP patients of the family carry the nucleotide change, 
although two other family members that also carry the c.287T>C variation remain
asymptomatic. This result complicates the genetic counselling of the family. The 
pathogenic mechanisms associated with adRP NRL mutations appear to be caused by a
gain of function. To suppress the negative effect of an NRL mutant, the
suppression and replacement strategy seems to be the most suitable therapeutic
approach capable of overcoming the mutational heterogeneity associated with
NRL-linked adRP. Thus, we evaluated this methodology in the NRL gene for the
first time.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21981118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24074. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024074. Epub 2011 Sep 30.

Photoreceptor cell death, proliferation and formation of hybrid rod/S-cone
photoreceptors in the degenerating STK38L mutant retina.

Berta ÁI(1), Boesze-Battaglia K, Genini S, Goldstein O, O'Brien PJ, Szél Á,
Acland GM, Beltran WA, Aguirre GD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvanis, United States of America.

A homozygous mutation in STK38L in dogs impairs the late phase of photoreceptor
development, and is followed by photoreceptor cell death (TUNEL) and
proliferation (PCNA, PHH3) events that occur independently in different cells
between 7-14 weeks of age. During this period, the outer nuclear layer (ONL) cell
number is unchanged. The dividing cells are of photoreceptor origin, have rod
opsin labeling, and do not label with markers specific for macrophages/microglia 
(CD18) or Müller cells (glutamine synthetase, PAX6). Nestin labeling is absent
from the ONL although it labels the peripheral retina and ciliary marginal zone
equally in normals and mutants. Cell proliferation is associated with increased
cyclin A1 and LATS1 mRNA expression, but CRX protein expression is unchanged.
Coincident with photoreceptor proliferation is a change in the photoreceptor
population. Prior to cell death the photoreceptor mosaic is composed of L/M- and 
S-cones, and rods. After proliferation, both cone types remain, but the majority 
of rods are now hybrid photoreceptors that express rod opsin and, to a lesser
extent, cone S-opsin, and lack NR2E3 expression. The hybrid photoreceptors renew 
their outer segments diffusely, a characteristic of cones. The results indicate
the capacity for terminally differentiated, albeit mutant, photoreceptors to
divide with mutations in this novel retinal degeneration gene.

PMCID: PMC3184085
PMID: 21980341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Neurosci Res. 2012 Feb;90(2):407-21. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22747. Epub 2011 Oct 4.

Müller glial cells induce stem cell properties in retinal progenitors in vitro
and promote their further differentiation into photoreceptors.

Simón MV(1), De Genaro P, Abrahan CE, de los Santos B, Rotstein NP, Politi LE.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Bioquímicas de Bahía Blanca, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Using stem cells to replace lost neurons is a promising strategy for treating
retinal neurodegenerative diseases. Among their multiple functions, Müller glial 
cells are retina stem cells, with a robust regenerative potential in lower
vertebrates, which is much more restricted in mammals. In rodents, most retina
progenitors exit the cell cycle immediately after birth, differentiate as
neurons, and then cannot reenter the cell cycle. Here we demonstrate that, in
mixed cultures with Müller glial cells, rat retina progenitor cells expressed
stem cell properties, maintained their proliferative potential, and were able to 
preserve these properties and remain mitotically active after several consecutive
passages. Notably, these progenitors retained the capacity to differentiate as
photoreceptors, even after successive reseedings. Müller glial cells markedly
stimulated differentiation of retina progenitors; these cells initially expressed
Crx and then developed as mature photoreceptors that expressed characteristic
markers, such as opsin and peripherin. Moreover, they were light responsive,
insofar as they decreased their cGMP levels when exposed to light, and they also 
showed high-affinity glutamate uptake, a characteristic of mature photoreceptors.
Our present findings indicate that, in addition to giving rise to new
photoreceptors, Müller glial cells might instruct a pool of undifferentiated
cells to develop and preserve stem cell characteristics, even after successive
reseedings, and then stimulate their differentiation as functional
photoreceptors. This complementary mechanism might contribute to enlarge the
limited regenerative capacity of mammalian Müller cells.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21972118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25123. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025123. Epub 2011 Sep 22.

No interaction of barrier-to-autointegration factor (BAF) with HIV-1 MA, cone-rod
homeobox (Crx) or MAN1-C in absence of DNA.

Huang Y(1), Cai M, Clore GM, Craigie R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United
States of America.

Barrier-to-autointegration factor is a cellular protein that protects retroviral 
DNA from autointegration. Its cellular role is not well understood, but genetic
studies show that it is essential and depletion or knockout results in lethal
nuclear defects. In addition to binding DNA, BAF interacts with the LEM domain, a
domain shared among a family of lamin-associated polypeptides. BAF has also been 
reported to interact with several other viral and cellular proteins suggesting
that these interactions may be functionally relevant. We find that, contrary to
previous reports, BAF does not interact with HIV-1 MA, cone-rod homeobox (Crx) or
MAN1-C. The reported interactions can be explained by indirect association
through DNA binding and are unlikely to be biologically relevant. A mutation that
causes a premature aging syndrome lies on the previously reported MAN1-C binding 
surface of BAF. The absence of direct binding of BAF to MAN1-C eliminates
disruption of this interaction as the cause of the premature aging phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3178605
PMID: 21966431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Biol Chem. 2011 Oct 21;286(42):36921-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.279026. Epub
2011 Aug 24.

Transcriptional regulation of neural retina leucine zipper (Nrl), a photoreceptor
cell fate determinant.

Montana CL(1), Lawrence KA, Williams NL, Tran NM, Peng GH, Chen S, Corbo JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

The transcription factor neural retina leucine zipper (Nrl) is a critical
determinant of rod photoreceptor cell fate and a key regulator of rod
differentiation. Nrl(-/-) rod precursors fail to turn on rod genes and instead
differentiate as cones. Furthermore, NRL mutations in humans cause retinitis
pigmentosa. Despite the developmental and clinical significance of this gene,
little is known about the transcriptional regulation of Nrl itself. In this
study, we sought to define the cis- and trans-acting factors responsible for
initiation and maintenance of Nrl transcription in the mouse retina. Utilizing a 
quantitative mouse retinal explant electroporation assay, we discovered a
phylogenetically conserved, 30-base pair region immediately upstream of the
transcription start site that is required for Nrl promoter activity. This region 
contains binding sites for the retinal transcription factors CRX, OTX2, and RORß,
and point mutations in these sites completely abolish promoter activity in living
retinas. Gel-shift experiments show that CRX, OTX2, and RORß can bind to the
critical region in vitro, whereas ChIP experiments demonstrate binding of CRX and
OTX2 to the critical region in vivo. Thus, our results indicate that CRX, OTX2,
and RORß directly regulate Nrl transcription by binding to critical sites within 
the Nrl promoter. We propose a model in which Nrl expression is primarily
initiated by OTX2 and RORß and later maintained at high levels by CRX and RORß.

PMCID: PMC3196091
PMID: 21865162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Aug 12;89(2):253-64. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.07.005.

Exome sequencing and cis-regulatory mapping identify mutations in MAK, a gene
encoding a regulator of ciliary length, as a cause of retinitis pigmentosa.

Ozgül RK(1), Siemiatkowska AM, Yücel D, Myers CA, Collin RW, Zonneveld MN,
Beryozkin A, Banin E, Hoyng CB, van den Born LI; European Retinal Disease
Consortium, Bose R, Shen W, Sharon D, Cremers FP, Klevering BJ, den Hollander AI,
Corbo JC.

Collaborators: Ayuso C, Banfi S, Ben-Yosef T, de Baere E, Hamel C, Inglehearn C, 
Koenekoop RK, Kohl S, Leroy BP, Toomes C, Wissinger B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Child Health and Metabolism Unit, Department of Pediatrics,
Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.

A fundamental challenge in analyzing exome-sequence data is distinguishing
pathogenic mutations from background polymorphisms. To address this problem in
the context of a genetically heterogeneous disease, retinitis pigmentosa (RP), we
devised a candidate-gene prioritization strategy called cis-regulatory mapping
that utilizes ChIP-seq data for the photoreceptor transcription factor CRX to
rank candidate genes. Exome sequencing combined with this approach identified a
homozygous nonsense mutation in male germ cell-associated kinase (MAK) in the
single affected member of a consanguineous Turkish family with RP. MAK encodes a 
cilium-associated mitogen-activated protein kinase whose function is conserved
from the ciliated alga, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, to humans. Mutations in MAK
orthologs in mice and other model organisms result in abnormally long cilia and, 
in mice, rapid photoreceptor degeneration. Subsequent sequence analyses of
additional individuals with RP identified five probands with missense mutations
in MAK. Two of these mutations alter amino acids that are conserved in all known 
kinases, and an in vitro kinase assay indicates that these mutations result in a 
loss of kinase activity. Thus, kinase activity appears to be critical for MAK
function in humans. This study highlights a previously underappreciated role for 
CRX as a direct transcriptional regulator of ciliary genes in photoreceptors. In 
addition, it demonstrates the effectiveness of CRX-based cis-regulatory mapping
in prioritizing candidate genes from exome data and suggests that this strategy
should be generally applicable to a range of retinal diseases.

Copyright © 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3155188
PMID: 21835304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Nov 1;20(21):4102-15. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr334. Epub 2011 Aug 
3.

Excess cones in the retinal degeneration rd7 mouse, caused by the loss of
function of orphan nuclear receptor Nr2e3, originate from early-born
photoreceptor precursors.

Cheng H(1), Khan NW, Roger JE, Swaroop A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA.

The orphan nuclear receptor NR2E3 is a direct transcriptional target of NRL, the 
key basic motif leucine zipper transcription factor that dictates rod versus cone
photoreceptor cell fate in the mammalian retina. The lack of NR2E3 function in
humans and in retinal degeneration rd7 mutant mouse leads to increased S-cones
accompanied by rod degeneration, whereas ectopic expression of Nr2e3 in the
cone-only Nrl(-/-) retina generates rod-like cells that do not exhibit any visual
function. Using GFP to tag the newborn rods and by 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine
birthdating, we demonstrate that early-born post-mitotic photoreceptor precursors
in the rd7 retina express cone-specific genes. Transgenic mouse studies in the
rd7 background show that Nr2e3 when expressed under the control of Crx promoter
can restore rod photoreceptor function and suppress cone gene expression.
Furthermore, Nr2e3 expression in photoreceptor precursors committed to be rods
(driven by the Nrl promoter) could completely rescue the retinal phenotype of the
rd7 mice. We conclude that excess of S-cones in the rd7 retina originate from
photoreceptor precursors with a 'default' fate and not from proliferation of
cones and that Nr2e3 is required to suppress the expression of S-cone genes
during normal rod differentiation. These studies further support the
'transcriptional dominance' model of photoreceptor cell fate determination and
provide insights into the pathogenesis of retinal disease phenotypes caused by
NR2E3 mutations.

PMCID: PMC3188990
PMID: 21813656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Neurochem. 2011 Oct;119(2):262-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07405.x. Epub 
2011 Sep 2.

Crx broadly modulates the pineal transcriptome.

Rovsing L(1), Clokie S, Bustos DM, Rohde K, Coon SL, Litman T, Rath MF, Møller M,
Klein DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, Panum Institute, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Cone-rod homeobox (Crx) encodes Crx, a transcription factor expressed selectively
in retinal photoreceptors and pinealocytes, the major cell type of the pineal
gland. In this study, the influence of Crx on the mammalian pineal gland was
studied by light and electron microscopy and by use of microarray and qRTPCR
technology, thereby extending previous studies on selected genes (Furukawa et al.
1999). Deletion of Crx was not found to alter pineal morphology, but was found to
broadly modulate the mouse pineal transcriptome, characterized by a>2-fold
down-regulation of 543 genes and a>2-fold up-regulation of 745 genes (p<0.05). Of
these, one of the most highly up-regulated (18-fold) was Hoxc4, a member of the
Hox gene family, members of which are known to control gene expression cascades. 
During a 24-h period, a set of 51 genes exhibited differential day/night
expression in pineal glands of wild-type animals; only eight of these were also
day/night expressed in the Crx<U+207B>/<U+207B> pineal gland. However, in the Crx<U+207B>/<U+207B> pineal
gland 41 genes exhibited differential night/day expression that was not seen in
wild-type animals. These findings indicate that Crx broadly modulates the pineal 
transcriptome and also influences differential night/day gene expression in this 
tissue. Some effects of Crx deletion on the pineal transcriptome might be
mediated by Hoxc4 up-regulation.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2011 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMCID: PMC3422619
PMID: 21797868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mol Vis. 2011;17:1701-15. Epub 2011 Jun 25.

The expression of retinal cell markers in human retinal pigment epithelial cells 
and their augmentation by the synthetic retinoid fenretinide.

Carr AJ(1), Vugler AA, Yu L, Semo M, Coffey P, Moss SE, Greenwood J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College
London, London, UK. a.carr@ucl.ac.uk

PURPOSE: In several species the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) has the
potential to transdifferentiate into retinal cells to regenerate functional
retinal tissue after injury. However, this capacity for regeneration is lost in
mammals. The synthetic retinoic acid derivative, fenretinide [N(4-hydroxyphenyl) 
retinamide], induces a neuronal-like phenotype in the human adult retinal pigment
epithelial cell line (ARPE-19). These changes are characterized by the appearance
of neural-like processes and the expression of neuronal markers not normally
associated with RPE cells. Here we assess whether fenretinide can induce a
neuroretinal cell phenotype in ARPE-19 cells, by examining retinal cell marker
expression.
METHODS: ARPE-19 cells were treated daily with culture medium containing either 3
µM fenretinide or dimethyl sulfoxide as a control for 7 days. Cells were
processed for immunocytochemistry, western blotting, and for analysis by PCR to
examine the expression of a panel of RPE, neural, and retinal-associated cellular
markers, including classical and non-canonical opsins.
RESULTS: Treatment with fenretinide for 7 days induced the formation of
neuronal-like processes in ARPE-19 cells. Fenretinide induced the expression of
the cone long wavelength sensitive opsin (OPN1lw) but not rhodopsin (RHO), while 
decreasing the expression of RPE cell markers. Many of the neuronal and retinal
specific markers examined were expressed in both control and fenretinide treated 
cells, including those involved in photoreceptor cell development and the
multipotency of neural retinal progenitor cells. Interestingly, ARPE-19 cells
also expressed both photoreceptor specific and non-specific canonical opsins.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of retinal-associated markers and loss of RPE cell
markers in control ARPE-19 cells suggests that these cells might have
dedifferentiated from an RPE cell phenotype under standard culture conditions.
The expression of molecules, such as the transcription factors paired box 6 gene 
(PAX6), sex determining region Y-box 2 (SOX2), cone-rod homeobox (CRX), and
neural retina leucine zipper (NRL), further implies that in culture these cells
are predisposed toward a retinal progenitor-like state. The fenretinide-induced
increase in photoreceptor cell markers, accompanied by a decrease in RPE cell
markers, suggests that retinoids may play a role in the transdifferentiation of
RPE cells. Importantly, our data show for the first time the expression of a
vertebrate ciliary opsin (OPN1lw) and rhabdomeric-like opsin, opsin 4 (OPN4 also 
known as melanopsin) in a clonal cell line. Together these data suggest that
ARPE-19 cells are primed for and possess the capacity to differentiate toward a
retinal cell-like lineage.

PMCID: PMC3130725
PMID: 21738400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Cell Immunol. 2011;270(2):237-50. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2011.05.015. Epub 2011
May 31.

Combination treatment of mice with CRx-153 (nortriptyline and desloratadine)
decreases the severity of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Podojil JR(1), Padval MV, Miller SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University Feinberg School
of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Pro-inflammatory CD4(+) T cell-mediated autoimmune diseases, such as multiple
sclerosis, are hypothesized to be initiated and maintained by self-reactive
interferon-gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>) and interleukin-17 (IL-17) producing CD4(+) T cells.
Previous studies have shown moderate to significant alterations in inflammatory T
cell responses and potentially treatment of autoimmune disease by administration 
of antihistamine or tricyclic antidepressants alone. The goal of the present
study was to determine if treatment of PLP(139-151)-induced relapsing-remitting
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (R-EAE) in SJL/J mice with a
combination of two FDA approved drugs for other indications could decrease R-EAE 
disease. The findings show that combination treatment with desloratadine and
nortriptyline decreases the mean clinical score, disease relapse frequency, and
number of CD4(+) T cells infiltrating into the CNS. In addition, combination
treatment of PLP(139-151) primed mice decreases the level of IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17
secreted via a decrease in both the number of cells secreting and the amount of
cytokine secreted per cell following PLP(139-151) reactivation ex vivo. This is
in contrast to an increase in the level of IL-4 produced and the number of IL-4
secreting cells. The data also show that combination treatment with desloratadine
and nortriptyline inhibits the production of IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17 produced by naive
CD4(+) T cells activated in the presence of Th1 cell- and Th17 cell-promoting
conditions, while increasing the level of IL-4 produced by naive CD4(+) T cells
activated in the presence of Th2 cell-promoting conditions. The present findings 
suggest a novel method for the development of a putative autoimmune therapy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3156865
PMID: 21696712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Jul 7;52(8):5111-20. doi: 10.1167/iovs.11-75301.

Early onset and differential temporospatial expression of melanopsin isoforms in 
the developing chicken retina.

Verra DM(1), Contín MA, Hicks D, Guido ME.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Biológica, CIQUIBC (Centro de Investigaciones en
Química Biológica de Córdoba), Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad
Nacional de Córdoba CONICET (Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y
Técnicas), Córdoba, Argentina.

PURPOSE: Retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) expressing the photopigment melanopsin
(Opn4) display intrinsic photosensitivity. In this study, the presence of
nonvisual phototransduction cascade components in the developing chicken retina
and primary RGCs cultures was investigated, focusing on the two Opn4 genes: the
Xenopus (Opn4x) and the mammalian (Opn4m) orthologs.
METHODS: Retinas were dissected at different embryonic (E) and postnatal (P)
days, and primary RGC cultures were obtained at E8 and kept for 1 hour to 5 days.
Samples were processed for RT-PCR and immunochemistry.
RESULTS: Embryonic retinas expressed the master eye gene Pax6, the prospective
RGC specification gene Brn3, and components of the nonvisual phototransduction
cascade, such as Opn4m and the G protein q (Gq) mRNAs at very early stages
(E4-E5). By contrast, expression of photoreceptor cell markers (CRX, red-opsin,
rhodopsin, and a-transducin) was observed from E7 to E12. Opn4m protein was
visualized in the whole retina as early as E4 and remained elevated from E6 to
the postnatal days, whereas Opn4x was weakly detected at E8 and highly expressed 
after E11. RGC cultures expressed Gq mRNA, as well as both Opn4 mRNAs and
proteins. Opn4m was restricted exclusively to the GC layer at all ages, whereas
Opn4x was limited to the forming GC layer and optic nerve at E8, but by E15, its 
expression was mostly in Prox1(+) horizontal cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The early expression onset of nonvisual phototransduction molecules 
could confer premature photosensitivity to RGCs, while the appearance of Opn4x
expression in horizontal cells suggests the identification of a novel type of
photosensitive cell in birds.

PMID: 21676907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e19458. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019458. Epub 2011 May 13.

Detection of variants in 15 genes in 87 unrelated Chinese patients with Leber
congenital amaurosis.

Li L(1), Xiao X, Li S, Jia X, Wang P, Guo X, Jiao X, Zhang Q, Hejtmancik JF.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

BACKGROUND: Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) is the earliest onset and most
severe form of hereditary retinal dystrophy. So far, full spectrum of variations 
in the 15 genes known to cause LCA has not been systemically evaluated in East
Asians. Therefore, we performed comprehensive detection of variants in these 15
genes in 87 unrelated Han Chinese patients with LCA.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The 51 most frequently mutated exons and introns 
in the 15 genes were selected for an initial scan using cycle sequencing. All the
remaining exons in 11 of the 15 genes were subsequently sequenced. Fifty-three
different variants were identified in 44 of the 87 patients (50.6%), involving 78
of the 88 alleles (11 homozygous and 56 heterozygous variants). Of the 53
variants, 35 (66%) were novel pathogenic mutations. In these Chinese patients,
variants in GUCY2D are the most common cause of LCA (16.1% cases), followed by
CRB1 (11.5%), RPGRIP1 (8%), RPE65 (5.7%), SPATA7 (4.6%), CEP290 (4.6%), CRX
(3.4%), LCA5 (2.3%), MERTK (2.3%), AIPL1 (1.1%), and RDH12 (1.1%). This differs
from the variation spectrum described in other populations. An initial scan of 55
of 215 PCR amplicons, including 214 exons and 1 intron, detected 83.3% (65/78) of
the mutant alleles ultimately found in these 87 patients. In addition, sequencing
only 9 exons would detect over 50% of the identified variants and require less
than 5% of the labor and cost of comprehensive sequencing for all exons.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results suggest that specific difference in the
variation spectrum found in LCA patients from the Han Chinese and other
populations are related by ethnicity. Sequencing exons in order of decreasing
risk is a cost-effective way to identify causative mutations responsible for LCA,
especially in the context of genetic counseling for individual patients in a
clinical setting.

PMCID: PMC3094346
PMID: 21602930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e19685. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019685. Epub 2011 May 13.

Analysis of transcriptional regulatory pathways of photoreceptor genes by
expression profiling of the Otx2-deficient retina.

Omori Y(1), Katoh K, Sato S, Muranishi Y, Chaya T, Onishi A, Minami T, Fujikado
T, Furukawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Osaka Bioscience Institute, Osaka, Japan.

In the vertebrate retina, the Otx2 transcription factor plays a crucial role in
the cell fate determination of both rod and cone photoreceptors. We previously
reported that Otx2 conditional knockout (CKO) mice exhibited a total absence of
rods and cones in the retina due to their cell fate conversion to amacrine-like
cells. In order to investigate the entire transcriptome of the Otx2 CKO retina,
we compared expression profile of Otx2 CKO and wild-type retinas at P1 and P12
using microarray. We observed that expression of 101- and 1049-probe sets
significantly decreased in the Otx2 CKO retina at P1 and P12, respectively,
whereas, expression of 3- and 4149-probe sets increased at P1 and P12,
respectively. We found that expression of genes encoding transcription factors
involved in photoreceptor development, including Crx, Nrl, Nr2e3, Esrrb, and
NeuroD, was markedly down-regulated in the Otx2 CKO at both P1 and P12.
Furthermore, we identified three human retinal disease loci mapped in close
proximity to certain down-regulated genes in the Otx2 CKO retina including
Ccdc126, Tnfsf13 and Pitpnm1, suggesting that these genes are possibly
responsible for these diseases. These transcriptome data sets of the Otx2 CKO
retina provide a resource on developing rods and cones to further understand the 
molecular mechanisms underlying photoreceptor development, function and disease.

PMCID: PMC3094341
PMID: 21602925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Ophthalmol. 2011;2011:906943. doi: 10.1155/2011/906943. Epub 2011 Apr 14.

The domestic cat as a large animal model for characterization of disease and
therapeutic intervention in hereditary retinal blindness.

Narfström K(1), Holland Deckman K, Menotti-Raymond M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine and Surgery, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Mason Eye Institute, University of Missouri-Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

Large mammals, including canids and felids, are affected by spontaneously
occurring hereditary retinal diseases with similarities to those of humans. The
large mammal models may be used for thorough clinical characterization of disease
processes, understanding the effects of specific mutations, elucidation of
disease mechanisms, and for development of therapeutic intervention. Two
well-characterized feline models are addressed in this paper. The first model is 
the autosomal recessive, slowly progressive, late-onset, rod-cone degenerative
disease caused by a mutation in the CEP290 gene. The second model addressed in
this paper is the autosomal dominant early onset rod cone dysplasia, putatively
caused by the mutation found in the CRX gene. Therapeutic trials have been
performed mainly in the former type including stem cell therapy, retinal
transplantation, and development of ocular prosthetics. Domestic cats, having
large human-like eyes with comparable spontaneous retinal diseases, are also
considered useful for gene replacement therapy, thus functioning as effective
model systems for further research.

PMCID: PMC3090773
PMID: 21584261  [PubMed]


150. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 29;6(4):e18992. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018992.

Transplantation of adult mouse iPS cell-derived photoreceptor precursors restores
retinal structure and function in degenerative mice.

Tucker BA(1), Park IH, Qi SD, Klassen HJ, Jiang C, Yao J, Redenti S, Daley GQ,
Young MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Institute for Vision Research, Carver College of 
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, United States of America.
budd-tucker@uiowa.edu

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(5):e0125947.

This study was designed to determine whether adult mouse induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs), could be used to produce retinal precursors and subsequently
photoreceptor cells for retinal transplantation to restore retinal function in
degenerative hosts. iPSCs were generated using adult dsRed mouse dermal
fibroblasts via retroviral induction of the transcription factors Oct4, Sox2,
KLF4 and c-Myc. As with normal mouse ES cells, adult dsRed iPSCs expressed the
pluripotency genes SSEA1, Oct4, Sox2, KLF4, c-Myc and Nanog. Following
transplantation into the eye of immune-compromised retinal degenerative mice
these cells proceeded to form teratomas containing tissue comprising all three
germ layers. At 33 days post-differentiation a large proportion of the cells
expressed the retinal progenitor cell marker Pax6 and went on to express the
photoreceptor markers, CRX, recoverin, and rhodopsin. When tested using calcium
imaging these cells were shown to exhibit characteristics of normal retinal
physiology, responding to delivery of neurotransmitters. Following subretinal
transplantation into degenerative hosts differentiated iPSCs took up residence in
the retinal outer nuclear layer and gave rise to increased electro retinal
function as determined by ERG and functional anatomy. As such, adult
fibroblast-derived iPSCs provide a viable source for the production of retinal
precursors to be used for transplantation and treatment of retinal degenerative
disease.

PMCID: PMC3084746
PMID: 21559507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. BMC Evol Biol. 2011 May 9;11:120. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-11-120.

Divergence in cis-regulatory sequences surrounding the opsin gene arrays of
African cichlid fishes.

O'Quin KE(1), Smith D, Naseer Z, Schulte J, Engel SD, Loh YH, Streelman JT, Boore
JL, Carleton KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA.

BACKGROUND: Divergence within cis-regulatory sequences may contribute to the
adaptive evolution of gene expression, but functional alleles in these regions
are difficult to identify without abundant genomic resources. Among African
cichlid fishes, the differential expression of seven opsin genes has produced
adaptive differences in visual sensitivity. Quantitative genetic analysis
suggests that cis-regulatory alleles near the SWS2-LWS opsins may contribute to
this variation. Here, we sequence BACs containing the opsin genes of two
cichlids, Oreochromis niloticus and Metriaclima zebra. We use phylogenetic
footprinting and shadowing to examine divergence in conserved non-coding
elements, promoter sequences, and 3'-UTRs surrounding each opsin in search of
candidate cis-regulatory sequences that influence cichlid opsin expression.
RESULTS: We identified 20 conserved non-coding elements surrounding the opsins of
cichlids and other teleosts, including one known enhancer and a retinal microRNA.
Most conserved elements contained computationally-predicted binding sites that
correspond to transcription factors that function in vertebrate opsin expression;
O. niloticus and M. zebra were significantly divergent in two of these.
Similarly, we found a large number of relevant transcription factor binding sites
within each opsin's proximal promoter, and identified five opsins that were
considerably divergent in both expression and the number of transcription factor 
binding sites shared between O. niloticus and M. zebra. We also found several
microRNA target sites within the 3'-UTR of each opsin, including two 3'-UTRs that
differ significantly between O. niloticus and M. zebra. Finally, we examined
interspecific divergence among 18 phenotypically diverse cichlids from Lake
Malawi for one conserved non-coding element, two 3'-UTRs, and five opsin proximal
promoters. We found that all regions were highly conserved with some evidence of 
CRX transcription factor binding site turnover. We also found three SNPs within
two opsin promoters and one non-coding element that had weak association with
cichlid opsin expression.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to systematically search the opsins of
cichlids for putative cis-regulatory sequences. Although many putative regulatory
regions are highly conserved across a large number of phenotypically diverse
cichlids, we found at least nine divergent sequences that could contribute to
opsin expression differences in cis and stand out as candidates for future
functional analyses.

PMCID: PMC3116502
PMID: 21554730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Ophthalmic Genet. 2011 Nov;32(4):217-27. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2011.567884. Epub 
2011 Apr 7.

Anterior segment abnormalities and angle-closure glaucoma in a family with a
mutation in the BEST1 gene and Best vitelliform macular dystrophy.

Wittström E(1), Ponjavic V, Bondeson ML, Andréasson S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Lund University, Sweden.
elisabeth.ewi.wittstrom@skane.se

PURPOSE: To present the clinical and electrophysiological findings in four
members of a family with Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD) and
angle-closure glaucoma (ACG).
METHODS: Four members of a family with BVMD were examined clinically, including
visual acuity, slit-lamp examination, biomicroscopy, Goldmann applanation
tonometry and gonioscopy. Measurements of the anterior chamber depth and axial
length, visual field, optical coherence tomography, full-field
electroretinography, multifocal electroretinography and electrooculography were
performed. In addition molecular genetic analysis of the bestrophin-1 gene
(BEST1), the microphthalmia-associated transcription factor gene (MITF) and the
cone-rod homeobox gene (CRX) were performed.
RESULTS: Four family members with the c.253T>C p.Y85H mutation in the BEST1 gene 
and BVMD in different stages also exhibited anterior segment abnormalities such
as shallow anterior chambers (two cases), and reduced axial lengths in all cases.
Microphthalmos (axial length = 20mm) was found in the index patient and in her
son. Hyperopia was found in all four examined patients. Closed angles/narrow
angles were observed in patients with microphthalmos. The index patient developed
ACG at the age of 12 years. Her son inherited microphthalmos, severe hyperopia,
and narrow angles. He is at risk of developing ACG. No pathogenic mutation of the
MITF or the CRX genes was detected in the index patient.
CONCLUSIONS: BVMD could be associated with anterior segment abnormalities such as
shallow anterior chambers, closed/narrow anterior chamber angles and ACG.
Ophthalmologists should be aware of the association between ACG and BVMD.
Examination of the anterior segment, gonioscopy and intraocular pressure control 
are recommended in patients with BVMD.

PMID: 21473666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Jan;21(1):42-53. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0073. Epub 2011 Jun
1.

Differentiation of human embryonic stem cell-derived retinal progenitors into
retinal cells by Sonic hedgehog and/or retinal pigmented epithelium and
transplantation into the subretinal space of sodium iodate-injected rabbits.

Amirpour N(1), Karamali F, Rabiee F, Rezaei L, Esfandiari E, Razavi S, Dehghani
A, Razmju H, Nasr-Esfahani MH, Baharvand H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Royan Institute for Animal
Biotechnology, Isfahan, Iran.

Transplantation of retinal cells has recently provided a promising therapeutic
approach for retinal degeneration. Here, we differentiated initially retinal
progenitors (RPs) from adherent feeder-free human embryonic stem cells (hESCs)
with the use of defined media supplemented with a specific combination of growth 
factors. The differentiated RPs highly (>80%) expressed related molecular
features that included Six3 at an early stage in addition to Crx, Rx, Pax6, Otx2,
and Chx10 at later stage. Next, we examined the induction of photoreceptors by
Shh and/or the coculture of rabbit retinal pigmented epithelium with
hESCs-derived RPs. The differentiation of retinal cells was demonstrated by
protein and gene expression in all groups. However, S-Opsin, a cone photoreceptor
marker, had higher expression in the presence of Shh, whereas expressions of Gli 
and Hes1 decreased in the same group. Finally, hESC-derived RPs were treated with
Shh transplanted into the subretinal space of sodium iodate-injected albino-type 
adult rabbits and analyzed 4 weeks later. Transplanted retinal cells survived,
migrated into retinal layers, and restored a small but significant B-wave. The
grafted cells expressed photoreceptor markers, S-Opsin and Rhodopsin. Our results
indicate that putative hESC-derived retinal cells express related genes and
proteins. Further, our results show that retinal-like cells can be useful
replacements for photoreceptors in retinal diseases.

PMID: 21456900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Apr-Jun;1809(4-6):245-54. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2011.03.001. Epub 2011 Mar 23.

Retinal expression of the X-linked juvenile retinoschisis (RS1) gene is
controlled by an upstream CpG island and two opposing CRX-bound regions.

Kraus D(1), Karlstetter M, Walczak Y, Hilfinger D, Langmann T, Weber BH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Regensburg, Germany.

X-linked juvenile retinoschisis (XLRS) is an orphan retinal disease in males
caused by mutations in the RS1 gene. Previously we have characterized cone-rod
homeobox (CRX)-responsive elements in the promoter region of RS1 driving
selective gene expression in the retina. Here, we expanded our identification and
functional analysis of cis-regulatory elements controlling quantitative
expression of RS1 in vitro and in vivo. Sequence analysis identified a CpG island
3kb upstream of the transcription start site (TSS). In addition, chromatin
immunoprecipitation coupled to microarrays (ChIP-Chip) targeting the retinal
transcription factor CRX was performed. Thereby, we identified a second CRX-bound
region (CBR2) in the first intron of RS1 which contains six evolutionarily
conserved CRX binding motifs. In vitro luciferase reporter gene assays and dsRed 
reporter electroporation of mouse retinal organ cultures demonstrated a strong
constitutive and orientation-independent enhancing effect of the upstream CpG
island. The intronic CBR2 potently suppressed CBR1-driven RS1 promoter activity
in vitro but failed to regulate a CBR1-reporter in short-term cultured mouse
retinae. We conclude that a CpG island enhancer and two CBRs may act in a
combinatorial fashion to fine-tune RS1 transcript levels in the retina.

2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21392589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Phys Condens Matter. 2010 Apr 21;22(15):155502. doi:
10.1088/0953-8984/22/15/155502. Epub 2010 Mar 26.

Cr3+ in layered perovskites: do the electron paramagnetic resonance parameters
only depend on the impurity-ligand distances?

García-Lastra JM(1), Barriuso MT, Aramburu JA, Moreno M.

Author information: 
(1)Nano-Bio Spectroscopy Group and European Theoretical Spectroscopy Facility
(ETSF), Departamento Fisica de Materiales UPV/EHU, Apartado 1072, 20018 San
Sebastián, Spain. scpgalaj@ehu.es

The actual value of axial, R(ax), and equatorial, R(eq), impurity-ligand
distances for Cr(3+) embedded in tetragonal K(2)MgX(4) (X = F, Cl) lattices has
been explored by means of density functional theory (DFT) calculations on
clusters involving up to 69 ions using two different functionals. For
K(2)MgF(4):Cr(3+) R(eq) and R(ax) are found to be coincident within only 0.5 pm. 
When the g tensor of K(2)MgF(4):Cr(3+) is derived considering only the CrF(6)(3-)
unit in vacuo at the calculated equilibrium geometry the g(<U+22A5>)-g(||) quantity
fails to reproduce the experimental value by one order of magnitude. In contrast,
when the active electrons localized in the CrX(6)(3-) complex (X = F, Cl) are
allowed to feel the anisotropic electric field coming from the rest of the
lattice ions the splitting in the first excited state, (4)T(2), increases by one 
order of magnitude. The present results thus show that the g tensor anisotropy
and the zero-field splitting constant, D, observed for K(2)MgX(4):Cr(3+) (X = F, 
Cl) are not mainly due to a local deformation of the CrX(6)(3-) octahedron but to
the action of the internal electric field, often ignored when seeking the
microscopic origin of electronic properties due to impurities in insulating
lattices. Accordingly, serious doubts on the validity of the superposition model 
are cast by the present work.

PMID: 21389557  [PubMed]


156. Biol Pharm Bull. 2011;34(3):311-7.

Beta-cryptoxanthin, plentiful in Japanese mandarin orange, prevents age-related
cognitive dysfunction and oxidative damage in senescence-accelerated mouse brain.

Unno K(1), Sugiura M, Ogawa K, Takabayashi F, Toda M, Sakuma M, Maeda K, Fujitani
K, Miyazaki H, Yamamoto H, Hoshino M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka 4228526, Japan. unno@u-shizuoka-ken.ac.jp

Increased oxidative stress is known to accelerate age-related pathologies.
Beta-cryptoxanthin (ß-CRX, (3R)-ß,ß-caroten-3-ol) is a potent antioxidant that is
highly rich in Satsuma mandarin orange (mandarin), which is the most popular
fruit in Japan. We investigated the antioxidative and anti-aging effects of ß-CRX
and mandarin using senescence-accelerated mice (SAMP10), which were characterized
by a short lifespan, high generation of superoxide anions in the brain and poor
learning ability with aging. ß-CRX (0.5-5.0 µg/ml) or mandarin juice (3.8-38.0%) 
was added to drinking water of SAMP10 one to 12 months of age. ß-CRX was
dose-dependently incorporated into the cerebral cortex and the contents were
similar to the concentration of ß-CRX in the human frontal lobe. These mice also 
had higher learning ability. The level of DNA oxidative damage was significantly 
lower in the cerebral cortex of mice that ingested ß-CRX and mandarin than
control mice. In addition, the mice that ingested ß-CRX (>1.5 µg/ml) and mandarin
(>11.3%) exhibited a higher survival when 12 month-old, the presenile age of
SAMP10, than control mice. These results suggest that ß-CRX is incorporated into 
the brain and has an important antioxidative role and anti-aging effect.

PMID: 21372377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Med Dosw Mikrobiol. 2010;62(3):201-9.

[Occurrence of 16s rRNA methylase ArmA producing Enterobacteriaceae in a general 
hospital in Warsaw, Poland].

[Article in Polish]

Piekarska K(1), Zacharczuk K, Bareja E, Olak M, Szych J, Jagielski M, Wardak S,
Gierczynski R.

Author information: 
(1)Zaklad Bakteriologii Narodowego Instytutu Zdrowia Publicznego-Panstwowego
Zakladu Higieny.

Resistance to gentamicin, amikacin and kanamycin was screened in 270 clinical
isolates of Enterobacteriaceae originated from April 19 to May 19, 2010 in a
regular hospital in Warsaw, Poland. Most of the isolated bacteria were considered
pathogenic. Nineteen isolates (7%) were simultaneously resistant to two or three 
of the tested aminoglycosides. MICs of the three aminoglycosides ranged form 128 
to 1024 mcg/ml for six isolates. These isolates were suspected to produce 16S
rRNA methylase. Genes encoding for three methylases reported in Europe: ArmA,
RmtB and RmtC were searched by PCR. The armA gene was detected in all of the six 
isolates. This group encompassed Enterobacter cloacae (n=4), Klebsiella
pneumoniae (n=1) and Proteus mirabilis (n=1). Five isolates of this group carried
the bla(CAX-M) gene for CTX-M type ESBL. The remaining isolate E. cloacae DM0340 
was ESBL negative and lacked bla(CRX-M) that may suggest an altered genetic
environment of the armA gene in this isolate. Our results showed that 2.2% of the
tested isolates produced 16S rRNA methylase ArmA. This finding may argue for a
high incidence of ArmA producing Enterobacteriaceae in Poland when compared to
reports from other European countries.

PMID: 21114012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Ophthalmol. 2011;2011:391384. doi: 10.1155/2011/391384. Epub 2010 Oct 31.

Mouse model resources for vision research.

Won J(1), Shi LY, Hicks W, Wang J, Hurd R, Naggert JK, Chang B, Nishina PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main Street, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA.

The need for mouse models, with their well-developed genetics and similarity to
human physiology and anatomy, is clear and their central role in furthering our
understanding of human disease is readily apparent in the literature. Mice
carrying mutations that alter developmental pathways or cellular function provide
model systems for analyzing defects in comparable human disorders and for testing
therapeutic strategies. Mutant mice also provide reproducible, experimental
systems for elucidating pathways of normal development and function. Two
programs, the Eye Mutant Resource and the Translational Vision Research Models,
focused on providing such models to the vision research community are described
herein. Over 100 mutant lines from the Eye Mutant Resource and 60 mutant lines
from the Translational Vision Research Models have been developed. The ocular
diseases of the mutant lines include a wide range of phenotypes, including
cataracts, retinal dysplasia and degeneration, and abnormal blood vessel
formation. The mutations in disease genes have been mapped and in some cases
identified by direct sequencing. Here, we report 3 novel alleles of Crx(tvrm65), 
Rp1(tvrm64), and Rpe65(tvrm148) as successful examples of the TVRM program, that 
closely resemble previously reported knockout models.

PMCID: PMC2968714
PMID: 21052544  [PubMed]


159. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 7;5(10):e13075. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013075.

Expression of rod-derived cone viability factor: dual role of CRX in regulating
promoter activity and cell-type specificity.

Lambard S(1), Reichman S, Berlinicke C, Niepon ML, Goureau O, Sahel JA,
Léveillard T, Zack DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, INSERM, U968, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: RdCVF and RdCVF2, encoded by the nucleoredoxin-like genes NXNL1 and
NXNL2, are trophic factors with therapeutic potential that are involved in cone
photoreceptor survival. Studying how their expression is regulated in the retina 
has implications for understanding both their activity and the mechanisms
determining cell-type specificity within the retina.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In order to define and characterize their
promoters, a series of luciferase/GFP reporter constructs that contain various
fragments of the 5'-upstream region of each gene, both murine and human, were
tested in photoreceptor-like and non-photoreceptor cell lines and also in a
biologically more relevant mouse retinal explant system. For NXNL1, 5'-deletion
analysis identified the human -205/+57 bp and murine -351/+51 bp regions as
having promoter activity. Moreover, in the retinal explants these constructs
drove expression specifically to photoreceptor cells. For NXNL2, the human
-393/+27 bp and murine -195/+70 bp regions were found to be sufficient for
promoter activity. However, despite the fact that endogenous NXNL2 expression is 
photoreceptor-specific within the retina, neither of these DNA sequences nor
larger upstream regions demonstrated photoreceptor-specific expression. Further
analysis showed that a 79 bp NXNL2 positive regulatory sequence (-393 to 315 bp) 
combined with a 134 bp inactive minimal NXNL1 promoter fragment (-77 to +57 bp)
was able to drive photoreceptor-specific expression, suggesting that the minimal 
NXNL1 fragment contains latent elements that encode cell-type specificity.
Finally, based on bioinformatic analysis that suggested the importance of a CRX
binding site within the minimal NXNL1 fragment, we found by mutation analysis
that, depending on the context, the CRX site can play a dual role.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The regulation of the Nucleoredoxin-like genes involves
a CRX responsive element that can act as both as a positive regulator of promoter
activity and as a modulator of cell-type specificity.

PMCID: PMC2951342
PMID: 20949100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 May;20(5):851-63. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0291. Epub 2010 Dec 
6.

Comparative analysis of the retinal potential of embryonic stem cells and
amniotic fluid-derived stem cells.

Decembrini S(1), Cananzi M, Gualdoni S, Battersby A, Allen N, Pearson RA, Ali RR,
De Coppi P, Sowden JC.

Author information: 
(1)UCL Institute of Child Health, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United
Kingdom.

Photoreceptors have recently been generated from mouse and human embryonic stem
cells (ESCs), although ethics concerns impede their utilization for cell
replacement therapy for retinal disease. Extra-embryonic tissues have received
attention as alternative therapeutic sources of stem cells. Human and mouse
amniotic fluid-derived stem cells (AFCs) have been reported to be multipotent and
express embryonic and adult stem cell markers. Here, in vitro conditions that
generate retinal cells from ESCs were used to analyze and compare the retinal
potential of murine AFCs and ESCs. We show that AFCs express pluripotency markers
(Nanog, Sox2, and Oct3/4) as well as retinal transcription factor genes (Et,
Lhx2, Tll1, Six6, Otx2, Pax6, and Fgf15). AFCs from amniotic fluid of Fgf15.gfp, 
Nrl.gfp, and Crx.gfp embryos cultured in retinal proliferation and
differentiation conditions failed to switch on these retinal transgenes. AFCs
cultured in retinal-promoting conditions, effective on ESCs, showed reduced
expression of retinal markers. Retinal co-cultures activated retinal genes in
ESCs but not in AFCs, and migration assays in retinal explants showed limited
migration of AFCs compared with ESCs. Unlike ESCs, AFCs do not express the early 
embryonic ectodermal gene Utf1 and Western analysis of AFCs identified only the B
isoform of Oct3/4, rather than the isoform A present in ESCs. We conclude that
AFCs have restricted potential and differ considerably from ESCs and retinal
progenitor cells. Reprogramming to induce pluripotency or new differentiation
protocols will be required to confer retinal potential to AFCs as expression of a
subset of pluripotency and retinal markers is not sufficient.

PMID: 20939691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Dec 1;19(23):4545-59. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq378. Epub 2010 Sep 
21.

Cone and rod photoreceptor transplantation in models of the childhood retinopathy
Leber congenital amaurosis using flow-sorted Crx-positive donor cells.

Lakowski J(1), Baron M, Bainbridge J, Barber AC, Pearson RA, Ali RR, Sowden JC.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, University College 
London, 30 Guilford Street, London, UK.

Retinal degenerative disease causing loss of photoreceptor cells is the leading
cause of untreatable blindness in the developed world, with inherited
degeneration affecting 1 in 3000 people. Visual acuity deteriorates rapidly once 
the cone photoreceptors die, as these cells provide daylight and colour vision.
Here, in proof-of-principle experiments, we demonstrate the feasibility of cone
photoreceptor transplantation into the wild-type and degenerating retina of two
genetic models of Leber congenital amaurosis, the Crb1(rd8/rd8) and Gucy2e(-/-)
mouse. Crx-expressing cells were flow-sorted from the developing retina of CrxGFP
transgenic mice and transplanted into adult recipient retinae; CrxGFP is a marker
of cone and rod photoreceptor commitment. Only the embryonic-stage Crx-positive
donor cells integrated within the outer nuclear layer of the recipient and
differentiated into new cones, whereas postnatal cells generated a 10-fold higher
number of rods compared with embryonic-stage donors. New cone photoreceptors
displayed unambiguous morphological cone features and expressed mature cone
markers. Importantly, we found that the adult environment influences the number
of integrating cones and favours rod integration. New cones and rods were
observed in ratios similar to that of the host retina (1:35) even when the
transplanted population consisted primarily of cone precursors. Cone integration 
efficiency was highest in the cone-deficient Gucy2e(-/-) retina suggesting that
cone depletion creates a more optimal environment for cone transplantation. This 
is the first comprehensive study demonstrating the feasibility of cone
transplantation into the adult retina. We conclude that flow-sorted
embryonic-stage Crx-positive donor cells have the potential to replace lost
cones, as well as rods, an important requirement for retinal disease therapy.

PMCID: PMC2972691
PMID: 20858907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Sep 10;87(3):376-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.07.018. Epub
2010 Aug 12.

Nonsense mutations in FAM161A cause RP28-associated recessive retinitis
pigmentosa.

Langmann T(1), Di Gioia SA, Rau I, Stöhr H, Maksimovic NS, Corbo JC, Renner AB,
Zrenner E, Kumaramanickavel G, Karlstetter M, Arsenijevic Y, Weber BH, Gal A,
Rivolta C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Regensburg, Germany.

Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a degenerative disease of the retina leading to
progressive loss of vision and, in many instances, to legal blindness at the end 
stage. The RP28 locus was assigned in 1999 to the short arm of chromosome 2 by
homozygosity mapping in a large Indian family segregating autosomal-recessive RP 
(arRP). Following a combined approach of chromatin immunoprecipitation and
parallel sequencing of genomic DNA, we identified a gene, FAM161A, which was
shown to carry a homozygous nonsense mutation (p.Arg229X) in patients from the
original RP28 pedigree. Another homozygous FAM161A stop mutation (p.Arg437X) was 
detected in three subjects from a cohort of 118 apparently unrelated German RP
patients. Age at disease onset in these patients was in the second to third
decade, with severe visual handicap in the fifth decade and legal blindness in
the sixth to seventh decades. FAM161A is a phylogenetically conserved gene,
expressed in the retina at relatively high levels and encoding a putative 76 kDa 
protein of unknown function. In the mouse retina, Fam161a mRNA is developmentally
regulated and controlled by the transcription factor Crx, as demonstrated by
chromatin immunoprecipitation and organotypic reporter assays on explanted
retinas. Fam161a protein localizes to photoreceptor cells during development, and
in adult animals it is present in the inner segment as well as the outer
plexiform layer of the retina, the synaptic interface between photoreceptors and 
their efferent neurons. Taken together, our data indicate that null mutations in 
FAM161A are responsible for the RP28-associated arRP.

2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2933350
PMID: 20705278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Genome Res. 2010 Nov;20(11):1512-25. doi: 10.1101/gr.109405.110. Epub 2010 Aug 6.

CRX ChIP-seq reveals the cis-regulatory architecture of mouse photoreceptors.

Corbo JC(1), Lawrence KA, Karlstetter M, Myers CA, Abdelaziz M, Dirkes W, Weigelt
K, Seifert M, Benes V, Fritsche LG, Weber BH, Langmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, Missouri 63110-1024, USA. jcorbo@pathology.wustl.edu

Approximately 98% of mammalian DNA is noncoding, yet we understand relatively
little about the function of this enigmatic portion of the genome. The
cis-regulatory elements that control gene expression reside in noncoding regions 
and can be identified by mapping the binding sites of tissue-specific
transcription factors. Cone-rod homeobox (CRX) is a key transcription factor in
photoreceptor differentiation and survival, but its in vivo targets are largely
unknown. Here, we used chromatin immunoprecipitation with massively parallel
sequencing (ChIP-seq) on CRX to identify thousands of cis-regulatory regions
around photoreceptor genes in adult mouse retina. CRX directly regulates
downstream photoreceptor transcription factors and their target genes via a
network of spatially distributed regulatory elements around each locus. CRX-bound
regions act in a synergistic fashion to activate transcription and contain
multiple CRX binding sites which interact in a spacing- and orientation-dependent
manner to fine-tune transcript levels. CRX ChIP-seq was also performed on
Nrl(-/-) retinas, which represent an enriched source of cone photoreceptors.
Comparison with the wild-type ChIP-seq data set identified numerous rod- and
cone-specific CRX-bound regions as well as many shared elements. Thus, CRX
combinatorially orchestrates the transcriptional networks of both rods and cones 
by coordinating the expression of photoreceptor genes including most retinal
disease genes. In addition, this study pinpoints thousands of noncoding regions
of relevance to both Mendelian and complex retinal disease.

PMCID: PMC2963815
PMID: 20693478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Hum Mutat. 2010 Oct;31(10):E1709-66. doi: 10.1002/humu.21336.

Genetic screening of LCA in Belgium: predominance of CEP290 and identification of
potential modifier alleles in AHI1 of CEP290-related phenotypes.

Coppieters F(1), Casteels I, Meire F, De Jaegere S, Hooghe S, van Regemorter N,
Van Esch H, Matuleviciene A, Nunes L, Meersschaut V, Walraedt S, Standaert L,
Coucke P, Hoeben H, Kroes HY, Vande Walle J, de Ravel T, Leroy BP, De Baere E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA), the most severe inherited retinal dystrophy, is
genetically heterogeneous, with 14 genes accounting for 70% of patients. Here, 91
LCA probands underwent LCA chip analysis and subsequent sequencing of 6 genes
(CEP290, CRB1, RPE65, GUCY2D, AIPL1and CRX), revealing mutations in 69% of the
cohort, with major involvement of CEP290 (30%). In addition, 11 patients with
early-onset retinal dystrophy (EORD) and 13 patients with Senior-Loken syndrome
(SLS), LCA-Joubert syndrome (LCA-JS) or cerebello-oculo-renal syndrome (CORS)
were included. Exhaustive re-inspection of the overall phenotypes in our LCA
cohort revealed novel insights mainly regarding the CEP290-related phenotype. The
AHI1 gene was screened as a candidate modifier gene in three patients with the
same CEP290 genotype but different neurological involvement. Interestingly, a
heterozygous novel AHI1 mutation, p.Asn811Lys, was found in the most severely
affected patient. Moreover, AHI1 screening in five other patients with
CEP290-related disease and neurological involvement revealed a second novel
missense variant, p.His758Pro, in one LCA patient with mild mental retardation
and autism. These two AHI1 mutations might thus represent neurological modifiers 
of CEP290-related disease.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3048164
PMID: 20683928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2010 Aug;11(8):563-76. doi: 10.1038/nrn2880.

Transcriptional regulation of photoreceptor development and homeostasis in the
mammalian retina.

Swaroop A(1), Kim D, Forrest D.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology-Neurodegeneration and Repair Laboratory, Building 6/338, MSC
0610, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, 6 Center Drive,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. swaroopa@nei.nih.gov

In the developing vertebrate retina, diverse neuronal subtypes originate from
multipotent progenitors in a conserved order and are integrated into an intricate
laminated architecture. Recent progress in mammalian photoreceptor development
has identified a complex relationship between six key transcription-regulatory
factors (RORbeta, OTX2, NRL, CRX, NR2E3 and TRbeta2) that determine rod versus M 
cone or S cone cell fate. We propose a step-wise 'transcriptional dominance'
model of photoreceptor cell fate determination, with the S cone representing the 
default state of a generic photoreceptor precursor. Elucidation of
gene-regulatory networks that dictate photoreceptor genesis and homeostasis will 
have wider implications for understanding the development of nervous system
function and for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases.

PMID: 20648062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010 Nov;51(11):6038-50. doi: 10.1167/iovs.10-5443.
Epub 2010 Jun 23.

Transcriptional profile analysis of RPGRORF15 frameshift mutation identifies
novel genes associated with retinal degeneration.

Genini S(1), Zangerl B, Slavik J, Acland GM, Beltran WA, Aguirre GD.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Ophthalmology, Department of Clinical Studies, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

PURPOSE: To identify genes and molecular mechanisms associated with photoreceptor
degeneration in a canine model of XLRP caused by an RPGR exon ORF15
microdeletion. Methods. Expression profiles of mutant and normal retinas were
compared by using canine retinal custom cDNA microarrays. qRT-PCR, Western blot
analysis, and immunohistochemistry (IHC) were applied to selected genes, to
confirm and expand the microarray results.
RESULTS: At 7 and 16 weeks, respectively, 56 and 18 transcripts were
downregulated in the mutant retinas, but none were differentially expressed (DE) 
at both ages, suggesting the involvement of temporally distinct pathways.
Downregulated genes included the known retina-relevant genes PAX6, CHML, and
RDH11 at 7 weeks and CRX and SAG at 16 weeks. Genes directly or indirectly active
in apoptotic processes were altered at 7 weeks (CAMK2G, NTRK2, PRKCB, RALA,
RBBP6, RNF41, SMYD3, SPP1, and TUBB2C) and 16 weeks (SLC25A5 and NKAP).
Furthermore, the DE genes at 7 weeks (ELOVL6, GLOD4, NDUFS4, and REEP1) and 16
weeks (SLC25A5 and TARS2) are related to mitochondrial functions. qRT-PCR of 18
genes confirmed the microarray results and showed DE of additional genes not on
the array. Only GFAP was DE at 3 weeks of age. Western blot and IHC analyses also
confirmed the high reliability of the transcriptomic data.
CONCLUSIONS: Several DE genes were identified in mutant retinas. At 7 weeks, a
combination of nonclassic anti- and proapoptosis genes appear to be involved in
photoreceptor degeneration, whereas at both 7 and 16 weeks, the expression of
mitochondria-related genes indicates that they may play a relevant role in the
disease process.

PMCID: PMC3061521
PMID: 20574030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. BMC Evol Biol. 2010 Jun 17;10:182. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-182.

The origin and evolution of ARGFX homeobox loci in mammalian radiation.

Li G(1), Holland PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PS,
UK.

BACKGROUND: Many homeobox genes show remarkable conservation between divergent
animal phyla. In contrast, the ARGFX (Arginine-fifty homeobox) homeobox locus was
identified in the human genome but is not present in mouse or invertebrates. Here
we ask when and how this locus originated and examine its pattern of molecular
evolution.
RESULTS: Phylogenetic and phylogenomic analyses suggest that ARGFX originated by 
gene duplication from Otx1, Otx2 or Crx during early mammalian evolution, most
likely on the stem lineage of the eutherians. ARGFX diverged extensively from its
progenitor homeobox gene and its exons have been functional and subject to
purifying selection through much of placental mammal radiation. Surprisingly, the
coding region is disrupted in most mammalian genomes analysed, with human being
the only mammal identified in which the full open reading frame is retained.
Indeed, we describe a transcript from human testis that has the potential to
encode the full deduced protein.
CONCLUSIONS: The unusual pattern of evolution suggests that the ARGFX gene may
encode a functional RNA or alternatively it may have 'flickered' between
functional and non-functional states in the evolutionary history of mammals,
particularly in the period when many mammalian lineages diverged within a
relatively short time span.

PMCID: PMC2894831
PMID: 20565723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jun 22;107(25):11579-84. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1000102107. Epub 2010 Jun 4.

The orphan nuclear hormone receptor ERRbeta controls rod photoreceptor survival.

Onishi A(1), Peng GH, Poth EM, Lee DA, Chen J, Alexis U, de Melo J, Chen S,
Blackshaw S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

Mutation of rod photoreceptor-enriched transcription factors is a major cause of 
inherited blindness. We identified the orphan nuclear hormone receptor
estrogen-related receptor beta (ERRbeta) as selectively expressed in rod
photoreceptors. Overexpression of ERRbeta induces expression of rod-specific
genes in retinas of wild-type as well as Nrl(-/-) mice, which lack rod
photoreceptors. Mutation of ERRbeta results in dysfunction and degeneration of
rods, whereas inverse agonists of ERRbeta trigger rapid rod degeneration, which
is rescued by constitutively active mutants of ERRbeta. ERRbeta coordinates
expression of multiple genes that are rate-limiting regulators of ATP generation 
and consumption in photoreceptors. Furthermore, enhancing ERRbeta activity
rescues photoreceptor defects that result from loss of the photoreceptor-specific
transcription factor Crx. Our findings demonstrate that ERRbeta is a critical
regulator of rod photoreceptor function and survival, and suggest that ERRbeta
agonists may be useful in the treatment of certain retinal dystrophies.

PMCID: PMC2895124
PMID: 20534447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Hum Mutat. 2010 Jun;31(6):E1472-83. doi: 10.1002/humu.21268.

Two novel CRX mutant proteins causing autosomal dominant Leber congenital
amaurosis interact differently with NRL.

Nichols LL 2nd(1), Alur RP, Boobalan E, Sergeev YV, Caruso RC, Stone EM, Swaroop 
A, Johnson MA, Brooks BP.

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmic Genetics and Visual Function Branch, National Eye Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) is a congenital retinal dystrophy characterized 
by severe visual loss in infancy and nystagmus. Although most often inherited in 
an autosomal recessive fashion, rare individuals with mutations in the cone-rod
homeobox gene, CRX, have dominant disease. CRX is critical for photoreceptor
development and acts synergistically with the leucine-zipper transcription
factor, NRL. We report on the phenotype of two individuals with LCA due to novel,
de novo CRX mutations, c.G264T(p.K74N) and c.413delT(p.I138fs48), that reduce
transactivation in vitro to 10% and 30% of control values, respectively. Whereas 
the c.413delT(p.I138fs48) mutant allows co-expressed NRL to transactivate
independently at its normal, baseline level, the c.G264T(p.K74N) mutant reduces
co-expressed NRL transactivation and reduces steady state levels of both
proteins. Although both mutant proteins predominantly localize normally to the
nucleus, they also both show variable cytoplasmic localization. These
observations suggest that some CRX-mediated LCA may result from effects beyond
haploinsufficiency, such as the mutant protein interefering with other
transcription factors' function. Such patients would therefore not likely benefit
from a simple, gene-replacement strategy for their disease.

PMCID: PMC2952391
PMID: 20513135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Gene Ther. 2010 Nov;17(11):1390-9. doi: 10.1038/gt.2010.77. Epub 2010 May 13.

Quantitative fine-tuning of photoreceptor cis-regulatory elements through
affinity modulation of transcription factor binding sites.

Lee J(1), Myers CA, Williams N, Abdelaziz M, Corbo JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Given the remarkable recent progress in gene therapy-based treatments for retinal
disease, there is an urgent need for the development of new approaches to
quantitative design and analysis of photoreceptor-specific promoters. In this
study, we determined the relative binding affinity of all single-nucleotide
variants of the consensus binding site of the mammalian photoreceptor
transcription factor, Crx. We then showed that it is possible to use these data
to accurately predict the relative binding affinity of Crx for all possible 8 bp 
sequences. By rationally adjusting the binding affinity of three Crx sites, we
were able to fine-tune the expression of the rod-specific Rhodopsin promoter over
a 225-fold range in living retinas. In addition, we showed that it is possible to
fine-tune the activity of the rod-specific Gnat1 promoter over ~275-fold range by
modulating the affinity of a single Crx-binding site. We found that the action of
individual binding sites depends on the precise promoter context of the site and 
that increasing binding affinity does not always equate with increased promoter
output. Despite these caveats, this tuning approach permits quantitative
engineering of photoreceptor-specific cis-regulatory elements, which can be used 
as drivers in gene therapy vectors for the treatment of blindness.

PMID: 20463752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Neurosci Methods. 2010 Jun 30;190(1):63-70. doi:
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2010.04.025. Epub 2010 May 4.

Three-dimensional early retinal progenitor 3D tissue constructs derived from
human embryonic stem cells.

Nistor G(1), Seiler MJ, Yan F, Ferguson D, Keirstead HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy & Neurobiology, Reeve-Irvine Research Center, Sue and
Bill Gross Stem Cell Research Center, University of California at Irvine, Irvine,
CA, USA.

PURPOSE: To develop three-dimensional (3D) constructs of retinal pigment
epithelium (RPE) and early retina progenitor cells from human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs).
METHODS: 3D tissue constructs were developed by culturing hESC-derived neural
retinal progenitors in a matrix on top of hESC-derived RPE cells in a cell
culture insert. An osmolarity gradient maintained the nutrition of the 3D cell
constructs. Cross-sections through hESC-derived tissue constructs were
characterized by immunohistochemistry for various transcription factors and cell 
markers.
RESULTS: hESC-derived tissue constructs expressed transcription factors
characteristic of retinal development, such as pax6, Otx2, Chx10, retinal RAX;
Brn3b (necessary for differentiation of retinal ganglion cells); and crx and nrl 
(role in photoreceptor development). Many cells expressed neuronal markers
including nestin, beta-tubulin and microtubule-associated proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows for the first time that 3D early retinal progenitor
tissue constructs can be derived from hESCs.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20447416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Exp Eye Res. 2010 Aug;91(2):186-94. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2010.04.017. Epub 2010
May 4.

A 350 bp region of the proximal promoter of Rds drives cell-type specific gene
expression.

Cai X(1), Conley SM, Cheng T, Al-Ubaidi MR, Naash MI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 940
Stanton L. Young Blvd, BMSB 781, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

RDS (retinal degeneration slow) is a photoreceptor-specific tetraspanin protein
required for the biogenesis and maintenance of rod and cone outer segments.
Mutations in the Rds gene are associated with multiple forms of rod- and
cone-dominant retinal degeneration. To gain more insight into the mechanisms
underlying the regulation of this gene, the identification of regulatory
sequences within the promoter of Rds was undertaken. A 3.5 kb fragment of the 5' 
flanking region of the mouse Rds gene was isolated and binding sites for Crx,
Otx2, Nr2e3, RXR family members, Mef2C, Esrrb, NF1, AP1, and SP1 in addition to
several E-boxes, GC-boxes and GAGA-boxes were identified. Crx binding sequences
were conserved in all mammalian species examined. Truncation expression analysis 
of the Rds promoter region in Y-79 retinoblastoma cells showed maximal activity
in the 350 bp proximal promoter region. We also show that inclusion of more
distal fragments reduced promoter activity to the basal level, and that the
promoter activities are cell-type and direction specific. Co-transfection with
Nrl increased promoter activity, suggesting that this gene positively regulates
Rds expression. Based on these findings, a relatively small fragment of the Rds
promoter may be useful in future gene transfer studies to drive gene expression
in photoreceptors.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2937571
PMID: 20447394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Brain Res. 2010 Jul 9;1343:54-65. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.04.066. Epub 2010 
May 31.

A neuroanatomical and physiological study of the non-image forming visual system 
of the cone-rod homeobox gene (Crx) knock out mouse.

Rovsing L(1), Rath MF, Lund-Andersen C, Klein DC, Møller M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, Panum Institute, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

The anatomy and physiology of the non-image forming visual system was
investigated in a visually blind cone-rod homeobox gene (Crx) knock-out mouse
(Crx(-)(/)(-)), which lacks the outer segments of the photoreceptors. We show
that the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) in the Crx(-/-) mouse exhibit morphology as
in the wild type mouse. In addition, the SCN contain vasoactive intestinal
peptide-, vasopressin-, and gastrin-releasing peptide-immunoreactive neurons as
present in the wild type. Anterograde in vivo tracings from the retina of the
Crx(-/-) and wild type mouse showed that the retinohypothalamic projection to the
SCN and the central optic pathways were similar in both animals. Telemetric
monitoring of the running activity and temperature revealed that both the
Crx(-/-)and wild type mouse exhibited diurnal rhythms with a 24-h period, which
could be phase changed by light. However, power spectral analysis revealed that
both rhythms in the Crx(-/-) mouse were less robust than those in the wild type. 
The normal development of the SCN and the central visual pathways in the Crx(-/-)
mouse suggests that a modulatory input from the photoreceptors in the peripheral 
retina to the retinal melanopsin neurons or the SCN may be necessary for a normal
function of the non-image forming system of the mouse. However, a change in the
SCN of the Crx(-/-) mouse might also explain the observed circadian differences
between the knock out mouse and wild type mouse.

Copyright (c) 2010. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3652412
PMID: 20438719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. East Afr Med J. 2010 May;87(5):205-10.

Antibiotic resistant salmonella and Escherichia coli isolated from indigenous
Gallus domesticus in Nairobi, Kenya.

Wesonga SM(1), Muluvi GM, Okemo PO, Kariuki S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Kenyatta University, P. O. Box
43844, Nairobi, Kenya.

OBJECTIVE: To characterise and investigate antimicrobial resistance of Esherichia
coli and salmonella strains isolated from indigenous Gallus gallus in a leading
slaughterhouse/market outlet in Nairobi-Kenya.
DESIGN: A repeated cross sectional study and based on random sampling was used.
SETTING: The study was carried out in a leading market outlet in Nairobi, Kenya.
RESULTS: A hundred and four indigenous chicken rectal swabs were analysed, of
which 67.3% were contaminated with Escherichia coli and 12.5% with Salmonella
typhimurium. Seventy Escherichia coli isolates showed resistance phenotypes to
one, two or more antibiotics. The most common antimicrobial resistance pattern
was the single resistance to Tet (21.43%), followed by Amp Cot Tet (14%), Aug Amp
Cot Tet (4.29%), Aug Amp Cot Tet Kan Chl (2.86%), Amp Cot Tet Chl, Cot Tet
(2.86%) and Crx Amp Cot Tet Chl, Crx Amp Cot Chi, Amp Cot, Aug Amp, (1.43%)
respectively. The highest rate of resistance was against Tet (55.7%), followed by
Cot (40%). Third in line of resistance was Amp 32.86%, followed by Aug (11.43%), 
low or moderate resistance was against Chl (8.57%), Kan (4.29%), and Crx (2.86%) 
(P<0.0002). Salmonella typhimurium recovered displayed single resistance pattern 
to Tet (16.67%), Gen Cot Tet (8.33%), Amp Cot Tet (8.33%), Aug Amp Cot Tet
(8.33%) and Amp Cot Tet Chl (16.67%). The highest resistance was against Tet
(58.3%), Cot (41.7%), Amp (33.3%), Chl (16.7%), Aug and Gen (8.3%) respectively
(P<0.0001). 3.0kb and 5.6kb plasmids isolated were not transferable by
conjugation.
CONCLUSION: Routine surveillance at slaughter/market outlets of Escherichia coli 
and Salmonella enterica should be done to identify infected flocks as a
regulatory procedure for food safety and security programme.

PMID: 23057283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. BMC Evol Biol. 2010 Mar 30;10:87. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-87.

Genomic organization of duplicated short wave-sensitive and long wave-sensitive
opsin genes in the green swordtail, Xiphophorus helleri.

Watson CT(1), Lubieniecki KP, Loew E, Davidson WS, Breden F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC,
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Long wave-sensitive (LWS) opsin genes have undergone multiple
lineage-specific duplication events throughout the evolution of teleost fishes.
LWS repertoire expansions in live-bearing fishes (family Poeciliidae) have
equipped multiple species in this family with up to four LWS genes. Given that
color vision, especially attraction to orange male coloration, is important to
mate choice within poeciliids, LWS opsins have been proposed as candidate genes
driving sexual selection in this family. To date the genomic organization of
these genes has not been described in the family Poeciliidae, and little is known
about the mechanisms regulating the expression of LWS opsins in any teleost.
RESULTS: Two BAC clones containing the complete genomic repertoire of LWS opsin
genes in the green swordtail fish, Xiphophorus helleri, were identified and
sequenced. Three of the four LWS loci identified here were linked in a tandem
array downstream of two tightly linked short wave-sensitive 2 (SWS2) opsin genes.
The fourth LWS opsin gene, containing only a single intron, was not linked to the
other three and is the product of a retrotransposition event. Genomic and
phylogenetic results demonstrate that the LWS genes described here share a common
evolutionary origin with those previously characterized in other poeciliids.
Using qualitative RT-PCR and MSP we showed that each of the LWS and SWS2 opsins, 
as well as three other cone opsin genes and a single rod opsin gene, were
expressed in the eyes of adult female and male X. helleri, contributing to six
separate classes of adult retinal cone and rod cells with average lambdamax
values of 365 nm, 405 nm, 459 nm, 499 nm, 534 nm and 568 nm. Comparative genomic 
analysis identified two candidate teleost opsin regulatory regions containing
putative CRX binding sites and hormone response elements in upstream sequences of
LWS gene regions of seven teleost species, including X. helleri.
CONCLUSIONS: We report the first complete genomic description of LWS and SWS2
genes in poeciliids. These data will serve as a reference for future work seeking
to understand the relationship between LWS opsin genomic organization, gene
expression, gene family evolution, sexual selection and speciation in this fish
family.

PMCID: PMC3087554
PMID: 20353595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Leber Congenital Amaurosis.

Weleber RG, Francis PJ, Trzupek KM, Beattie C.
In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD,
Fong CT, Mefford HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016.
2004 Jul 7.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA), a severe dystrophy of
the retina, typically becomes evident in the first year of life. Visual function 
is usually poor and often accompanied by nystagmus, sluggish or near-absent
pupillary responses, photophobia, high hyperopia, and keratoconus. Visual acuity 
is rarely better than 20/400. A characteristic finding is Franceschetti's
oculo-digital sign, comprising eye poking, pressing, and rubbing. The appearance 
of the fundus is extremely variable. While the retina may initially appear
normal, a pigmentary retinopathy reminiscent of retinitis pigmentosa is
frequently observed later in childhood. The electroretinogram (ERG) is
characteristically "nondetectable" or severely subnormal.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of LCA is established by clinical findings.
Pathogenic variants in 17 genes are known to cause LCA: GUCY2D (locus name:
LCA1), RPE65 (LCA2), SPATA7 (LCA3), AIPL1 (LCA4), LCA5 (LCA5), RPGRIP1 (LCA6),
CRX (LCA7), CRB1 (LCA8), NMNAT1 (LCA9), CEP290 (LCA10), IMPDH1 (LCA11), RD3
(LCA12), RDH12 (LCA13), LRAT (LCA14), TULP1 (LCA15),KCNJ13 (LCA16), and IQCB1.
Together, pathogenic variants in these genes are estimated to account for more
than half of all LCA diagnoses. At least one other disease locus for LCA has been
reported, but the gene is not known.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment is supportive. Children and
their parents should be referred to programs for the visually impaired child
within their state or locality. Affected individuals benefit from correction of
refractive error, use of low-vision aids when possible, and optimal access to
educational and work-related opportunities. Prevention of secondary
complications: When possible children should be discouraged from repeatedly
poking and pressing on their eyes. Surveillance: Periodic ophthalmic evaluation
for assessment of vision, trials of correction for refractive error, and, in
those with residual vision, assessment of the presence of amblyopia, glaucoma, or
cataract.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Most often LCA is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
At conception, each sib of an individual with recessively inherited LCA has a 25%
chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a
25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk
family members is possible if the pathogenic variants in the family are known.
Prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk is possible through
laboratories offering either testing for the gene of interest or custom testing. 
Rarely, LCA is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner as a result of a
pathogenic variant in CRX; the possibility of autosomal dominant inheritance
resulting from a de novoCRX pathogenic variant should be considered in
individuals with LCA and no family history of the disease.

PMID: 20301475  [PubMed]


177. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2010;664:517-24. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-1399-9_59.

A hypoplastic retinal lamination in the purpurin knock down embryo in zebrafish.

Nagashima M(1), Saito J, Mawatari K, Mori Y, Matsukawa T, Koriyama Y, Kato S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, University of Kanazawa, Kanazawa, Japan.

Recently, we cloned a photoreceptor-specific purpurin cDNA from axotomized
goldfish retina. In the present study, we investigate the structure of zebrafish 
purpurin genomic DNA and its function during retinal development. First, we
cloned a 3.7-kbp genomic DNA fragment including 1.4-kbp 5'-flanking region and
2.3-kbp full-length coding region. In the 1.4-kbp 5'-upstream region, there were 
some cone-rod homeobox (crx) protein binding motifs. The vector of the 1.4-kbp
5'-flanking region combined with the reporter GFP gene showed specific expression
of this gene only in the photoreceptors. Although the first appearance time of
purpurin mRNA expression was a little bit later (40 hpf) than that of crx (17-24 
hpf), the appearance site was identical to the ventral part of the retina. Next, 
we made purpurin or crx knock down embryos with morpholino antisense
oligonucleotides. The both morphants (purpurin and crx) showed similar abnormal
phenotypes in the eye development; small size of eyeball and lacking of retinal
lamination. Furthermore, co-injection of crx morpholino and purpurin mRNA
significantly rescued these abnormalities. These data strongly indicate that
purpurin is a key molecule for the cell differentiation during early retinal
development in zebrafish under transcriptional crx regulation.

PMID: 20238054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Apr 16;394(4):877-83. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.03.008. Epub 2010 Mar 4.

Differentiation of primate ES cells into retinal cells induced by ES cell-derived
pigmented cells.

Yue F(1), Johkura K, Shirasawa S, Yokoyama T, Inoue Y, Tomotsune D, Sasaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Medical School of Shinshu University, 
3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto, Nagano 390-8621, Japan. yuefm75@gmail.com

PURPOSE: Photoreceptors cannot regenerate and recover their functions once
disordered. Transplantation of retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) has recently
become a possible therapeutic approach for retinal degeneration. In the present
study, we investigated the induction of photoreceptors by coculturing primate
embryonic stem cells (ESCs) with ESC-derived RPE cells.
METHODS: RPE cells were derived by coculturing ESCs and Sertoli cells.
Photoreceptors were then induced by using ESC-derived RPE cells and retinoic acid
(RA) RESULTS: RPE cell generation was confirmed by morphological analysis, which 
revealed highly pigmented polygonal cells with a compact c
