
1. EMBO J. 2016 Feb 29. pii: e201592701. [Epub ahead of print]

How to make a synaptic ribbon: RIBEYE deletion abolishes ribbons in retinal
synapses and disrupts neurotransmitter release.

Maxeiner S(1), Luo F(2), Tan A(2), Schmitz F(3), Südhof TC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA Department of
Neuroanatomy, Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology Medical School Saarland
University, Homburg/Saar, Germany. (2)Department of Molecular and Cellular
Physiology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. (3)Department of Neuroanatomy, Institute for Anatomy
and Cell Biology Medical School Saarland University, Homburg/Saar, Germany
tcs1@stanford.edu frank.schmitz@uks.eu. (4)Department of Molecular and Cellular
Physiology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA tcs1@stanford.edu frank.schmitz@uks.eu.

Synaptic ribbons are large proteinaceous scaffolds at the active zone of ribbon
synapses that are specialized for rapid sustained synaptic vesicles exocytosis. A
single ribbon-specific protein is known, RIBEYE, suggesting that ribbons may be
constructed from RIBEYE protein. RIBEYE knockdown in zebrafish, however, only
reduced but did not eliminate ribbons, indicating a more ancillary role. Here, we
show in mice that full deletion of RIBEYE abolishes all presynaptic ribbons in
retina synapses. Using paired recordings in acute retina slices, we demonstrate
that deletion of RIBEYE severely impaired fast and sustained neurotransmitter
release at bipolar neuron/AII amacrine cell synapses and rendered spontaneous
miniature release sensitive to the slow Ca(2+)-buffer EGTA, suggesting that
synaptic ribbons mediate nano-domain coupling of Ca(2+) channels to synaptic
vesicle exocytosis. Our results show that RIBEYE is essential for synaptic
ribbons as such, and may organize presynaptic nano-domains that position
release-ready synaptic vesicles adjacent to Ca(2+) channels.

© 2016 The Authors.

PMID: 26929012  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 8. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7242. [Epub ahead of print]

Pinin interacts with C-terminal binding proteins for RNA alternative splicing and
epithelial cell identity of human ovarian cancer cells.

Zhang Y(1), Kwok JS(2), Choi PW(1), Liu M(2), Yang J(1), Singh M(1), Ng SK(3),
Welch WR(4), Muto MG(1), Tsui SK(2), Sugrue SP(5), Berkowitz RS(1), Ng SW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gynecologic Oncology, Division of Gynecologic Oncology,
Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA. (2)School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. (3)School of Medicine and Menzies Health Institute
Queensland, Griffith University, Meadowbrook, Australia. (4)Department of
Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida College of
Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA.

Unlike many other human solid tumors, ovarian tumors express many epithelial
markers at a high level for cell growth and local invasion. The phosphoprotein
Pinin plays a key role in epithelial cell identity. We showed that clinical
ovarian tumors and ovarian cancer cell lines express a high level of Pinin when
compared with normal ovarian tissues and immortalized normal ovarian surface
epithelial cell lines. Pinin co-localized and physically interacted with
transcriptional corepressor C-terminal binding proteins, CtBP1 and CtBP2, in the 
nuclei of cancer cells. Knockdown of Pinin in ovarian cancer cells resulted in
specific reduction of CtBP1 protein expression, cell adhesion,
anchorage-independent growth, and increased drug sensitivity. Whole
transcriptomic comparison of next-generation RNA sequencing data between control 
ovarian cancer cell lines and cancer cell lines with respective knockdown of
Pinin, CtBP1, and CtBP2 expression also showed reduced expression of CtBP1 mRNA
in the Pinin knockdown cell lines. The Pinin knockdown cell lines shared
significant overlap of differentially expressed genes and RNA splicing
aberrations with CtBP1 knockdown and in a lesser degree with CtBP2 knockdown
cancer cells. Hence, Pinin and CtBP are oncotargets that closely interact with
each other to regulate transcription and pre-mRNA alternative splicing and
promote cell adhesion and other epithelial characteristics of ovarian cancer
cells.

PMID: 26871283  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Arch Med Sci. 2015 Dec 10;11(6):1318-23. doi: 10.5114/aoms.2015.56359. Epub 2015 
Dec 11.

CtBP2 overexpression is associated with tumorigenesis and poor clinical outcome
of prostate cancer.

Zhang C(1), Li S(1), Qiao B(1), Yang K(1), Liu R(1), Ma B(1), Liu Y(1), Zhang
Z(1), Xu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Second Hospital of Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 
Institute of Urology, Tianjin, China.

INTRODUCTION: The aim of the study was to evaluate the expression of CtBP2 in
prostate cancer and to determine its relationship with clinicopathologic
parameters.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The expression of CtBP2 in 119 prostate cancer tissues and 
41 normal tissues was examined by qPCR and Western blot analysis, and the results
were correlated with clinicopathologic parameters.
RESULTS: CtBP2 expression in prostate cancer tissues was higher than that in
normal samples. CtBP2 overexpression was closely correlated with serum prostatic 
specific antigen (PSA) (p = 0.018), advanced tumor stage (T3) (p = 0.025), higher
Gleason scores (p = 0.019), positive extraprostatic extension (p = 0.012),
positive vascular invasion (p = 0.011) and perineural invasion (p = 0.035).
However, no significant association was found between CtBP2 abnormal expression
and other parameters, including age (p = 0.776), positive lymph node (p = 0.872) 
and positive surgical margin (p = 0.37). Moreover, CtBP2 overexpression was
significantly associated with poor clinical outcome of prostate cancer (p =
0.0168).
CONCLUSIONS: CtBP2 is overexpressed in prostate cancer, and its increased
expression is closely associated with tumor progression and the outcome of
prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC4697064
PMID: 26788097  [PubMed]


4. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 2;7(5):5690-701. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6788.

Down-regulation of the zinc-finger homeobox protein TSHZ2 releases GLI1 from the 
nuclear repressor complex to restore its transcriptional activity during mammary 
tumorigenesis.

Riku M(1), Inaguma S(1), Ito H(1), Tsunoda T(1), Ikeda H(1), Kasai K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Aichi Medical University School of Medicine,
Nagakute, Aichi, Japan.

Although breast cancer is one of the most common malignancies, the molecular
mechanisms underlying its development and progression are not fully understood.
To identify key molecules involved, we screened publicly available microarray
datasets for genes differentially expressed between breast cancers and normal
mammary glands. We found that three of the genes predicted in this analysis were 
differentially expressed among human mammary tissues and cell lines. Of these
genes, we focused on the role of the zinc-finger homeobox protein TSHZ2, which is
down-regulated in breast cancer cells. We found that TSHZ2 is a nuclear protein
harboring a bipartite nuclear localization signal, and we confirmed its function 
as a C-terminal binding protein (CtBP)-dependent transcriptional repressor.
Through comprehensive screening, we identified TSHZ2-suppressing genes such as
AEBP1 and CXCR4, which are conversely up-regulated by GLI1, the downstream
transcription factor of Hedgehog signaling. We found that GLI1 forms a ternary
complex with CtBP2 in the presence of TSHZ2 and that the transcriptional activity
of GLI1 is suppressed by TSHZ2 in a CtBP-dependent manner. Indeed, knockdown of
TSHZ2 increases the expression of AEBP1 and CXCR4 in TSHZ2-expressing
immortalized mammary duct epithelium. Concordantly, immunohistochemical staining 
of mammary glands revealed that normal duct cells expresses GLI1 in the nucleus
along with TSHZ2 and CtBP2, whereas invasive ductal carcinoma cells, which does
not express TSHZ2, show the increase in the expression of AEBP1 and CXCR4 and in 
the cytoplasmic localization of GLI1. Thus, we propose that down-regulation of
TSHZ2 is crucial for mammary tumorigenesis via the activation of GLI1.

PMID: 26744317  [PubMed - in process]


5. Curr Eye Res. 2015 Dec 17:1-7. [Epub ahead of print]

CtBP2 Regulates TGFß2-Induced Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition Through Notch
Signaling Pathway in Lens Epithelial Cells.

Zhang G(1), Kang L(1), Chen J(1), Xue Y(1), Yang M(1), Qin B(1), Yang L(1), Zhang
J(1), Lu H(1), Guan H(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Eye Institute, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University , Nantong , Jiangsu
Province , China.

BACKGROUND: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of human lens epithelial
cells (LECs) contributes to posterior capsule opacification (PCO). C-terminal
binding protein 2 (CtBP2) has been reported to be essential in EMT and embryonic 
development. However, the function of CtBP2 in EMT of LECs is unknown. The goal
of this study was to investigate the role of CtBP2 through Notch signaling in
transforming growth factor ß2 (TGFß2)-induced EMT in LECs.
METHODS: The human LEC line SRA01/04 was cultured in the presence of TGFß2 for
different periods of time or with <U+03B3>-Secretase Inhibitor IX (DAPT), a specific
inhibitor of Notch receptor cleavage, for 24 h, utilizing plasmid-based method.
The levels of protein expression of CtBP2, EMT markers, and Notch signaling
molecules were measured by Western bolts.
RESULTS: Treatment of SRA01/04 cells with TGFß2 induced typical molecular changes
of EMT and increased the expression of CtBP2 in a time-dependent manner.
Similarly, the expressions of Jagged1 and Notch1 were increased after TGFß2
treatment. Knockdown of CtBP2 by specific siRNA inhibited TGFß2-induced changes
of Connexin 43 (CX43), a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA), Notch1, and Notch
intracellular domain (NICD). In addition, treatment of LECs with ectopic
expression of CtBP2 changed the expressions of CX43, a-SMA, Notch1, and NICD, but
blockade of Notch pathway with DAPT inhibited CtBP2-induced changes of a-SMA and 
CX43.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that CtBP2 plays a critical role in TGFß2-induced
EMT via the Jagged/Notch signaling pathway in human LECs and may contribute to
the development of PCO.

PMID: 26681554  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Hear Res. 2016 Feb;332:39-45. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2015.11.011. Epub 2015 Dec 2.

FGF22 protects hearing function from gentamycin ototoxicity by maintaining ribbon
synapse number.

Li S(1), Hang L(2), Ma Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology and Head-Neck Surgery, Zhenjiang First People's
Hospital, the Affiliated People's Hospital of Jiangsu University, 8 Dianli Rd,
Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, 212000, China. Electronic address: lishuna2256@163.com.
(2)Department of Anesthesia, Zhenjiang First People's Hospital, the Affiliated
People's Hospital of Jiangsu University, 8 Dianli Rd, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, 212000,
China. (3)Department of Otolaryngology and Head-Neck Surgery, Zhenjiang First
People's Hospital, the Affiliated People's Hospital of Jiangsu University, 8
Dianli Rd, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, 212000, China.

Inner hair cell (IHC) ribbon synapses of cochlea play important role in
transmitting sound signal into auditory nerve and are sensitive to ototoxicity.
However, ototoxic damage of ribbon synapses is not understood clearly. Roles of
fibroblast growth factor 22 (FGF22) on synapse formation were explored under
gentamycin ototoxicity. 6-week-old mice were injected intraperitoneally once
daily with 50-150 mg/kg gentamicin for 10 days. Immunostaining with anti-
GluR2&3/CtBP2 was used to estimate the number of ribbon synapses in the cochlea. 
Expression of FGF22 and myocyte enhancer factor 2D (MEF2D) was assayed with
RT-PCR. Expression and localization of FGF22 protein were visualized with
anti-FGF22 immunostaining. Hearing thresholds were assessed using auditory
brainstem responses. Gentamicin administration caused reduction in ribbon synapse
number and hearing impairment without effect on hair cells in CBA/J mouse model. 
Immunohistochemistry showed that FGF22 protein was expressed in IHCs, but not
OHCs of cochlea. Gentamycin attenuated expression of FGF22 but enhanced
expression of MEF2D. Cochlear infusion of recombinant FGF22 inhibited expression 
of MEF2D, preserved ribbon synapses, and restored hearing function impaired by
gentamycin. FGF22 restores hearing loss through maintaining ribbon synapse
number, likely via inhibition of MEF2D. Activating FGF22 might provide the
conceptual basis for the therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26639016  [PubMed - in process]


7. J Neurosci. 2015 Jul 1;35(26):9701-6. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0879-15.2015.

Re-Emergent Inhibition of Cochlear Inner Hair Cells in a Mouse Model of Hearing
Loss.

Zachary SP(1), Fuchs PA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Centers for Sensory Biology and 
Hearing and Balance, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205.
(2)Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Department of Otolaryngology,
and Centers for Sensory Biology and Hearing and Balance, Johns Hopkins School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 pfuchs1@jhmi.edu.

Hearing loss among the elderly correlates with diminished social, mental, and
physical health. Age-related cochlear cell death does occur, but growing
anatomical evidence suggests that synaptic rearrangements on sensory hair cells
also contribute to auditory functional decline. Here we present voltage-clamp
recordings from inner hair cells of the C57BL/6J mouse model of age-related
hearing loss, which reveal that cholinergic synaptic inputs re-emerge during
aging. These efferents are functionally inhibitory, using the same ionic
mechanisms as do efferent contacts present transiently before the developmental
onset of hearing. The strength of efferent inhibition of inner hair cells
increases with hearing threshold elevation. These data indicate that the aged
cochlea regains features of the developing cochlea and that efferent inhibition
of the primary receptors of the auditory system re-emerges with hearing
impairment.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Synaptic changes in the auditory periphery are
increasingly recognized as important factors in hearing loss. To date, anatomical
work has described the loss of afferent contacts from cochlear hair cells.
However, relatively little is known about the efferent innervation of the cochlea
during hearing loss. We performed intracellular recordings from mouse inner hair 
cells across the lifespan and show that efferent innervation of inner hair cells 
arises in parallel with the loss of afferent contacts and elevated hearing
threshold during aging. These efferent neurons inhibit inner hair cells, raising 
the possibility that they play a role in the progression of age-related hearing
loss.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/359701-06$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4571504
PMID: 26134652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Hear Res. 2015 Sep;327:163-74. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2015.06.007. Epub 2015 Jun
16.

Morphological correlates of hearing loss after cochlear implantation and
electro-acoustic stimulation in a hearing-impaired Guinea pig model.

Reiss LA(1), Stark G(2), Nguyen-Huynh AT(2), Spear KA(2), Zhang H(3), Tanaka
C(4), Li H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Oregon Hearing Research Center, Department of Otolaryngology, Oregon Health & 
Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR 97239, USA.
Electronic address: reiss@ohsu.edu. (2)Oregon Hearing Research Center, Department
of Otolaryngology, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park
Road, Portland, OR 97239, USA. (3)Oregon Hearing Research Center, Department of
Otolaryngology, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park
Road, Portland, OR 97239, USA; Department of Otolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, 
Zhujiang Hospital of Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510280, China.
(4)Oregon Hearing Research Center, Department of Otolaryngology, Oregon Health & 
Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR 97239, USA;
Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, John A. Burns School of
Medicine, University of Hawai'i at Manoa, 677 Ala Moana Blvd, Honolulu, HI 96816,
USA.

Hybrid or electro-acoustic stimulation (EAS) cochlear implants (CIs) are designed
to provide high-frequency electric hearing together with residual low-frequency
acoustic hearing. However, 30-50% of EAS CI recipients lose residual hearing
after implantation. The objective of this study was to determine the mechanisms
of EAS-induced hearing loss in an animal model with high-frequency hearing loss. 
Guinea pigs were exposed to 24 h of noise (12-24 kHz at 116 dB) to induce a
high-frequency hearing loss. After recovery, two groups of animals were implanted
(n = 6 per group), with one group receiving chronic acoustic and electric
stimulation for 10 weeks, and the other group receiving no stimulation during
this time frame. A third group (n = 6) was not implanted, but received chronic
acoustic stimulation. Auditory brainstem responses were recorded biweekly to
monitor changes in hearing. The organ of Corti was immunolabeled with phalloidin,
anti-CtBP2, and anti-GluR2 to quantify hair cells, ribbons and post-synaptic
receptors. The lateral wall was immunolabeled with phalloidin and lectin to
quantify stria vascularis capillary diameters. Bimodal or trimodal diameter
distributions were observed; the number and location of peaks were objectively
determined using the Aikake Information Criterion and Expectation Maximization
algorithm. Noise exposure led to immediate hearing loss at 16-32 kHz for all
groups. Cochlear implantation led to additional hearing loss at 4-8 kHz; this
hearing loss was negatively and positively correlated with minimum and maximum
peaks of the bimodal or trimodal distributions of stria vascularis capillary
diameters, respectively. After chronic stimulation, no significant group changes 
in thresholds were seen; however, elevated thresholds at 1 kHz in implanted,
stimulated animals were significantly correlated with decreased presynaptic
ribbon and postsynaptic receptor counts. Inner and outer hair cell counts did not
differ between groups and were not correlated with threshold shifts at any
frequency. As in the previous study in a normal-hearing model, stria vascularis
capillary changes were associated with immediate hearing loss after implantation,
while little to no hair cell loss was observed even in cochlear regions with
threshold shifts as large as 40-50 dB. These findings again support a role of
lateral wall blood flow changes, rather than hair cell loss, in hearing loss
after surgical trauma, and implicate the endocochlear potential as a factor in
implantation-induced hearing loss. Further, the analysis of the hair cell ribbons
and post-synaptic receptors suggest that delayed hearing loss may be linked to
synapse or peripheral nerve loss due to stimulation excitotoxicity or
inflammation. Further research is needed to separate these potential mechanisms
of delayed hearing loss.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26087114  [PubMed - in process]


9. J Neurosci. 2015 May 13;35(19):7509-20. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5138-14.2015.

Aging after noise exposure: acceleration of cochlear synaptopathy in "recovered" 
ears.

Fernandez KA(1), Jeffers PW(2), Lall K(1), Liberman MC(1), Kujawa SG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otology and Laryngology, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, and Eaton-Peabody Laboratories and. (2)Eaton-Peabody
Laboratories and. (3)Department of Otology and Laryngology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, and Eaton-Peabody Laboratories and
Department of Audiology, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114 sharon_kujawa@meei.harvard.edu.

Cochlear synaptic loss, rather than hair cell death, is the earliest sign of
damage in both noise- and age-related hearing impairment (Kujawa and Liberman,
2009; Sergeyenko et al., 2013). Here, we compare cochlear aging after two types
of noise exposure: one producing permanent synaptic damage without hair cell loss
and another producing neither synaptopathy nor hair cell loss. Adult mice were
exposed (8-16 kHz, 100 or 91 dB SPL for 2 h) and then evaluated from 1 h to ~ 20 
months after exposure. Cochlear function was assessed via distortion product
otoacoustic emissions and auditory brainstem responses (ABRs). Cochlear whole
mounts and plastic sections were studied to quantify hair cells, cochlear
neurons, and the synapses connecting them. The synaptopathic noise (100 dB)
caused 35-50 dB threshold shifts at 24 h. By 2 weeks, thresholds had recovered,
but synaptic counts and ABR amplitudes at high frequencies were reduced by up to 
~ 45%. As exposed animals aged, synaptopathy was exacerbated compared with
controls and spread to lower frequencies. Proportional ganglion cell losses
followed. Threshold shifts first appeared >1 year after exposure and, by ~ 20
months, were up to 18 dB greater in the synaptopathic noise group. Outer hair
cell losses were exacerbated in the same time frame (~ 10% at 32 kHz). In
contrast, the 91 dB exposure, producing transient threshold shift without acute
synaptopathy, showed no acceleration of synaptic loss or cochlear dysfunction as 
animals aged, at least to ~ 1 year after exposure. Therefore, interactions
between noise and aging may require an acute synaptopathy, but a single
synaptopathic exposure can accelerate cochlear aging.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/357509-12$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4429155
PMID: 25972177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Stem Cells. 2015 Aug;33(8):2442-55. doi: 10.1002/stem.2046. Epub 2015 May 26.

Ctbp2 Modulates NuRD-Mediated Deacetylation of H3K27 and Facilitates
PRC2-Mediated H3K27me3 in Active Embryonic Stem Cell Genes During Exit from
Pluripotency.

Kim TW(1), Kang BH(1), Jang H(1,)(2), Kwak S(1), Shin J(1), Kim H(1), Lee SE(3), 
Lee SM(1), Lee JH(1), Kim JH(1), Kim SY(4), Cho EJ(5), Kim JH(6), Park KS(7), Che
JH(7), Han DW(8), Kang MJ(9), Yi EC(9), Youn HD(1,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)National Creative Research Center for Epigenome Reprogramming Network,
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ischemic/Hypoxic Disease Institute, Seoul,
Republic of Korea. (2)Division of Cancer Biology, Research Institute, National
Cancer Center, Goyang, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Internal Medicine,
Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (4)Medical Genomic 
Research Center, KRIBB, Daejeon, Republic of Korea. (5)College of Pharmacy,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Republic of Korea. (6)Seoul National University
Biomedical Informatics (SNUBI), Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. (7)Biomedical Center for Animal Resource Development,
N-Bio, Suwon, Republic of Korea. (8)Department of Molecular Medicine and
Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of Convergence Science, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (9)Department of Stem Cell
Biology, School of Medicine, Konkuk University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

For cells to exit from pluripotency and commit to a lineage, the circuitry of a
core transcription factor (CTF) network must be extinguished in an orderly manner
through epigenetic modifications. However, how this choreographed epigenetic
remodeling at active embryonic stem cell (ESC) genes occurs during
differentiation is poorly understood. In this study, we demonstrate that
C-terminal binding protein 2 (Ctbp2) regulates nucleosome remodeling and
deacetylation (NuRD)-mediated deacetylation of H3K27 and facilitates recruitment 
of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2)-mediated H3K27me3 in active ESC genes for
exit from pluripotency during differentiation. By genomewide analysis, we found
that Ctbp2 resides in active ESC genes and co-occupies regions with ESC CTFs in
undifferentiated ESCs. Furthermore, ablation of Ctbp2 effects inappropriate gene 
silencing in ESCs by sustaining high levels of H3K27ac and impeding H3K27me3 in
active ESC genes, thereby sustaining ESC maintenance during differentiation.
Thus, Ctbp2 preoccupies regions in active genes with the NuRD complex in
undifferentiated ESCs that are directed toward H3K27me3 by PRC2 to induce stable 
silencing, which is pivotal for natural lineage commitment.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 25944056  [PubMed - in process]


11. BMC Cancer. 2015 May 6;15:358. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1361-3.

Mechanism study of peptide GMBP1 and its receptor GRP78 in modulating gastric
cancer MDR by iTRAQ-based proteomic analysis.

Wang X(1), Li Y(2), Xu G(3), Liu M(4), Xue L(5), Liu L(6), Hu S(7), Zhang Y(8),
Nie Y(9), Liang S(10), Wang B(11), Ding J(12).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Xijing Hospital of Digestive
Diseases, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, 127 Changle
Western Road, Xi'an, 710032, China. xiaojuan318318@163.com. (2)State Key
Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Xijing Hospital of Digestive Diseases, Xijing
Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, 127 Changle Western Road, Xi'an,
710032, China. lyn810828@163.com. (3)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology and
Xijing Hospital of Digestive Diseases, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, 127 Changle Western Road, Xi'an, 710032, China. 471845102@qq.com.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Xijing Hospital of Digestive
Diseases, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, 127 Changle
Western Road, Xi'an, 710032, China. olorin183795@gmail.com. (5)State Key
Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Xijing Hospital of Digestive Diseases, Xijing
Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, 127 Changle Western Road, Xi'an,
710032, China. xuelin214209@126.com. (6)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology
and Xijing Hospital of Digestive Diseases, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military
Medical University, 127 Changle Western Road, Xi'an, 710032, China.
fmmullj@126.com. (7)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Xijing Hospital of
Digestive Diseases, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, 127
Changle Western Road, Xi'an, 710032, China. husijun211@aliyun.com. (8)State Key
Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Xijing Hospital of Digestive Diseases, Xijing
Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, 127 Changle Western Road, Xi'an,
710032, China. yingzhcindy@126.com. (9)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology and
Xijing Hospital of Digestive Diseases, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, 127 Changle Western Road, Xi'an, 710032, China. yongznie@fmmu.edu.cn.
(10)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Xijing Hospital of Digestive
Diseases, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, 127 Changle
Western Road, Xi'an, 710032, China. liangsh@fmmu.edu.cn. (11)State Key Laboratory
of Cancer Biology and Xijing Hospital of Digestive Diseases, Xijing Hospital,
Fourth Military Medical University, 127 Changle Western Road, Xi'an, 710032,
China. wangbiaoluodoc@163.com. (12)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology and
Xijing Hospital of Digestive Diseases, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, 127 Changle Western Road, Xi'an, 710032, China. dingjie@fmmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Multidrug resistance (MDR) is a major obstacle to the treatment of
gastric cancer (GC). Using a phage display approach, we previously obtained the
peptide GMBP1, which specifically binds to the surface of MDR gastric cancer
cells and is subsequently internalized. Furthermore, GMBP1 was shown to have the 
potential to reverse the MDR phenotype of gastric cancer cells, and GRP78 was
identified as the receptor for this peptide. The present study aimed to
investigate the mechanism of peptide GMBP1 and its receptor GRP78 in modulating
gastric cancer MDR.
METHODS: Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) and immunofluorescence
staining were used to investigate the subcellular location and mechanism of GMBP1
internalization. iTRAQ was used to identify the MDR-associated downstream targets
of GMBP1. Differentially expressed proteins were identified in GMBP1-treated
compared to untreated SGC7901/ADR and SGC7901/VCR cells. GO and KEGG pathway
analyses of the differentially expressed proteins revealed the interconnection of
these proteins, the majority of which are involved in MDR. Two differentially
expressed proteins were selected and validated by western blotting.
RESULTS: GMBP1 and its receptor GRP78 were found to be localized in the cytoplasm
of GC cells, and GRP78 can mediate the internalization of GMBP1 into MDR cells
through the transferrin-related pathway. In total, 3,752 and 3,749 proteins were 
affected in GMBP1-treated SGC7901/ADR and SGC7901/VCR cells, respectively,
involving 38 and 79 KEGG pathways. Two differentially expressed proteins, CTBP2
and EIF4E, were selected and validated by western blotting.
CONCLUSION: This study explored the role and downstream mechanism of GMBP1 in GC 
MDR, providing insight into the role of endoplasmic reticulum stress protein
GRP78 in the MDR of cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4430905
PMID: 25943993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;35(6):2285-98. doi: 10.1159/000374032. Epub 2015 Apr
13.

Obesity-Associated MiR-342-3p Promotes Adipogenesis of Mesenchymal Stem Cells by 
Suppressing CtBP2 and Releasing C/EBPa from CtBP2 Binding.

Wang L(1), Xu L, Xu M, Liu G, Xing J, Sun C, Ding H.

Author information: 
(1)Shengli Oilfield Central Hospital, Dongying, Shandong, P.R. China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The elucidation of the molecular mechanism of adipocyte
differentiation in mesenchymal stem cells is of essential importance for the
development of treatments for metabolic diseases, such as obesity and diabetes.
METHODS: The expression levels of miR-342-3p and carboxy-terminal binding protein
2 (CtBP2) were regulated by oligonucleotide transfection. Adipogenic
differentiation was induced by adipogenic medium containing indomethacin,
dexamethasone and 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine on day 12, as determined by Oil Red
O staining and triglyceride concentration assay to assess intracellular lipid
accumulation. The induction of adipocyte-specific transcription factors and
markers was detected by qRT-PCR and western blot. The regulation of CtBP2
expression by miR-342-3p was determined by western blot, qRT-PCR, luciferase
reporter assay, ChIP assay and functional experiments.
RESULTS: We revealed that miR-342-3p was enriched in the adipose tissue of obese 
mice, and its expression was significantly elevated during adipogenic
differentiation in both human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) and 3T3L1 cells.
Using gain- and loss-of-function assays, we demonstrated that the overexpression 
of miR-342-3p markedly promoted the differentiation of hMSCs into an adipogenic
lineage. Adipogenesis was significantly blocked by miR-342-3p downregulation. We 
identified and validated that CtBP2 was a direct target of miR-342-3p in this
process. The effects of the inhibition of CtBP2 were similar to those of
miR-342-5p overexpression on adipogenic differentiation, promoting the release of
C/EBPa from CtBP2 binding.
CONCLUSION: miR-342-3p is a powerful enhancer of the adipogenesis of human
adipose-derived MSCs that acts by inhibiting CtBP2 and releasing the key
adipogenic regulator C/EBPa from CtBP2 binding, subsequently activating the
expression of adipogenic transcription factors and markers.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25895816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Tumour Biol. 2015 Sep;36(9):6701-14. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3354-x. Epub 2015
Mar 29.

Interaction with CCNH/CDK7 facilitates CtBP2 promoting esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) metastasis via upregulating epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) progression.

Zhang J(1), Zhu J(2), Yang L(2), Guan C(2), Ni R(2), Wang Y(2), Ji L(2), Tian
Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Soochow University,
Suzhou, 215000, Jiangsu, China. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated
Hospital of Nantong University, Nantong, 226001, Jiangsu, China. (3)Department of
Oncology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Soochow University, Suzhou, 215000,
Jiangsu, China. tianye_2014@126.com.

CtBP2, as a transcriptional corepressor of epithelial-specific genes, has been
reported to promote tumor due to upregulating epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) in cancer cells. CtBP2 was also demonstrated to contribute to the
proliferation of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) cells through a
negative transcriptional regulation of p16(INK4A). In this study, for the first
time, we reported that CtBP2 expression, along with CCNH/CDK7, was higher in ESCC
tissues with lymph node metastases than in those without lymph node metastases.
Moreover, both CtBP2 and CCNH/CDK7 were positively correlated with E-cadherin,
tumor grade, and tumor metastasis. However, the concrete mechanism of CtBP2's
role in enhancing ESCC migration remains incompletely understood. We confirmed
that CCNH/CDK7 could directly interact with CtBP2 in ESCC cells in vivo and in
vitro. Furthermore, our data demonstrate for the first time that CtBP2 enhanced
the migration of ESCC cells in a CCNH/CDK7-dependent manner. Our results
indicated that CCNH/CDK7-CtBP2 axis may augment ESCC cell migration, and
targeting the interaction of both may provide a novel therapeutic target of ESCC.

PMID: 25820824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Tissue Eng Part A. 2015 Jun;21(11-12):1763-71. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2014.0669.
Epub 2015 Mar 24.

Enhanced functional integration of human photoreceptor precursors into human and 
rodent retina in an ex vivo retinal explant model system.

Yanai A(1), Laver CR(1), Gregory-Evans CY(1), Liu RR(1), Gregory-Evans K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Faculty of Medicine,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Retinal disease is the major cause of irreversible blindness in developed
countries. Transplantation of photoreceptor precursor cells (PPCs) derived from
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) is a promising and widely applicable approach 
for the treatment of these blinding conditions. Previously, it has been shown
that after transplantation into the degenerating retina, the percentage of PPCs
that undergo functional integration is low. The factors that inhibit PPC
engraftment remain largely unknown, in part, because so many adverse factors
could be at play during in vivo experiments. To advance our knowledge in
overcoming potential adverse effects and optimize PPC transplantation, we have
developed a novel ex vivo system. Harvested neural retina was placed directly on 
top of cultured retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells from a number of different
sources. To mimic PPC transplantation into the subretinal space, hESC-derived
PPCs were inserted between the retinal explant and underlying RPE. Explants
cocultured with hESC-derived RPE maintained normal gross morphology and viability
for up to 2 weeks, whereas the explants cultured on ARPE19 and RPE-J failed by 7 
days. Furthermore, the proportion of PPCs expressing ribbon synapse-specific
proteins BASSOON and RIBEYE was significantly higher when cocultured with
hESC-derived RPE (20% and 10%, respectively), than when cocultured with ARPE19
(only 6% and 2%, respectively). In the presence of the synaptogenic factor
thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1), the proportion of BASSOON-positive and RIBEYE-positive 
PPCs cocultured with hESC-derived RPE increased to ~30% and 15%, respectively.
These data demonstrate the utility of an ex vivo model system to define factors, 
such as TSP-1, which could influence integration efficiency in future in vivo
experiments in models of retinal degeneration.

PMCID: PMC4449699 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25693608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Mar 11;43(5):2590-602. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv103. Epub 2015
Feb 17.

Epigenetic remodeling in B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia occurs in two tracks
and employs embryonic stem cell-like signatures.

Lee ST(1), Muench MO(2), Fomin ME(3), Xiao J(4), Zhou M(4), de Smith A(4),
Martín-Subero JI(5), Heath S(6), Houseman EA(7), Roy R(8), Wrensch M(9), Wiencke 
J(9), Metayer C(10), Wiemels JL(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California at San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul 120752, Republic of Korea. (2)Blood Systems
Research Institute, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 
94158, USA Liver Center and Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of
California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (3)Blood Systems
Research Institute, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 
94158, USA. (4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of
California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (5)Unidad de
Hematopatología, Servicio de Anatomía Patológica, Hospital Clínic, Universitat de
Barcelona, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS),
Barcelona 08036, Spain. (6)Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico, Parc Científic
de Barcelona, Barcelona 08036, Spain. (7)Department of Public Health, Oregon
State University, Corvallis, OR, 97331 USA. (8)Cancer Research Institute,
University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(9)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California at San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (10)Division of Epidemiology, School of Public
Health, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(11)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California at San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA Department of Neurological Surgery,
University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA
joe.wiemels@ucsf.edu.

We investigated DNA methylomes of pediatric B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias 
(B-ALLs) using whole-genome bisulfite sequencing and high-definition microarrays,
along with RNA expression profiles. Epigenetic alteration of B-ALLs occurred in
two tracks: de novo methylation of small functional compartments and
demethylation of large inter-compartmental backbones. The deviations were
exaggerated in lamina-associated domains, with differences corresponding to
methylation clusters and/or cytogenetic groups. Our data also suggested a pivotal
role of polycomb and CTBP2 in de novo methylation, which may be traced back to
bivalency status of embryonic stem cells. Driven by these potent epigenetic
modulations, suppression of polycomb target genes was observed along with
disruption of developmental fate and cell cycle and mismatch repair pathways and 
altered activities of key upstream regulators.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4357708
PMID: 25690899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 28;6(6):3752-69.

CtBP2 is an independent prognostic marker that promotes GLI1 induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zheng X(1), Song T(1), Dou C(1), Jia Y(1), Liu Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, China.

C-terminal binding protein 2 (CtBP2) is a transcriptional co-repressor that
promotes cancer cell migration and invasion by inhibiting multiple tumor
suppressor genes that contribute to cell mobility and adhesion. In this
investigation, we showed thatCtBP2 expression was increased significantly in HCC 
tissues when compared to matched normal adjacent liver tissues. We also showed
that CtBP2 expression is associated with worse HCC patient prognosis after liver 
resection. CtBP2 over-expression induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) 
in Huh7 cells and, correspondingly, silencing CtBP2 suppressed EMT in MHCC97H
cells. ChIP assays revealed that GLI1 increased CtBP2 transcription by directly
binding its promoter. Furthermore, interaction of CtBP2 and Snail Family Zinc
Finger 1 (SNAI1), both of which were found to be positively regulated by GLI1,
was confirmed by Co-IP assay. SNAI1 knockdown revealed that SNAI1 was essential
for CtBP2 induction of the EMT phenotype of HCC cells, and CtBP2 knockdown
reversed GLI1-SNAI1 driven EMT in Huh7 cells. Finally, in vivo experiments
demonstrated that enhanced CtBP2expression promoted HCC xenograft growth and
induced EMT. In conclusion, CtBP2 may serve as a prognostic marker for post liver
resection HCC and may play a role during GLI1-driven EMT as a transcriptional
co-repressor of SNAI1.

PMCID: PMC4414151
PMID: 25686837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Synapse. 2015 May;69(5):242-55. doi: 10.1002/syn.21812. Epub 2015 Mar 11.

Resolving the structure of inner ear ribbon synapses with STED microscopy.

Rutherford MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Central Institute for the Deaf, Washington
University School of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri, 63110; Inner Ear Lab, Department of Otolaryngology, University
of Göttingen Medical Center, Göttingen, Germany, D-37077.

Synapses are diverse in form and function; however, the mechanisms underlying
this diversity are poorly understood. To illuminate structure/function
relationships, robust analysis of molecular composition and morphology is needed.
The molecular-anatomical components of synapses-vesicles, clusters of
voltage-gated ion channels in presynaptic densities, arrays of transmitter
receptors in postsynaptic densities-are only tens to hundreds of nanometers in
size. Measuring the topographies of synaptic proteins requires nanoscale
resolution of their molecularly specific labels. Super-resolution light
microscopy has emerged to meet this need. Achieving 50 nm resolution in thick
tissue, we employed stimulated emission depletion (STED) microscopy to image the 
functionally and molecularly unique ribbon-type synapses in the inner ear that
connect mechano-sensory inner hair cells to cochlear nerve fibers. Synaptic
ribbons, bassoon protein, voltage-gated Ca(2+) channels, and glutamate receptors 
are inhomogeneous in their spatial distributions within synapses; the protein
clusters assume variations of shapes typical for each protein specifically at
cochlear afferent synapses. Heterogeneity of substructure among these synapses
may contribute to functional differences among auditory nerve fibers. The
morphology of synaptic voltage-gated Ca(2+) channels matures over development in 
a way that depends upon bassoon protein, which aggregates in similar form.
Functional properties of synaptic transmission appear to depend on voltage-gated 
Ca(2+) channel cluster morphology and position relative to synaptic vesicles.
Super-resolution light microscopy is a group of techniques that complement
electron microscopy and conventional light microscopy. Although technical hurdles
remain, we are beginning to resolve the details of molecular nanoanatomy that
relate mechanistically to synaptic function.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25682928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Biol Chem. 2015 Mar 27;290(13):8591-605. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.638338. Epub
2015 Feb 6.

Phosphorylation of Krüppel-like factor 3 (KLF3/BKLF) and C-terminal binding
protein 2 (CtBP2) by homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 2 (HIPK2) modulates
KLF3 DNA binding and activity.

Dewi V(1), Kwok A(2), Lee S(2), Lee MM(2), Tan YM(2), Nicholas HR(2), Isono K(3),
Wienert B(1), Mak KS(1), Knights AJ(1), Quinlan KG(1), Cordwell SJ(2), Funnell
AP(1), Pearson RC(1), Crossley M(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New 
South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia. (2)the School of Molecular 
Bioscience, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, 2006, Australia, and. 
(3)the RIKEN Research Center for Allergy and Immunology, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama
City, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. (4)From the School of Biotechnology and
Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales
2052, Australia, the School of Molecular Bioscience, University of Sydney,
Sydney, New South Wales, 2006, Australia, and m.crossley@unsw.edu.au.

Krüppel-like factor 3 (KLF3/BKLF), a member of the Krüppel-like factor (KLF)
family of transcription factors, is a widely expressed transcriptional repressor 
with diverse biological roles. Although there is considerable understanding of
the molecular mechanisms that allow KLF3 to silence the activity of its target
genes, less is known about the signal transduction pathways and
post-translational modifications that modulate KLF3 activity in response to
physiological stimuli. We observed that KLF3 is modified in a range of different 
tissues and found that the serine/threonine kinase homeodomain-interacting
protein kinase 2 (HIPK2) can both bind and phosphorylate KLF3. Mass spectrometry 
identified serine 249 as the primary phosphorylation site. Mutation of this site 
reduces the ability of KLF3 to bind DNA and repress transcription. Furthermore,
we also determined that HIPK2 can phosphorylate the KLF3 co-repressor C-terminal 
binding protein 2 (CtBP2) at serine 428. Finally, we found that phosphorylation
of KLF3 and CtBP2 by HIPK2 strengthens the interaction between these two factors 
and increases transcriptional repression by KLF3. Taken together, our results
indicate that HIPK2 potentiates the activity of KLF3.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4375508
PMID: 25659434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Apr;167A(4):786-90. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36949. Epub 2015
Feb 5.

Clinical comparison of 10q26 overlapping deletions: delineating the critical
region for urogenital anomalies.

Vera-Carbonell A(1), López-González V, Bafalliu JA, Ballesta-Martínez MJ,
Fernández A, Guillén-Navarro E, López-Expósito I.

Author information: 
(1)Sección de Citogenética, Centro de Bioquímica y Genética Clínica, Hospital
Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, El Palmar, Murcia, Spain; Instituto 
Murciano de Investigación Biosanitaria-Arrixaca (IMIB-Arrixaca); Centro de
Investigación Biomédica de Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Instituto de,
Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain.

The 10q26 deletion syndrome is a clinically heterogeneous disorder. The most
common phenotypic characteristics include pre- and/or postnatal growth
retardation, microcephaly, developmental delay/intellectual disability and a
facial appearance consisting of a broad nasal bridge with a prominent nose,
low-set malformed ears, strabismus, and a thin vermilion of the upper lip. In
addition, limb and cardiac anomalies as well as urogenital anomalies are
occasionally observed. In this report, we describe three unrelated females with
10q26 terminal deletions who shared clinical features of the syndrome, including 
urogenital defects. Cytogenetic studies showed an apparently de novo isolated
deletion of the long arm of chromosome 10, with breakpoints in 10q26.1, and
subsequent oligo array-CGH analysis confirmed the terminal location and defined
the size of the overlapping deletions as ~ 13.46, ~ 9.31 and ~ 9.17 Mb. We
compared the phenotypic characteristics of the present patients with others
reported to have isolated deletions and we suggest that small 10q26.2 terminal
deletions may be associated with growth retardation, developmental
delay/intellectual disability, craniofacial features and external genital
anomalies whereas longer terminal deletions affecting the 10q26.12 and/or
10q26.13 regions may be responsible for renal/urinary tract anomalies. We propose
that the haploinsufficiency of one or several genes located in the
10q26.12-q26.13 region may contribute to the renal or urinary tract pathogenesis 
and we highlight the importance of FGFR2 and probably of CTBP2 as candidate
genes.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25655674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Comp Neurol. 2015 Jul 1;523(10):1529-47. doi: 10.1002/cne.23752. Epub 2015 Mar 
10.

Morphology and connectivity of the small bistratified A8 amacrine cell in the
mouse retina.

Lee SC(1,)(2), Meyer A(3), Schubert T(4), Hüser L(1), Dedek K(3,)(5), Haverkamp
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Brain Research, 60438, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(2)University of Sydney-Save Sight Institute, Sydney, New South Wales, 2000,
Australia. (3)Department of Neurobiology, University of Oldenburg, 26129,
Oldenburg, Germany. (4)Werner Reichardt Center for Integrative Neuroscience
(CIN)/Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University of Tübingen, 72076, Tübingen,
Germany. (5)Research Center for Neurosensory Science, University of Oldenburg,
26129, Oldenburg, Germany.

Amacrine cells comprise ~ 30 morphological types in the mammalian retina. The
synaptic connectivity and function of a few <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic
wide-field amacrine cells have recently been studied; however, with the exception
of the rod pathway-specific AII amacrine cell, the connectivity of glycinergic
small-field amacrine cells has not been investigated in the mouse retina. Here,
we studied the morphology and connectivity pattern of the small-field A8 amacrine
cell. A8 cells in mouse retina are bistratified with lobular processes in the ON 
sublamina and arboreal dendrites in the OFF sublamina of the inner plexiform
layer. The distinct bistratified morphology was first visible at postnatal day 8,
reaching the adult shape at P13, around eye opening. The connectivity of A8 cells
to bipolar cells and ganglion cells was studied by double and triple
immunolabeling experiments by using various cell markers combined with synaptic
markers. Our data suggest that A8 amacrine cells receive glutamatergic input from
both OFF and ON cone bipolar cells. Furthermore, A8 cells are coupled to ON cone 
bipolar cells by gap junctions, and provide inhibitory input via glycine receptor
(GlyR) subunit a1 to OFF cone bipolar cells and to ON A-type ganglion cells.
Measurements of spontaneous glycinergic postsynaptic currents and GlyR
immunolabeling revealed that A8 cells express GlyRs containing the a2 subunit.
The results show that the bistratified A8 cell makes very similar synaptic
contacts with cone bipolar cells as the rod pathway-specific AII amacrine cell.
However, unlike AII cells, A8 amacrine cells provide glycinergic input to ON
A-type ganglion cells.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4439304 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25630271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Front Genet. 2015 Jan 13;5:465. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2014.00465. eCollection 2014.

Identification of genetic variants or genes that are associated with
Homoharringtonine (HHT) response through a genome-wide association study in human
lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs).

Tong Y(1), Niu N(2), Jenkins G(3), Batzler A(3), Li L(4), Kalari KR(3), Wang
L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University Affiliated First People's Hospital Shanghai, China. (2)Department of
Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic Rochester, MN, 
USA. (3)Division of Statistic and Bioinformatics, Department of Health Science
Research, Mayo Clinic Rochester, MN, USA. (4)Department of Oncology, Institute of
Medicinal Biotechnology, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences Beijing, China.

Homoharringtonine (HHT) has been widely used in China to treat patients with
acute and chronic myeloid leukemia for decades. Since response to HHT varies
among patients, our study aimed to identify biomarkers that might influence the
response to HHT using a panel of various human lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs). 
Genome-wide association (GWA) analysis using single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
and mRNA expression data was assessed for association with cytotoxicity to HHT in
LCLs. Integrated analysis among SNPs, expression, AUC value was also performed to
help select candidate genes for further functional characterization. Functional
validation of candidate genes was performed using leukemia cell lines (U937,
K562). Candidate genes were knocked down using specific siRNA and its response to
HHT was assessed using MTS assay. We found that 15 expression probes were
associated with HHT AUC with P < 10(-4), and 96 individual probe sets with P <
10(-3). Eighteen SNPs were associated with HHT AUC with P < 10(-5) and 281 SNPs
with P < 10(-4). The integrated analysis identified 4 unique SNPs that were
associated with both expression and AUC. Functional validation using siRNA
knockdown in leukemia cell lines showed that knocking down CCDC88A, CTBP2, SOCS4 
genes in U937 and K562 cells significantly altered HHT cytotoxicity. In summary, 
this study performed with LCLs can help to identify novel biomarker that might
contribute to variation in response to HHT therapy.

PMCID: PMC4292778
PMID: 25628645  [PubMed]


22. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Jul;35(5):633-40. doi: 10.1007/s10571-015-0158-x. Epub
2015 Jan 28.

Role of CtBP2 in the Apoptosis of Retinal Ganglion Cells.

Wang W(1), Zhang G, Gu H, Liu Y, Lao J, Li K, Guan H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology of Traditional Chinese Medicine Hospital, Jiangyin,
Jiangsu, China.

Glaucoma damages the optic nerve and is a leading cause of irreversible
blindness, and its pathogenesis remains unclear. C-terminal-binding protein 2
(CtBP2) is a transcriptional repressor which plays an important role in central
nervous system injury and repair. Using the glaucoma model of DBA/2J mouse whose 
retina ganglion cells (RGCs) were degenerating with the process of glaucoma, we
demonstrated for the first time the special relationship between CtBP2 protein
and RGCs. Our research indicated that the expression of CtBP2 was gradually
decreased with aging by the means of Western blotting. The CtBP2
immunoreactivity-positive cells were present in the various retinal layers, and
CtBP2-positive cells were dramatically decreased in ganglion cell layer. Our
research also found ectopic expression of CtBP2 can protect the apoptosis of
primary mouse RGC cells induced by L-glutamate. These results suggest that CtBP2 
may have a potential therapeutic effect in protecting RGC.

PMID: 25627828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(22):3506-18. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.958407.

Inhibition of C-terminal binding protein attenuates transcription factor 4
signaling to selectively target colon cancer stem cells.

Patel J(1), Baranwal S, Love IM, Patel NJ, Grossman SR, Patel BB.

Author information: 
(1)a Hunter Holmes McGuire VA Medical Center ; Richmond , VA USA.

Selective targeting of cancer stem cells (CSCs), implicated in tumor relapse,
holds great promise in the treatment of colorectal cancer. Overexpression of
C-terminal binding protein (CtBP), an NADH dependent transcriptional regulator,
is often observed in colon cancer. Of note, TCF-4 signaling is also up-regulated 
in colonic CSCs. We hypothesized that CtBP, whose dehydrogenase activity is
amenable to pharmacological inhibition by 4-methylthio-2-oxobutyric acid (MTOB), 
positively regulates TCF-4 signaling, leading to CSC growth and self-renewal.
CSCs demonstrated significant upregulation of CtBP1 and CtBP2 levels (mRNA and
protein) and activity partly due to increased NADH/NAD ratio, as well as
increased TCF/LEF transcriptional activity, compared to respective controls.
Depletion of CtBP2 inhibited, while its overexpression enhanced, CSC growth (1°
spheroids) and self-renewal (2°/3° spheroids). Similarly, MTOB caused a robust
inhibition of spheroid growth and self-renewal in a dose dependent manner. MTOB
displayed significantly greater selectivity for growth inhibition in the
spheroids, at least in part through induction of apoptosis, compared to monolayer
controls. Moreover, MTOB inhibited basal as well as induced (by GSK-3ß inhibitor)
TCF/LEF activity while suppressing mRNA and protein levels of several ß-catenin
target genes (CD44, Snail, C-MYC and LGR5). Lastly, CtBP physically interacted
with TCF-4, and this interaction was significantly inhibited in the presence of
MTOB. The above findings point to a novel role of CtBPs in the promotion of CSC
growth and self-renewal through direct regulation of TCF/LEF transcription.
Moreover, small molecular inhibition of its function can selectively target CSCs,
presenting a novel approach for treatment of colorectal cancer focused on
targeting of CSCs.

PMCID: PMC4613182
PMID: 25483087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Mar 1;332(1):128-35. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.10.013. Epub
2014 Oct 30.

Oxygen-dependent acetylation and dimerization of the corepressor CtBP2 in neural 
stem cells.

Karaca E(1), Lewicki J(1), Hermanson O(2).

Author information: 
(1)Linnaeus Center in Developmental Biology for Regenerative Medicine (DBRM),
Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Linnaeus
Center in Developmental Biology for Regenerative Medicine (DBRM), Department of
Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address:
Ola.Hermanson@ki.se.

The transcriptional corepressor CtBP2 is essential for proper development of the 
nervous system. The factor exerts its repression by interacting in complexes with
chromatin-modifying factors such as histone deacetylases (HDAC) 1/2 and the
histone demethylase LSD1/KDM1. Notably, the histone acetyl transferase p300
acetylates CtBP2 and this is an important regulatory event of the activity and
subcellular localization of the protein. We recently demonstrated an essential
role for CtBPs as sensors of microenvironmental oxygen levels influencing the
differentiation potential of neural stem cells (NSCs), but it is not known
whether oxygen levels influence the acetylation levels of CtBP factors. Here we
show by using proximity ligation assay (PLA) that CtBP2 acetylation levels
increased significantly in undifferentiated, proliferating NSCs under hypoxic
conditions. CtBP2 interacted with the class III HDAC Sirt1 but this interaction
was unaltered in hypoxic conditions, and treatment with the Sirt1 inhibitor Ex527
did not result in any significant change in total CtBP2 acetylation levels.
Instead, we revealed a significant decrease in PLA signal representing CtBP2
dimerization in NSCs under hypoxic conditions, negatively correlating with the
acetylation levels. Our results suggest that microenvironmental oxygen levels
influence the dimerization and acetylation levels, and thereby the activity, of
CtBP2 in proliferating NSCs.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25447313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biomol Concepts. 2014 Dec;5(6):489-511. doi: 10.1515/bmc-2014-0027.

C-terminal binding proteins: central players in development and disease.

Stankiewicz TR, Gray JJ, Winter AN, Linseman DA.

C-terminal binding proteins (CtBPs) were initially identified as binding partners
for the E1A-transforming proteins. Although the invertebrate genome encodes one
CtBP protein, two CtBPs (CtBP1 and CtBP2) are encoded by the vertebrate genome
and perform both unique and duplicative functions. CtBP1 and CtBP2 are closely
related and act as transcriptional corepressors when activated by nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide binding to their dehydrogenase domains. CtBPs exert
transcriptional repression primarily via recruitment of a corepressor complex to 
DNA that consists of histone deacetylases (HDACs) and histone methyltransferases,
although CtBPs can also repress transcription through HDAC-independent
mechanisms. More recent studies have demonstrated a critical function for CtBPs
in the transcriptional repression of pro-apoptotic genes such as Bax, Puma, Bik, 
and Noxa. Nonetheless, although recent efforts have characterized the essential
involvement of CtBPs in promoting cellular survival, the dysregulation of CtBPs
in both neurodegenerative disease and cancers remains to be fully elucidated.

PMID: 25429601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Dec;52(3):1680-9. doi: 10.1007/s12035-014-8951-y. Epub 2014
Nov 7.

Spontaneous and Partial Repair of Ribbon Synapse in Cochlear Inner Hair Cells
After Ototoxic Withdrawal.

Liu K(1), Chen D(1), Guo W(1), Yu N(1), Wang X(1), Ji F(1), Hou Z(1), Yang WY(1),
Yang S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, the Institute of
Otolaryngology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, 28 Fuxing Road, 100853, Beijing,
China. (2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, the Institute of
Otolaryngology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, 28 Fuxing Road, 100853, Beijing,
China. Yangsm301@263.net.

Ototoxicity is one of the major causes of sensorineural deafness. However, it
remains unclear whether sensorineural deafness is reversible after ototoxic
withdrawal. Here, we report that the ribbon synapses between the inner hair cells
(IHCs) and spiral ganglion nerve (SGN) fibers can be restored after ototoxic
trauma. This corresponds with hearing restoration after ototoxic withdrawal. In
this study, adult mice were injected daily with a low dose of gentamicin for 14
consecutive days. Immunostaining for RIBEYE/CtBP2 was used to estimate the number
and size of synaptic ribbons in the cochlea. Hearing thresholds were assessed
using auditory brainstem responses. Auditory temporal processing between IHCs and
SGNs was evaluated by compound action potentials. We found automatic hearing
restoration after ototoxicity withdrawal, which corresponded to the number and
size recovery of synaptic ribbons, although both hearing and synaptic recovery
were not complete. Thus, our study indicates that sensorineural deafness in mice 
can be reversible after ototoxic withdrawal due to an intrinsic repair of ribbon 
synapse in the cochlea.

PMID: 25377793  [PubMed - in process]


27. Neurobiol Dis. 2015 Jan;73:418-27. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.09.005. Epub 2014 Sep 
22.

Timed conditional null of connexin26 in mice reveals temporary requirements of
connexin26 in key cochlear developmental events before the onset of hearing.

Chang Q(1), Tang W(1), Kim Y(1), Lin X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Emory University School of Medicine, 615 Michael
Street, Atlanta, GA 30322-3030, USA. (2)Department of Otolaryngology, Emory
University School of Medicine, 615 Michael Street, Atlanta, GA 30322-3030, USA;
Department of Cell Biology, Emory University School of Medicine, 615 Michael
Street, Atlanta, GA 30322-3030, USA.

Mutations in the Gjb2 gene, which encodes a gap junction protein connexin26
(Cx26), are the most prevalent form of hereditary deafness in humans and
represent about half of non-syndromic congenital deafness cases in many ethnic
populations. Cochlear potassium (K+) recycling in mature cochlea is required for 
normal hearing. It is thought that gap junctions are essential for K+ recycling
and that Gjb2 mutations cause Gjb2-associated deafness by disrupting K+ recycling
in mature cochlea. Here we present evidence showing that Gjb2 is required for
normal development of the neonatal organ of Corti prior to the onset of the
hearing in mice. In the conditional Gjb2 null (cCx26 null) mice, ribbon synapses 
in inner hair cells remained poorly developed, the afferent type I fibers failed 
to finish the refinement process to form convergent innervation to individual
inner hair cells. The spontaneous depolarizing activities in the supporting
cells, which normally diminish in the wild type cochleae after postnatal day 8
(P8), remained strong in the cochlea after P8 in the mutant mice. Furthermore,
the deafness phenotype was readily generated only if the Cx26 expression in the
organ of Corti was significantly reduced before P6. Similar amount of Cx26
reduction in more mature cochleae had a much weaker effect in damaging the
hearing sensitivity. Our findings indicated that Cx26 plays essential roles in
the maturation process of the organ of Corti prior to the establishment of high
K+ in the endolymph and the onset of hearing. These results suggest that
successful treatment of Cx26 deafness requires early intervention before the
cochlea fully matures.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25251605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cancer Res. 2014 Nov 15;74(22):6542-53. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1030. Epub 
2014 Sep 16.

CtBP2 modulates the androgen receptor to promote prostate cancer progression.

Takayama K(1), Suzuki T(2), Fujimura T(3), Urano T(1), Takahashi S(4), Homma
Y(3), Inoue S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anti-Aging Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 
Japan. Department of Geriatric Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Pathology, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan. (3)Department of Urology, Graduate School of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Urology, Nihon 
University School of Medicine, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Department of
Anti-Aging Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. Department
of Geriatric Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. Division
of Gene Regulation and Signal Transduction, Research Center for Genomic Medicine,
Saitama Medical University, Hidaka, Saitama, Japan. INOUE-GER@h.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

The androgen receptor (AR) is the key driver of both early and advanced prostate 
cancer, making a complete understanding of its regulation important. Here, we
report the identification of multiple AR-binding sites in the gene encoding the
transcription factor CtBP2 (carboxyl terminal-binding protein), genetic
variations of which have been associated with prostate cancer susceptibility.
Notably, we found that SNPs in the human CTBP2 gene that were associated with
prostate cancer development were correlated with AR-enhancer activity. High CtBP2
expression levels correlated with poor prognosis in patients, whereas CtBP2
silencing reduced tumor growth in a mouse xenograft model of human prostate
cancer. Consistent with its function as a transcriptional corepressor, CtBP2
repressed tumor-suppressor genes and AR corepressors in prostate cancer cells,
such as NCOR and RIP140, by binding with AR to the promoter enhancers of these
genes. Global gene-expression analyses revealed a positive effect on
androgen-mediated gene expression, and CtBP2 silencing was found to increase AR
interactions with corepressors that limit histone modification. Overall, our
results show how CtBP2 contributes to prostate cancer progression by modulating
AR and oncogenic signaling.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25228652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Genes Dev. 2014 Sep 15;28(18):2013-26. doi: 10.1101/gad.246579.114.

ZNF750 interacts with KLF4 and RCOR1, KDM1A, and CTBP1/2 chromatin regulators to 
repress epidermal progenitor genes and induce differentiation genes.

Boxer LD(1), Barajas B(2), Tao S(2), Zhang J(2), Khavari PA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California 94305, USA; Department of Biology, Stanford University,
Stanford, California 94305, USA; (2)Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA; (3)Program in
Epithelial Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 
94305, USA; Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Healthcare System, Palo Alto, California
94304, USA khavari@stanford.edu.

ZNF750 controls epithelial homeostasis by inhibiting progenitor genes while
inducing differentiation genes, a role underscored by pathogenic ZNF750 mutations
in cancer and psoriasis. How ZNF750 accomplishes these dual gene regulatory
impacts is unknown. Here, we characterized ZNF750 as a transcription factor that 
binds both the progenitor and differentiation genes that it controls at a
CCNNAGGC DNA motif. ZNF750 interacts with the pluripotency transcription factor
KLF4 and chromatin regulators RCOR1, KDM1A, and CTBP1/2 through conserved PLNLS
sequences. ChIP-seq (chromatin immunoprecipitation [ChIP] followed by
high-throughput sequencing) and gene depletion revealed that KLF4 colocalizes ~
10 base pairs from ZNF750 at differentiation target genes to facilitate their
activation but is unnecessary for ZNF750-mediated progenitor gene repression. In 
contrast, KDM1A colocalizes with ZNF750 at progenitor genes and facilitates their
repression but is unnecessary for ZNF750-driven differentiation. ZNF750 thus
controls differentiation in concert with RCOR1 and CTBP1/2 by acting with either 
KDM1A to repress progenitor genes or KLF4 to induce differentiation genes.

© 2014 Boxer et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4173152
PMID: 25228645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 10;9(9):e107256. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107256.
eCollection 2014.

Characterization of Ribeye subunits in zebrafish hair cells reveals that
exogenous Ribeye B-domain and CtBP1 localize to the basal ends of synaptic
ribbons.

Sheets L(1), Hagen MW(2), Nicolson T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otology and Laryngology, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America; Eaton-Peabody Laboratory, Massachusetts 
Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (2)Oregon
Hearing Research Center and Vollum Institute, Oregon Health & Science University,
Portland, Oregon, United States of America.

Synaptic ribbons are presynaptic structures formed by the self-association of
RIBEYE-the main structural component of ribbon synapses. RIBEYE consists of two
domains: a unique N-terminal A-domain and a C-terminal B-domain that is identical
to the transcription co-repressor C-terminal binding protein 2 (CtBP2). Previous 
studies in cell lines have shown that RIBEYE A-domain alone is sufficient to form
ribbon-like aggregates and that both A- and B- domains form homo-and heterotypic 
interactions. As these interactions are likely the basis for synaptic-ribbon
assembly and structural plasticity, we wanted to examine how zebrafish Ribeye A- 
and B- domains interact with synaptic ribbons in vivo. To that end, we
characterized the localization of exogenously expressed Ribeye A- and B- domains 
and the closely related protein, CtBP1, in the hair cells of transgenic zebrafish
larvae. Unexpectedly, exogenously expressed Ribeye A-domain showed variable
patterns of localization in hair cells; one zebrafish paralog of A-domain failed 
to self-associate or localize to synaptic ribbons, while the other self-assembled
but sometimes failed to localize to synaptic ribbons. By contrast, Ribeye
B-domain/CtBP2 was robustly localized to synaptic ribbons. Moreover, both
exogenously expressed B-domain/CtBP2 and CtBP1 were preferentially localized to
the basal end of ribbons adjacent to the postsynaptic density. Overexpression of 
B-domain/CtBP2 also appeared to affect synaptic-ribbon composition; endogenous
levels of ribbon-localized Ribeye were significantly reduced as hair cells
matured in B-domain/CtBP2 transgenic larvae compared to wild-type. These results 
reveal how exogenously expressed Ribeye domains interact with synaptic ribbons,
and suggest a potential organization of elements within the ribbon body.

PMCID: PMC4160224
PMID: 25208216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Circ Res. 2014 Oct 24;115(10):884-96. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.304458. Epub
2014 Sep 9.

Increased frequency of de novo copy number variants in congenital heart disease
by integrative analysis of single nucleotide polymorphism array and exome
sequence data.

Glessner JT(1), Bick AG(1), Ito K(1), Homsy JG(1), Rodriguez-Murillo L(1), Fromer
M(1), Mazaika E(1), Vardarajan B(1), Italia M(1), Leipzig J(1), DePalma SR(1),
Golhar R(1), Sanders SJ(1), Yamrom B(1), Ronemus M(1), Iossifov I(1), Willsey
AJ(1), State MW(1), Kaltman JR(1), White PS(1), Shen Y(1), Warburton D(1),
Brueckner M(1), Seidman C(1), Goldmuntz E(1), Gelb BD(1), Lifton R(1), Seidman
J(1), Hakonarson H(2), Chung WK(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Center for Applied Genomics (J.T.G., R.G., H.H.), Center for
Biomedical Informatics (M.I., J.L., P.S.W.), and Division of Cardiology (E.G.),
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA; Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia (J.T.G., H.H.); Department
of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA (A.G.B., K.I., J.G.H., E.M.,
S.R.D., C.S., J.S.); Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA (J.G.H.); Department of Pediatrics, Mindich Child Health and
Development Institute (L.R.-M., B.D.G.), Department of Genetics and Genomic
Sciences (L.R.-M., M.F., B.D.G.), Icahn Institute for Genomics and Multiscale
Biology (M.F.), and Psychiatric Genomics in the Department of Psychiatry (M.F.), 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY; Department of Systems
Biology (B.V., Y.S.), Department of Genetics and Development (in Medicine)
(D.W.), and Department of Pediatrics and Medicine (W.K.C.), Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, NY; Department of Genetics (S.J.S., A.J.W., M.W.S.,
R.L.), Department of Pediatrics (M.B.), and Department of Medicine (R.L.), Yale
University, New Haven, CT; Department of Psychiatry, University of California,
San Francisco (S.J.S., A.J.W., M.W.S.); Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, NY (B.Y., 
M.R., I.I.); and Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute (NHLBI), NIH, Bethesda, MD (J.R.K.). (2)From the Center for
Applied Genomics (J.T.G., R.G., H.H.), Center for Biomedical Informatics (M.I.,
J.L., P.S.W.), and Division of Cardiology (E.G.), Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, PA; Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman
School of Medicine, Philadelphia (J.T.G., H.H.); Department of Genetics, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA (A.G.B., K.I., J.G.H., E.M., S.R.D., C.S., J.S.);
Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA
(J.G.H.); Department of Pediatrics, Mindich Child Health and Development
Institute (L.R.-M., B.D.G.), Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences
(L.R.-M., M.F., B.D.G.), Icahn Institute for Genomics and Multiscale Biology
(M.F.), and Psychiatric Genomics in the Department of Psychiatry (M.F.), Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY; Department of Systems Biology
(B.V., Y.S.), Department of Genetics and Development (in Medicine) (D.W.), and
Department of Pediatrics and Medicine (W.K.C.), Columbia University Medical
Center, New York, NY; Department of Genetics (S.J.S., A.J.W., M.W.S., R.L.),
Department of Pediatrics (M.B.), and Department of Medicine (R.L.), Yale
University, New Haven, CT; Department of Psychiatry, University of California,
San Francisco (S.J.S., A.J.W., M.W.S.); Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, NY (B.Y., 
M.R., I.I.); and Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute (NHLBI), NIH, Bethesda, MD (J.R.K.). hakonarson@email.chop.edu
Wkc15@Cumc.Columbia.Edu.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2014 Oct 24;115(10):821-3.

RATIONALE: Congenital heart disease (CHD) is among the most common birth defects.
Most cases are of unknown pathogenesis.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the contribution of de novo copy number variants (CNVs)
in the pathogenesis of sporadic CHD.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied 538 CHD trios using genome-wide dense single
nucleotide polymorphism arrays and whole exome sequencing. Results were
experimentally validated using digital droplet polymerase chain reaction. We
compared validated CNVs in CHD cases with CNVs in 1301 healthy control trios. The
2 complementary high-resolution technologies identified 63 validated de novo CNVs
in 51 CHD cases. A significant increase in CNV burden was observed when comparing
CHD trios with healthy trios, using either single nucleotide polymorphism array
(P=7×10(-5); odds ratio, 4.6) or whole exome sequencing data (P=6×10(-4); odds
ratio, 3.5) and remained after removing 16% of de novo CNV loci previously
reported as pathogenic (P=0.02; odds ratio, 2.7). We observed recurrent de novo
CNVs on 15q11.2 encompassing CYFIP1, NIPA1, and NIPA2 and single de novo CNVs
encompassing DUSP1, JUN, JUP, MED15, MED9, PTPRE SREBF1, TOP2A, and ZEB2, genes
that interact with established CHD proteins NKX2-5 and GATA4. Integrating de novo
variants in whole exome sequencing and CNV data suggests that ETS1 is the
pathogenic gene altered by 11q24.2-q25 deletions in Jacobsen syndrome and that
CTBP2 is the pathogenic gene in 10q subtelomeric deletions.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate a significantly increased frequency of rare de novo
CNVs in CHD patients compared with healthy controls and suggest several novel
genetic loci for CHD.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4209190
PMID: 25205790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2014;34(3):753-67. doi: 10.1159/000363040. Epub 2014 Aug
19.

Changes in the numbers of ribbon synapses and expression of RIBEYE in
salicylate-induced tinnitus.

Zhang FY(1), Xue YX, Liu WJ, Yao YL, Ma J, Chen L, Shang XL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital, China Medical
University, Shenyang, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: This study was performed to explore the mechanism underlying tinnitus
by investigating the changes in the synaptic ribbons and RIBEYE expression in
cochlear inner hair cells in salicylate-induced tinnitus.
METHODS: C57BL/6J mice were injected with salicylate (350 mg/kg) for 10 days and 
grouped. Behavioral procedures were performed to assess whether the animals
experienced tinnitus. The specific presynaptic RIBEYE protein and non-specific
postsynaptic glutamate receptor 2&3 protein in basilar membrane samples were
examined by immunofluorescent labeling. RT-PCR and Western blot assays were used 
to examine RIBEYE expression. Serial sections were used to build
three-dimensional models using 3ds MAX software to evaluate the changes in the
synaptic ribbons.
RESULTS: The administration of salicylate increased false positives in the
behavioral procedure from 3 d to 10 d. The membrane profiles of inner hair cells 
in all mice were intact. The number of synaptic ribbons in the salicylate group
increased on the 7(th) d and decreased on the 9(th) and 10(th) d. mRNA and
protein expression of RIBEYE were initially up-regulated and later down-regulated
by injecting salicylate for 10 consecutive days.
CONCLUSION: This change in the ribbon synapses of cochlear inner hair cells in
salicylate-induced mice might serve as a compensatory mechanism in the early
stages of ototoxicity and contribute to tinnitus later. The alteration of RIBEYE 
expression could be responsible for the changes in the morphology of ribbon
synapses and for salicylate-induced tinnitus.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25170565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Brain Res. 2014 Oct 24;1586:23-33. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.08.051. Epub 2014
Aug 22.

Preferential localization of type I phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinase <U+03B3>
at the periactive zone of mouse photoreceptor ribbon synapses.

Sakagami H(1), Katsumata O(2), Hara Y(2), Tamaki H(2), Fukaya M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara,
Kanagawa 252-0374, Japan. Electronic address: sakagami@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara,
Kanagawa 252-0374, Japan.

Type I phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5 kinase <U+03B3> (PIP5KI<U+03B3>) constitutes a major 
pathway for the generation of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate
(PtdIns(4,5)P2) that regulates a variety of neuronal functions at both
presynaptic and postsynaptic compartments. In this study, we examined the
expression and localization of PIP5KI<U+03B3> in the adult mouse retina. RT-PCR analysis
revealed that PIP5KI<U+03B3>_v2 was predominantly expressed in the retina while
PIP5KI<U+03B3>_v3 was also expressed faintly. Immunostaining of the adult mouse retina
revealed intense PIP5KI<U+03B3>-immunoreactivity in the inner and outer plexiform layers
in a punctate manner. In the photoreceptor ribbon synapse, PIP5KI<U+03B3> was highly
concentrated at the periactive zone. These findings suggest that PIP5KI<U+03B3>,
especially PIP5KI<U+03B3>_i2, is localized at the periactive zone, a functionally
suitable compartment for the endocytosis of synaptic vesicles in photoreceptor
ribbon synapses.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25152467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Dev Cell. 2014 Aug 25;30(4):423-36. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.07.006. Epub 2014 
Aug 14.

A self-organizing miR-132/Ctbp2 circuit regulates bimodal notch signals and glial
progenitor fate choice during spinal cord maturation.

Salta E(1), Lau P(1), Sala Frigerio C(1), Coolen M(2), Bally-Cuif L(2), De
Strooper B(3).

Author information: 
(1)VIB Center for the Biology of Disease, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Center for Human 
Genetics and Leuven Institute for Neurodegenerative Disorders, KU Leuven, 3000
Leuven, Belgium. (2)Zebrafish Neurogenetics Group, Laboratory of Neurobiology and
Development, CNRS UPR 3294, Institute of Neurobiology Alfred Fessard, Avenue de
la Terrasse, 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette Cédex, France. (3)VIB Center for the Biology of
Disease, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Center for Human Genetics and Leuven Institute for
Neurodegenerative Disorders, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Institute of
Neurology, University College London, Queen Square, WC1N 3BG London, UK.
Electronic address: bart.destrooper@cme.vib-kuleuven.be.

Radial glial progenitors play pivotal roles in the development and patterning of 
the spinal cord, and their fate is controlled by Notch signaling. How Notch is
shaped to regulate their crucial transition from expansion toward differentiation
remains, however, unknown. miR-132 in the developing zebrafish dampens Notch
signaling via a cascade involving the transcriptional corepressor Ctbp2 and the
Notch suppressor Sirt1. At early embryonic stages, high Ctbp2 levels sustain
Notch signaling and radial glial expansion and concomitantly induce miR-132
expression via a double-negative feedback loop involving Rest inhibition. The
changing balance in miR-132 and Ctbp2 interaction gradually drives the switch in 
Notch output and radial glial progenitor fate as part of the larger developmental
program involved in the transition from embryonic to larval spinal cord.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25132384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Chin Med J (Engl). 2014;127(16):2972-6.

Reinnervation of hair cells by neural stem cell-derived neurons.

Yuan Y(1), Wang Y(2), Chi F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of ENT-Head & Neck Surgery, Eye, Ear, Nose and Throat Hospital,
Shanghai 200031, China; Shanghai Medical School, FuDan University, Shanghai
210029, China. (2)Department of Anatomy, Shanghai Medical School, FuDan
University, Shanghai 210029, China.

BACKGROUND: Replacement of spiral ganglion neurons would be one prioritized step 
in an attempt to restore sensory neuronal hearing loss. However, the possibility 
that transplanted neurons could regenerate new synaptic connections to hair cells
has not been explored. The objective of this study was to test whether neural
stem cell (NSC)-derived neurons can form synaptic connections with hair cells in 
vitro.
METHODS: NSCs were mechanically separated from the hippocampus in SD rat embryos 
(E12-E14) and cultured in a serum-free medium containing basic fibroblast growth 
factor and epidermal growth factor. Rat NSCs were co-cultured with explants of
cochlea sensory epithelia obtained from postnatal Day 3 rats under transway
filter membrane.
RESULTS: At Day 3, the NSCs began to show chemotactic differentiation and grew
toward cochlea sensory epithelia. After 9-day co-culture, neurites of NSC-derived
neurons predominantly elongated toward hair cells. Immunohistochemical analyses
revealed the fibers overlapped with synapsin and hair cells, indicating the
formation of new synaptic connections. After 14-day culture, triple staining
revealed the fibers overlapped with PSD95 (postsynaptic density) which is
juxtaposed with CtBP2 (presynaptic vesicle), indicating the formation of new
ribbon synapse.
CONCLUSIONS: NSC-derived neurons can make synaptic connections with hair cells
and provide a model for studying synaptic plasticity and regeneration. Whether
the newly forming synapse is functional merits further electrophysiological
study.

PMID: 25131237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cell Rep. 2014 Aug 7;8(3):665-70. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.06.057. Epub 2014
Jul 31.

CtBPs sense microenvironmental oxygen levels to regulate neural stem cell state.

Dias JM(1), Ilkhanizadeh S(2), Karaca E(2), Duckworth JK(2), Lundin V(1),
Rosenfeld MG(3), Ericson J(1), Hermanson O(4), Teixeira AI(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
171 77, Sweden. (2)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
171 77, Sweden. (3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute School of Medicine, University
of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA 92093, USA. (4)Department of
Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 171 77, Sweden. Electronic
address: ola.hermanson@ki.se. (5)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 171 77, Sweden. Electronic address:
ana.teixeira@ki.se.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) secreted by the dorsal neural tube and
overlying ectoderm are key signals for the specification of the roof plate and
dorsal interneuron populations. However, the signals that confer nonneurogenic
character to the roof plate region are largely unknown. We report that the roof
plate region shows elevated oxygen levels compared to neurogenic regions of the
neural tube. These high oxygen levels are required for the expression of the
antineuronal transcription factor Hes1 in the roof plate region. The
transcriptional corepressor CtBP is a critical mediator of the oxygen-sensing
response. High oxygen promotes a decrease in the CtBP occupancy of the promoter
of Hes1. Furthermore, under conditions of high oxygen and BMP, CtBP associates
with HES1 and represses neurogenesis. We propose that CtBP integrates signals
originating from microenvironmental levels of oxygen and BMP to confer
nonneurogenic character to the roof plate region.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25088415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 18;9(7):e102077. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102077.
eCollection 2014.

Hair cell regeneration after ATOH1 gene therapy in the cochlea of profoundly deaf
adult guinea pigs.

Atkinson PJ(1), Wise AK(2), Flynn BO(3), Nayagam BA(4), Richardson RT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bionics Institute, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; Department of
Otolaryngology, University of Melbourne, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Bionics Institute, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; Department of
Otolaryngology, University of Melbourne, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia;
Department of Medical Bionics, University of Melbourne, East Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia. (3)Bionics Institute, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (4)Bionics 
Institute, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; Department of Otolaryngology,
University of Melbourne, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; Department of
Audiology and Speech Pathology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia.

The degeneration of hair cells in the mammalian cochlea results in permanent
sensorineural hearing loss. This study aimed to promote the regeneration of
sensory hair cells in the mature cochlea and their reconnection with auditory
neurons through the introduction of ATOH1, a transcription factor known to be
necessary for hair cell development, and the introduction of neurotrophic
factors. Adenoviral vectors containing ATOH1 alone, or with neurotrophin-3 and
brain derived neurotrophic factor were injected into the lower basal scala media 
of guinea pig cochleae four days post ototoxic deafening. Guinea pigs treated
with ATOH1 gene therapy, alone, had a significantly greater number of cells
expressing hair cell markers compared to the contralateral non-treated cochlea
when examined 3 weeks post-treatment. This increase, however, did not result in a
commensurate improvement in hearing thresholds, nor was there an increase in
synaptic ribbons, as measured by CtBP2 puncta after ATOH1 treatment alone, or
when combined with neurotrophins. However, hair cell formation and synaptogenesis
after co-treatment with ATOH1 and neurotrophic factors remain inconclusive as
viral transduction was reduced due to the halving of viral titres when the
samples were combined. Collectively, these data suggest that, whilst ATOH1 alone 
can drive non-sensory cells towards an immature sensory hair cell phenotype in
the mature cochlea, this does not result in functional improvements after
aminoglycoside-induced deafness.

PMCID: PMC4103851
PMID: 25036727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jun 24;15:520. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-520.

Global analysis of ZNF217 chromatin occupancy in the breast cancer cell genome
reveals an association with ERalpha.

Frietze S(1), O'Geen H, Littlepage LE, Simion C, Sweeney CA, Farnham PJ, Krig SR.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Northern Colorado, Greeley, CO
80639, USA. seth.frietze@unco.edu.

BACKGROUND: The ZNF217 gene, encoding a C2H2 zinc finger protein, is located at
20q13 and found amplified and overexpressed in greater than 20% of breast tumors.
Current studies indicate ZNF217 drives tumorigenesis, yet the regulatory
mechanisms of ZNF217 are largely unknown. Because ZNF217 associates with
chromatin modifying enzymes, we postulate that ZNF217 functions to regulate
specific gene signaling networks. Here, we present a large-scale functional
genomic analysis of ZNF217, which provides insights into the regulatory role of
ZNF217 in MCF7 breast cancer cells.
RESULTS: ChIP-seq analysis reveals that the majority of ZNF217 binding sites are 
located at distal regulatory regions associated with the chromatin marks H3K27ac 
and H3K4me1. Analysis of ChIP-seq transcription factor binding sites shows
clustering of ZNF217 with FOXA1, GATA3 and ERalpha binding sites, supported by
the enrichment of corresponding motifs for the ERalpha-associated cis-regulatory 
sequences. ERalpha expression highly correlates with ZNF217 in lysates from
breast tumors (n = 15), and ERalpha co-precipitates ZNF217 and its binding
partner CtBP2 from nuclear extracts. Transcriptome profiling following ZNF217
depletion identifies differentially expressed genes co-bound by ZNF217 and
ERalpha; gene ontology suggests a role for ZNF217-ERalpha in expression programs 
associated with ER+ breast cancer studies found in the Molecular Signature
Database. Data-mining of expression data from breast cancer patients correlates
ZNF217 with reduced overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Our genome-wide ZNF217 data suggests a functional role for ZNF217 at
ERalpha target genes. Future studies will investigate whether ZNF217 expression
contributes to aberrant ERalpha regulatory events in ER+ breast cancer and
hormone resistance.

PMCID: PMC4082627
PMID: 24962896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Genes Cancer. 2014 Apr;5(1-2):31-40.

CtBP2 proteome: Role of CtBP in E2F7-mediated repression and cell proliferation.

Zhao LJ(1), Subramanian T(1), Vijayalingam S(1), Chinnadurai G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology Saint Louis University Health Sciences Center
Doisy Research Center 1100 South Grand Blvd St. Louis, Missouri 63104.

C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) family transcriptional corepressors include
CtBP1 and CtBP2. While CtBP1 and CtBP2 share significant amino acid sequence
homology, CtBP2 possesses a unique N-terminal domain that is modified by
acetylation and contributes to exclusive nuclear localization. Although CtBP1 and
CtBP2 are functionally redundant for certain activities during vertebrate
development, they also perform unique functions. Previous studies have identified
several CtBP1-interacting proteins that included other transcriptional
corepressors, DNA-binding repressors and histone modifying enzymatic components
such as the histone deacetylases and the histone demethylase LSD-1. Here, we
carried out an unbiased proteomic analysis of CtBP2-associated proteins and
discovered the association of several components of the CtBP1 proteome as well as
novel interactions. The CtBP2 proteome contained components of the NuRD complex
and the E2F family member E2F7. E2F7 interacted with the hydrophobic cleft region
of CtBP1 and CtBP2 through a prototypical CtBP binding motif, PIDLS. E2F7
repressed E2F1 transcription, inhibited cell proliferation in a CtBP-dependent
fashion. Our study identified CtBP as a corepressor of E2F7 and as a regulator of
DNA damage response.

PMCID: PMC4063256
PMID: 24955216  [PubMed]


40. Gene. 2014 Aug 1;546(1):73-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.05.032. Epub 2014 May 14.

CtBP2 could promote prostate cancer cell proliferation through c-Myc signaling.

Zhang C(1), Gao C(1), Xu Y(1), Zhang Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Second Hospital of Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 
Institute of Urology, Tianjin 300211, China. (2)Department of Urology, Second
Hospital of Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin Institute of Urology, Tianjin
300211, China. Electronic address: zhangzhihong8816@hotmail.com.

C-terminal binding protein-2 (CtBP2) is a CtBP-family member which plays a
significant role in tumor initiation, progression and response to therapy.
However, little has been known about the potential oncobiological role of CtBP2
and its mechanism in human prostate cancer. In this study, we observed the
overexpression of CtBP2 in prostate cancer and demonstrated that its expression
was closely correlated with several malignant behaviors, e.g., increased serum
PSA level, advanced tumor stage (T3), higher Gleason scores and poor outcome.
Furthermore, downregulation of CtBP2 expression in prostate cancer PC3 cells
could markedly inhibit their proliferation by inducing apoptosis in vitro.
Additionally, CtBP2 inhibition could decrease the level of c-Myc and its direct
transcriptional target, HSPC111. Taken together, our investigations demonstrated 
that low-expression of CtBP2 could highly inhibit proliferation of prostate
cancer by c-Myc induced signaling, suggesting that targeting CtBP2 may yield a
viable anti-tumor strategy by restraining tumor progression in prostate cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24835310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Comp Neurol. 2014 Oct 1;522(14):3141-59. doi: 10.1002/cne.23625. Epub 2014 Jun 
10.

Large basolateral processes on type II hair cells are novel processing units in
mammalian vestibular organs.

Pujol R(1), Pickett SB, Nguyen TB, Stone JS.

Author information: 
(1)The Virginia Merrill Bloedel Hearing Research Center, and the Department of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington, 98195-7923; INSERM Unit 1051, Institute of Neuroscience, 34091,
Montpellier, France.

Sensory receptors in the vestibular system (hair cells) encode head movements and
drive central motor reflexes that control gaze, body movements, and body
orientation. In mammals, type I and II vestibular hair cells are defined by their
shape, contacts with vestibular afferent nerves, and membrane conductance. Here
we describe unique morphological features of type II vestibular hair cells in
mature rodents (mice and gerbils) and bats. These features are cytoplasmic
processes that extend laterally from the hair cell base and project under type I 
hair cells. Closer analysis of adult mouse utricles demonstrated that the
basolateral processes of type II hair cells vary in shape, size, and branching,
with the longest processes extending three to four hair cell widths. The hair
cell basolateral processes synapse upon vestibular afferent nerves and receive
inputs from vestibular efferent nerves. Furthermore, some basolateral processes
make physical contacts with the processes of other type II hair cells, forming
some sort of network among type II hair cells. Basolateral processes are rare in 
perinatal mice and do not attain their mature form until 3-6 weeks of age. These 
observations demonstrate that basolateral processes are significant signaling
regions of type II vestibular hair cells and suggest that type II hair cells may 
directly communicate with each other, which has not been described in
vertebrates.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4107051
PMID: 24825750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Chin Med J (Engl). 2014;127(10):1941-6.

Dynamic changes in hair cell ribbon synapse induced by loss of spiral ganglion
neurons in mice.

Yuan Y(1), Chi F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Eye, Ear, Nose & Throat Hospital, Fudan
University, Shanghai 200031, China; Department of Otolaryngology, MEEI, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Department of Otolaryngology, Eye, Ear,
Nose & Throat Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200031, China. Email:
chifanglu@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have suggested that primary degeneration of hair
cells causes secondary degeneration of spiral ganglion neurons (SGNs), but the
effect of SGN degeneration on hair cells has not been studied. In the adult mouse
inner ear ouabain can selectively and permanently induce the degeneration of type
1 SGNs while leaving type 2 SGNs, efferent fibers, and sensory hair cells
relatively intact. This study aimed to investigate the dynamic changes in hair
cell ribbon synapse induced by loss of SGNs using ouabain application to the
round window niche of adult mice.
METHODS: In the analysis, 24 CBA/CAJ mice aged 8-10 weeks, were used, of which 6 
normal mice were used as the control group. After ouabain application in the
round window niche 6 times in an hour, ABR threshold shifts at least 30 dB in the
three experimental groups which had six mice for 1-week group, six for 1-month
group, and six for 3-month group. All 24 animals underwent function test at 1
week and then immunostaining at 1 week, 1 month, and 3 months.
RESULTS: The loss of neurons was followed by degeneration of postsynaptic
specializations at the afferent synapse with hair cells. One week after ouabain
treatment, the nerve endings of type 1 SGNs and postsynaptic densities, as
measured by Na/K ATPase and PSD-95, were affected but not entirely missing, but
their partial loss had consequences for synaptic ribbons that form the
presynaptic specialization at the synapse between hair cells and primary afferent
neurons. Ribbon numbers in inner hair cells decreased (some of them broken and
the ribbon number much decreased), and the arrangement of the synaptic ribbons
had undergone a dynamic reorganization: ribbons with or without associated
postsynaptic densities moved from their normal location in the basal membrane of 
the cell to a more apical location and the neural endings alone were also found
at more apical locations without associated ribbons. After 1 month, when the
neural postsynaptic densities had completed their degeneration, most ribbons were
lost and the remaining ribbons had no contact with postsynaptic densities; after 
3 months, the ribbon synapses were gone except for an occasional remnant of a
CtBP2-positive vesicle. Hair cells were intact other than the loss of ribbons
(based on immunohistochemistry and DPOAE).
CONCLUSION: These findings define the effect of SGN loss on the precise
spatiotemporal size and location of ribbons and the time course of synaptic
degeneration and provide a model for studying plasticity and regeneration.

PMID: 24824260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2014 Feb;28(4):261-4.

[Gentamicin on inner hair cells ribbon synapses CaV1.3 calcium ion channel
protein expression].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun J, Wang X, Liu K.

OBJECTIVE: To learn the influence the gentamycin on C57BL/6J mice hear and
cochlear hair cell ribbon synapses CaV1.3 calcium protein amount. To explore the 
relationship between hear loss and its dosage correlation change and
significance.
METHOD: The fixed amino glucoside to C57BL/6J mice was used to make abdominal
cavity injection mold every day. The auditory brain-stem response ABR was used to
measure the hear of mice in 7th, 14th, 28th after the injection.
Immunofluorescence method was used to observe cochlear basement membrane of hair 
ribbon synapse CaV1.3 calcium channel proteins in the distribution and
expression. Inner hair cells synaptic membrane was immune fluorescent tags with
CtbP2 and CaV1. 3.
RESULT: With the growth of the injected drugs, ABR threshold increased,but all
the hair cells and shape had no obvious change. However the amount of hair rib
bon synapse CaV1.3 calcium ion channel proteins in the expression had significant
differences (P < 0.01). CaV1.3 calcium ion channel proteins increased slightly
lower than normal at 7th day, significantly decreased at 14th day, had increased,
increased quantity compare with 14th day, but at 28th day after intraperitoneal
injection of gentamicin.
CONCLUSION: The increasing,decreasing and increasing trend of cochlear hair cells
CaV1.3 proteins in the environment of amino glucoside drug toxicity showed that
the increase of hair ribbon synapse CaV1.3 proteins may have a compensatory
effect on the drug toxicity. With the increase of the drug toxicity effect, this 
kind of decompensated function could be the listening decline, which may be one
of the mechanism of damage to hearing.

PMID: 24800546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Apr 15;55(5):3081-92. doi: 10.1167/iovs.13-13728.

Early alteration of retinal neurons in Aipl1-/- animals.

Singh RK(1), Kolandaivelu S(1), Ramamurthy V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology and Biochemistry, Center for Neuroscience, West
Virginia University, Morgantown, West Virginia, United States.

PURPOSE: Mutations in the photoreceptor cell-specific gene encoding aryl
hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein-like 1 (AIPL1) lead to Leber congenital 
amaurosis (LCA4), retinitis pigmentosa, and cone-rod dystrophy. Gene therapy
appears to be promising in the treatment for AIPL1-mediated vision loss in
humans. Prior to initiating these treatments, however, it is crucial to
understand how the retinal neurons remodel themselves in response to
photoreceptor cell degeneration. In this study, using an animal model for
AIPL1-LCA, Aipl1(-/-) mice, we investigate the changes in postreceptoral retinal 
neurons during the course of photoreceptor cell loss.
METHODS: Morphology of the Aipl1(-/-) retina from postnatal day 8 to 150 was
compared to that of age-matched, wild-type C57Bl6/J retina (WT) by
immunocytochemistry using cell-specific markers.
RESULTS: Expression of postsynaptic proteins in bipolar cells is reduced prior to
photoreceptor cell degeneration at postnatal day 8. Bipolar and horizontal cells 
retract their dendrites. Cell bodies and axons of bipolar and horizontal cells
are disorganized during the course of degeneration. Müller cell processes become 
hypertrophic and form a dense fibrotic layer outside the inner nuclear layer.
CONCLUSIONS: An early defect in photoreceptor cells in the AIPL1-LCA mouse model 
affects the expression of postsynaptic markers, suggesting abnormal development
of bipolar synapses. Once degeneration of photoreceptor cells is initiated,
remodeling of retinal neurons in the Aipl1(-/-) animal is rapid.

Copyright 2014 The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4034756
PMID: 24736053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Neurosci. 2014 Apr 9;34(15):5245-60. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3837-13.2014.

ArfGAP3 is a component of the photoreceptor synaptic ribbon complex and forms an 
NAD(H)-regulated, redox-sensitive complex with RIBEYE that is important for
endocytosis.

Dembla M(1), Wahl S, Katiyar R, Schmitz F.

Author information: 
(1)Saarland University, Medical School, Department of Neuroanatomy, 66421
Homburg/Saar, Germany.

Ribbon synapses are tonically active synapses in the retina and inner ear with
intense vesicle traffic. How this traffic is organized and regulated is still
unknown. Synaptic ribbons, large presynaptic structures associated with numerous 
synaptic vesicles, appear to be essential for this process. The base of the
synaptic ribbon is anchored at the active zone and is a hotspot of exocytosis.
The synaptic ribbon complex is also important for vesicle replenishment. RIBEYE
is a unique and major component of synaptic ribbons. It consists of a unique
A-domain and an NAD(H)-binding, C-terminal B-domain. In the present study, we
show that the Arf-GTPase activating protein-3 (ArfGAP3), a well characterized
regulator of vesicle formation at the Golgi apparatus, is also a component of the
synaptic ribbon complex in photoreceptor synapses of the mouse retina and
interacts with RIBEYE as shown by multiple, independent approaches. ArfGAP3 binds
to RIBEYE(B)-domain in an NAD(H)-dependent manner. The interaction is redox
sensitive because NADH is more efficient than the oxidized NAD(+) in promoting
ArfGAP3-RIBEYE interaction. RIBEYE competes with the GTP-binding protein Arf1 for
binding to ArfGAP3. Thus, binding of RIBEYE(B) to ArfGAP3 could prevent
inactivation of Arf1 by ArfGAP3 and provides the synaptic ribbon with the
possibility to control Arf1 function. The interaction is relevant for endocytic
vesicle trafficking because overexpression of ArfGAP3 in photoreceptors strongly 
inhibited endocytotic uptake of FM1-43.

PMID: 24719103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. FEBS Lett. 2014 May 2;588(9):1743-8. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.03.026. Epub
2014 Mar 19.

Crystal structures of human CtBP in complex with substrate MTOB reveal active
site features useful for inhibitor design.

Hilbert BJ(1), Grossman SR(2), Schiffer CA(1), Royer WE Jr(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. (2)Division of
Hematology, Oncology, and Palliative Care and Massey Cancer Center, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298, USA. (3)Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605, USA. Electronic address: William.Royer@umassmed.edu.

The oncogenic corepressors C-terminal Binding Protein (CtBP) 1 and 2 harbor
regulatory d-isomer specific 2-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase (d2-HDH) domains.
4-Methylthio 2-oxobutyric acid (MTOB) exhibits substrate inhibition and can
interfere with CtBP oncogenic activity in cell culture and mice. Crystal
structures of human CtBP1 and CtBP2 in complex with MTOB and NAD(+) revealed two 
key features: a conserved tryptophan that likely contributes to substrate
specificity and a hydrophilic cavity that links MTOB with an NAD(+) phosphate.
Neither feature is present in other d2-HDH enzymes. These structures thus offer
key opportunities for the development of highly selective anti-neoplastic CtBP
inhibitors.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4072453
PMID: 24657618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 3;9(3):e89821. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089821. eCollection 
2014.

Zscan4 is regulated by PI3-kinase and DNA-damaging agents and directly interacts 
with the transcriptional repressors LSD1 and CtBP2 in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Storm MP(1), Kumpfmueller B(2), Bone HK(1), Buchholz M(3), Sanchez Ripoll Y(1),
Chaudhuri JB(4), Niwa H(5), Tosh D(3), Welham MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Regenerative Medicine and Departments of Pharmacy & Pharmacology,
University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom. (2)Centre for Regenerative Medicine and
Departments of Pharmacy & Pharmacology, University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom;
Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Bath, United
Kingdom. (4)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Bath, Bath, United 
Kingdom. (5)RIKEN Centre for Developmental Biology, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan.

The Zscan4 family of genes, encoding SCAN-domain and zinc finger-containing
proteins, has been implicated in the control of early mammalian embryogenesis as 
well as the regulation of pluripotency and maintenance of genome integrity in
mouse embryonic stem cells. However, many features of this enigmatic family of
genes are poorly understood. Here we show that undifferentiated mouse embryonic
stem cell (ESC) lines simultaneously express multiple members of the Zscan4 gene 
family, with Zscan4c, Zscan4f and Zscan4-ps2 consistently being the most
abundant. Despite this, between only 0.1 and 0.7% of undifferentiated mouse
pluripotent stem cells express Zscan4 protein at a given time, consistent with a 
very restricted pattern of Zscan4 transcripts reported previously. Herein we
demonstrate that Zscan4 expression is regulated by the p110a catalytic isoform of
phosphoinositide 3-kinases and is induced following exposure to a sub-class of
DNA-damage-inducing agents, including Zeocin and Cisplatin. Furthermore, we
observe that Zscan4 protein expression peaks during the G2 phase of the cell
cycle, suggesting that it may play a critical role at this checkpoint. Studies
with GAL4-fusion proteins suggest a role for Zscan4 in transcriptional
regulation, further supported by the fact that protein interaction analyses
demonstrate that Zscan4 interacts with both LSD1 and CtBP2 in ESC nuclei. This
study advances and extends our understanding of Zscan4 expression, regulation and
mechanism of action. Based on our data we propose that Zscan4 may regulate gene
transcription in mouse ES cells through interaction with LSD1 and CtBP2.

PMCID: PMC3940611
PMID: 24594919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Med Oncol. 2014 Mar;31(3):878. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0878-7. Epub 2014 Feb 13.

High expression and prognostic role of CAP1 and CtBP2 in breast carcinoma:
associated with E-cadherin and cell proliferation.

Liu X(1), Yao N, Qian J, Huang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Therapy, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University,
Nantong, 226001, Jiangsu Province, People's Republic of China.

Overexpression of C-terminal binding protein-2 (CtBP2) has been noted to
correlate with cancer metastasis in several human cancers including breast
cancer. The aim of this study was to examine the effect of cyclase-associated
protein 1 (CAP1) overexpression on CtBP2 expression and related mechanism in the 
metastasis of breast cancer. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed in 100
human breast carcinoma samples, and the data were correlated with
clinicopathologic features. Furthermore, Western blot analysis was performed for 
CAP1 and CtBP2 in breast carcinoma samples and cell lines to evaluate their
protein levels and molecular interaction. We found that the expression of CAP1
was positively related to CtBP2 expression (P<0.01); moreover, CAP1 expression
was significantly correlated with histologic grade (P<0.01) and negatively
related to E-cadherin expression (P<0.01). Meanwhile, CtBP2 expression obtained
similar results. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis showed that overexpression of
CAP1 and CtBP2 exhibited a significant correlation with poor prognosis in human
breast cancer (P<0.01). While in vitro, we employed siRNA technique to knockdown 
CAP1 and CtBP2 expressions and observed their effects on MDA-MB-231 cells growth.
CtBP2 depletion by siRNA-inhibited cell proliferation, resulted in increased
E-cadherin levels. Moreover, knockdown of CAP1 resulted in decreased CtBP2 and
increased E-cadherin expression. On the basis of these results, we suggested that
CAP1's oncogenic abilities appear to be triggered at least in part by the
modulation of CtBP2 and E-cadherin, which might serve as a future target for
breast cancer.

PMID: 24522810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Acta Otolaryngol. 2014 Apr;134(4):345-51. doi: 10.3109/00016489.2013.875219. Epub
2014 Feb 12.

Dynamic distribution of ototoxic gentamicin entry into inner hair cells of mice.

Liu K(1), Shi C, Sun Y, Xu Y, Shi L, Shi L, Wang X, Ji F, Hou Z, Yang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head & Neck Surgery, Institute of
Otolaryngology, Chinese PLA General Hospital , Beijing.

CONCLUSION: Dynamic distribution of ototoxic gentamicin entry into inner hair
cells (IHCs) may cause an interruption of cochlear ribbon synapse.
OBJECTIVE: To explore the pattern of uptake of gentamicin into IHCs, as well as
its possible contribution to hearing loss.
METHODS: Adult C57 mice were injected intraperitoneally with gentamicin (100
mg/kg, conjugated with Texas Red ester) continuously for 14 days. The hearing
thresholds were detected by auditory brainstem response (ABR) examinations.
Immunostaining and confocal microscopy were utilized to trace gentamicin
distribution, as well as the expression of RIBEYE/CtBP2 in mouse IHCs. Scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) observation was used to find possible alterations of
stereocilia.
RESULTS: The distribution of gentamicin in IHCs was first found on the 4th day
and the accumulation of gentamicin was increased significantly on the 7th day
after treatment, corresponding to the maximal elevation of the hearing threshold.
However, the accumulation of gentamicin on the 14th day did not show significant 
differences compared with the level found on the 7th day. In addition, the uptake
of gentamicin was excessively identified at or near the synaptic ribbons of IHCs 
throughout the 4th, 7th, and 14th days after the treatment, suggesting that
cochlear ribbon synapses could be affected by ototoxic gentamicin exposure.

PMID: 24521345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Prostate Cancer. 2013;2013:384594. doi: 10.1155/2013/384594. Epub 2013 Dec 9.

Variation in HNF1B and Obesity May Influence Prostate Cancer Risk in African
American Men: A Pilot Study.

Chornokur G(1), Amankwah EK(2), Davis SN(3), Phelan CM(1), Park JY(2), Pow-Sang
J(4), Kumar NB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Epidemiology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL 33612, USA
; The Center for Equal Health, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. (2)Department of Cancer
Epidemiology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. (3)Department of
Health Outcomes and Behavior, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.
(4)Department of Genitourinary Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL 33612, 
USA.

Background. Prostate cancer (PCa) racial disparity is multifactorial, involving
biological, sociocultural, and lifestyle determinants. We investigated the
association between selected potentially functional polymorphisms (SNPs) and
prostate cancer (PCa) risk in Black (AAM) and White (EAM) men. We further
explored if these associations varied by the body mass index (BMI) and height.
Methods. Age-matched DNA samples from 259 AAM and 269 EAM were genotyped for 10
candidate SNPs in 7 genes using the TaqMan allelic differentiation analysis. The 
dominant, recessive, and additive age-adjusted unconditional logistic regression 
models were fitted. Results. Three SNPs showed statistically significant
associations with PCa risk: in AAM, HNF1B rs7501939 (OR = 2.42, P = 0.0046) and
rs4430796 (OR = 0.57, P = 0.0383); in EAM, CTBP2 rs4962416 (OR = 1.52, P =
0.0384). In addition, high BMI in AAM (OR = 1.06, P = 0.022) and height in EAM
(OR = 0.92, P = 0.0434) showed significant associations. Interestingly, HNF1B
rs7501939 was associated with PCa exclusively in obese AAM (OR = 2.14, P =
0.0103). Conclusion. Our results suggest that variation in the HNF1B may
influence PCa risk in obese AAM.

PMCID: PMC3872424
PMID: 24386569  [PubMed]


51. Urol Oncol. 2014 May;32(4):426-32. doi: 10.1016/j.urolonc.2013.09.006. Epub 2013 
Dec 12.

Expression patterns of candidate susceptibility genes HNF1ß and CtBP2 in prostate
cancer: association with tumor progression.

Debiais-Delpech C(1), Godet J(1), Pedretti N(2), Bernard FX(2), Irani J(3),
Cathelineau X(4), Cussenot O(5), Fromont G(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, CHU-Universite de Poitiers, Poitiers, France.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Bioalternatives, Gencay, France.
(3)Department of Urology, CHU-Universite de Poitiers, Poitiers, France.
(4)Department of Urology, Institut Mutualiste Montsouris, Paris, France.
(5)Centre d'etude et de Recherche sur les Pathologies Prostatique (CeRePP),
Hospital Tenon, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(6)Department of Pathology, CHU-Universite de Poitiers, Poitiers, France; Centre 
d'etude et de Recherche sur les Pathologies Prostatique (CeRePP), Hospital Tenon,
Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France. Electronic address:
g.fromont@chu-poitiers.fr.

OBJECTIVES: Genome-wide association studies have identified variants at multiple 
loci associated with prostate cancer (PCa) risk. Some of these loci include
candidate susceptibility genes, such as MSMB, HNF1ß, and C-terminal-binding
protein (CtBP2). Except for MSMB, the clinicopathological significance of these
genes has not been investigated. We therefore aimed to analyze their expression
in PCa tissues, in relation with tumor progression and aggressiveness.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Protein expression was evaluated by immunohistochemistry
on tissue microarrays containing samples from normal prostate (NL, n = 91),
high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN, n = 61), clinically
localized PCa (CLC, n = 434), PCa metastases (M, n = 28), and
castration-resistant PCa (CRC, n = 49). Moreover, mRNA expression for each marker
was assessed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, on 53 frozen
samples of NL, CLC, and CRC.
RESULTS: These genes were differentially expressed at the different stages of PCa
natural history. MSMB expression decreased with disease development and
progression. In contrast, nuclear HNF1ß and CtBP2 staining significantly
increased in the CRC and M groups when compared with CLC, together with the
transcripts levels. In patients with CLC, HNF1ß and CtBP2 nuclear expressions
were strongly associated with cancer cell proliferation. After adjusting for the 
Gleason score and the pathological stage, none of the candidate genes was
significantly predictive of recurrence after radical prostatectomy. In patients
with CRC, CtBP2 nuclear staining was associated with shorter overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: The decrease of MSMB expression during tumor progression strongly
supports its role as a tumor-suppressor gene. Although its functions remain to be
clarified in PCa cells, HNF1ß and CtBP2 are associated with cancer cell
proliferation, tumor progression, and castration-resistant disease.

© 2013 Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24332637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Neurosci. 2013 Nov 20;33(47):18409-24. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2529-13.2013.

Mutation of Foxo3 causes adult onset auditory neuropathy and alters cochlear
synapse architecture in mice.

Gilels F(1), Paquette ST, Zhang J, Rahman I, White PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Department of Biology, and Department 
of Environmental Medicine, University of Rochester School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Rochester, New York 14642.

Auditory neuropathy is a form of hearing loss in which cochlear inner hair cells 
fail to correctly encode or transmit acoustic information to the brain. Few genes
have been implicated in the adult-onset form of this disease. Here we show that
mice lacking the transcription factor Foxo3 have adult onset hearing loss with
the hallmark characteristics of auditory neuropathy, namely, elevated auditory
thresholds combined with normal outer hair cell function. Using histological
techniques, we demonstrate that Foxo3-dependent hearing loss is not due to a loss
of cochlear hair cells or spiral ganglion neurons, both of which normally express
Foxo3. Moreover, Foxo3-knock-out (KO) inner hair cells do not display reductions 
in numbers of synapses. Instead, we find that there are subtle structural changes
in and surrounding inner hair cells. Confocal microscopy in conjunction with 3D
modeling and quantitative analysis show that synaptic localization is altered in 
Foxo3-KO mice and Myo7a immunoreactivity is reduced. TEM demonstrates apparent
afferent degeneration. Strikingly, acoustic stimulation promotes Foxo3 nuclear
localization in vivo, implying a connection between cochlear activity and
synaptic function maintenance. Together, these findings support a new role for
the canonical damage response factor Foxo3 in contributing to the maintenance of 
auditory synaptic transmission.

PMID: 24259566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Dev Neurobiol. 2014 Apr;74(4):457-66. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22136. Epub 2013 Nov 20.

Inhibition of repulsive guidance molecule, RGMa, increases afferent synapse
formation with auditory hair cells.

Brugeaud A(1), Tong M, Luo L, Edge AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otology and Laryngology, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, 02115; Eaton-Peabody Laboratory, Massachusetts Eye and Ear
Infirmary, Boston, Massachusetts, 02114.

The peripheral fibers that extend from auditory neurons to hair cells are
sensitive to damage, and replacement of the fibers and their afferent synapse
with hair cells would be of therapeutic interest. Here, we show that RGMa, a
repulsive guidance molecule previously shown to play a role in the development of
the chick visual system, is expressed in the developing, newborn, and mature
mouse inner ear. The effect of RGMa on synaptogenesis between afferent neurons
and hair cells, from which afferent connections had been removed, was assessed.
Contact of neural processes with hair cells and elaboration of postsynaptic
densities at sites of the ribbon synapse were increased by treatment with a
blocking antibody to RGMa, and pruning of auditory fibers to achieve the mature
branching pattern of afferent neurons was accelerated. Inhibition by RGMa could
thus explain why auditory neurons have a low capacity to regenerate peripheral
processes: postnatal spiral ganglion neurons retain the capacity to send out
processes that respond to signals for synapse formation, but expression of RGMa
postnatally appears to be detrimental to regeneration of afferent hair cell
innervation and antagonizes synaptogenesis. Increased synaptogenesis after
inhibition of RGMa suggests that manipulation of guidance or inhibitory factors
may provide a route to increase formation of new synapses at deafferented hair
cells.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24123853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. PLoS Pathog. 2013 Sep;9(9):e1003636. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003636. Epub 2013
Sep 12.

Modulation of enhancer looping and differential gene targeting by Epstein-Barr
virus transcription factors directs cellular reprogramming.

McClellan MJ(1), Wood CD, Ojeniyi O, Cooper TJ, Kanhere A, Arvey A, Webb HM,
Palermo RD, Harth-Hertle ML, Kempkes B, Jenner RG, West MJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, John Maynard-Smith Building, University of Sussex,
Falmer, Brighton, United Kingdom.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) epigenetically reprogrammes B-lymphocytes to drive
immortalization and facilitate viral persistence. Host-cell transcription is
perturbed principally through the actions of EBV EBNA 2, 3A, 3B and 3C, with
cellular genes deregulated by specific combinations of these EBNAs through
unknown mechanisms. Comparing human genome binding by these viral transcription
factors, we discovered that 25% of binding sites were shared by EBNA 2 and the
EBNA 3s and were located predominantly in enhancers. Moreover, 80% of potential
EBNA 3A, 3B or 3C target genes were also targeted by EBNA 2, implicating
extensive interplay between EBNA 2 and 3 proteins in cellular reprogramming.
Investigating shared enhancer sites neighbouring two new targets (WEE1 and CTBP2)
we discovered that EBNA 3 proteins repress transcription by modulating
enhancer-promoter loop formation to establish repressive chromatin hubs or
prevent assembly of active hubs. Re-ChIP analysis revealed that EBNA 2 and 3
proteins do not bind simultaneously at shared sites but compete for binding
thereby modulating enhancer-promoter interactions. At an EBNA 3-only intergenic
enhancer site between ADAM28 and ADAMDEC1 EBNA 3C was also able to independently 
direct epigenetic repression of both genes through enhancer-promoter looping.
Significantly, studying shared or unique EBNA 3 binding sites at WEE1, CTBP2,
ITGAL (LFA-1 alpha chain), BCL2L11 (Bim) and the ADAMs, we also discovered that
different sets of EBNA 3 proteins bind regulatory elements in a gene and
cell-type specific manner. Binding profiles correlated with the effects of
individual EBNA 3 proteins on the expression of these genes, providing a
molecular basis for the targeting of different sets of cellular genes by the EBNA
3s. Our results therefore highlight the influence of the genomic and cellular
context in determining the specificity of gene deregulation by EBV and provide a 
paradigm for host-cell reprogramming through modulation of enhancer-promoter
interactions by viral transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3771879
PMID: 24068937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Immunity. 2013 Sep 19;39(3):611-21. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.08.025. Epub 2013 
Sep 5.

Myeloid-derived suppressor cells enhance stemness of cancer cells by inducing
microRNA101 and suppressing the corepressor CtBP2.

Cui TX(1), Kryczek I, Zhao L, Zhao E, Kuick R, Roh MH, Vatan L, Szeliga W, Mao Y,
Thomas DG, Kotarski J, Tarkowski R, Wicha M, Cho K, Giordano T, Liu R, Zou W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor,
MI 48109, USA.

Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and cancer stem cells (CSCs) are
important cellular components in the cancer microenvironment and may affect
cancer phenotype and patient outcome. The nature of MDSCs and their interaction
with CSCs in ovarian carcinoma are unclear. We examined the interaction between
MDSCs and CSCs in patients with ovarian carcinoma and showed that MDSCs inhibited
T cell activation and enhanced CSC gene expression, sphere formation, and cancer 
metastasis. MDSCs triggered miRNA101 expression in cancer cells. miRNA101
subsequently repressesed the corepressor gene C-terminal binding protein-2
(CtBP2), and CtBP2 directly targeted stem cell core genes resulting in increased 
cancer cell stemness and increasing metastatic and tumorigenic potential.
Increased MDSC density and tumor microRNA101 expression predict poor survival, as
does decreased tumor CtBP2 expression, independent of each other. Collectively,
our work identifies an immune-associated cellular, molecular, and clinical
network involving MDSCs-microRNA101-CtBP2-stem cell core genes, which
extrinsically controls cancer stemness and impacts patient outcome.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3831370
PMID: 24012420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Comp Neurol. 2014 Mar;522(4):900-20. doi: 10.1002/cne.23452.

Structural organization and function of mouse photoreceptor ribbon synapses
involve the immunoglobulin protein synaptic cell adhesion molecule 1.

Ribic A(1), Liu X, Crair MC, Biederer T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New
Haven, Connecticut, 06520-8024.

Adhesive interactions in the retina instruct the developmental specification of
inner retinal layers. However, potential roles of adhesion in the development and
function of photoreceptor synapses remain incompletely understood. This contrasts
with our understanding of synapse development in the CNS, which can be guided by 
select adhesion molecules such as the Synaptic Cell Adhesion Molecule 1 (SynCAM
1/CADM1/nectin-like 2 protein). This immunoglobulin superfamily protein modulates
the development and plasticity of classical excitatory synapses. We show here by 
immunoelectron microscopy and immunoblotting that SynCAM 1 is expressed on mouse 
rod photoreceptors and their terminals in the outer nuclear and plexiform layers 
in a developmentally regulated manner. Expression of SynCAM 1 on rods is low in
early postnatal stages (P3-P7) but increases after eye opening (P14). In support 
of functional roles in the photoreceptors, electroretinogram recordings
demonstrate impaired responses to light stimulation in SynCAM 1 knockout (KO)
mice. In addition, the structural integrity of synapses in the OPL requires
SynCAM 1. Quantitative ultrastructural analysis of SynCAM 1 KO retina measured
fewer fully assembled, triadic rod ribbon synapses. Furthermore, rod synapse
ribbons are shortened in KO mice, and protein levels of Ribeye, a major
structural component of ribbons, are reduced in SynCAM 1 KO retina. Together, our
results implicate SynCAM 1 in the synaptic organization of the rod visual pathway
and provide evidence for novel roles of synaptic adhesion in the structural and
functional integrity of ribbon synapses.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3947154
PMID: 23982969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 23;288(34):24581-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.467506. Epub 2013
Jul 13.

Interaction of E2F7 transcription factor with E2F1 and C-terminal-binding protein
(CtBP) provides a mechanism for E2F7-dependent transcription repression.

Liu B(1), Shats I, Angus SP, Gatza ML, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Department of Molecular
Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina
27708, USA.

Previous work has identified distinct functions for E2F proteins during a
cellular proliferative response including a role for E2F1-3 in the activation of 
transcription at G1/S and a role for E2F4-8 in repressing the same group of
E2F1-3 target genes as cells progress through S phase. We now find that E2F7 and 
E2F8, which are induced by E2F1-3 at G1/S, can form a heterodimer with E2F1
through interactions involving the DNA-binding domains of the two proteins. In
vitro DNA interaction assays demonstrate the formation of an E2F1-E2F7 complex,
as well as an E2F7-E2F7 complex on adjacent E2F-binding sites. We also show that 
E2F7 recruits the co-repressor C-terminal-binding protein (CtBP) and that CtBP2
is essential for E2F7 to repress E2F1 transcription. Taken together, these
findings suggest a mechanism for the repression of transcription by E2F7.

PMCID: PMC3750156
PMID: 23853115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Neurosci. 2013 Jun 19;33(25):10278-300. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5048-12.2013.

A local, periactive zone endocytic machinery at photoreceptor synapses in close
vicinity to synaptic ribbons.

Wahl S(1), Katiyar R, Schmitz F.

Author information: 
(1)Saarland University, Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Department
Neuroanatomy, 66421 Homburg, Saar, Germany.

Photoreceptor ribbon synapses are continuously active synapses with large active 
zones that contain synaptic ribbons. Synaptic ribbons are anchored to the active 
zones and are associated with large numbers of synaptic vesicles. The base of the
ribbon that is located close to L-type voltage-gated Ca(2+) channels is a hotspot
of exocytosis. The continuous exocytosis at the ribbon synapse needs to be
balanced by compensatory endocytosis. Recent analyses indicated that vesicle
recycling at the synaptic ribbon is also an important determinant of synaptic
signaling at the photoreceptor synapse. To get insights into mechanisms of
vesicle recycling at the photoreceptor ribbon synapse, we performed
super-resolution structured illumination microscopy and immunogold electron
microscopy to localize major components of the endocytotic membrane retrieval
machinery in the photoreceptor synapse of the mouse retina. We found dynamin,
syndapin, amphiphysin, and calcineurin, a regulator of activity-dependent
endocytosis, to be highly enriched around the active zone and the synaptic
ribbon. We present evidence for two clathrin heavy chain variants in the
photoreceptor terminal; one is enriched around the synaptic ribbon, whereas the
other is localized in the entry region of the terminal. The focal enrichment of
endocytic proteins around the synaptic ribbon is consistent with a focal uptake
of endocytic markers at that site. This endocytic activity functionally depends
on dynamin. These data propose that the presynaptic periactive zone surrounding
the synaptic ribbon complex is a hotspot of endocytosis in photoreceptor ribbon
synapses.

PMID: 23785143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;33(16):3343-53. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01213-12. Epub 2013 Jun 
17.

The corepressor CTBP2 is a coactivator of retinoic acid receptor/retinoid X
receptor in retinoic acid signaling.

Bajpe PK(1), Heynen GJ, Mittempergher L, Grernrum W, de Rink IA, Nijkamp W,
Beijersbergen RL, Bernards R, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Molecular Carcinogenesis, The Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Retinoids play key roles in development, differentiation, and homeostasis through
regulation of specific target genes by the retinoic acid receptor/retinoid X
receptor (RAR/RXR) nuclear receptor complex. Corepressors and coactivators
contribute to its transcriptional control by creating the appropriate chromatin
environment, but the precise composition of these nuclear receptor complexes
remains to be elucidated. Using an RNA interference-based genetic screen in mouse
F9 cells, we identified the transcriptional corepressor CTBP2 (C-terminal binding
protein 2) as a coactivator critically required for retinoic acid (RA)-induced
transcription. CTBP2 suppression by RNA interference confers resistance to
RA-induced differentiation in diverse murine and human cells. Mechanistically, we
find that CTBP2 associates with RAR/RXR at RA target gene promoters and is
essential for their transactivation in response to RA. We show that CTBP2 is
indispensable to create a chromatin environment conducive for RAR/RXR-mediated
transcription by recruiting the histone acetyltransferase p300. Our data reveal
an unexpected function of the corepressor CTBP2 as a coactivator for RAR/RXR in
RA signaling.

PMCID: PMC3753894
PMID: 23775127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Virology. 2013 Sep 1;443(2):313-20. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2013.05.018. Epub 2013
Jun 5.

Interaction of CtBP with adenovirus E1A suppresses immortalization of primary
epithelial cells and enhances virus replication during productive infection.

Subramanian T(1), Zhao LJ, Chinnadurai G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, Saint Louis University Health Sciences
Center, Doisy Research Center, 1100 South Grand Blvd., Saint Louis, MO 63104,
USA.

Adenovirus E1A induces cell proliferation, oncogenic transformation and promotes 
viral replication through interaction with p300/CBP, TRRAP/p400 multi-protein
complex and the retinoblastoma (pRb) family proteins through distinct domains in 
the E1A N-terminal region. The C-terminal region of E1A suppresses E1A/Ras
co-transformation and interacts with FOXK1/K2, DYRK1A/1B/HAN11 and CtBP1/2 (CtBP)
protein complexes. To specifically dissect the role of CtBP interaction with E1A,
we engineered a mutation (DL<U+2192>AS) within the CtBP-binding motif, PLDLS, and
investigated the effect of the mutation on immortalization and Ras cooperative
transformation of primary cells and viral replication. Our results suggest that
CtBP-E1A interaction suppresses immortalization and Ras co-operative
transformation of primary rodent epithelial cells without significantly
influencing the tumorigenic activities of transformed cells in immunodeficient
and immunocompetent animals. During productive infection, CtBP-E1A interaction
enhances viral replication in human cells. Between the two CtBP family proteins, 
CtBP2 appears to restrict viral replication more than CtBP1 in human cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3732182
PMID: 23747199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Neoplasia. 2013 Jun;15(6):600-8.

BRCA1 expression is epigenetically repressed in sporadic ovarian cancer cells by 
overexpression of C-terminal binding protein 2.

May T(1), Yang J, Shoni M, Liu S, He H, Gali R, Ng SK, Crum C, Berkowitz RS, Ng
SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics/Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Division of
Gynecologic Oncology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Ovarian cancer is the leading cause of mortality from gynecological
malignancy despite advancements in novel therapeutics. We have recently
demonstrated that the transcriptional co-repressor C-terminal binding protein 2
(CtBP2) is overexpressed in epithelial ovarian carcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Reverse-transcribed cDNA from CtBP2 wild-type and
knockdown ovarian cancer cell lines was hybridized to Affymetrix Gene 1.0 ST
microarrays, and differentially expressed genes were studied. Immunohistochemical
analysis of CtBP2 and BRCA1 staining of ovarian tissues was performed. Chromatin 
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and luciferase assays were carried out. The effect of 
the drugs 4-methylthio-2-oxobutyric acid (MTOB) and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
(PARP) inhibitor Olaparib on CtBP2 wild-type and knockdown cell lines was
examined using methylthiazol tetrazolium assays and an xCELLigence System.
RESULTS: Eighty-five genes involved in DNA repair, mitotic checkpoint, nucleosome
assembly, and the BRCA1 network were differentially regulated by CtBP2
expression. ChIP and luciferase reporter assays using a BRCA1 promoter-regulated 
luciferase construct indicated that the CtBP2 complex binds the BRCA1 promoter
and represses BRCA1 transcription. Immunohistochemistry illustrated a significant
inverse CtBP2 and BRCA1 expression in a panel of malignant ovarian tumor tissues.
The CtBP2 inhibitor MTOB suppressed ovarian cancer cell survival in a
CtBP2-dependent manner. Ovarian cancer cells with CtBP2 knockdown did not display
increased sensitivity to the PARP inhibitor Olaparib.
CONCLUSION: CtBP2 is an ovarian cancer oncogene that may play a significant role 
in epigenetically silencing BRCA1 function in sporadic epithelial ovarian cancer.
CtBP2-specific inhibitors, such as MTOB, may be effective adjunct therapies in
the management of patients with CtBP2-positive ovarian carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3664992
PMID: 23730208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mol Vis. 2013 Apr 18;19:917-26. Print 2013.

The ribbon-associated protein C-terminal-binding protein 1 is not essential for
the structure and function of retinal ribbon synapses.

Vaithianathan T(1), Akmentin W, Henry D, Matthews G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, 
NY 11794-5230, USA.

PURPOSE: Synaptic ribbons are organelles found at presynaptic active zones of
sensory neurons that generate sustained graded electrical signals in response to 
stimuli, including retinal photoreceptor cells and bipolar neurons. RIBEYE is the
major and specific protein constituent of ribbons; however, over the past decade 
an increasing number of other proteins have been identified at ribbon active
zones, including C-terminal-binding protein 1 (CtBP1; a regulator of
transcription and membrane trafficking that might bind to the B domain of
RIBEYE). The appearance of CtBP1 together with RIBEYE suggests that it may
contribute to ribbon function, but the possible role of CtBP1 at ribbon synapses 
has not yet been examined. Using CtBP1-knockout mice, we tested for functional
effects of absence of CtBP1 protein.
METHODS: Confocal microscopy, electrophysiology, and electron microscopy were
used to examine the structure and function of ribbon synapses in the retina and
in isolated bipolar neurons from CtBP1 null mice compared with their wild-type
littermates.
RESULTS: Expression of ribbons appeared to be normal in CtBP1 null mouse retina
as revealed by immunofluorescence with an antibody to the B domain of RIBEYE and 
by binding studies using a fluorescent peptide that binds to RIBEYE in ribbons of
living bipolar cells. Electron microscopy also showed grossly normal pre- and
postsynaptic organization of ribbon synapses in both photoreceptors and bipolar
cells. Synaptic vesicles were normal in size, but the overall density of reserve 
vesicles was reduced by ~20% in the cytoplasm of CtBP1 null ribbon synaptic
terminals. However, the reduced vesicle density did not detectably alter synaptic
function of bipolar neurons as revealed by activity-dependent loading of synaptic
vesicles with FM4-64, presynaptic calcium current, capacitance measurements of
synaptic exocytosis, and destaining of FM dye upon stimulation.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall the results suggest that CtBP1 protein is not essential for 
the formation of functional ribbon synapses in the retina.

PMCID: PMC3654860
PMID: 23687428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Synapse. 2013 Aug;67(8):515-31. doi: 10.1002/syn.21674. Epub 2013 May 27.

Early degeneration of photoreceptor synapse in Ccl2/Cx3cr1-deficient mice on
Crb1(rd8) background.

Zhang J(1), Tuo J, Cao X, Shen D, Li W, Chan CC.

Author information: 
(1)Histology Core, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. junzhang@ninds.nih.gov

Photoreceptor ribbon synapse releases glutamate to postsynaptic targets. The
synaptic ribbon may play multiple roles in ribbon synapse development, synaptic
vesicle recycling, and synaptic transmission. Age-related macular degeneration
(AMD) patients appear to have fewer or no detectable synaptic ribbons as well as 
abnormal swelling in the photoreceptor terminals in the macula. However, reports 
on changes of photoreceptor synapses in AMD are scarce and photoreceptor type and
quantity affected in early AMD is still unclear. Here, we employed multiple
anatomical techniques to investigate these questions in Ccl2<U+207B>/<U+207B>/Cx3cr1<U+207B>/<U+207B> mouse
on Crb1(rd8) background (DKO rd8) at one month of age. We found that
approximately 17% of photoreceptors over the focal lesion were lost.
Immunostaining for synapse-associated proteins (CtBP2, synaptophysin, and
vesicular glutamate transporter 1) showed significantly reduced expression and
ectopic localization. Cone opsins demonstrated dramatic reduction in expression
(S-opsins) and extensive mislocalization (M-opsins). Quantitative ultrastructural
analysis confirmed a significant decrease in the number of cone terminals and
nuclei, numerous vacuoles in remaining cone terminals, reduction in the number of
synaptic ribbons in photoreceptor terminals, and ectopic rod ribbon synapses. In 
addition, glutamate receptor immunoreactivity on aberrant sprouting of rod
bipolar cells and horizontal cells were identified at the ectopic synapses. These
results indicate that synaptic alterations occur at the early stages of disease
and cones are likely more susceptible to damage caused by DKO rd8 mutation. They 
provide a new insight into potential mechanism of vision function lost due to
synaptic degeneration before cell death in the early stages of AMD.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3745602
PMID: 23592324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e57247. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057247. Epub 2013 Mar 13.

The reduced cochlear output and the failure to adapt the central auditory
response causes tinnitus in noise exposed rats.

Rüttiger L(1), Singer W, Panford-Walsh R, Matsumoto M, Lee SC, Zuccotti A,
Zimmermann U, Jaumann M, Rohbock K, Xiong H, Knipper M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Hearing Research Centre Tübingen (THRC),
Molecular Physiology of Hearing, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

Tinnitus is proposed to be caused by decreased central input from the cochlea,
followed by increased spontaneous and evoked subcortical activity that is
interpreted as compensation for increased responsiveness of central auditory
circuits. We compared equally noise exposed rats separated into groups with and
without tinnitus for differences in brain responsiveness relative to the degree
of deafferentation in the periphery. We analyzed (1) the number of
CtBP2/RIBEYE-positive particles in ribbon synapses of the inner hair cell (IHC)
as a measure for deafferentation; (2) the fine structure of the amplitudes of
auditory brainstem responses (ABR) reflecting differences in sound responses
following decreased auditory nerve activity and (3) the expression of the
activity-regulated gene Arc in the auditory cortex (AC) to identify long-lasting 
central activity following sensory deprivation. Following moderate trauma, 30% of
animals exhibited tinnitus, similar to the tinnitus prevalence among hearing
impaired humans. Although both tinnitus and no-tinnitus animals exhibited a
reduced ABR wave I amplitude (generated by primary auditory nerve fibers), IHCs
ribbon loss and high-frequency hearing impairment was more severe in tinnitus
animals, associated with significantly reduced amplitudes of the more centrally
generated wave IV and V and less intense staining of Arc mRNA and protein in the 
AC. The observed severe IHCs ribbon loss, the minimal restoration of ABR wave
size, and reduced cortical Arc expression suggest that tinnitus is linked to a
failure to adapt central circuits to reduced cochlear input.

PMCID: PMC3596376
PMID: 23516401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Neurosci. 2013 Mar 6;33(10):4456-67. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3491-12.2013.

Disruption of the presynaptic cytomatrix protein bassoon degrades ribbon
anchorage, multiquantal release, and sound encoding at the hair cell afferent
synapse.

Jing Z(1), Rutherford MA, Takago H, Frank T, Fejtova A, Khimich D, Moser T,
Strenzke N.

Author information: 
(1)Auditory Systems Physiology Group, InnerEarLab, University Medical Center,
37075 Göttingen, Germany.

Inner hair cells (IHCs) of the cochlea use ribbon synapses to transmit auditory
information faithfully to spiral ganglion neurons (SGNs). In the present study,
we used genetic disruption of the presynaptic scaffold protein bassoon in mice to
manipulate the morphology and function of the IHC synapse. Although
partial-deletion mutants lacking functional bassoon (Bsn(<U+0394>Ex4/5)) had a
near-complete loss of ribbons from the synapses (up to 88% ribbonless synapses), 
gene-trap mutants (Bsn(gt)) showed weak residual expression of bassoon and 56%
ribbonless synapses, whereas the remaining 44% had a loosely anchored ribbon.
Patch-clamp recordings and synaptic CaV1.3 immunolabeling indicated a larger
number of Ca(2+) channels for Bsn(gt) IHCs compared with Bsn(<U+0394>Ex4/5) IHCs and for
Bsn(gt) ribbon-occupied versus Bsn(gt) ribbonless synapses. An intermediate
phenotype of Bsn(gt) IHCs was also found by membrane capacitance measurements for
sustained exocytosis, but not for the size of the readily releasable vesicle
pool. The frequency and amplitude of EPSCs were reduced in Bsn(<U+0394>Ex4/5) mouse
SGNs, whereas their postsynaptic AMPA receptor clusters were largely unaltered.
Sound coding in SGN, assessed by recordings of single auditory nerve fibers and
their population responses in vivo, was similarly affected in Bsn(gt) and
Bsn(<U+0394>Ex4/5) mice. Both genotypes showed impaired sound onset coding and reduced
evoked and spontaneous spike rates. In summary, reduced bassoon expression or
complete lack of full-length bassoon impaired sound encoding to a similar extent,
which is consistent with the comparable reduction of the readily releasable
vesicle pool. This suggests that the remaining loosely anchored ribbons in
Bsn(gt) IHCs were functionally inadequate or that ribbon independent mechanisms
dominated the coding deficit.

PMID: 23467361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2013 Jun;14(3):321-9. doi: 10.1007/s10162-013-0374-3.
Epub 2013 Feb 20.

Regenerated synapses between postnatal hair cells and auditory neurons.

Tong M(1), Brugeaud A, Edge AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otology and Laryngology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Regeneration of synaptic connections between hair cells and spiral ganglion
neurons would be required to restore hearing after neural loss. Here we
demonstrate by immunohistochemistry the appearance of afferent-like cochlear
synapses in vitro after co-culture of de-afferented organ of Corti with spiral
ganglion neurons from newborn mice. The glutamatergic synaptic complexes at the
ribbon synapse of the inner hair cell contain markers for presynaptic ribbons and
postsynaptic densities. We found postsynaptic density protein PSD-95 at the
contacts between hair cells and spiral ganglion neurons in newly formed synapses 
in vitro. The postsynaptic proteins were directly facing the CtBP2-positive
presynaptic ribbons of the hair cells. BDNF and NT-3 promoted afferent
synaptogenesis in vitro. Direct juxtaposition of the postsynaptic densities with 
the components of the preexisting ribbon synapse indicated that growing fibers
recognized components of the presynaptic sites. Initiation of cochlear
synaptogenesis appeared to be influenced by glutamate release from the hair cell 
ribbons at the presynaptic site since the synaptic regeneration was impaired in
glutamate vesicular transporter 3 mutant mice. These insights into cochlear
synaptogenesis could be relevant to regenerative approaches for neural loss in
the cochlea.

PMCID: PMC3642275
PMID: 23423560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Mar 15;432(3):418-24. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.01.124. Epub 2013 Feb 11.

C-terminus of Hsc70-interacting protein regulates C-terminal binding protein 2
and the expression of its target genes.

Lee JS(1), Yoo SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee University,
Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea.

C-terminal binding protein 2 (CtBP2) is a transcriptional co-repressor involved
in cell migration, apoptosis, and tumorization. Up-regulation of CtBP2 is
implicated in various human cancers including breast cancers. In our present
study, we found that the C-terminus of Hsc70-interacting protein (CHIP) regulated
the steady-state level of CtBP2. CHIP interacted with CtBP2 via a
tetratricopeptide domain in the nucleus and ubiquitinated CtBP2, marking it for
proteasomal degradation. Depletion of CHIP resulted in stabilization of the CtBP2
protein, which was not affected by ultraviolet irradiation. Finally, CHIP
expression regulated the expression of CtBP2 target genes. Taken together, our
data demonstrate that CHIP regulates the steady-state level of CtBP2 as an E3
ubiquitin ligase and determines the expression levels of CtBP2 target genes.
Regulating CtBP2 levels with CHIP may be a useful therapeutic strategy in human
cancers.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23410750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Neuron. 2013 Feb 6;77(3):516-27. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.11.024.

Synaptic ribbons influence the size and frequency of miniature-like evoked
postsynaptic currents.

Mehta B(1), Snellman J, Chen S, Li W, Zenisek D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Yale University School of
Medicine, Sterling Hall of Medicine, Room B147, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Nonspiking cells of several sensory systems respond to stimuli with graded
changes in neurotransmitter release and possess specialized synaptic ribbons.
Here, we show that manipulations to synaptic ribbons caused dramatic effects on
mEPSC-like (mlEPSC) amplitude and frequency. Damage to rod-bipolar cell ribbons
using fluorophore-assisted light inactivation resulted in the immediate reduction
of mlEPSC amplitude and frequency, whereas the first evoked response after damage
remained largely intact. The reduction in amplitude could not be recovered by
increasing release frequency after ribbon damage. In parallel experiments, we
looked at mlEPSCs from cones of hibernating ground squirrels, which exhibit
dramatically smaller ribbons than awake animals. Fewer and smaller mlEPSCs were
observed postsynaptic to cones from hibernating animals, although depolarized
cones were able to generate larger mlEPSCs. Our results indicate that ribbon size
may influence mlEPSC frequency and support a role for ribbons in coordinating
multivesicular release.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3569740
PMID: 23395377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Neuron. 2013 Feb 6;77(3):503-15. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.11.028.

Apoptosis regulates ipRGC spacing necessary for rods and cones to drive circadian
photoentrainment.

Chen SK(1), Chew KS, McNeill DS, Keeley PW, Ecker JL, Mao BQ, Pahlberg J, Kim B, 
Lee SC, Fox MA, Guido W, Wong KY, Sampath AP, Reese BE, Kuruvilla R, Hattar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2013 Feb 25;24(4):338-40.

The retina consists of ordered arrays of individual types of neurons for
processing vision. Here, we show that such order is necessary for intrinsically
photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs) to function as irradiance
detectors. We found that during development, ipRGCs undergo proximity-dependent
Bax-mediated apoptosis. Bax mutant mice exhibit disrupted ipRGC spacing and
dendritic stratification with an increase in abnormally localized synapses.
ipRGCs are the sole conduit for light input to circadian photoentrainment, and
either their melanopsin-based photosensitivity or ability to relay rod/cone input
is sufficient for circadian photoentrainment. Remarkably, the disrupted ipRGC
spacing does not affect melanopsin-based circadian photoentrainment but severely 
impairs rod/cone-driven photoentrainment. We demonstrate reduced rod/cone-driven 
cFos activation and electrophysiological responses in ipRGCs, suggesting that
impaired synaptic input to ipRGCs underlies the photoentrainment deficits. Thus, 
for irradiance detection, developmental apoptosis is necessary for the spacing
and connectivity of ipRGCs that underlie their functioning within a neural
network.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3569737
PMID: 23395376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 29;288(13):9028-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.432005. Epub 2013
Feb 7.

Interaction with cyclin H/cyclin-dependent kinase 7 (CCNH/CDK7) stabilizes
C-terminal binding protein 2 (CtBP2) and promotes cancer cell migration.

Wang Y(1), Liu F, Mao F, Hang Q, Huang X, He S, Wang Y, Cheng C, Wang H, Xu G,
Zhang T, Shen A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogen and Immunology, Medical College, Nantong University,
Nantong 226001, China.

CtBP2 has been demonstrated to possess tumor-promoting capacities by virtue of
up-regulating epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and down-regulating
apoptosis in cancer cells. As a result, cellular CtBP2 levels are considered a
key factor determining the outcome of oncogenic transformation. How
pro-tumorigenic and anti-tumorigenic factors compete for fine-tuning CtBP2 levels
is incompletely understood. Here we report that the cyclin H/cyclin-dependent
kinase 7 (CCNH/CDK7) complex interacted with CtBP2 in vivo and in vitro.
Depletion of either CCNH or CDK7 decreased CtBP2 protein levels by accelerating
proteasome-dependent CtBP2 clearance. Further analysis revealed that CCNH/CDK7
competed with the tumor repressor HIPK2 for CtBP2 binding and consequently
inhibited phosphorylation and dimerization of CtBP2. Phosphorylation-defective
CtBP2 interacted more strongly with CCNH/CDK7 and was more resistant to
degradation. Finally, overexpression of CtBP2 increased whereas depletion of
CtBP2 dampened the invasive and migratory potential of breast cancer cells. CtBP2
promoted the invasion and migration of breast cancer cells in a CCNH-dependent
manner. Taken together, our data have delineated a novel pathway that regulates
CtBP2 stability, suggesting that targeting the CCNH/CDK7-CtBP2 axis may yield a
viable anti-tumor strategy.

PMCID: PMC3610975
PMID: 23393140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Neurosci. 2013 Jan 16;33(3):1014-23. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2072-12.2013.

The rod pathway of the microbat retina has bistratified rod bipolar cells and
tristratified AII amacrine cells.

Müller B(1), Butz E, Peichl L, Haverkamp S.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Brain Research, 60528 Frankfurt/Main, Germany.
brigitte.mueller@brain.mpg.de

We studied the retinal rod pathway of Carollia perspicillata and Glossophaga
soricina, frugivorous microbats of the phyllostomid family. Protein kinase Ca
(PKCa) immunolabeling revealed abundant rod bipolar cells (RBCs) with axon
terminals in the innermost sublamina of the inner plexiform layer (IPL), which is
typical for mammals. Extraordinarily, the RBC axons showed additional synaptic
contacts in a second sublamina further out in the IPL. Dye injections of
PKCa-prelabeled RBCs of C. perspicillata confirmed the bistratified axon
morphology. The functional partition of the IPL into ON and OFF sublayers was
shown by using antibodies against vesicular glutamate transporter 1 [labeling all
ON and OFF bipolar cell (BC) axon terminals] and G-protein <U+03B3>13 (labeling all ON
BCs). The ON sublayer occupied 75% of the IPL thickness, including both strata of
the RBC axons. RBC output onto putative AII amacrine cells (ACs), the crucial
interneurons of the rod pathway, was identified by calretinin, PKCa, and CtBP2
triple immunolabeling. Dye injections of calretinin-prelabeled ACs revealed
tristratification of the AII ACs corresponding to the bistratified RBCs. Triple
immunolabeling for PKCa, nitric oxide synthetase (NOS), and either GABA(C) or
CtBP2 indicated GABAergic feedback onto RBCs via NOS-immunoreactive ACs. AII
output analysis showed glycineric synapses with glycine receptor a1 expression
between AII cells and OFF cone BCs and connexin 36-labeled gap junctions between 
AII cells and ON cone BCs. We conclude that microbats have a well developed rod
pathway with great similarities to that of other mammals, but with an unusual IPL
stratification pattern of RBCs and AIIs.

PMID: 23325239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Genes Cancer. 2012 Jul;3(7-8):481-90. doi: 10.1177/1947601912463695.

CtBP2 Promotes Human Cancer Cell Migration by Transcriptional Activation of
Tiam1.

Paliwal S(1), Ho N, Parker D, Grossman SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA, USA ; Department of Surgery, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, Worcester, MA, USA.

The mammalian COOH-terminal binding proteins (CtBPs) CtBP1 and CtBP2 are
metabolically regulated transcriptional co-repressors that are degraded upon
acute exposure to the alternative reading frame (ARF) tumor suppressor. We
reported previously that CtBP stimulates cell migration in certain contexts via
repression of PTEN transcription and activation of the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K) pathway. We have now identified an additional and direct
mechanism for CtBP stimulation of cell migration via regulation of T-cell
lymphoma invasion and metastasis 1 (Tiam1) protein. Tiam1 is a guanine nucleotide
exchange factor (GEF) for Rac GTPase that plays a critical role in regulating
cell adhesion, invasion, and migration and has been directly implicated in the
promotion of cancer progression and metastasis. We noted a strict positive
correlation between CtBP2 and Tiam1 expression levels and that CtBP promotion of 
cell migration required CtBP-dependent transcriptional activation of Tiam1. RNA
interference (RNAi)-mediated knockdown of CtBP2 in human colon or lung carcinoma 
cells led to decreased Tiam1 protein and mRNA expression, while overexpression of
CtBP2 increased Tiam1 expression levels. RNAi and overexpression studies also
demonstrated that Tiam1 is a key downstream mediator of CtBP2-mediated cell
migration. An analysis of the Tiam1 promoter revealed binding sites for the
CtBP-interacting Kruppel-like factor 8 (KLF8), and a Tiam1 promoter luciferase
reporter was induced in the presence of both KLF8 and CtBP2, consistent with
KLF8-dependent CtBP transactivation of Tiam1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
analyses demonstrated CtBP2 occupancy of the Tiam1 promoter that was dependent on
the presence of KLF8. Our results indicate that Tiam1 is a transcriptional
activation target of CtBP2 and that this interaction promotes the pro-oncogenic
function of CtBP2 leading to cancer cell migration. Transcriptional activation
thus plays a role in CtBP pro-oncogenic functions along with the previously
characterized CtBP co-repressor function.

PMCID: PMC3527986
PMID: 23264848  [PubMed]


73. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Jun;114(6):1343-54. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24475.

CtBP2 contributes to malignant development of human esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma by regulation of p16INK4A.

Guan C(1), Shi H, Wang H, Zhang J, Ni W, Chen B, Hou S, Yang X, Shen A, Ni R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University,
Nantong 226001, Jiangsu, China.

C-terminal binding protein-2 (CtBP2), as a transcriptional co-repressor, has been
shown to mediate the repression of p16(INK4A) , a tumor suppressor gene product, 
in primary human cells. Here we aimed to investigate how the correlation between 
CtBP2 and p16(INK4A) influenced the development of esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC). Immunohistochemistry of ESCC tissue sections indicated that the
CtBP2 and p16(INK4A) expressions were inversely correlated to each other with a
linear regression coefficient of -0.747 (P < 0.05), and Western blot analysis
revealed that CtBP2 was higher expressed in tumorous tissues than in adjacent
non-tumorous tissues. Either CtBP2 or p16(INK4A) expression was significantly
related to histological differentiation (P = 0.016 or 0.001) and to the
expression of Ki-67, a proliferating marker (P = 0.006 or 0.02), and patients
with higher CtBP2 and lower p16(INK4A) expressions had shorter overall survival. 
We also observed that CtBP2 modulated the cell proliferation and cell cycle in
ECA109 cells, an ESCC cell line, by inhibiting p16(INK4A) . Overexpression or
knockdown of CtBP2 in ECA109 cells was found to inhibit or activate the mRNA or
protein expression of p16(INK4A) , which in turn altered the cell proliferation
and cell cycle in ECA109 cells, as measured by flow cytometry and cell count
assay. Additionally, after ECA109 cells silenced for CtBP2 were treated with
cisplatin (an anti-ESCC agent), the p16(INK4A) expression was up-regulated, and
the cell apoptosis was promoted, thus confirming the repression of p16(INK4A) by 
CtBP2. Collectively, all results suggested that CtBP2 might contribute to the
progression of ESCC through a negative transcriptional regulation of p16(INK4A).

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23255392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Neural Dev. 2012 Dec 7;7:38. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-7-38.

Synaptic profiles during neurite extension, refinement and retraction in the
developing cochlea.

Huang LC(1), Barclay M, Lee K, Peter S, Housley GD, Thorne PR, Montgomery JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University
of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland, New Zealand.

BACKGROUND: During development, excess synapses form between the central and
peripheral nervous systems that are then eliminated to achieve correct
connectivity. In the peripheral auditory system, the developing type I spiral
ganglion afferent fibres undergo a dramatic re-organisation, initially forming
connections with both sensory inner hair cells (IHCs) and outer hair cells
(OHCs). The OHC connections are then selectively eliminated, leaving sparse
innervation by type II afferent fibres, whilst the type I afferent synapses with 
IHCs are consolidated.
RESULTS: We examined the molecular makeup of the synaptic contacts formed onto
the IHCs and OHCs during this period of afferent fibre remodelling. We observed
that presynaptic ribbons initially form at all the afferent neurite contacts,
i.e. not only at the expected developing IHC-type I fibre synapses but also at
OHCs where type I fibres temporarily contact. Moreover, the transient contacts
forming onto OHCs possess a broad set of pre- and postsynaptic proteins,
suggesting that functional synaptic connections are formed prior to the removal
of type I fibre innervation. AMPA-type glutamate receptor subunits were
transiently observed at the base of the OHCs, with their downregulation occurring
in parallel with the withdrawal of type I fibres, dispersal of presynaptic
ribbons, and downregulation of the anchoring proteins Bassoon and Shank.
Conversely, at developing type I afferent IHC synapses, the presence of pre- and 
postsynaptic scaffold proteins was maintained, with differential plasticity in
AMPA receptor subunits observed and AMPA receptor subunit composition changing
around hearing onset.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall our data show a differential balance in the patterns of
synaptic proteins at developing afferent IHC versus OHC synapses that likely
reflect their stable versus transient fates.

PMCID: PMC3545844
PMID: 23217150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Mol Neurosci. 2013 Mar;49(3):531-8. doi: 10.1007/s12031-012-9916-0. Epub 2012
Nov 9.

The role of C-terminal binding protein 2 in Schwann cell differentiation after
sciatic nerve crush.

Cao X(1), Zhao P, Tao G, Zhu Y, Zhou F, Cui Z, Bao G, Xu D, Zhang G, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Nantong
University, Nantong, 226001, People's Republic of China.

C-terminal binding protein 2 (CtBP2), as a transcriptional repressor, plays an
essential role in development and tumorigenesis. However, its distribution and
function in peripheral system lesion and repair are still unknown. Here, we
investigated the spatiotemporal expression of CtBP2 in rat sciatic nerve crush
model. Western blot analysis revealed that CtBP2 was expressed in normal sciatic 
nerve. It gradually decreased, reached minimal levels at 7 days after crush, and 
then returned to the normal level at 4 weeks. We observed that CtBP2 is mainly
expressed in Schwann cells (SCs). In vitro, we induced SC differentiation via
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and found that CtBP2 expression was
downregulated during the process of differentiation. CtBP2-specific siRNA
inhibited the cAMP-induced expression of the immature SC marker P75(NTR), and
exogenous CtBP2 expression upregulated the expression of P75(NTR). Taken
together, we hypothesized that peripheral nerve crush-induced downregulation of
CtBP2 in the sciatic nerve was associated with SC differentiation, and CtBP2
likely played an important role in peripheral nerve injury and regeneration.

PMID: 23138653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Mol Neurosci. 2013 Feb;49(2):395-408. doi: 10.1007/s12031-012-9906-2. Epub 2012
Oct 18.

Different functions of HIPK2 and CtBP2 in traumatic brain injury.

Zou F(1), Xu J, Fu H, Cao J, Mao H, Gong M, Cui G, Zhang Y, Shi W, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Surgical Comprehensive Laboratory Affiliated Hospital
of Nantong University, 19 Qi-Xiu Road, Nantong, Jiangsu Province, 226001, China.

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) initiates a complex series of neurochemical and
signaling changes that lead to neuronal dysfunction and over-reactive astrocytes.
In our study, homeodomain interacting protein kinase 2 (HIPK2) can interact with 
C-terminal binding protein 2 (CtBP2) in rat brain, which is a component of
Wnt-regulated transcription. Up to now, the functions of HIPK2 and CtBP2 in CNS
are still with limited acquaintance. In our study, we found that the interaction 
between HIPK2 and CtBP2 was involved in central nervous system (CNS) injury and
repair. We performed an acute TBI model in adult rats. Western blot and
immunohistochemistry analysis revealed that both HIPK2 and CtBP2 significantly
increased in the peritrauma brain cortex in comparison to contralateral cerebral 
cortex. And immunofluorescence double-labeling revealed that HIPK2 was mainly
co-expressed with NeuN but less GFAP. Meanwhile, we also examined that the
expression profiles of active-caspase-3 was correlated with the expression of
HIPK2 and the expression profiles of the proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA) was correlated with the expression of CtBP2. HIPK2 participated in
apoptosis of neurons, but CtBP2 was associated with the activation and
proliferation of astrocytes. Immunoprecipitation further showed that they
enhanced the interaction with each other in the pathophysiology process. In
conclusion, this was the first description that HIPK2 interacted with CtBP2 in
traumatic brains. Our data suggest that HIPK2 and CtBP2 might play important
roles in CNS pathophysiology after TBI, and might provide a basis for the further
study on their roles in regulating the prognosis after TBI.

PMID: 23076816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Genome Res. 2012 Nov;22(11):2262-9. doi: 10.1101/gr.140665.112. Epub 2012 Sep 7.

Spark: a navigational paradigm for genomic data exploration.

Nielsen CB(1), Younesy H, O'Geen H, Xu X, Jackson AR, Milosavljevic A, Wang T,
Costello JF, Hirst M, Farnham PJ, Jones SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver,
British Columbia, V5Z 4S6, Canada. cydneyn@bcgsc.ca

Biologists possess the detailed knowledge critical for extracting biological
insight from genome-wide data resources, and yet they are increasingly faced with
nontrivial computational analysis challenges posed by genome-scale methodologies.
To lower this computational barrier, particularly in the early data exploration
phases, we have developed an interactive pattern discovery and visualization
approach, Spark, designed with epigenomic data in mind. Here we demonstrate
Spark's ability to reveal both known and novel epigenetic signatures, including a
previously unappreciated binding association between the YY1 transcription factor
and the corepressor CTBP2 in human embryonic stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3483555
PMID: 22960372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Oncogene. 2013 Aug 15;32(33):3896-903. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.380. Epub 2012 Sep
3.

C-terminal binding protein-2 regulates response of epithelial ovarian cancer
cells to histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Barroilhet L(1), Yang J, Hasselblatt K, Paranal RM, Ng SK, Rauh-Hain JA, Welch
WR, Bradner JE, Berkowitz RS, Ng SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics/Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Ovarian cancer survival rates have stagnated in the last 20 years despite the
development of novel chemotherapeutic agents. Modulators of gene expression, such
as histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, are among the new agents being used in 
clinical trials. Predictors of sensitivity to chemotherapy have remained elusive.
In this study, we show that the expression of the transcriptional corepressor
C-terminal binding protein-2 (CtBP2) is elevated in human ovarian tumors.
Downregulation of CtBP2 expression in ovarian cancer cell lines using
short-hairpin RNA strategy suppressed the growth rate and migration of the
resultant cancer cells. The knockdown cell lines also showed upregulation of HDAC
activity and increased sensitivity to selected HDAC inhibitors. Conversely,
forced expression of wild-type CtBP2 in the knockdown cell lines reversed HDAC
activity and partially rescued cellular sensitivity to the HDAC inhibitors. We
propose that CtBP2 is an ovarian cancer oncogene that regulates gene expression
program by modulating HDAC activity. CtBP2 expression may be a surrogate
indicator of cellular sensitivity to HDAC inhibitors.

PMID: 22945647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Comp Neurol. 2013 Feb 15;521(3):709-24. doi: 10.1002/cne.23201.

Characterization of small-field bistratified amacrine cells in macaque retina
labeled by antibodies against synaptotagmin-2.

Neumann S(1), Haverkamp S.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Brain Research, D-60528 Frankfurt a.M., Germany.

Macaque retinae were immunostained with monoclonal antibodies directed against
the protein synaptotagmin-2 (Syt2). Syt2 was localized in a population of
small-field amacrine cells, whose cell bodies formed a regular mosaic within the 
inner nuclear layer, indicating they represent a single amacrine cell type. The
labeled amacrine cells had a bistratified appearance with a dense dendritic
plexus in the OFF-layer and only a few lobular processes extending into the
ON-layer of the inner plexiform layer, similar to A8 amacrine cells described in 
cat and human retina. Syt2-labeled cells were immunoreactive for glycine but
lacked immunoreactivity for <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid (GABA), suggesting they use
glycine as their neurotransmitter. The density of these cells increases from
~200/mm(2) in peripheral retina to ~1,400/mm(2) in central retina. Their bipolar 
cell input was studied by immunolabeling experiments using various bipolar cell
markers combined with CtBP2, a marker of presynaptic ribbons. Our data show that 
Syt2-labeled amacrine cells receive input from both OFF and ON cone bipolar
cells, as well as from rod bipolar cells. The OFF input is dominated by the
diffuse bipolar cell DB1 (44%) and the OFF midget bipolar cell (38%). Here we
describe a population of bistratified small-field amacrine cells closely
resembling A8 amacrine cells and their cone-dominated bipolar cell input. J.
Comp. Neurol. 521:709-724, 2013. © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22821706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39710. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039710. Epub 2012 Jun 22.

Differential spatial expression and subcellular localization of CtBP family
members in rodent brain.

Hübler D(1), Rankovic M, Richter K, Lazarevic V, Altrock WD, Fischer KD,
Gundelfinger ED, Fejtova A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurochemistry and Molecular Biology, Leibniz Institute for
Neurobiology, Magdeburg, Germany.

C-terminal binding proteins (CtBPs) are well-characterized nuclear
transcriptional co-regulators. In addition, cytoplasmic functions were discovered
for these ubiquitously expressed proteins. These include the involvement of the
isoform CtBP1-S/BARS50 in cellular membrane-trafficking processes and a role of
the isoform RIBEYE as molecular scaffolds in ribbons, the presynaptic
specializations of sensory synapses. CtBPs were suggested to regulate neuronal
differentiation and they were implied in the control of gene expression during
epileptogenesis. However, the expression patterns of CtBP family members in
specific brain areas and their subcellular localizations in neurons in situ are
largely unknown. Here, we performed comprehensive assessment of the expression of
CtBP1 and CtBP2 in mouse brain at the microscopic and the ultra-structural levels
using specific antibodies. We quantified and compared expression levels of both
CtBPs in biochemically isolated brain fractions containing cellular nuclei or
synaptic compartment. Our study demonstrates differential regional and
subcellular expression patterns for the two CtBP family members in brain and
reveals a previously unknown synaptic localization for CtBP2 in particular brain 
regions. Finally, we propose a mechanism of differential synapto-nuclear
targeting of its splice variants CtBP2-S and CtBP2-L in neurons.

PMCID: PMC3382178
PMID: 22745816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Cell Calcium. 2012 Sep-Oct;52(3-4):327-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ceca.2012.05.008. Epub 
2012 Jun 6.

Molecular anatomy and physiology of exocytosis in sensory hair cells.

Rutherford MA(1), Pangric T.

Author information: 
(1)InnerEarLab, Department of Otolaryngology, University Medical Center
Göttingen, Robert-Koch-Str. 40, 37075 Göttingen, Germany.
rutherford.neuro@yahoo.com

Hair cells mediate our senses of hearing and balance by synaptic release of
glutamate from somatic active zones (AZs). They share conserved mechanisms of
exocytosis with neurons and other secretory cells of diverse form and function.
Concurrently, AZs of these neuro-epithelial hair cells employ several processes
that differ remarkably from those of neuronal synaptic terminals of the brain.
Their unique molecular anatomy enables them to better respond to small, graded
changes in membrane potential and to produce unsurpassed rates of exocytosis.
Here, we focus on the AZs of cochlear inner hair cells (IHCs). As in other hair
cells, these AZs are occupied by a cytoplasmic extension of the presynaptic
density, called the synaptic ribbon: a specialized protein complex required for
normal physiological function. Some proteins found at IHC synapses are uniquely
expressed or enriched there, where their disruption can beget deafness in humans 
and in animal models. Other proteins, essential for regulation of conventional
neuronal Ca(2+)-triggered fusion, are apparently absent from IHCs. Certain common
synaptic proteins appear to have extra significance at ribbon-type AZs because of
their interactions with unique molecules, their unusual concentrations, or their 
atypical localization and regulation. We summarize the molecular-anatomical
specializations that underlie the unique synaptic physiology of hair cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22682011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Comp Neurol. 2013 Jan 1;521(1):69-78. doi: 10.1002/cne.23161.

Strain differences in illumination-dependent structural changes at mouse
photoreceptor ribbon synapses.

Fuchs M(1), Sendelbeck A, Atorf J, Kremers J, Brandstätter JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Animal Physiology, FAU Erlangen-Nuremberg, 91058
Erlangen, Germany.

Photoreceptor cells encode light signals over a wide range of intensities with
graded changes in their membrane potential. At their highly specialized ribbon
synapses they transmit the signals to the postsynaptic neurons by the tonic
release of glutamate, which is continuously adjusted to changes in light
intensity. Such a level of performance requires adaptive mechanisms, and it is
suggested that illumination-dependent changes in ribbon shape and size are one of
these adaptive processes. In this study we compared structural properties of
synaptic ribbons under various illumination conditions between three mouse
strains: the pigmented C57BL/6 and the two albino strains Balb/c and
B6(Cg)-Tyr(c-2J) /J (coisogenic to C57BL/6). In addition, electroretinograms
(ERGs) recorded in the same groups were compared. In the C57BL/6 mouse a change
in illumination did not result in structural alterations of the synaptic ribbon. 
Similarly, in the B6(Cg)-Tyr(c-2J) /J mouse only minor structural changes were
detected. In contrast, the state of adaptation had a large influence on the
ribbon structure of the Balb/c mouse. The ERG recordings showed only small
functional differences between C57BL/6 and B6(Cg)-Tyr(c-2J) /J mice, but the
retinal function of Balb/c mice was strongly compromised. We conclude that
illumination-dependent changes of photoreceptor ribbon structure differ between
strains and thus cannot be regarded as a general mechanism for light adaptation.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22678522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Am J Epidemiol. 2012 May 1;175(9):926-35. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwr423. Epub 2012 Mar 
29.

Interactions between genome-wide significant genetic variants and circulating
concentrations of insulin-like growth factor 1, sex hormones, and binding
proteins in relation to prostate cancer risk in the National Cancer Institute
Breast and Prostate Cancer Cohort Consortium.

Tsilidis KK(1), Travis RC, Appleby PN, Allen NE, Lindstrom S, Schumacher FR, Cox 
D, Hsing AW, Ma J, Severi G, Albanes D, Virtamo J, Boeing H, Bueno-de-Mesquita
HB, Johansson M, Quirós JR, Riboli E, Siddiq A, Tjønneland A, Trichopoulos D,
Tumino R, Gaziano JM, Giovannucci E, Hunter DJ, Kraft P, Stampfer MJ, Giles GG,
Andriole GL, Berndt SI, Chanock SJ, Hayes RB, Key TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epidemiology Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University
of Oxford, United Kingdom. kostas.tsilidis@ceu.ox.ac.uk

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified many single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with prostate cancer risk. There is limited
information on the mechanistic basis of these associations, particularly about
whether they interact with circulating concentrations of growth factors and sex
hormones, which may be important in prostate cancer etiology. Using conditional
logistic regression, the authors compared per-allele odds ratios for prostate
cancer for 39 GWAS-identified SNPs across thirds (tertile groups) of circulating 
concentrations of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), insulin-like growth
factor binding protein 3 (IGFBP-3), testosterone, androstenedione, androstanediol
glucuronide, estradiol, and sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) for 3,043 cases
and 3,478 controls in the Breast and Prostate Cancer Cohort Consortium. After
allowing for multiple testing, none of the SNPs examined were significantly
associated with growth factor or hormone concentrations, and the SNP-prostate
cancer associations did not differ by these concentrations, although 4
interactions were marginally significant (MSMB-rs10993994 with androstenedione
(uncorrected P = 0.008); CTBP2-rs4962416 with IGFBP-3 (uncorrected P = 0.003);
11q13.2-rs12418451 with IGF-1 (uncorrected P = 0.006); and 11q13.2-rs10896449
with SHBG (uncorrected P = 0.005)). The authors found no strong evidence that
associations between GWAS-identified SNPs and prostate cancer are modified by
circulating concentrations of IGF-1, sex hormones, or their major binding
proteins.

PMCID: PMC3390010
PMID: 22459122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Mol Histol. 2012 Jun;43(3):327-34. doi: 10.1007/s10735-012-9399-x. Epub 2012
Mar 17.

Involvement of CtBP2 in LPS-induced microglial activation.

Zhang G(1), Yan Y, Kang L, Cao Q, Ke K, Wu X, Gao Y, Hang Q, Li C, Zhu L, Yuan Q,
Wu Q, Cheng C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Medical College, Nantong University, 19 Qixiu Road, 
Nantong 226001, People's Republic of China.

CtBP2 (C-terminal binding protein 2), which is widely expressed during
developmental processes and differentiation, acts as a transcriptional repressor 
following recruitment to target promoters through repressors or other
co-repressor proteins. In this study, we elucidated the dynamic expression
changes and localization of CtBP2 in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced
neuroinflammatory processes in adult rats. CtBP2 expression was strongly induced 
in active glia cells (microglia and astrocytes) in inflamed spinal cord. In vitro
studies indicated that the up-regulation of CtBP2 may be involved in the
subsequent microglia activation following LPS exposure. And the knock-down of
CtBP2 in microglia cell line HAPI by siRNA showed that CtBP2 increased the
activation of microglia induced by LPS. Collectively, these results suggested
CtBP2 may be important in host defense in microglia-mediated immune response.
Understanding the cell signal pathway may provide a novel strategy against
inflammatory and immune reaction in neuroinflammation in central nervous system.

PMID: 22426895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Neurosci. 2011 Nov 2;31(44):15996-6011. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2965-11.2011.

The synaptic ribbon is a site of phosphatidic acid generation in ribbon synapses.

Schwarz K(1), Natarajan S, Kassas N, Vitale N, Schmitz F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Saarland
University Medical School, Homburg/Saar, 66421 Homburg/Saar, Germany.
dr.karin.schwarz@uks.eu

Ribbon synapses continuously transmit graded membrane potential changes into
changes of synaptic vesicle exocytosis and rely on intense synaptic membrane
trafficking. The synaptic ribbon is considered central to this process. In the
present study we asked whether tonically active ribbon synapses are associated
with the generation of certain lipids, specifically the highly active signaling
phospholipid phosphatidic acid (PA). Using PA-sensor proteins, we demonstrate
that PA is enriched at mouse retinal ribbon synapses in close vicinity to the
synaptic ribbon in situ. As shown by heterologous expression, RIBEYE, a main
component of synaptic ribbons, is responsible for PA binding at synaptic ribbons.
Furthermore, RIBEYE is directly involved in the synthesis of PA. Using various
independent substrate binding and enzyme assays, we demonstrate that the B domain
of RIBEYE possesses lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) acyltransferase (LPAAT) activity,
which leads to the generation of PA from LPA. Since an LPAAT-deficient RIBEYE
mutant does not recruit PA-binding proteins to artificial synaptic ribbons,
whereas wild-type RIBEYE supports PA binding, we conclude that the LPAAT activity
of the RIBEYE(B) domain is a physiologically relevant source of PA generation at 
the synaptic ribbon. We propose that PA generated at synaptic ribbons likely
facilitates synaptic vesicle trafficking.

PMID: 22049442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Proteome Res. 2012 Feb 3;11(2):982-94. doi: 10.1021/pr200740a. Epub 2011 Nov
18.

Triple SILAC to determine stimulus specific interactions in the Wnt pathway.

Hilger M(1), Mann M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of
Biochemistry , Am Klopferspitz 18, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany.

Many important regulatory functions are performed by dynamic multiprotein
complexes that adapt their composition and activity in response to different
stimuli. Here we employ quantitative affinity purification coupled with mass
spectrometry to efficiently separate background from specific interactors but add
an additional quantitative dimension to explicitly characterize
stimulus-dependent interactions. This is accomplished by SILAC in a
triple-labeling format, in which pull-downs with bait, with bait and stimulus,
and without bait are quantified against each other. As baits, we use full-length 
proteins fused to the green fluorescent protein and expressed under endogenous
control. We applied this technology to Wnt signaling, which is important in
development, tissue homeostasis, and cancer, and investigated interactions of the
key components APC, Axin-1, DVL2, and CtBP2 with differential pathway activation.
Our screens identify many known Wnt signaling complex components and link novel
candidates to Wnt signaling, including FAM83B and Girdin, which we found as
interactors to multiple Wnt pathway players. Girdin binds to DVL2 independent of 
stimulation with the ligand Wnt3a but to Axin-1 and APC in a stimulus-dependent
manner. The core destruction complex itself, which regulates beta-catenin
stability as the key step in canonical Wnt signaling, remained essentially
unchanged.

PMCID: PMC3271738
PMID: 22011079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Eur J Neurosci. 2011 Nov;34(9):1419-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2011.07861.x.
Epub 2011 Oct 17.

Carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII is expressed in rod bipolar cells and
alters signaling at the rod bipolar to AII-amacrine cell synapse in the mammalian
retina.

Puthussery T(1), Gayet-Primo J, Taylor WR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health and Sciences
University, Portland, OR, USA.

Mutation of the gene encoding carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII (CAVIII)
results in motor coordination deficits in mice and humans, due to loss of this
protein in Purkinje cells of the cerebellum. Recent studies have indicated that
the CAVIII gene, Car8, is also expressed in rod bipolar cells (RBCs), a critical 
glutamatergic neuron for scotopic vision. We investigated the localization of
CAVIII in the mouse and macaque retina, and utilized the wdl mouse, which has a
null mutation in the Car8 gene, to determine how the loss of CAVIII affects
retinal signaling. CAVIII immunoreactivity was observed in RBCs, with
particularly high staining intensity in the axon terminals. In addition, weaker
staining was observed in a subset of cone bipolar cells and <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid
(GABA)ergic amacrine cells. Light-evoked current and voltage responses of RBCs
were not altered in the wdl mutant. However, light-evoked current responses from 
the AII-amacrine cell, a postsynaptic partner at the RBC ribbon synapse, were
significantly larger, and more prolonged than in control mice. These changes
could not be attributed to alterations in calcium current activation or
inactivation, or to changes in the density of RBCs. Furthermore, no gross
synaptic alterations were evident in the wdl mutant at the light or
ultrastructural level. These data provide evidence that the CAVIII protein, which
is highly conserved in vertebrates, is selectively expressed within neural
circuits, and may be important for modulating retinal neurotransmission.

© 2011 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience © 2011 Federation of
European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3481853
PMID: 22004450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Curr Biol. 2011 Oct 11;21(19):R819-21. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.08.038.

Synaptic ribbons: machines for priming vesicle release?

Pelassa I(1), Lagnado L.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, CB2 0QH, UK.

Synaptic ribbons are specialized organelles that hold vesicles close to the
active zone of sensory synapses, but their function is mysterious. Acute
disruption of the ribbon complex using light has now revealed that it has a role 
in priming synaptic vesicles for fusion.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21996507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Neural Dev. 2011 Aug 24;6:31. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-6-31.

Coordinated increase in inhibitory and excitatory synapses onto retinal ganglion 
cells during development.

Soto F(1), Bleckert A, Lewis R, Kang Y, Kerschensteiner D, Craig AM, Wong RO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, 1950 Pacific
Ave, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

BACKGROUND: Neuronal output is shaped by a balance of excitation and inhibition. 
How this balance is attained in the central nervous system during development is 
not well understood, and is complicated by the fact that, in vivo, GABAergic and 
glycinergic synaptogenesis precedes that of glutamatergic synapses. Here, we
determined the distributions of inhibitory postsynaptic sites on the dendritic
arbors of individual neurons, and compared their developmental patterns with that
of excitatory postsynaptic sites. We focused on retinal ganglion cells (RGCs),
the output neurons of the retina, which receive excitatory input from bipolar
cells and inhibitory input from amacrine cells. To visualize and map inhibitory
postsynaptic sites, we generated transgenic mice in which RGCs express
fluorescently tagged Neuroligin 2 (YFP-NL2) under the control of the Thy1
promoter. By labeling RGC dendrites biolistically in YFP-NL2-expressing retinas, 
we were able to map the spatial distribution and thus densities of inhibitory
postsynaptic sites on the dendritic arbors of individual large-field RGCs across 
ages.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that YFP-NL2 is present at inhibitory synapses in the
inner plexiform layer by its co-localization with gephyrin, the <U+03B3>2 subunit of the
GABAA receptor and glycine receptors. YFP-NL2 puncta were apposed to the
vesicular inhibitory transmitter transporter VGAT but not to CtBP2, a marker of
presynaptic ribbons found at bipolar cell terminals. Similar patterns of
co-localization with synaptic markers were observed for endogenous NL2. We also
verified that expression of YFP-NL2 in the transgenic line did not significantly 
alter spontaneous inhibitory synaptic transmission onto RGCs. Using these mice,
we found that, on average, the density of inhibitory synapses on individual
arbors increased gradually until eye opening (postnatal day 15). A small
centro-peripheral gradient in density found in mature arbors was apparent at the 
earliest age we examined (postnatal day 8). Unexpectedly, the adult ratio of
inhibitory/excitatory postsynaptic sites was rapidly attained, shortly after
glutamatergic synaptogenesis commenced (postnatal day 7).
CONCLUSION: Our observations suggest that bipolar and amacrine cell
synaptogenesis onto RGCs appear coordinated to rapidly attain a balanced ratio of
excitatory and inhibitory synapse densities prior to the onset of visual
experience.

PMCID: PMC3179698
PMID: 21864334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Neurosci. 2011 Aug 3;31(31):11231-43. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2875-11.2011.

In situ visualization of protein interactions in sensory neurons: glutamic
acid-rich proteins (GARPs) play differential roles for photoreceptor outer
segment scaffolding.

Ritter LM(1), Khattree N, Tam B, Moritz OL, Schmitz F, Goldberg AF.

Author information: 
(1)Eye Research Institute, Oakland University, Rochester, Michigan 48309, USA.

Vertebrate photoreceptors initiate vision via a G-protein-mediated signaling
cascade organized within a specialized cilium, the outer segment (OS). The
membranous "stacked pancake" architecture of this organelle must be partially
renewed daily to maintain cell function and viability; however, neither its
static structure nor renewal process is well described in molecular terms.
Glutamic acid-rich proteins (GARPs), including the cyclic nucleotide-gated cation
channel (CNGB1) and GARP2 (a CNGB1 splice-variant), are proposed to contribute to
OS organization in concert with peripherin/rds (P/rds), a retinal tetraspanin. We
developed and applied an in situ fluorescence complementation approach that
offers an unprecedented glimpse at the formation, trafficking, and localization
of GARP-P/rds interactions in transgenic Xenopus laevis rod photoreceptors.
Interactions for these (and other) proteins could be readily visualized using
confocal microscopy. Nearly all associations, including CNGB1-P/rds interaction, 
were initiated within inner segments (ISs) before trafficking to OSs. In
contrast, GARP2-P/rds interactions were only observed downstream, at or near
sites of disk morphogenesis. These results suggest that GARP2-P/rds interaction
participates directly in structuring disk stacks but CNGB1-P/rds interaction does
not and instead serves mainly to localize plasma membrane ion channels.
Altogether, the results lead us to propose that differential interaction of GARPs
with P/rds may contribute to the broad phenotypic heterogeneity produced by
inherited defects in P/rds. Analogous experiments applied to the synaptic protein
RIBEYE suggest that monomers can oligomerize at the level of the IS before ribbon
assembly and demonstrate the general applicability of this strategy for in situ
analysis of protein interactions in sensory neurons.

PMCID: PMC3158677
PMID: 21813684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Nat Neurosci. 2011 Jul 24;14(9):1135-41. doi: 10.1038/nn.2870.

Acute destruction of the synaptic ribbon reveals a role for the ribbon in vesicle
priming.

Snellman J(1), Mehta B, Babai N, Bartoletti TM, Akmentin W, Francis A, Matthews
G, Thoreson W, Zenisek D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2011 Sep;14(9):1097-8.

In vision, balance and hearing, sensory receptor cells translate sensory stimuli 
into electrical signals whose amplitude is graded with stimulus intensity. The
output synapses of these sensory neurons must provide fast signaling to follow
rapidly changing stimuli while also transmitting graded information covering a
wide range of stimulus intensity and must be able to sustain this signaling for
long time periods. To meet these demands, specialized machinery for transmitter
release, the synaptic ribbon, has evolved at the synaptic outputs of these
neurons. We found that acute disruption of synaptic ribbons by photodamage to the
ribbon markedly reduced both sustained and transient components of
neurotransmitter release in mouse bipolar cells and salamander cones without
affecting the ultrastructure of the ribbon or its ability to localize synaptic
vesicles to the active zone. Our results indicate that ribbons mediate both slow 
and fast signaling at sensory synapses and support an additional role for the
synaptic ribbon in priming vesicles for exocytosis at active zones.

PMCID: PMC3171202
PMID: 21785435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Sep 15;20(18):3554-64. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr273. Epub 2011 Jun
10.

APC mutations in colorectal tumours from FAP patients are selected for
CtBP-mediated oligomerization of truncated APC.

Schneikert J(1), Brauburger K, Behrens J.

Author information: 
(1)Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Center for Molecular Medicine, University of
Erlangen-Nu¨rnberg, Glu¨ckstrasse 6, 91054 Erlangen,Germany.
jschneik@molmed.uni-erlangen.de

The germline transmission of a mutation in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC)
gene leads to cancer of the gastro-intestinal tract upon somatic inactivation of 
the remaining allele in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) patients. APC
mutations result in truncated products that have primarily lost the ability to
properly regulate the level of the transcription factor ß-catenin. However,
colorectal cancer cells from FAP patients always retain a truncated APC product
and the reasons for this strong selective pressure are not understood. We
describe here the surprising property for the transcriptional repressor
C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) to promote the oligomerization of truncated APC
through binding to the 15 amino acid repeats of truncated APC. CtBP can bind to
either first, third or fourth 15 amino acid repeats, but not to the second.
CtBP-mediated oligomerization requires both dimerization domains of truncated APC
as well as CtBP dimerization. The analysis of the position of the mutations along
the APC sequence in adenomas from FAP patients reveals that the presence of the
first 15 amino acid repeat is almost always selected in the resulting truncated
APC product. This suggests that the sensitivity of truncated APC to
oligomerization by CtBP constitutes an essential facet of tumour development.

PMID: 21665989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Mol Cancer Res. 2011 Jul;9(7):867-77. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0475. Epub
2011 Jun 2.

The ARF tumor suppressor inhibits tumor cell colonization independent of p53 in a
novel mouse model of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma metastasis.

Muniz VP(1), Barnes JM, Paliwal S, Zhang X, Tang X, Chen S, Zamba KD, Cullen JJ, 
Meyerholz DK, Meyers S, Davis JN, Grossman SR, Henry MD, Quelle DE.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Graduate Program, The University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is an incurable, highly metastatic
disease that is largely resistant to existing treatments. A better understanding 
of the genetic basis of PDAC metastasis should facilitate development of improved
therapies. To that end, we developed a novel mouse xenograft model of PDAC
metastasis to expedite testing of candidate genes associated with the disease.
Human PDAC cell lines BxPC-3, MiaPaCa-2, and Panc-1 stably expressing luciferase 
were generated and introduced by intracardiac injections into immunodeficient
mice to model hematogenous dissemination of cancer cells. Tumor development was
monitored by bioluminescence imaging. Bioluminescent MiaPaCa-2 cells most
effectively recapitulated PDAC tumor development and metastatic distribution in
vivo. Tumors formed in nearly 90% of mice and in multiple tissues, including
normal sites of PDAC metastasis. Effects of p14ARF, a known suppressor of PDAC,
were tested to validate the model. In vitro, p14ARF acted through a
CtBP2-dependent, p53-independent pathway to inhibit MiaPaCa-2-invasive
phenotypes, which correlated with reduced tumor cell colonization in vivo. These 
findings establish a new bioluminescent mouse tumor model for rapidly assessing
the biological significance of suspected PDAC metastasis genes. This system may
also provide a valuable platform for testing innovative therapies.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3140613
PMID: 21636682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Development. 2011 Apr;138(7):1309-19. doi: 10.1242/dev.059451. Epub 2011 Feb 24.

Ribeye is required for presynaptic Ca(V)1.3a channel localization and afferent
innervation of sensory hair cells.

Sheets L(1), Trapani JG, Mo W, Obholzer N, Nicolson T.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Oregon Hearing Research Center, 3181 SW Sam
Jackson Park Road, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239, USA.

Ribbon synapses of the ear, eye and pineal gland contain a unique protein
component: Ribeye. Ribeye consists of a novel aggregation domain spliced to the
transcription factor CtBP2 and is one of the most abundant proteins in synaptic
ribbon bodies. Although the importance of Ribeye for the function and physical
integrity of ribbon synapses has been shown, a specific role in synaptogenesis
has not been described. Here, we have modulated Ribeye expression in zebrafish
hair cells and have examined the role of Ribeye in synapse development. Knockdown
of ribeye resulted in fewer stimulus-evoked action potentials from afferent
neurons and loss of presynaptic Ca(V)1.3a calcium channel clusters in hair cells.
Additionally, afferent innervation of hair cells was reduced in ribeye morphants,
and the reduction was correlated with depletion of Ribeye punctae. By contrast,
transgenic overexpression of Ribeye resulted in Ca(V)1.3a channels colocalized
with ectopic aggregates of Ribeye protein. Overexpression of Ribeye, however, was
not sufficient to create ectopic synapses. These findings reveal two distinct
functions of Ribeye in ribbon synapse formation--clustering Ca(V)1.3a channels at
the presynapse and stabilizing contacts with afferent neurons--and suggest that
Ribeye plays an organizing role in synaptogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3050663
PMID: 21350006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 May;1813(5):713-22. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2011.01.035.
Epub 2011 Feb 23.

Ataxin-1 occupies the promoter region of E-cadherin in vivo and activates
CtBP2-repressed promoter.

Lee S(1), Hong S, Kim S, Kang S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, 1, 5ka,
Anam-dong, Sungbuk-gu, Seoul 136-701, Republic of Korea.

Ataxin-1 is a polyglutamine protein of unknown function that is encoded by the
ATXN1 gene in humans. To gain insight into the function of ataxin-1, we sought to
identify proteins that interact with ataxin-1 through yeast two-hybrid screening.
In this study, transcriptional corepressor CtBP2 was identified as a protein that
interacted with ataxin-1. CtBP2 and ataxin-1 colocalized in the nucleus of
mammalian cells. Since the E-cadherin promoter is a target of CtBP-mediated
repression, the relationship between ataxin-1 and the E-cadherin promoter was
investigated. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that CtBP2 and ataxin-1
were recruited to the E-cadherin promoter in mammalian cells. Luciferase assays
using E-cadherin promoter reporter constructs revealed that the luciferase
activity was enhanced as the level of ataxin-1 protein expression increased.
CtBP2 overexpression decreased E-cadherin expression, but expression of ataxin-1 
inversely increased the mRNA and protein levels of endogenous E-cadherin.
Interestingly, siRNA experiments showed that the transcriptional activation of
ataxin-1 was associated with the presence of CtBP2. This study demonstrates that 
ataxin-1 occupies the promoter region of E-cadherin in vivo and that ataxin-1
activates the promoter in a CtBP2-mediated transcriptional regulation manner.
This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: 11th European Symposium on
Calcium.

2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21315774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Neurosci. 2011 Jan 19;31(3):801-8. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3389-10.2011.

Opposing gradients of ribbon size and AMPA receptor expression underlie
sensitivity differences among cochlear-nerve/hair-cell synapses.

Liberman LD(1), Wang H, Liberman MC.

Author information: 
(1)Eaton-Peabody Laboratory, Massachusetts Eye & Ear Infirmary, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114-3096, USA.

The auditory system transduces sound-evoked vibrations over a range of input
sound pressure levels spanning six orders of magnitude. An important component of
the system mediating this impressive dynamic range is established in the cochlear
sensory epithelium, where functional subtypes of cochlear nerve fibers differ in 
threshold sensitivity, and spontaneous discharge rate (SR), by more than a factor
of 1000 (Liberman, 1978), even though, regardless of type, each fiber contacts
only a single hair cell via a single ribbon synapse. To study the mechanisms
underlying this remarkable heterogeneity in threshold sensitivity among the 5-30 
primary sensory fibers innervating a single inner hair cell, we quantified the
sizes of presynaptic ribbons and postsynaptic AMPA receptor patches in >1200
synapses, using high-power confocal imaging of mouse cochleas immunostained for
CtBP2 (C-terminal binding protein 2, a major ribbon protein) and GluR2/3
(glutamate receptors 2 and 3). We document complementary gradients, most striking
in mid-cochlear regions, whereby synapses from the modiolar face and/or basal
pole of the inner hair cell have larger ribbons and smaller receptor patches than
synapses located in opposite regions of the cell. The AMPA receptor expression
gradient likely contributes to the differences in cochlear nerve threshold and SR
seen on the two sides of the hair cell in vivo (Liberman, 1982a); the differences
in ribbon size may contribute to the heterogeneity of EPSC waveforms seen in
vitro (Grant et al., 2010).

PMCID: PMC3290333
PMID: 21248103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Mar;31(5):955-70. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01062-10. Epub 2011 Jan 3.

CtBP2 downregulation during neural crest specification induces expression of Mitf
and REST, resulting in melanocyte differentiation and sympathoadrenal lineage
suppression.

Liang H(1), Fekete DM, Andrisani OM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Purdue University, 625 Harrison Street, 
West Lafayette, IN 47907-2026, USA.

Trunk neural crest (NC) cells differentiate to neurons, melanocytes, and glia. In
NC cultures, cyclic AMP (cAMP) induces melanocyte differentiation while
suppressing the neuronal sympathoadrenal lineage, depending on the signal
intensity. Melanocyte differentiation requires activation of CREB and
cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA), but the role of PKA is not understood. We 
have demonstrated, in NC cultures, cAMP-induced transcription of the
microphthalmia-associated transcription factor gene (Mitf) and the RE-1 silencing
transcription factor gene (REST), both Wnt-regulated genes. In NC cultures and
zebrafish, knockdown of the corepressor of Wnt-mediated transcription C-terminal 
binding protein 2 (CtBP2) but not CtBP1 derepressed Mitf and REST expression and 
enhanced melanocyte differentiation. cAMP in NC and B16 melanoma cells decreased 
CtBP2 protein levels, while inhibition of PKA or proteasome rescued CtBP2
degradation. Interestingly, knockdown of homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 2
(HIPK2), a CtBP stability modulator, increased CtBP2 levels, suppressed
expression of Mitf, REST, and melanocyte differentiation, and increased neuronal 
gene expression and sympathoadrenal lineage differentiation. We conclude that
cAMP/PKA via HIPK2 promotes CtBP2 degradation, leading to Mitf and REST
expression. Mitf induces melanocyte specification, and REST suppresses
neuron-specific gene expression and the sympathoadrenal lineage. Our studies
identify a novel role for REST in NC cell differentiation and suggest cross talk 
between cAMP and Wnt signaling in NC lineage specification.

PMCID: PMC3067817
PMID: 21199918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Vis. 2010 Dec 12;16:2690-700.

Stability of active zone components at the photoreceptor ribbon complex.

Regus-Leidig H(1), Specht D, Tom Dieck S, Brandstätter JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Animal Physiology, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg,
Erlangen, Germany.

PURPOSE: Photoreceptor ribbon synapses translate light-dependent changes of
membrane potential into graded transmitter release over several orders of
magnitude in intensity. A specialized organelle at the active zone--the synaptic 
ribbon--is a key player in this process, and it is well known that the ribbon
undergoes illumination and thus activity-dependent structural changes. However,
the molecular basis for these changes is unknown. The aim of this study was to
correlate the known ultrastructural ribbon changes to the distribution of
proteins of the presynaptic ribbon complex.
METHODS: In an in vitro assay, two distinct structural ribbon states--club-shaped
and spherical-shaped--were enriched and the distribution of presynaptic proteins 
at the rod photoreceptor ribbon complex was analyzed with immunocytochemistry and
light and electron microscopy.
RESULTS: We show that structural changes of the ribbon correlate with the
redistribution of selected presynaptic proteins. The disassembly of the ribbon
complex seems to be a multistep process, which starts with the removal of
spherical ribbon material while arciform density and active zone plasma membrane 
proteins remain largely unchanged at their synaptic location. Only later, in a
second phase following the removal of ribbon material, the arciform density and
plasma membrane proteins are redistributed from their synaptic localization and
active zones disappear.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of our study show that photoreceptor ribbon and arciform
density/plasma membrane components might be influenced differentially by
activity-driven processes, thus providing a molecular basis for further
investigation of regulatory and adaptive processes in photoreceptor ribbon
synaptic transmission.

PMCID: PMC3002953
PMID: 21179232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Oncogene. 2011 Mar 17;30(11):1272-80. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.507. Epub 2010 Nov 8.

CtBPs promote mitotic fidelity through their activities in the cell nucleus.

Birts CN(1), Bergman LM, Blaydes JP.

Author information: 
(1)Southampton Cancer Research UK Centre, University of Southampton School of
Medicine, Southampton, Hampshire, UK.

CtBPs form NADH-sensitive chromatin-modifying complexes, which link cellular
metabolism to gene transcription. They also function in the cytoplasm to regulate
Golgi fissioning; their inhibition can consequently cause a Golgi-dependent
checkpoint in G(2). We have recently identified a novel role of CtBPs in the
maintenance of mitotic fidelity; inhibition of CtBP synthesis resulting in
reduced association of aurora B with mitotic chromatin and aberrant segregation
of chromosomes. Here, we demonstrate that it is the interaction of CtBPs with
transcriptional regulators and/or chromatin-modifying enzymes in the cell
nucleus, rather than their role in Golgi fission, which is critical for the
maintenance of mitotic fidelity.

PMID: 21057548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Biol Cell. 2010 Jan;103(1):1-19. doi: 10.1042/BC20100067.

Expression of CtBP family protein isoforms in breast cancer and their role in
chemoresistance.

Birts CN(1), Harding R, Soosaipillai G, Halder T, Azim-Araghi A, Darley M,
Cutress RI, Bateman AC, Blaydes JP.

Author information: 
(1)Southampton Cancer Research UK Centre (MP824), University of Southampton
School of Medicine, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK.

BACKGROUND INFORMATION: CtBPs [C-terminal (of E1A) binding protein] have roles in
the nucleus as transcriptional co-repressors, and in the cytoplasm in the
maintenance of vesicular membranes. CtBPs are expressed from two genes, CTBP1 and
CTBP2, mRNA products of which are alternatively spliced at their 5'-ends to
generate distinct protein isoforms. Extensive molecular and cellular analyses
have identified CtBPs as regulators of pathways critical for tumour initiation,
progression and response to therapy. However, little is known of the expression
or regulation of CtBP isoforms in human cancer, nor of the relative contributions
of CTBP1 and CTBP2 to the tumour cell phenotype.
RESULTS: Expression of CtBP proteins and CTBP1 and CTBP2 mRNA splice forms in
breast cancer cell lines and tumour tissue was examined. CtBP1 proteins are
identifiable as a single band on Western blots and are ubiquitously detectable in
breast tumour samples, by both Western blotting and immunohistochemistry. CtBP1
is present in six of six breast cancer cell lines, although it is barely
detectable in SKBr3 cells due to reduced CTBP1 mRNA expression. In the cell
lines, the predominant CTBP1 mRNA splice form encodes CtBP1-S protein; in
tumours, both major CTBP1 mRNA splice forms are variably expressed. CtBP2
proteins are ubiquitously expressed in all lines and tumour samples. The
predominant CTBP2 mRNA encodes CtBP2-L, although an alternatively spliced form
that encodes CtBP2-S, previously unidentified in humans, is expressed at low
abundance. Both CtBP2-L and CtBP2-S are readily detectable as two distinct bands 
on Western blots; here we show that the CTBP2-L mRNA is translated from two AUG
codons to generate both CtBP2-L and CtBP2-S. We have also identified an
autoregulatory feedback mechanism whereby CtBP protein abundance is maintained in
proliferating breast cancer cells through the post-transcriptional regulation of 
CtBP2. This feedback is disrupted by UV-C radiation or exposure to cisplatin.
Finally, we demonstrate that CtBP1 and CtBP2 both have p53-dependent and
-independent roles in suppressing the sensitivity of breast cancer cells to
mechanistically diverse cancer chemotherapeutic agents.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies support recent evidence that CtBP family proteins
represent potential targets for therapeutic strategies for the treatment of
cancer in general, and breast cancer in particular.

PMCID: PMC2995425
PMID: 20964627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Neurosci. 2010 Sep 15;30(37):12387-99. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1014-10.2010.

Molecular anatomy of the hair cell's ribbon synapse.

Uthaiah RC(1), Hudspeth AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Laboratory of Sensory Neuroscience, The
Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10065, USA.

Hearing depends on reliable and temporally precise neurotransmission by cochlear 
hair cells. The wide dynamic range and high sensitivity with which these cells
encode acoustic stimuli are associated with a presynaptic specialization termed
the presynaptic dense body or synaptic ribbon. Apposed to the presynaptic
density, this spherical or flattened structure tethers a layer of synaptic
vesicles and is thought to facilitate their exocytotic fusion. Although defining 
the molecular constituents of the hair cell's synaptic ribbon should contribute
to our understanding of neurotransmitter release at this synapse, accomplishing
this task has been slowed by the difficulty of obtaining sufficient amounts of
starting material for protein analysis from hair cells. We isolated synaptic
material from chicken cochleas, purified synaptic ribbons with specific
immunological reagents, and identified the associated proteins by tandem mass
spectrometry. Purification of the ribbons revealed a predominant composition of
C-terminal-binding proteins, especially ribeye, in association with the small
GTPase Rab3, which is possibly involved in attaching vesicles to the ribbon. In
comparison with the components of conventional synapses and of retinal ribbon
synapses, we observed that certain regulatory proteins are excluded from the hair
cell's synapse. Using antisera against several of the novel proteins and
membrane-trafficking components that we had identified, we documented their
localization in isolated hair cells. Our results indicate that the ribbon
synapses of hair cells display modifications to the presynaptic machinery that
are associated with the high-fidelity transmission of acoustic signals to the
brain.

PMCID: PMC2945476
PMID: 20844134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Nat Cell Biol. 2010 Oct;12(10):933-42. doi: 10.1038/ncb2096. Epub 2010 Sep 12.

Control of endothelial sprouting by a Tel-CtBP complex.

Roukens MG(1), Alloul-Ramdhani M, Baan B, Kobayashi K, Peterson-Maduro J, van Dam
H, Schulte-Merker S, Baker DA.

Author information: 
(1)Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC), Section of Growth Control and
Transcription, Department of Molecular Cell Biology, 2300 RC Leiden, The
Netherlands.

We show that the transcriptional repressor Tel plays an evolutionarily conserved 
role in angiogenesis: it is indispensable for the sprouting of human endothelial 
cells and for normal development of the Danio rerio blood circulatory system. Tel
orchestrates endothelial sprouting by binding to the generic co-repressor, CtBP. 
The Tel-CtBP complex temporally restricts a VEGF (vascular endothelial growth
factor)-mediated pulse of dll4 expression and thereby directly links VEGF
receptor intracellular signalling and intercellular Notch-Dll4 signalling. It
further controls branching by regulating expression of other factors that
constrain angiogenesis such as sprouty family members and ve-cadherin. Thus, the 
Tel-CtBP complex conditions endothelial cells for angiogenesis by controlling the
balance between stimulatory and antagonistic sprouting cues. Tel control of
branching seems to be a refinement of invertebrate tracheae morphogenesis that
requires Yan, the invertebrate orthologue of Tel. This work highlights Tel and
its associated networks as potential targets for the development of therapeutic
strategies to inhibit pathological angiogenesis.

PMID: 20835243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Neural Dev. 2010 Sep 1;5:24. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-5-24.

Enrichment and differential targeting of complexins 3 and 4 in ribbon-containing 
sensory neurons during zebrafish development.

Zanazzi G(1), Matthews G.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Neuroscience, State University of New York, Stony Brook,
NY 11794, USA.

BACKGROUND: In sensory systems with broad bandwidths, polarized receptor cells
utilize highly specialized organelles in their apical and basolateral
compartments to transduce and ultimately transmit signals to the rest of the
nervous system. While progress has been made in elucidating the assembly of the
transduction apparatus, the development of synaptic ribbon-containing terminals
remains poorly understood. To begin to delineate the targeting of the exocytotic 
machinery specifically in ribbon-containing neurons, we have examined the
expression of complexins 3 and 4 in the zebrafish visual and acousticolateral
systems during the first week of development.
RESULTS: We have identified five members of the complexin 3/4 subfamily in
zebrafish that show 50 to 75% amino acid identity with mammalian complexins 3 and
4. Utilizing a polyclonal antibody that recognizes all five orthologs, we
demonstrate that these proteins are enriched in ribbon-containing sensory
neurons. Complexin 3/4 is rapidly targeted to presynaptic terminals in the pineal
organ and retina concomitantly with RIBEYE b, a component of ribbons. In hair
cells of the inner ear and lateral line, however, complexin 3/4 immunoreactivity 
clusters on the apical surfaces of hair cells, among their stereocilia, rather
than along the basolateral plasma membrane with RIBEYE b. A complexin 4a-specific
antibody selectively labels the presynaptic terminals of visual system
ribbon-containing neurons.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide evidence for the concurrent transport and/or
assembly of multiple components of the active zone in developing ribbon
terminals. Members of the complexin 3/4 subfamily are enriched in these terminals
in the visual system and in hair bundles of the acousticolateral system,
suggesting that these proteins are differentially targeted and may have multiple 
roles in ribbon-containing sensory neurons.

PMCID: PMC2941751
PMID: 20809954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Dev Biol. 2010 Sep 15;345(2):191-203. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.07.009. Epub 2010
Jul 14.

Pinin modulates expression of an intestinal homeobox gene, Cdx2, and plays an
essential role for small intestinal morphogenesis.

Joo JH(1), Taxter TJ, Munguba GC, Kim YH, Dhaduvai K, Dunn NW, Degan WJ, Oh SP,
Sugrue SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida College of
Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA.

Pinin (Pnn), a nuclear speckle-associated protein, has been shown to function in 
maintenance of epithelial integrity through altering expression of several key
adhesion molecules. Here we demonstrate that Pnn plays a crucial role in small
intestinal development by influencing expression of an intestinal homeobox gene, 
Cdx2. Conditional inactivation of Pnn within intestinal epithelia resulted in
significant downregulation of a caudal type homeobox gene, Cdx2, leading to
obvious villus dysmorphogenesis and severely disrupted epithelial
differentiation. Additionally, in Pnn-deficient small intestine, we observed
upregulated Tcf/Lef reporter activity, as well as misregulated
expression/distribution of beta-catenin and Tcf4. Since regulation of Cdx gene
expression has been closely linked to Wnt/beta-catenin signaling activity, we
explored the possibility of Pnn's interaction with beta-catenin, a major effector
of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. Co-immunoprecipitation assays revealed
that Pnn, together with its interaction partner CtBP2, a transcriptional
co-repressor, was in a complex with beta-catenin. Moreover, both of these
proteins were found to be recruited to the proximal promoter area of Cdx2. Taken 
together, our results suggest that Pnn is essential for tight regulation of Wnt
signaling and Cdx2 expression during small intestinal development.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2949054
PMID: 20637749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Neuron. 2010 Jun 24;66(6):884-95. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.05.010.

SV2 acts via presynaptic calcium to regulate neurotransmitter release.

Wan QF(1), Zhou ZY, Thakur P, Vila A, Sherry DM, Janz R, Heidelberger R.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Texas Medical School
at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Synaptic vesicle 2 (SV2) proteins, critical for proper nervous system function,
are implicated in human epilepsy, yet little is known about their function. We
demonstrate, using direct approaches, that loss of the major SV2 isoform in a
central nervous system nerve terminal is associated with an elevation in both
resting and evoked presynaptic Ca(2+) signals. This increase is essential for the
expression of the SV2B(-/-) secretory phenotype, characterized by changes in
synaptic vesicle dynamics, synaptic plasticity, and synaptic strength. Short-term
reproduction of the Ca(2+) phenotype in wild-type nerve terminals reproduces
almost all aspects of the SV2B(-/-) secretory phenotype, while rescue of the
Ca(2+) phenotype in SV2B(-/-) neurons relieves every facet of the SV2B(-/-)
secretory phenotype. Thus, SV2 controls key aspects of synaptic functionality via
its ability to regulate presynaptic Ca(2+), suggesting a potential new target for
therapeutic intervention in the treatment of epilepsy.

PMCID: PMC2913707
PMID: 20620874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2010;152 Suppl 1:18-21. doi: 10.1159/000312121. Epub
2010 Jun 4.

Selective down-regulation of Th2 cytokines by C-terminal binding protein 2 in
human T cells.

Kitamura F(1), Kitamura N, Mori A, Tatsumi H, Nemoto S, Miyoshi H, Miyatake S,
Hiroi T, Kaminuma O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Immunology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Among several C-terminal binding proteins (CtBPs), friend of GATA
(FOG) has been implicated in the down-regulation of GATA-3-mediated Th2 cell
differentiation. Here we investigated the role of CtBP2 in Th1 and Th2 cytokine
expression in human T cells.
METHODS: CtBP2 was introduced into human peripheral CD4+ T cells by a lentiviral 
transduction system. Subsequently, the expression of Th1 and Th2 cytokine mRNA
was determined by quantitative real-time RT-PCR.
RESULTS: CtBP2 significantly suppressed stimulation-induced expression of IL-4,
IL-5 and IL-13 in human T cells. However, IFN-gamma expression was not affected
by the introduction of CtBP2.
CONCLUSION: CtBP2 selectively down-regulates Th2 cytokines, therefore it is a
potential target for the treatment of allergic diseases.

(c) 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20523059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Neurosci. 2010 Jun 2;30(22):7587-97. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0389-10.2010.

Onset coding is degraded in auditory nerve fibers from mutant mice lacking
synaptic ribbons.

Buran BN(1), Strenzke N, Neef A, Gundelfinger ED, Moser T, Liberman MC.

Author information: 
(1)Eaton-Peabody Laboratory, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114, USA. bburan@alum.mit.edu

Erratum in
    J Neurosci. 2012 Apr 18;32(16):5704.

Synaptic ribbons, found at the presynaptic membrane of sensory cells in both ear 
and eye, have been implicated in the vesicle-pool dynamics of synaptic
transmission. To elucidate ribbon function, we characterized the response
properties of single auditory nerve fibers in mice lacking Bassoon, a scaffolding
protein involved in anchoring ribbons to the membrane. In bassoon mutants,
immunohistochemistry showed that fewer than 3% of the hair cells' afferent
synapses retained anchored ribbons. Auditory nerve fibers from mutants had normal
threshold, dynamic range, and postonset adaptation in response to tone bursts,
and they were able to phase lock with normal precision to amplitude-modulated
tones. However, spontaneous and sound-evoked discharge rates were reduced, and
the reliability of spikes, particularly at stimulus onset, was significantly
degraded as shown by an increased variance of first-spike latencies. Modeling
based on in vitro studies of normal and mutant hair cells links these findings to
reduced release rates at the synapse. The degradation of response reliability in 
these mutants suggests that the ribbon and/or Bassoon normally facilitate high
rates of exocytosis and that its absence significantly compromises the temporal
resolving power of the auditory system.

PMCID: PMC2901931
PMID: 20519533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Neurosci. 2010 May 12;30(19):6559-76. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3701-09.2010.

Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide-dependent binding of the neuronal Ca2+ sensor
protein GCAP2 to photoreceptor synaptic ribbons.

Venkatesan JK(1), Natarajan S, Schwarz K, Mayer SI, Alpadi K, Magupalli VG, Sung 
CH, Schmitz F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Saarland
University Medical School, 66421 Homburg/Saar, Germany.

Guanylate cyclase activating protein 2 (GCAP2) is a recoverin-like Ca2+-sensor
protein known to modulate guanylate cyclase activity in photoreceptor outer
segments. GCAP2 is also present in photoreceptor ribbon synapses where its
function is unknown. Synaptic ribbons are active zone-associated presynaptic
structures in the tonically active photoreceptor ribbon synapses and contain
RIBEYE as a unique and major protein component. In the present study, we
demonstrate by various independent approaches that GCAP2 specifically interacts
with RIBEYE in photoreceptor synapses. We show that the flexible hinge 2 linker
region of RIBEYE(B) domain that connects the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NADH)-binding subdomain with the substrate-binding subdomain (SBD) binds to the 
C terminus of GCAP2. We demonstrate that the RIBEYE-GCAP2 interaction is induced 
by the binding of NADH to RIBEYE. RIBEYE-GCAP2 interaction is modulated by the
SBD. GCAP2 is strongly expressed in synaptic terminals of light-adapted
photoreceptors where GCAP2 is found close to synaptic ribbons as judged by
confocal microscopy and proximity ligation assays. Virus-mediated overexpression 
of GCAP2 in photoreceptor synaptic terminals leads to a reduction in the number
of synaptic ribbons. Therefore, GCAP2 is a prime candidate for mediating
Ca2+-dependent dynamic changes of synaptic ribbons in photoreceptor synapses.

PMCID: PMC3900572
PMID: 20463219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 28;285(22):16967-77. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.102046. Epub
2010 Apr 2.

Acetylation of lysine 564 adjacent to the C-terminal binding protein-binding
motif in EVI1 is crucial for transcriptional activation of GATA2.

Shimahara A(1), Yamakawa N, Nishikata I, Morishita K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tumor and Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Medical Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki 889-1692, Japan.

Ecotropic viral integration site 1 (EVI1) is an important transcription factor
for leukemogenesis. EVI1 is a member of a group of transcription factors with
C-terminal binding protein (CtBP)-binding motifs that act as transcriptional
co-repressors; however, we recently found that EVI1 directly activates GATA2
transcription, which is an important gene for the maintenance of hematopoietic
stem cells. We show here that EVI1-activated GATA2 transcripts derive from exon
1S of GATA2, which is specifically activated in neural and hematopoietic cells.
EVI1 was acetylated by the histone acetyltransferase p300/CBP association factor 
(P/CAF) in myeloid leukemia cells and hematopoietic progenitor cells. Acetylation
at Lys(564), which is adjacent to the CtBP-binding consensus sequence of EVI1,
was found to be important for transcriptional activation of GATA2. Mutation of
Lys(564) to alanine (K564A) markedly reduced the ability of EVI1 to bind DNA and 
activate transcription of GATA2. Furthermore, we confirmed that Lys(564) in EVI1 
was specifically acetylated in leukemia and primary hematopoietic cells by using 
an antibody directed against an acetylated Lys(564) EVI1 peptide. Moreover,
co-transfection of P/CAF with EVI1 overcame the suppressive effect of the CtBP
co-repressor and resulted in GATA2 transcriptional activation; nonetheless, CtBP2
was still included in the protein complex with EVI1 and P/CAF on the EVI1-binding
site in the GATA2 promoter region. Thus, acetylation of EVI1 at Lys(564) by P/CAF
enhances the DNA binding capacity of EVI1 and thereby contributes to the
activation of GATA2.

PMCID: PMC2878005
PMID: 20363750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2010;664:671-8. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-1399-9_77.

Adeno-associated virus serotype-9 mediated retinal outer plexiform layer
transduction is mainly through the photoreceptors.

Lei B(1), Zhang K, Yue Y, Ghosh A, Duan D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing, China. bolei99@126.com

Due to its high ocular transduction, low immune clearance and capability to
bypass the brain blood barrier, adeno-associated virus-9 (AAV9) has been regarded
as a promising vector for retinal disease gene therapy. We recently demonstrated 
that AAV9 efficiently transduces the retinal outer plexiform layer (OPL). The OPL
consists of synapses formed between axons of the rod and cone photoreceptors
(cell bodies in the outer nuclear layer, ONL) and dendrites of bipolar and
horizontal cells (cell bodies in the inner nuclear layer, INL). It is not clear
whether AAV9 transduces the OPL through the photoreceptors in the ONL or through 
bipolar and horizontal cells in the INL. To map the subcelluar pathway(s)
involved in AAV9-mediated OPL transduction, we delivered subretinally
AAV9.CMV.eGFP, an AAV vector carrying the enhanced green fluorescent protein gene
(eGFP, 1 x 10(10) viral genome particles in microliter), to young (21-day-old)
and adult (2- to 3-month-old) C57BL/6 mice. Four weeks after subretinal
injection, eGFP expression was examined on retinal cryosections. PSD95
(postsynaptic density protein, a marker for photoreceptor terminals), CtBP2
(C-terminal binding protein 2, a marker for the photoreceptor synaptic ribbon),
PKCalpha (protein kinase Calpha, a marker for rod bipolar cells), and calbindin
(a marker for horizontal cells) were localized by immunofluorescence staining. In
AAV9 infected retina, eGFP expression was seen in the retinal pigment epithelia, 
photoreceptor inner segments, ONL, OPL, Müller cells in the INL, inner plexiform 
layer and ganglion cell layer. Interestingly, eGFP expression co-localized with
PSD95 and CtBP2, but not with PKCalpha and calbindin. Our results suggest that
AAV9 transduces the photoreceptor side of the synapses in the OPL rather than the
dendrites of bipolar and horizontal cells.

PMID: 20238072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2010;664:89-96. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-1399-9_11.

Tubby-like protein 1 (Tulp1) is required for normal photoreceptor synaptic
development.

Grossman GH(1), Pauer GJ, Narendra U, Hagstrom SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmic Research, Cole Eye Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Mutations in the photoreceptor-specific tubby-like protein 1 (TULP1) underlie a
form of autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa in humans and photoreceptor
degeneration in mice. In wild type (wt) mice, Tulp1 is localized to the
photoreceptor inner segment, connecting cilium and synapse. To investigate the
role of Tulp1 in the synapse, we examined the pre- and postsynaptic architecture 
in tulp1-/- mice. We used immunohistochemistry to examine tulp1-/- mice prior to 
retinal degeneration and made comparisons to wt littermates and rd10 mice. In the
tulp1-/- synapse, the spatial relationship between the ribbon-associated
proteins, Bassoon and Piccolo, are disrupted, and few intact ribbons are present.
Furthermore, bipolar cell dendrites are stunted, most likely a direct consequence
of the malformed photoreceptor synapses. Comparable abnormalities are not seen in
rd10 mice. The association of early onset and severe photoreceptor degeneration, 
which is preceded by synaptic abnormalities, appears to represent a phenotype not
previously described. Our new evidence indicates that Tulp1 is not only critical 
for photoreceptor function and survival, but is essential for the proper
development of the photoreceptor synapse.

PMID: 20238006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Neuroscience. 2010 Feb 3;165(3):955-67. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.10.054. 
Epub 2009 Oct 31.

Differential distribution of exchange proteins directly activated by cyclic AMP
within the adult rat retina.

Whitaker CM(1), Cooper NG.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology, University of Louisville 
School of Medicine, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

The recently discovered exchange protein directly activated by cAMP (Epac), a
guanine exchange factor for the G-protein RAP-1, is directly activated by cAMP
independently of protein kinase A (PKA). While cAMP is known to be an important
second messenger in the retina, the presence of Epac has not been investigated in
this tissue. The goal of the present study was to determine if the Epac1 and
Epac2 genes are present and to characterize their location within the retina.
Western blot analysis revealed that Epac1 and Epac2 proteins are expressed within
the retina, and the presence of mRNA was demonstrated with the aid of reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Additionally, we used
immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy to demonstrate that Epac1 and Epac2
have overlapping as well as unique distributions within the retina. Both are
present within horizontal cells, rod and cone bipolar cells, cholinergic amacrine
cells, retrograde labeled retinal ganglion cells, and Müller cells. Uniquely,
Epac2 was expressed by cone photoreceptor inner and outer segments, cell bodies, 
and synaptic terminals. In contrast, Epac1 was expressed in vesicular glutamate
transporter 1 (VGlut1) and C-terminal binding protein 2 (CtBP2) positive
photoreceptor synaptic terminals. Together, these results provide evidence that
Epac1 and Epac2 are differentially expressed within the retina and provide the
framework for further functional studies of cAMP pathways within the retina.

Copyright 2010 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2815095
PMID: 19883736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Mech Dev. 2010 Jan-Feb;127(1-2):107-19. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2009.10.002. Epub 2009
Oct 13.

Delayed differentiation in embryonic stem cells and mesodermal progenitors in the
absence of CtBP2.

Tarleton HP(1), Lemischka IR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cancer Epidemiology, Department of Epidemiology, School of Public
Health, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. tarleton@ucla.edu

Mammalian embryonic stem cells (ESCs) are characterized by an ability to
self-renew and give rise to each of the three germ layers. ESCs are a
pluripotential source of numerous primitive progenitors and committed lineages
and can make stoichiometric decisions leading to either asymmetric or symmetric
cell division. Several genes have been identified as essential for maintenance of
self-renewal, but few non-lineage specific genes have been identified as
essential for differentiation. We selected the chromatin factor Ctbp2 from
microarray data for its enriched expression in stem cells, in comparison to
committed progenitors. RNA interference (RNAi) was used to knockdown gene
expression in mouse ESCs and the potential for transduced cells to self-renew and
differentiate was assessed in ESC and mesodermal assays. Here, we demonstrate an 
important role for Ctbp2 in stem cell maintenance and regulation of
differentiation using an in vitro system. The knockdown of Ctbp2 increases the
prevalence of ESCs in culture, delays differentiation induced by LIF withdrawal, 
and introduces developmental changes in mesodermal differentiation. A model is
presented for the importance of Ctbp2 in maintaining a balance in decisions to
self-renewal and differentiate.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2818266
PMID: 19825414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Eur J Neurosci. 2009 Oct;30(8):1509-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2009.06943.x.
Epub 2009 Oct 7.

IQ-ArfGEF/BRAG1 is associated with synaptic ribbons in the mouse retina.

Katsumata O(1), Ohara N, Tamaki H, Niimura T, Naganuma H, Watanabe M, Sakagami H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara,
Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan.

IQ-ArfGEF/BRAG1 is a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for ADP ribosylation
factors (Arfs), which are implicated in membrane trafficking and actin
cytoskeleton dynamics. In this study, we examined the immunohistochemical
localization of IQ-ArfGEF/BRAG1 in the adult mouse retina using light and
electron microscopy. IQ-ArfGEF/BRAG1 was distributed in a punctate manner and
colocalized well with RIBEYE in both the outer and inner plexiform layers.
Immunoelectron microscopic analysis showed that IQ-ArfGEF/BRAG1 was localized at 
the synaptic ribbons of photoreceptors. When heterologously expressed in HeLa
cells, IQ-ArfGEF/BRAG1 was recruited to RIBEYE-containing clusters and formed an 
immunoprecipitable complex with RIBEYE. Furthermore, immunoprecipitation analysis
showed that anti-IQ-ArfGEF/BRAG1 antibody efficiently pulled down RIBEYE from
retinal lysates. These findings indicate that IQ-ArfGEF/BRAG1 is a novel
component of retinal synaptic ribbons and forms a protein complex with RIBEYE.

PMID: 19811534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Sci China C Life Sci. 2009 Sep;52(9):807-12. doi: 10.1007/s11427-009-0116-2. Epub
2009 Oct 6.

Quantitative analysis of the ribbon synapse number of cochlear inner hair cells
in C57BL/6J mice using the three-dimensional modeling method.

Liu K(1), Li S, Jiang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, the First Affiliated Hospital, China Medical
University, Shenyang 110001, China. keliu66@hotmail.com

In mammals, the ribbon synapses of cochlear inner hair cells are a synaptic
structure of the first sensory nerve in the pathway of acoustical signal
transmission to the acoustic center, and it is directly involved in voice coding 
and neurotransmitter release. It is difficult to quantitatively analyze the
ribbon synaptic number only using an electron microscope, because the ribbon
synaptic number is relatively limited and their location is deep. In this study, 
the specific presynaptic structure-RIBEYE, and non-specific postsynaptic
structure-GluR 2 & 3 in C57BL/6J mouse basilar membrane samples were treated by
immunofluorescent labeling. Serial section was performed on the samples using a
laser scanning confocal microscope, and then the serial sections were used to
build three-dimensional models using 3DS MAX software. Each fluorescein color
pair indicates one synapse, so the number of ribbon synapses of inner hair cells 
is obtained. The spatial distribution and the number of ribbon synapses of
cochlear inner hair cells were clearly shown in this experiment, and the mean
number of ribbon synapses per inner hair cell was 16.10+/-1.03. Our results have 
demonstrated the number of ribbon synapses is accurately calculated by double
immunofluorescent labeling to presynaptic and postsynaptic structures, serial
sections obtained using a laser scanning confocal microscope, and
three-dimensional modeling obtained using 3DS MAX software. The method above is
feasible and has important significance for further exploring the mechanism of
sensorineural deafness.

PMID: 19802738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Cell Death Differ. 2010 Mar;17(3):513-21. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2009.140. Epub 2009
Oct 2.

An ARF/CtBP2 complex regulates BH3-only gene expression and p53-independent
apoptosis.

Kovi RC(1), Paliwal S, Pande S, Grossman SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 364 
Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The alternative reading frame (ARF) tumor suppressor exerts both p53-dependent
and p53-independent functions. The corepressor C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) 
interacts with ARF, resulting in proteasome-mediated degradation of CtBP. ARF can
induce apoptosis in p53-null colon cancer cells, in a manner dependent on ARF
interaction with CtBP. Bik was uniquely identified in an apoptotic gene array as 
coordinately upregulated in colon cancer cells after either CtBP2 knockdown or
ARF overexpression. Validating the array findings, ARF induced Bik mRNA and
protein expression, and this activity required an intact CtBP binding domain.
Apoptosis induced by CtBP deficiency was substantially impaired when Bik
expression was simultaneously silenced. An analysis of the Bik promoter revealed 
binding sites for the CtBP-interacting basic Kruppel-like factor (BKLF). A Bik
promoter luciferase reporter was repressed by BKLF and CtBP2, and ARF reversed
CtBP-associated repression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses showed that
CtBP was recruited to the Bik promoter largely by BKLF. Expression profiling of
BH3-only gene expression in ARF-expressing or CtBP-deficient cells revealed that 
Bik was uniquely regulated by ARF/CtBP in colon cancer cells, whereas additional 
BH3-only proteins (Bim, Bmf) showed CtBP-dependent repression in osteosarcoma
cells. ARF antagonism of CtBP repression of Bik and other BH3-only genes may have
a critical role in ARF-induced p53-independent apoptosis and tumor suppression.

PMCID: PMC2924672
PMID: 19798104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. BMC Mol Biol. 2009 Sep 15;10:89. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-10-89.

Interaction of ZEB and histone deacetylase with the PLDLS-binding cleft region of
monomeric C-terminal binding protein 2.

Zhao LJ(1), Kuppuswamy M, Vijayalingam S, Chinnadurai G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, Saint Louis University Health Sciences
Center, St, Louis, Missouri 63104, USA. zhaol@slu.edu

BACKGROUND: Proteins of the C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) family, CtBP1 and
CtBP2 are closely related transcriptional regulators that are coded by two
different gene loci in the vertebrate genomes. They perform redundant and unique 
functions during animal development. CtBP proteins mediate their transcriptional 
function through interaction with various DNA-binding repressors that contain
PLDLS-like motifs and chromatin modifying enzymes, such as class I histone
deacetylases (HDAC) that do not contain such motifs. The N-terminal region of
CtBP1/2 forms a hydrophobic cleft and is involved in interaction with both
PLDLS-containing factors and non-PLDLS factors. CtBP proteins function as dimers 
to mediate transcriptional repression and dimerization is modulated by specific
binding to NAD/NADH.
RESULTS: In this study, we have investigated the role of dimerization of CtBP2 in
recruitment of PLDLS-motif cofactors and non-PLDLS cofactors. Our results
indicate that mutations in CtBP2 that interfere with dimerization abolish CtBP2
interaction with most cellular factors, except the PLDLS-motif factor zinc-finger
E-box binding homeobox (ZEB) and the non-PLDLS factor HDAC2. Unlike most
PLDLS-containing CtBP-binding proteins, ZEB contains three PLDLS-like motifs and 
all three contribute to the interaction with the CtBP2 monomer. Despite the
ability to interact with ZEB and HDAC, the CtBP2 monomer fails to mediate
ZEB-dependent transcriptional repression. The lack of repression activity of the 
CtBP2 monomer is correlated with the competition between ZEB and HDAC for
interaction with the CtBP2 monomer.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest a competition between the canonical PLDLS-motif
factors such as E1A and non-PLDLS factor HDAC for interaction with CtBP. They
also indicate that the affinity for the CtBP monomer may be determined by the
number as well as amino acid sequence compositions of the PLDLS-like motifs. Our 
results are consistent with a model that the CtBP2 dimer may interact with a
PLDLS-containing repressor through one monomer and recruit HDAC and other
chromatin modifying enzymes through the second monomer in the CtBP2 dimer.

PMCID: PMC2749851
PMID: 19754958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Neuroscientist. 2009 Dec;15(6):611-24. doi: 10.1177/1073858409340253.

The making of synaptic ribbons: how they are built and what they do.

Schmitz F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, Saarland University, Medical School, Homburg/Saar,
Germany. frank.schmitz@uniklinik-saarland.de

Ribbon synapses in the retina and inner ear maintain tonic neurotransmitter
release at high rates to transduce a broad bandwidth of stimulus intensities. In 
ribbon synapses, synaptic vesicles can be released by a slow, sustained mode and 
by fast, synchronous mechanisms. The high release rates require structural and
functional specializations. The synaptic ribbon is the key structural
specialization of ribbon synapses. Synaptic ribbons are large, electron-dense
structures that immobilize numerous synaptic vesicles next to presynaptic release
sites. A main component of synaptic ribbons is the protein RIBEYE that has the
capability to build the scaffold of the synaptic ribbon via multiple
RIBEYE-RIBEYE interactions. A modular assembly model of synaptic ribbons has been
proposed in which synaptic ribbons are formed from individual RIBEYE subunits.
The scaffold of the synaptic ribbon provides a docking site for RIBEYE-associated
proteins that could execute specific synaptic ribbon functions. Multiple
functions have been assigned to synaptic ribbons including roles in exocytosis,
endocytosis, and synaptic membrane trafficking. Recent studies demonstrated the
importance of synaptic ribbons for fast, synchronous release and emphasized the
need of a tight and efficient coupling between presynaptic Ca(2+) signaling and
exocytosis. The present review summarizes recent advances on structure and
function of synaptic ribbons.

PMID: 19700740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Oncogene. 2009 Oct 29;28(43):3825-36. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.236. Epub 2009 Aug
10.

NGF inhibits human leukemia proliferation by downregulating cyclin A1 expression 
through promoting acinus/CtBP2 association.

Chan CB(1), Liu X, Jang SW, Hsu SI, Williams I, Kang S, Chen J, Ye K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Cyclin A1 is essential for leukemia progression, and its expression is tightly
regulated by acinus, a nuclear speckle protein. However, the molecular mechanism 
of how acinus mediates cyclin A1 expression remains elusive. Here we show that
transcription corepressor CtBP2 directly binds acinus, which is regulated by
nerve growth factor (NGF), inhibiting its stimulatory effect on cyclin A1, but
not cyclin A2, expression in leukemia. NGF, a cognate ligand for the neurotrophic
receptor TrkA, promotes the interaction between CtBP2 and acinus through
triggering acinus phosphorylation by Akt. Overexpression of CtBP2 diminishes
cyclin A1 transcription, whereas depletion of CtBP2 abolishes NGF's suppressive
effect on cyclin A1 expression. Strikingly, gambogic amide, a newly identified
TrkA agonist, potently represses cyclin A1 expression, thus blocking K562 cell
proliferation. Moreover, gambogic amide ameliorates the leukemia progression in
K562 cells inoculated nude mice. Hence, NGF downregulates cyclin A1 expression
through escalating CtBP2/acinus complex formation, and gambogic amide might be
useful for human leukemia treatment.

PMCID: PMC3481846
PMID: 19668232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mol Vis. 2009 Jul 17;15:1374-82.

Adeno-associated virus serotype-9 efficiently transduces the retinal outer
plexiform layer.

Lei B(1), Zhang K, Yue Y, Ghosh A, Duan D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing
Medical University, 1 You Yi Road, Yu Zhong District, Chongqing, China.
bolei99@126.com

PURPOSE: Adeno-associated virus serotype-9 (AAV-9) is a promising gene delivery
vector. In this study, we evaluated AAV-9 transduction in the mouse retina.
METHODS: Three different AAV vectors were used in our study: AAV-9.RSV.AP,
AAV-9.CMV.eGFP, and AAV-9.CMV.R4-23/C. In these vectors, two different promoters 
(the cytomegalovirus promoter-CMV promoter and the Rous sarcoma virus-RSV
promoter) were used to express three different transgenes including the alkaline 
phosphatase (AP) gene, the enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) gene, and a 
therapeutic microdystrophin gene (the R4-23/C). Specifically, 1 microl AAV-9
reporter gene vectors (1x10(9) viral genome particles of AAV-9.RSV.AP or 1x10(10)
viral genome particles of AAV-9.CMV.eGFP) were administered subretinally to young
(2-3-week-old), adult (3-month-old), and old (12-month-old) C57BL/6J mice. To
evaluate AAV-9 transduction in a diseased retina, we injected subretinally
1x10(9) viral genome particles of AAV-9.CMV.R4-23/C to mdx(3cv) mice, which we
used as a model for Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD). Transgene expression was
examined by histochemical as well as immunofluorescence staining at three and
five weeks after injection. Electroretinograms were recorded five weeks after
subretinal AAV-9.RSV.AP injection.
RESULTS: Subretinal injection yielded widespread transduction throughout the
retina in all age groups. Robust expression was seen in the retinal pigment
epithelium, outer nuclear layer, and in Müller cells. Interestingly a synaptic
layer, the outer plexiform layer (OPL), also showed intensive expression.
Transduction of the synaptic layer was further confirmed by immunostaining for
C-terminal binding protein 2 (CtBP2), a marker for the photoreceptor synaptic
ribbon. Dystrophin is normally expressed in the OPL photoreceptor terminals. This
expression is lost in DMD patients and mdx(3cv) mice. Consistent with our
findings in normal mice, we observed efficient microdystrophin expression in the 
OPL after AAV-9.CMV.R4-23/C infection. At five weeks after subretinal delivery of
AAV-9.RSV.AP, no morphology or ERG abnormalities were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated that AAV-9 is a potent vector for retinal gene
delivery. Furthermore, subretinal AAV-9 administration did not cause appreciable 
acute retinal damages. In summary, AAV-9-mediated OPL transduction holds promise 
for treating diseases that primarily affect this layer.

PMCID: PMC2713732
PMID: 19626133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Funct Integr Genomics. 2009 Nov;9(4):455-71. doi: 10.1007/s10142-009-0131-1. Epub
2009 Jul 14.

Porcine muscle sensory attributes associate with major changes in gene networks
involving CAPZB, ANKRD1, and CTBP2.

Ponsuksili S(1), Murani E, Phatsara C, Schwerin M, Schellander K, Wimmers K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Functional Genome Analysis, Research Institute for the Biology 
of Farm Animals (FBN), Wilhelm-Stahl-Allee 2, 18196, Dummerstorf, Germany.

Principal component analysis of traits related to carcass and meat properties
were combined with microarray expression data for the identification of
functional networks of genes and biological processes taking place during the
conversion of muscle to meat. Principal components (PCs) with high loadings of
meat quality traits were derived from phenotypic data of 572 animals of a porcine
crossbreed population. Microarray data of 74 M. longissimus dorsi samples were
correlated with PC datasets. Lists of significantly correlated genes were
analyzed for enrichment of functional annotation groups as defined in the Gene
Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes databases as well as the
Ingenuity Pathways Analysis library. Ubiquitination, phosphorylation,
mitochondrion dysfunction, actin, integrin, platelet-derived growth factor,
epidermal growth factor, vascular endothelial growth factor, and Ca signaling
pathways are correlated with meat quality. Among the significantly
trait-associated genes, CAPZB, ANKRD1, and CTBP2 are promoted as candidate genes 
for meat quality that provide a link between the highlighted pathways. Knowledge 
of the relevant biological processes and the differential expression of members
of the pathway will provide tools that are predictive for traits related to meat 
quality and that may also be diagnostic for many muscle defects or damages
including muscle atrophy, dystrophy, and hypoxia.

PMID: 19597856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Sep;29(17):4714-28. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01899-08. Epub 2009 Jun 
29.

C/EBPalpha and the corepressors CtBP1 and CtBP2 regulate repression of select
visceral white adipose genes during induction of the brown phenotype in white
adipocytes by peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma agonists.

Vernochet C(1), Peres SB, Davis KE, McDonald ME, Qiang L, Wang H, Scherer PE,
Farmer SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

White adipose tissue (WAT) stores energy in the form of triglycerides, whereas
brown tissue (BAT) expends energy, primarily by oxidizing lipids. WAT also
secretes many cytokines and acute-phase proteins that contribute to insulin
resistance in obese subjects. In this study, we have investigated the mechanisms 
by which activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
(PPARgamma) with synthetic agonists induces a brown phenotype in white adipocytes
in vivo and in vitro. We demonstrate that this phenotypic conversion is
characterized by repression of a set of white fat genes ("visceral white"),
including the resistin, angiotensinogen, and chemerin genes, in addition to
induction of brown-specific genes, such as Ucp-1. Importantly, the level of
expression of the "visceral white" genes is high in mesenteric and gonadal WAT
depots but low in the subcutaneous WAT depot and in BAT. Mutation of critical
amino acids within helix 7 of the ligand-binding domain of PPARgamma prevents
inhibition of visceral white gene expression by the synthetic agonists and
therefore shows a direct role for PPARgamma in the repression process. Inhibition
of the white adipocyte genes also depends on the expression of C/EBPalpha and the
corepressors, carboxy-terminal binding proteins 1 and 2 (CtBP1/2). The data
further show that repression of resistin and angiotensinogen expression involves 
recruitment of CtBP1/2, directed by C/EBPalpha, to the minimal promoter of the
corresponding genes in response to the PPARgamma ligand. Developing strategies to
enhance the brown phenotype in white adipocytes while reducing secretion of
stress-related cytokines from visceral WAT is a means to combat
obesity-associated disorders.

PMCID: PMC2725706
PMID: 19564408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Aug;29(16):4539-51. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00439-09. Epub 2009 Jun 
8.

CtBPs promote cell survival through the maintenance of mitotic fidelity.

Bergman LM(1), Birts CN, Darley M, Gabrielli B, Blaydes JP.

Author information: 
(1)Somers Cancer Research Building, University of Southampton, MP824 Southampton 
General Hospital, Southampton SO166YD, United Kingdom.

CtBPs (CtBP1 and CtBP2) act in the nucleus as transcriptional corepressors and in
the cytoplasm as regulators of Golgi apparatus fission. Studies in which the
expression or function of CtBPs has been inhibited have independently identified 
roles for CtBPs in both suppressing apoptosis and promoting cell cycle
progression. Here, we have analyzed the consequences of ablating CtBP expression 
in breast cancer-derived cell lines. We found that loss of CtBP expression
suppresses cell proliferation through a combination of apoptosis, reduction in
cell cycle progression, and aberrations in transit through mitosis. The third
phenotype includes errors in mitotic chromosome segregation that are associated
with decreased association of the chromosome passenger protein aurora B with
mitotic chromatin and that are likely to be a primary cause of the proapoptotic
and antiproliferative effects of CtBP loss. We also show that loss of CtBP
expression results in the activation of the transcription factor p53 and that
loss of p53 function renders cells more susceptible to CtBP small interfering
RNA-induced apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2725739
PMID: 19506021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Aug 1;18(15):2779-90. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp213. Epub 2009 May 
5.

Otoferlin interacts with myosin VI: implications for maintenance of the
basolateral synaptic structure of the inner hair cell.

Heidrych P(1), Zimmermann U, Kuhn S, Franz C, Engel J, Duncker SV, Hirt B, Pusch 
CM, Ruth P, Pfister M, Marcotti W, Blin N, Knipper M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tübingen, Institute of Human Genetics, Wilhelmstr. 27, 72074
Tübingen, Germany.

Otoferlin has been proposed to be the Ca(2+) sensor in hair cell exocytosis,
compensating for the classical synaptic fusion proteins synaptotagmin-1 and
synaptotagmin-2. In the present study, yeast two-hybrid assays reveal myosin VI
as a novel otoferlin binding partner. Co-immunoprecipitation assay and
co-expression suggest an interaction of both proteins within the basolateral part
of inner hair cells (IHCs). Comparison of otoferlin mutants and myosin VI mutant 
mice indicates non-complementary and complementary roles of myosin VI and
otoferlin for synaptic maturation: (i) IHCs from otoferlin mutant mice exhibited 
a decoupling of CtBP2/RIBEYE and Ca(V)1.3 and severe reduction of exocytosis.
(ii) Myosin VI mutant IHCs failed to transport BK channels to the membrane of the
apical cell regions, and the exocytotic Ca(2+) efficiency did not mature. (iii)
Otoferlin and myosin VI mutant IHCs showed a reduced basolateral synaptic surface
area and altered active zone topography. Membrane infoldings in otoferlin mutant 
IHCs indicated disturbed transport of endocytotic membranes and link the above
morphological changes to a complementary role of otoferlin and myosin VI in
transport of intracellular compartments to the basolateral IHC membrane.

PMID: 19417007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Cell Sci. 2009 May 1;122(Pt 9):1352-61. doi: 10.1242/jcs.045401.

Aberrant function and structure of retinal ribbon synapses in the absence of
complexin 3 and complexin 4.

Reim K(1), Regus-Leidig H, Ammermüller J, El-Kordi A, Radyushkin K, Ehrenreich H,
Brandstätter JH, Brose N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology and Center for the Molecular Physiology
of the Brain, Max Planck Institute of Experimental Medicine, D-37075 Göttingen,
Germany.

Complexins regulate the speed and Ca(2+) sensitivity of SNARE-mediated synaptic
vesicle fusion at conventional synapses. Two of the vertebrate complexins, Cplx3 
and Cplx4, are specifically localized to retinal ribbon synapses. To test whether
Cplx3 and Cplx4 contribute to the highly efficient transmitter release at ribbon 
synapses, we studied retina function and structure in Cplx3 and Cplx4 single- and
double-knockout mice. Electroretinographic recordings from single and double
mutants revealed a cooperative perturbing effect of Cplx3 and Cplx4 deletion on
the b-wave amplitude, whereas most other detected effects in both plexiform
synaptic layers were additive. Light and electron microscopic analyses uncovered 
a disorganized outer plexiform layer in the retinae of mice lacking Cplx3 and
Cplx4, with a significant proportion of photoreceptor terminals containing
spherical free-floating ribbons. These structural and functional aberrations were
accompanied by behavioural deficits indicative of a vision deficit. Our results
show that Cplx3 and Cplx4 are essential regulators of transmitter release at
retinal ribbon synapses. Their loss leads to aberrant adjustment and fine-tuning 
of transmitter release at the photoreceptor ribbon synapse, alterations in
transmission at bipolar cell terminals, changes in the temporal structure of
synaptic processing in the inner plexiform layer of the retina and perturbed
vision.

PMID: 19386896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009 Apr;18(4):1285-9. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-08-1142. Epub 2009 Mar 24.

Generalizability of associations from prostate cancer genome-wide association
studies in multiple populations.

Waters KM(1), Le Marchand L, Kolonel LN, Monroe KR, Stram DO, Henderson BE,
Haiman CA.

Author information: 
(1)Harlyne Norris Research Tower, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. kwaters@usc.edu

Genome-wide association studies have identified multiple common alleles
associated with prostate cancer risk in populations of European ancestry. Testing
these variants in other populations is needed to assess the generalizability of
the associations and may guide fine-mapping efforts. We examined 13 of these risk
variants in a multiethnic sample of 2,768 incident prostate cancer cases and
2,359 controls from the Multiethnic Cohort (African Americans, European
Americans, Latinos, Japanese Americans, and Native Hawaiians). We estimated
ethnic-specific and pooled odds ratios and tested for ethnic heterogeneity of
effects using logistic regression. In ethnic-pooled analyses, 12 of the 13
variants were positively associated with risk, with statistically significant
associations (P < 0.05) noted with six variants: JAZF1, rs10486567 [odds ratio
(OR), 1.23; 95% confidence interval (95% CI, 1.12-1.35); Xp11.2, rs5945572 (OR,
1.31; 95% CI, 1.13-1.51); HNF1B, rs4430796 (OR, 1.15; 95% CI, 1.06-1.25); MSMB,
rs10993994 (OR, 1.13; 95% CI, 1.04-1.23); 11q13.2, rs7931342 (OR, 1.13; 95% CI,
1.03-1.23); 3p12.1, rs2660753 (OR, 1.11; 95% CI, 1.01-1.21); SLC22A3, rs9364554
(OR, 1.10; 95% CI, 1.00-1.21); CTBP2, rs12769019 (OR, 1.11; 95% CI, 0.99-1.25);
HNF1B, rs11649743 (OR, 1.10; 95% CI, 0.99-1.22); EHBP1, rs721048 (OR, 1.08; 95%
CI, 0.94-1.25); KLK2/3, rs2735839 (OR, 1.06; 95% CI, 0.97-1.16); 17q24.3,
rs1859962 (OR, 1.04; 95% CI, 0.96-1.13); and LMTK2, rs6465657 (OR, 0.99; 95% CI, 
0.89-1.09). Significant ethnic heterogeneity of effects was noted for four
variants (EHBP1, P(het) = 3.9 x 10(-3); 11q13, P(het) = 0.023; HNF1B (rs4430796),
P(het) = 0.026; and KLK2/3, P(het) = 2.0 x 10(-3)). Although power was limited in
some ethnic/racial groups due to variation in sample size and allele frequencies,
these findings suggest that a large fraction of prostate cancer variants
identified in populations of European ancestry are global markers of risk. For
many of these regions, fine-mapping in non-European samples may help localize
causal alleles and better determine their contribution to prostate cancer risk in
the population.

PMCID: PMC2917607
PMID: 19318432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Nat Neurosci. 2009 Apr;12(4):444-53. doi: 10.1038/nn.2293. Epub 2009 Mar 8.

Tuning of synapse number, structure and function in the cochlea.

Meyer AC(1), Frank T, Khimich D, Hoch G, Riedel D, Chapochnikov NM, Yarin YM,
Harke B, Hell SW, Egner A, Moser T.

Author information: 
(1)InnerEarLab, Department of Otolaryngology and Center for Molecular Physiology 
of the Brain, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.

Cochlear inner hair cells (IHCs) transmit acoustic information to spiral ganglion
neurons through ribbon synapses. Here we have used morphological and
physiological techniques to ask whether synaptic mechanisms differ along the
tonotopic axis and within IHCs in the mouse cochlea. We show that the number of
ribbon synapses per IHC peaks where the cochlea is most sensitive to sound.
Exocytosis, measured as membrane capacitance changes, scaled with synapse number 
when comparing apical and midcochlear IHCs. Synapses were distributed in the
subnuclear portion of IHCs. High-resolution imaging of IHC synapses provided
insights into presynaptic Ca(2+) channel clusters and Ca(2+) signals, synaptic
ribbons and postsynaptic glutamate receptor clusters and revealed subtle
differences in their average properties along the tonotopic axis. However, we
observed substantial variability for presynaptic Ca(2+) signals, even within
individual IHCs, providing a candidate presynaptic mechanism for the divergent
dynamics of spiral ganglion neuron spiking.

PMID: 19270686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009 Jul;50(7):3074-83. doi: 10.1167/iovs.08-3190.
Epub 2009 Feb 14.

Early synaptic defects in tulp1-/- mice.

Grossman GH(1), Pauer GJ, Narendra U, Peachey NS, Hagstrom SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmic Research, Cole Eye Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

PURPOSE: Mutations in the photoreceptor-specific tubby-like protein 1 (TULP1)
underlie a form of autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa. To investigate the
role of Tulp1 in the photoreceptor synapse, the authors examined the presynaptic 
and postsynaptic architecture and retinal function in tulp1(-/-) mice
METHODS: The authors used immunohistochemistry to examine tulp1(-/-) mice before 
retinal degeneration and made comparisons with wild-type (wt) littermates and
retinal degeneration 10 (rd10) mice, another model of photoreceptor degeneration 
that has a comparable rate of degeneration. Retinal function was characterized
with the use of electroretinography.
RESULTS: In wt mice, Tulp1 is localized to the photoreceptor synapse. In the
tulp1(-/-) synapse, the spatial relationship between the ribbon-associated
proteins Bassoon and Piccolo are disrupted, and few intact ribbons are present.
Furthermore, bipolar cell dendrites are stunted. Comparable abnormalities are not
seen in rd10 mice. The leading edge of the a-wave had normal kinetics in
tulp1(-/-) mice but reduced gain in rd10 mice. The b-wave intensity-response
functions of tulp1(-/-) mice are shifted to higher intensities than in wt mice,
but those of rd10 mice are not.
CONCLUSIONS: Photoreceptor synapses and bipolar cell dendrites in tulp1(-/-) mice
display abnormal structure and function. A malformation of the photoreceptor
synaptic ribbon is likely the cause of the dystrophy in bipolar cell dendrites.
The association of early-onset, severe photoreceptor degeneration preceded by
synaptic abnormalities appears to represent a phenotype not previously described.
Not only is Tulp1 critical for photoreceptor function and survival, it is
essential for the proper development of the photoreceptor synapse.

PMCID: PMC3021947
PMID: 19218615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Int Immunol. 2009 Mar;21(3):227-35. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxn143. Epub 2009 Jan 30.

The transcription repressor, ZEB1, cooperates with CtBP2 and HDAC1 to suppress
IL-2 gene activation in T cells.

Wang J(1), Lee S, Teh CE, Bunting K, Ma L, Shannon MF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Bioscience, John Curtin School of Medical Research,
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2601 Australia.

Activation of T cells leads to the induction of many cytokine genes that are
required for appropriate immune responses, including IL-2, a key cytokine for T
cell proliferation and homeostasis. The activating transcription factors such as 
nuclear factor of activated T cells, nuclear factor kappaB/Rel and activated
protein-1 family members that regulate inducible IL-2 gene expression have been
well documented. However, negative regulation of the IL-2 gene is less studied.
Here we examine the role of zinc finger E-box-binding protein (ZEB) 1, a
homeodomain/Zn finger transcription factor, as a repressor of IL-2 gene
transcription. We show here that ZEB1 is expressed in non-stimulated and
stimulated T cells and using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays we show that
ZEB1 binds to the IL-2 promoter. Over-expression of ZEB1 can repress IL-2
promoter activity, as well as endogenous IL-2 mRNA production in EL-4 T cells,
and this repression is dependent on the ZEB-binding site at -100. ZEB1 cooperates
with the co-repressor C-terminal-binding protein (CtBP) 2 and with histone
deacetylase 1 to repress the IL-2 promoter and this cooperation depends on the
ZEB-binding site in the promoter as well as the Pro-X-Asp-Leu-Ser protein-protein
interaction domain in CtBP2. Thus, ZEB1 may function to recruit a repressor
complex to the IL-2 promoter.

PMID: 19181930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Cancer Res. 2009 Feb 1;69(3):731-4. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3349. Epub 2009
Jan 20.

The transcriptional corepressor CtBP: a foe of multiple tumor suppressors.

Chinnadurai G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, Saint Louis University Health Sciences
Center, Doisy Research Center, St Louis, Missouri 63104, USA. chinnag@slu.edu

CtBP1 and CtBP2 are closely related and evolutionarily conserved transcriptional 
corepressors. There is strong evidence linking CtBPs to tumorigenesis and tumor
progression. CtBPs promote epithelial-mesenchymal transition and function as
apoptosis antagonists. Also, CtBPs mediate repression of several tumor suppressor
genes. Certain tumor suppressors also target CtBPs to restrain their
tumor-promoting activity. Down-regulation of CtBPs mediated by some tumor
suppressors results in p53-independent apoptosis and reduced tumor cell migration
and invasion. The role of CtBPs in modulating the activities of different tumor
suppressors is reviewed here. The results discussed here suggest that CtBPs may
constitute a novel p53-independent anticancer target.

PMCID: PMC4367538
PMID: 19155295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Comp Neurol. 2009 Feb 20;512(6):814-24. doi: 10.1002/cne.21915.

Early steps in the assembly of photoreceptor ribbon synapses in the mouse retina:
the involvement of precursor spheres.

Regus-Leidig H(1), Tom Dieck S, Specht D, Meyer L, Brandstätter JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Animal Physiology, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg,
Erlangen, Germany.

The retinal photoreceptor ribbon synapse is a chemical synapse structurally and
functionally specialized for the tonic release of neurotransmitter. It is
characterized by the presynaptic ribbon, an electron-dense organelle at the
active zone covered by hundreds of synaptic vesicles. In conventional synapses,
dense-core transport vesicles carrying a set of active zone proteins are
implicated in early steps of synapse formation. In photoreceptor ribbon synapses,
synaptic spheres are suggested to be involved in ribbon synapse assembly, but
nothing is known about the molecular composition of these organelles. With light,
electron, and stimulated emission depletion microscopy and immunocytochemistry,
we investigated a series of presynaptic proteins during photoreceptor
synaptogenesis. The cytomatrix proteins Bassoon, Piccolo, RIBEYE, and RIM1 appear
early in synaptogenesis. They are transported in nonmembranous, electron-dense,
spherical transport units, which we called precursor spheres, to the future
presynaptic site. Other presynaptic proteins, i.e., Munc13, CAST1, RIM2, and an
L-type Ca(2+) channel alpha1 subunit are not associated with the precursor
spheres. They cluster directly at the active zone some time after the first set
of cytomatrix proteins has arrived. By quantitative electron microscopy, we found
an inverse correlation between the numbers of spheres and synaptic ribbons in the
postnatally developing photoreceptor synaptic terminals. From these results, we
suggest that the precursor spheres are the transport units for proteins of the
photoreceptor ribbon compartment and are involved in the assembly of mature
synaptic ribbons.

PMID: 19067356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Comp Neurol. 2009 Jan 10;512(2):218-31. doi: 10.1002/cne.21893.

Expression of synaptic and phototransduction markers during photoreceptor
development in the marmoset monkey Callithrix jacchus.

Hendrickson A(1), Troilo D, Djajadi H, Possin D, Springer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98195, USA.

Marmoset photoreceptor development was studied to determine the expression
sequence for synaptic, opsin, and phototransduction proteins. All markers appear 
first in cones within the incipient foveal center or in rods at the foveal edge. 
Recoverin appears in cones across 70% of the retina at fetal day (Fd) 88,
indicating that it is expressed shortly after photoreceptors are generated.
Synaptic markers synaptophysin, SV2, glutamate vesicular transporter 1, and CTBP2
label foveal cones at Fd 88 and cones at the retinal edge around birth. Cones and
rods have distinctly different patterns of synaptic protein and opsin expression.
Synaptic markers are expressed first in cones, with a considerable delay before
they appear in rods at the same eccentricity. Cones express synaptic markers 2-3 
weeks before they express opsin, but rods express opsin 2-4 weeks before rod
synaptic marker labeling is detected. Medium/long-wavelength-selective (M&L)
opsin appears in foveal cones and rod opsin in rods around the fovea at Fd 100.
Very few cones expressing short-wavelength-selective (S) opsin are found in the
Fd 105 fovea. Across peripheral retina, opsin appears first in rods, followed
about 1 week later by M&L cone opsin. S cone opsin appears last, and all opsins
reach the retinal edge by 1 week after birth. Cone transducin and rod arrestin
are expressed concurrently with opsin, but cone arrestin appears slightly later. 
Marmoset photoreceptor development differs from that in Macaca and humans. It
starts relatively late, at 56% gestation, compared with Macaca at 32% gestation. 
The marmoset opsin expression sequence is also different from that of either
Macaca or human.

PMCID: PMC3089894
PMID: 19003975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. BMC Genomics. 2008 Sep 16;9 Suppl 2:S19. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-S2-S19.

Inferring gene regulatory networks by thermodynamic modeling.

Chen CC(1), Zhong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign,
Urbana, IL 61801, USA. cchen63@uiuc.edu

BACKGROUND: To date, the reconstruction of gene regulatory networks from gene
expression data has primarily relied on the correlation between the expression of
transcription regulators and that of target genes.
RESULTS: We developed a network reconstruction method based on quantities that
are closely related to the biophysical properties of TF-TF interaction, TF-DNA
binding and transcriptional activation and repression. The Network-Identifier
method utilized a thermodynamic model for gene regulation to infer regulatory
relationships from multiple time course gene expression datasets. Applied to five
datasets of differentiating embryonic stem cells, Network-Identifier identified a
gene regulatory network among 87 transcription regulator genes. This network
suggests that Oct4, Sox2 and Klf4 indirectly repress lineage specific
differentiation genes by activating transcriptional repressors of Ctbp2, Rest and
Mtf2.

PMCID: PMC2559883
PMID: 18831784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Oct;36(17):5427-40. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn527. Epub 2008
Aug 14.

The transcription factor Sox5 modulates Sox10 function during melanocyte
development.

Stolt CC(1), Lommes P, Hillgärtner S, Wegner M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Emil-Fischer-Zentrum, Universität Erlangen,
Fahrstrasse 17, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany.

The transcription factor Sox5 has previously been shown in chicken to be
expressed in early neural crest cells and neural crest-derived peripheral glia.
Here, we show in mouse that Sox5 expression also continues after neural crest
specification in the melanocyte lineage. Despite its continued expression, Sox5
has little impact on melanocyte development on its own as generation of
melanoblasts and melanocytes is unaltered in Sox5-deficient mice. Loss of Sox5,
however, partially rescued the strongly reduced melanoblast generation and marker
gene expression in Sox10 heterozygous mice arguing that Sox5 functions in the
melanocyte lineage by modulating Sox10 activity. This modulatory activity
involved Sox5 binding and recruitment of CtBP2 and HDAC1 to the regulatory
regions of melanocytic Sox10 target genes and direct inhibition of
Sox10-dependent promoter activation. Both binding site competition and
recruitment of corepressors thus help Sox5 to modulate the activity of Sox10 in
the melanocyte lineage.

PMCID: PMC2553580
PMID: 18703590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Neurochem Int. 2008 Nov;53(5):165-72. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2008.07.006. Epub
2008 Jul 25.

Chromatin structure and expression of synapsin I and synaptophysin in retinal
precursor cells.

Ekici M(1), Schmitz F, Hohl M, Seigel GM, Thiel G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Saarland Medical Center, D-66421 Homburg, Germany.

Synapsin I and synaptophysin are major proteins of small synaptic vesicles. In
neurons the transcriptional repressor REST is a major regulator of synapsin I and
synaptophysin gene transcription. Gene regulation by REST is influenced by the
configuration of the chromatin and cell type specific variations have been
observed. Here, we have investigated the regulation of the synapsin I and
synaptophysin genes in R28 retinal precursor cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments revealed that both genes are embedded in open chromatin in R28
retinal precursor cells. In contrast, in fibroblasts the synapsin I and
synaptophysin genes are found in nucleosomes that carried an epigenetic marker
that is linked to a condensed form of chromatin and gene silencing. Synapsin I
and synaptophysin gene expression in retinal precursor cells was enhanced
following inhibition of histone deacetylase activity, indicating that these genes
are regulated via histone acetylation/deacetylation in R28 cells. Inhibition of
histone deacetylase activity did not induce synapsin I and synaptophysin
expression in fibroblasts, indicating that these genes are silenced in this cell 
type in a histone acetylation/deacetylation-independent manner. Moreover,
elevated levels of synapsin I and synaptophysin mRNA were found in retinal
precursor cells that expressed a mutant of REST that activated gene
transcription. In contrast, the ribeye gene, encoding a major structural protein 
of synaptic ribbons, was neither regulated by histone acetylation/deacetylation
nor by the REST mutant in retinal precursor cells. These data reveal that the
synapsin I and synaptophysin genes are bona fide target genes for REST in R28
retinal precursor cells.

PMID: 18692536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Neurosci. 2008 Aug 6;28(32):7954-67. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1964-08.2008.

Multiple RIBEYE-RIBEYE interactions create a dynamic scaffold for the formation
of synaptic ribbons.

Magupalli VG(1), Schwarz K, Alpadi K, Natarajan S, Seigel GM, Schmitz F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Saarland
University, Medical School Homburg/Saar, 66421 Homburg/Saar, Germany.

Synaptic ribbons are large, dynamic structures in the active zone complex of
ribbon synapses and important for the physiological properties of these tonically
active synapses. RIBEYE is a unique and major protein component of synaptic
ribbons. The aim of the present study was to understand how the synaptic ribbon
is built and how the construction of the ribbon could contribute to its
ultrastructural plasticity. In the present study, we demonstrate that RIBEYE
self-associates using different independent approaches (yeast two-hybrid
analyses, protein pull downs, synaptic ribbon-RIBEYE interaction assays,
coaggregation experiments, transmission electron microscopy and immunogold
electron microscopy). The A-domain [RIBEYE(A)] and B-domain [RIBEYE(B)] of RIBEYE
contain five distinct sites for RIBEYE-RIBEYE interactions. Three interaction
sites are present in the A-domain of RIBEYE and mediate RIBEYE(A)-RIBEYE(A)
homodimerization and heterodimerization with the B-domain. The docking site for
RIBEYE(A) on RIBEYE(B) is topographically and functionally different from the
RIBEYE(B) homodimerization interface and is negatively regulated by nicotinamide 
adenine dinucleotide. The identified multiple RIBEYE-RIBEYE interactions have the
potential to build the synaptic ribbon: heterologously expressed RIBEYE forms
large electron-dense aggregates that are in part physically associated with
surrounding vesicles and membrane compartments. These structures resemble
spherical synaptic ribbons. These ribbon-like structures coassemble with the
active zone protein bassoon, an interaction partner of RIBEYE at the active zone 
of ribbon synapses, emphasizing the physiological relevance of these
RIBEYE-containing aggregates. Based on the identified multiple RIBEYE-RIBEYE
interactions, we provide a molecular mechanism for the dynamic assembly of
synaptic ribbons from individual RIBEYE subunits.

PMID: 18685021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Cell Tissue Res. 2008 Aug;333(2):185-95. doi: 10.1007/s00441-008-0627-3. Epub
2008 Jun 4.

Active zone proteins are dynamically associated with synaptic ribbons in rat
pinealocytes.

Spiwoks-Becker I(1), Maus C, tom Dieck S, Fejtová A, Engel L, Wolloscheck T,
Wolfrum U, Vollrath L, Spessert R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Johannes Gutenberg University,
Becherweg 13, Mainz, Germany. spiwoks@uni-mainz.de

Synaptic ribbons (SRs) are prominent organelles that are abundant in the ribbon
synapses of sensory neurons where they represent a specialization of the
cytomatrix at the active zone (CAZ). SRs occur not only in neurons, but also in
neuroendocrine pinealocytes where their function is still obscure. In this study,
we report that pinealocyte SRs are associated with CAZ proteins such as Bassoon, 
Piccolo, CtBP1, Munc13-1, and the motorprotein KIF3A and, therefore, consist of a
protein complex that resembles the ribbon complex of retinal and other sensory
ribbon synapses. The pinealocyte ribbon complex is biochemically dynamic. Its
protein composition changes in favor of Bassoon, Piccolo, and Munc13-1 at night
and in favor of KIF3A during the day, whereas CtBP1 is equally present during the
night and day. The diurnal dynamics of the ribbon complex persist under constant 
darkness and decrease after stimulus deprivation of the pineal gland by constant 
light. Our findings indicate that neuroendocrine pinealocytes possess a protein
complex that resembles the CAZ of ribbon synapses in sensory organs and whose
dynamics are under circadian regulation.

PMCID: PMC2757586
PMID: 18523806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Oncogene. 2008 Sep 4;27(39):5214-22. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.162. Epub 2008 May 19.

Inhibition of transcriptional activation and cell proliferation activities of
adenovirus E1A by the unique N-terminal domain of CtBP2.

Zhao LJ(1), Subramanian T, Chinnadurai G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, Saint Louis University Health Sciences
Center, Doisy Research Center, St Louis, MO 63104, USA.

The 243-residue E1A protein of adenovirus induces cellular proliferation, at
least partly by regulating the transcription of cellular genes. This E1A function
requires E1A N-terminal region and conserved regions 1 and 2 (CR1 and CR2), which
interact with histone acetyl transferases, p400 chromatin-modifying complex and
the Rb family proteins. A PLDLS motif at the E1A C-terminal (CR4) region,
interacts with the C-terminal binding proteins (CtBP1 and CtBP2), and antagonizes
some E1A functions. In this report, we discovered that the transcriptional
activation function of E1A was specifically repressed by a short N-terminal
domain unique to CtBP2. The CtBP2-mediated repression of E1A transcriptional
activation activity is independent of histone deacetylases, which can be
recruited by CtBP1/2 proteins to inhibit transcription. Fusion of the CtBP2
N-terminal 20 residues to the E1A C-terminal region rendered E1A to be inactive
in transcriptional activation without interfering with E1A's ability to interact 
with major cofactors such as pRb, p400 and p300. Substitution of the N-terminal
domain of CtBP1 for the CtBP2 domain in E1A-CtBP2 fusion partially restored the
transactivation activity of E1A. In a cell-proliferation model utilizing primary 
baby rat kidney cells and retrovirally expressed E1A, the ability of E1A to
induce cellular proliferation was strongly inhibited when the CtBP2 N-terminal
region was fused to E1A. These results are consistent with a hypothesis that
CtBP2 may inhibit E1A induced cell proliferation by antagonizing the
transcriptional activation function controlled by the N-terminal region of E1A.

PMCID: PMC4364611
PMID: 18490918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Genes Dev. 2008 May 15;22(10):1397-409. doi: 10.1101/gad.1666108.

Regulation of the brown and white fat gene programs through a PRDM16/CtBP
transcriptional complex.

Kajimura S(1), Seale P, Tomaru T, Erdjument-Bromage H, Cooper MP, Ruas JL, Chin
S, Tempst P, Lazar MA, Spiegelman BM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and the Department of Cell Biology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA;

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2008 May 15;22(10):1269-75.

Brown fat is a specialized tissue that can dissipate energy and counteract
obesity through a pattern of gene expression that greatly increases mitochondrial
content and uncoupled respiration. PRDM16 is a zinc-finger protein that controls 
brown fat determination by stimulating brown fat-selective gene expression, while
suppressing the expression of genes selective for white fat cells. To determine
the mechanisms regulating this switching of gene programs, we purified native
PRDM16 protein complexes from fat cells. We show here that the PRDM16
transcriptional holocompex contains C-terminal-binding protein-1 (CtBP-1) and
CtBP-2, and this direct interaction selectively mediates the repression of white 
fat genes. This repression occurs through recruiting a PRDM16/CtBP complex onto
the promoters of white fat-specific genes such as resistin, and is abolished in
the genetic absence of CtBP-1 and CtBP-2. In turn, recruitment of
PPAR-gamma-coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha) and PGC-1beta to the PRDM16 complex
displaces CtBP, allowing this complex to powerfully activate brown fat genes,
such as PGC-1alpha itself. These data show that the regulated docking of the CtBP
proteins on PRDM16 controls the brown and white fat-selective gene programs.

PMCID: PMC2377193
PMID: 18483224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Neurosci. 2008 Mar 19;28(12):3150-8. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5753-07.2008.

Mobility and turnover of vesicles at the synaptic ribbon.

LoGiudice L(1), Sterling P, Matthews G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, State University of New York, Stony
Brook, Stony Brook, New York 11794-5230, USA.

Ribbon synapses release neurotransmitter continuously at high rates, and the
ribbons tether a large pool of synaptic vesicles. To determine whether the
tethered vesicles are actually released, we tracked vesicles labeled with styryl 
dye in mouse retinal bipolar cell terminals whose ribbons had been labeled with a
fluorescent peptide. We photobleached vesicles in regions with ribbons and
without them and then followed recovery of fluorescence as bleached regions were 
repopulated by labeled vesicles. In the resting terminal, fluorescence recovered 
by approximately 50% in non-ribbon regions but by only approximately 20% at
ribbons. Thus, at rest, vesicles associated with ribbons cannot exchange freely
with cytoplasmic vesicles. Depolarization stimulated vesicle turnover at ribbons 
as bleached, immobile vesicles were released by exocytosis and were then replaced
by fluorescent vesicles from the cytoplasm, producing an additional increase in
fluorescence specifically at the ribbon location. We conclude that vesicles
immobilized at synaptic ribbons participate in the readily releasable pool that
is tapped rapidly during depolarization.

PMCID: PMC2387080
PMID: 18354018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Vis Neurosci. 2008 Jan-Feb;25(1):67-76. doi: 10.1017/S0952523808080073.

Distribution of bipolar input to midget and parasol ganglion cells in marmoset
retina.

Eriköz B(1), Jusuf PR, Percival KA, Grünert U.

Author information: 
(1)National Vision Research Institute of Australia, Carlton, Australia.

Different types of retinal ganglion cell show differences in their response
properties. Here we investigated the question of whether these differences are
related to the distribution of the synaptic input to the dendritic tree. We
measured the distribution and density of synaptic input to the dendrites of
midget and parasol ganglion cells in the retina of a New World monkey, the
marmoset, Callithrix jacchus. Ganglion cells were retrogradely labeled by dye
injection into parvocellular or magnocellular regions of the lateral geniculate
nucleus and subsequently photo-filled. Presumed bipolar cell synapses were
identified immunocytochemically using antibodies against the ribbon protein CtBP2
or the GluR4 subunit of the AMPA receptor. For all cells, colocalized
immunoreactive puncta were distributed across the entire dendritic tree. The
density of the presumed bipolar input to midget ganglion cells was comparable for
both synaptic markers, suggesting that the AMPA receptor GluR4 subunit is
expressed at all synapses between midget bipolar and midget ganglion cells.
Midget ganglion cells had an average of nine colocalized immunoreactive puncta
per 100 microm2 dendritic surface, and parasol cells had an average of seven
colocalized immunoreactive puncta per 100 microm2 dendritic surface. The
densities were comparable in different regions of the dendritic tree and were not
influenced by the location of the cells with respect to the fovea. Our findings
suggest that the differences in the response characteristics of midget and
parasol cells are not due to differences in the density of synaptic input to
their dendritic tree.

PMID: 18282311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Nat Genet. 2008 Mar;40(3):310-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.91. Epub 2008 Feb 10.

Multiple loci identified in a genome-wide association study of prostate cancer.

Thomas G(1), Jacobs KB, Yeager M, Kraft P, Wacholder S, Orr N, Yu K, Chatterjee
N, Welch R, Hutchinson A, Crenshaw A, Cancel-Tassin G, Staats BJ, Wang Z,
Gonzalez-Bosquet J, Fang J, Deng X, Berndt SI, Calle EE, Feigelson HS, Thun MJ,
Rodriguez C, Albanes D, Virtamo J, Weinstein S, Schumacher FR, Giovannucci E,
Willett WC, Cussenot O, Valeri A, Andriole GL, Crawford ED, Tucker M, Gerhard DS,
Fraumeni JF Jr, Hoover R, Hayes RB, Hunter DJ, Chanock SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

We followed our initial genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 527,869 SNPs on
1,172 individuals with prostate cancer and 1,157 controls of European
origin-nested in the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer
Screening Trial prospective study-by testing 26,958 SNPs in four independent
studies (total of 3,941 cases and 3,964 controls). In the combined joint
analysis, we confirmed three previously reported loci (two independent SNPs at
8q24 and one in HNF1B (formerly known as TCF2 on 17q); P < 10(-10)). In addition,
loci on chromosomes 7, 10 (two loci) and 11 were highly significant (between P < 
7.31 x 10(-13) and P < 2.14 x 10(-6)). Loci on chromosome 10 include MSMB, which 
encodes beta-microseminoprotein, a primary constituent of semen and a proposed
prostate cancer biomarker, and CTBP2, a gene with antiapoptotic activity; the
locus on chromosome 7 is at JAZF1, a transcriptional repressor that is fused by
chromosome translocation to SUZ12 in endometrial cancer. Of the nine loci that
showed highly suggestive associations (P < 2.5 x 10(-5)), four best fit a
recessive model and included candidate susceptibility genes: CPNE3, IL16 and
CDH13. Our findings point to multiple loci with moderate effects associated with 
susceptibility to prostate cancer that, taken together, in the future may predict
high risk in select individuals.

PMID: 18264096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Cancer Res. 2008 Jan 15;68(2):476-82. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1960.

p19Arf inhibits the invasion of hepatocellular carcinoma cells by binding to
C-terminal binding protein.

Chen YW(1), Paliwal S, Draheim K, Grossman SR, Lewis BC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Gene Function and Expression, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

The INK4A/ARF tumor suppressor locus is frequently inactivated in hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC), yet the consequences of this remain unknown. We recently
described a HCC mouse model in which loss of the Ink4a/Arf locus accelerates the 
development of metastasis and enhances tumor cell migration and invasion in cell 
culture assays. We show here that knockdown of p19Arf in an HCC cell line
increases invasion in cell culture assays. Furthermore, reintroduction of
p19(Arf) into HCC cell lines lacking Ink4a/Arf inhibits tumor cell invasion,
without affecting cell proliferation, or cell transformation as measured by soft 
agar colony formation. Inhibition of cell invasion by p19(Arf) was dependent on
its C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) interaction domain but independent of Mdm2 
binding and nucleolar localization. Indeed, RNA interference-mediated knockdown
of CtBP1 or CtBP2 decreased cell invasion, and ectopic expression of CtBP2
enhanced tumor cell migration and invasion. Thus, our data indicate a novel role 
for the Arf tumor suppressor protein in regulating phenotypes associated with
tumor progression and metastasis in HCC cells.

PMCID: PMC2376045
PMID: 18199542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Biol Chem. 2008 Mar 14;283(11):6925-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708432200. Epub 2008 
Jan 9.

Phosphorylation of CtBP1 by cAMP-dependent protein kinase modulates induction of 
CYP17 by stimulating partnering of CtBP1 and 2.

Dammer EB(1), Sewer MB.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biology and Parker H Petit Institute for Bioengineering and
Bioscience, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30332-0230, USA.

In the human adrenal cortex, the peptide hormone adrenocorticotropin (ACTH)
directs cortisol and adrenal androgen biosynthesis by activating a
cAMP/cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) pathway. Carboxyl-terminal binding
protein 1 (CtBP1) is a corepressor that regulates transcription of the CYP17 gene
by periodically interacting with steroidogenic factor-1 in response to ACTH
signaling. Given that CtBP1 function is regulated by NADH binding, we
hypothesized that ACTH-stimulated changes in cellular pyridine nucleotide
concentrations modulate the ability of CtBP1 to repress CYP17 transcription.
Further, we postulated that PKA evokes changes in the phosphorylation status of
CtBP1 that control the ability of the protein to bind to steroidogenic factor-1
and the coactivator GCN5 (general control nonderepressed 5) and repress CYP17
gene expression. We show that ACTH alters pyridine nucleotide redox state and
identify amino acid residues in CtBP1 that are targeted by PKA and PAK6. Both
ACTH/cAMP signaling and NADH/NAD+ ratio stimulate nuclear-cytoplasmic oscillation
of both CtBP proteins. We provide evidence that PKA 1) induces metabolic changes 
in the adrenal cortex and 2) phosphorylates CtBP proteins, particularly CtBP1 at 
T144, resulting in CtBP protein partnering and ACTH-dependent CYP17
transcription.

PMCID: PMC2730192
PMID: 18184656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008 Sep 5;147B(6):983-6. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.30661.

A linkage analysis of cigarette and alcohol consumption in an unselected Mexican 
American population.

Viel K(1), Charlesworth J, Tejero E, Dyer T, Cole S, Haack K, MacCluer J,
Blangero J, Almasy L.

Author information: 
(1)Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research, Department of Genetics, San
Antonio, Texas, USA. kviel@sfbrgenetics.org

The use of alcohol and tobacco is highly prevalent. Studying the rate of
consumption in a non-selected population could contribute to the elucidation of
pathways involved in addiction or to the development of prevention programs. The 
San Antonio Family Heart Study has approximately 1,400 members with longitudinal 
data and did not select the proband with regard to exposure status. The goal of
this study was to perform genome-wide linkage analysis of the rate of alcohol and
cigarette consumption in a "normal" population. We used SOLAR to perform
variance-components based analysis of the transformed maximal rate of
consumption. Despite estimated heritabilities of 0.52 (P < 0.001) for cigarette
and 0.39 (P < 0.001) for alcohol consumption, univariate linkage analyses
produced only suggestive LOD scores, however the second suggestive linkage peak
for the alcohol phenotype was present at 148 cM on chromosome 10, in the exact
vicinity of the peak for the cigarette phenotype. In a bivariate analyses, the
environmental correlation between alcohol and cigarette consumption was not
significantly different from zero (rho(e) = -0.15, P = 0.18) and the overall
genetic correlation was not different from zero (rho(g) = 0.16, P = 0.34). The
results from the bivariate linkage analysis found a maximum LOD score of 3.82
(genome-wide P = 0.0054) at 151 cM on chromosome 10, at the location of the
overlapping peaks from the univariate analyses.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18163450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Eur J Neurosci. 2007 Nov;26(10):2906-21.

Characterization and synaptic connectivity of melanopsin-containing ganglion
cells in the primate retina.

Jusuf PR(1), Lee SC, Hannibal J, Grünert U.

Author information: 
(1)National Vision Research Institute of Australia, Cnr Keppel & Cardigan
Streets, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia.

Melanopsin is a photopigment expressed in retinal ganglion cells, which are
intrinsically photosensitive and are also involved in retinal circuits arising
from rod and cone photoreceptors. This circuitry, however, is poorly understood. 
Here, we studied the morphology, distribution and synaptic input to
melanopsin-containing ganglion cells in a New World monkey, the common marmoset
(Callithrix jacchus). The dendrites of melanopsin-containing cells in marmoset
stratify either close to the inner nuclear layer (outer stratifying), or close to
the ganglion cell layer (inner stratifying). The dendritic fields of
outer-stratifying cells tile the retina, with little overlap. However, the
dendritic fields of outer-stratifying cells largely overlap with the dendritic
fields of inner-stratifying cells. Thus, inner-stratifying and outer-stratifying 
cells may form functionally independent populations. The synaptic input to
melanopsin-containing cells was determined using synaptic markers (antibodies to 
C-terminal binding protein 2, CtBP2, for presumed bipolar synapses, and
antibodies to gephyrin for presumed amacrine synapses). Both outer-stratifying
and inner-stratifying cells show colocalized immunoreactive puncta across their
entire dendritic tree for both markers. The density of CtBP2 puncta on inner
dendrites was about 50% higher than that on outer dendrites. The density of
gephyrin puncta was comparable for outer and inner dendrites but higher than the 
density of CtBP2 puncta. The inner-stratifying cells may receive their input from
a type of diffuse bipolar cell (DB6). Our results are consistent with the idea
that both outer and inner melanopsin cells receive bipolar and amacrine input
across their dendritic tree.

PMID: 18001286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jan;28(1):269-81. Epub 2007 Oct 29.

Role of the PLDLS-binding cleft region of CtBP1 in recruitment of core and
auxiliary components of the corepressor complex.

Kuppuswamy M(1), Vijayalingam S, Zhao LJ, Zhou Y, Subramanian T, Ryerse J,
Chinnadurai G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine,
Daisy Research Center, 1100 South Grand Blvd., St. Louis, MO 63104, USA.

C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) family proteins CtBP1 and CtBP2 are highly
homologous transcriptional corepressors and are recruited by a large number of
transcription factors to mediate sequence-specific transcriptional repression. In
addition to DNA-binding repressors, the nuclear protein complex of CtBP1 consists
of enzymatic constituents such as histone deacetylases (HDAC1/2), histone methyl 
transferases (HMTases; G9a and GLP), and the lysine-specific demethylase (LSD1). 
Additionally, CtBPs also recruit the components of the sumoylation machinery. The
CtBPs contain two different unique structural elements, a hydrophobic cleft, with
which factors that contain motifs related to the E1A PLDLS motif bind, and a
surface groove that binds with factors containing motifs related to the sequence 
RRTGXPPXL (RRT motif). By structure-based functional dissection of CtBP1, we show
that the PLDLS-binding cleft region functions as the primary recruitment center
for DNA-binding factors and for the core and auxiliary enzymatic constituents of 
the CtBP1 corepressor complex. We identify HDAC1/2, CoREST/LSD1, and Ubc9 (E2) as
the core constituents of the CtBP1 complex, and these components interact with
the PLDLS cleft region through non-PLDLS interactions. Among the CtBP core
constituents, HDACs contribute predominantly to the repression activity of CtBP1.
The auxiliary components include an HMTase complex (G9a/Wiz/CDYL) and two SUMO E3
ligases, HPC2 and PIAS1. The interaction of auxiliary components with CtBP1 is
excluded by PLDLS (E1A)-mediated interactions. Although monomeric CtBP1 is
proficient in the recruiting of both core and auxiliary components,
NAD(H)-dependent dimerization is required for transcriptional repression. We also
provide evidence that CtBP1 functions as a platform for sumoylation of cofactors.

PMCID: PMC2223311
PMID: 17967884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Cancer Res. 2007 Oct 1;67(19):9322-9.

The alternative reading frame tumor suppressor antagonizes hypoxia-induced cancer
cell migration via interaction with the COOH-terminal binding protein
corepressor.

Paliwal S(1), Kovi RC, Nath B, Chen YW, Lewis BC, Grossman SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 364 
Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The alternative reading frame (ARF) tumor suppressor exerts both p53-dependent
and p53-independent activities critical to the prevention of cancer in mice and
humans. Recent evidence from mouse models suggests that when p53 is absent,
further loss of ARF can widen the tumor spectrum, and potentiate invasion and
metastasis. A major target of the p53-independent activity of ARF is the
COOH-terminal binding protein (CtBP) family of metabolically regulated
transcriptional corepressors, which are degraded upon acute exposure to the ARF
protein. CtBPs are activated under conditions of metabolic stress, such as
hypoxia, to repress epithelial and proapoptotic genes, and can mediate
hypoxia-induced migration of cancer cells. The possibility that ARF could
suppress tumor cell migration as part of its p53-independent activities was thus 
explored. Small-interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of ARF in human lung
carcinoma cells led to increased cell migration, especially during hypoxia, and
this effect was blocked by concomitant treatment with CtBP2 siRNA. Introduction
of ARF into p53 and ARF-null human colon cancer cells inhibited hypoxia-induced
migration. Furthermore, overexpression of CtBP2 in ARF-expressing cells enhanced 
cell migration, and an ARF mutant defective in CtBP-family binding was impaired
in its ability to inhibit cell migration induced by CtBP2. ARF depletion or CtBP2
overexpression was associated with decreased PTEN expression and activation of
the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway, and a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
inhibitor blocked CtBP2-mediated cell migration. Thus, ARF can suppress cell
migration by antagonizing CtBP2 and the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway,
and these data may explain the increased aggressiveness of ARF-null tumors in
mouse models.

PMID: 17909040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Neurophysiol. 2007 Nov;98(5):3023-33. Epub 2007 Sep 19.

Nyctalopin expression in retinal bipolar cells restores visual function in a
mouse model of complete X-linked congenital stationary night blindness.

Gregg RG(1), Kamermans M, Klooster J, Lukasiewicz PD, Peachey NS, Vessey KA,
McCall MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Louisville, KY
40202, USA. ron.gregg@louisville.edu

Mutations in the NYX gene that encodes the protein nyctalopin cause congenital
stationary night blindness type 1. In no b-wave (nob) mice, a mutation in Nyx
results in a functional phenotype that includes the absence of the
electroretinogram b-wave and abnormal spontaneous and light-evoked activity in
retinal ganglion cells (RGCs). In contrast, there is no morphological abnormality
in the retina at either the light or electron microscopic levels. These
functional deficits suggest that nyctalopin is required for normal synaptic
transmission between retinal photoreceptors and depolarizing bipolar cells
(DBCs). However, the synaptic etiology and, specifically, the exact location and 
function of nyctalopin, remain uncertain. We show that nob DBCs fail to respond
to exogenous application of the photoreceptor neurotransmitter, glutamate, thus
demonstrating a postsynaptic deficit in photoreceptor to bipolar cell
communication. To determine if postsynaptic expression of nyctalopin is necessary
and sufficient to rescue the nob phenotype, we constructed transgenic mice that
expressed an EYFP-nyctalopin fusion protein on the dendritic tips of the DBCs.
Immunohistochemical and ultrastructural studies verified that fusion protein
expression was limited to the DBC dendritic tips. Fusion gene expression in nob
mice restored normal outer and inner visual function as determined by the
electroretinogram and RGC spontaneous and evoked responses. Together, our data
show that nyctalopin expression on DBC dendrites is required for normal function 
of the murine retina.

PMCID: PMC2933657
PMID: 17881478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2007 Aug;48(8):3812-20.

Synaptic contact between melanopsin-containing retinal ganglion cells and rod
bipolar cells.

Østergaard J(1), Hannibal J, Fahrenkrug J.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.

PURPOSE: Evidence indicates that the melanopsin-containing intrinsically
photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs) receive input from rods and cones,
which are thought to modulate the irradiance detecting system driving entrainment
of the circadian system and pupillomotor control. This study was performed to
identify retinal cells that have synaptic contact with ipRGCs.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry and high-power confocal microscopy were used to
generate stacks of digital images of sections stained with antibodies against
melanopsin, protein kinase C (PKCalpha), tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), presynaptic
terminal markers (C-terminal binding protein 2 [CtBP2], vesicular monoamine
transporter 2 [VMAT2] and postsynaptic marker (glutamate receptor subunit 4
[GluR4]). Results were analyzed in a computer-based three-dimensional
reconstruction program for cellular contacts.
RESULTS: Markers and melanopsin rod bipolar processes were found to have
axosomatic and axodendritic contact with melanopsin-containing RGCs. Typically,
three to four contacts were found on the soma of the melanopsin-containing RGCs, 
together with contacts on proximal dendrites. Contacts visualized by only CtBP2
immunoreactivity could also be demonstrated on melanopsin cell bodies and
processes representing contacts with other types of bipolar cells. At the border 
of the inner plexiform layer (IPL) and inner nuclear layer (INL), where
melanopsin processes stratify, contacts between melanopsin and TH or VMAT2
immunoreactivity processes were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Through confocal microscopy and computer-based three-dimensional
analyses, this study demonstrates that melanopsin-containing RGCs have synaptic
contact with PKC/CtBP2-containing rod bipolar cells and TH/VMAT2-immunoreactive
amacrine cells through axodendritic and axosomatic contact, supporting
electrophysiological observations that rods and cones signal to the
melanopsin-containing intrinsically photosensitive RGCs.

PMID: 17652756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Vis Neurosci. 2007 Jul-Aug;24(4):489-502. Epub 2007 Jul 20.

Robust syntaxin-4 immunoreactivity in mammalian horizontal cell processes.

Hirano AA(1), Brandstätter JH, Vila A, Brecha NC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurobiology & Medicine, Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, California 90095, USA. ahirano@mednet.ucla.edu

Horizontal cells mediate inhibitory feed-forward and feedback communication in
the outer retina; however, mechanisms that underlie transmitter release from
mammalian horizontal cells are poorly understood. Toward determining whether the 
molecular machinery for exocytosis is present in horizontal cells, we
investigated the localization of syntaxin-4, a SNARE protein involved in
targeting vesicles to the plasma membrane, in mouse, rat, and rabbit retinae
using immunocytochemistry. We report robust expression of syntaxin-4 in the outer
plexiform layer of all three species. Syntaxin-4 occurred in processes and tips
of horizontal cells, with regularly spaced, thicker sandwich-like structures
along the processes. Double labeling with syntaxin-4 and calbindin antibodies, a 
horizontal cell marker, demonstrated syntaxin-4 localization to horizontal cell
processes; whereas, double labeling with PKC antibodies, a rod bipolar cell (RBC)
marker, showed a lack of co-localization, with syntaxin-4 immunolabeling
occurring just distal to RBC dendritic tips. Syntaxin-4 immunolabeling occurred
within VGLUT-1-immunoreactive photoreceptor terminals and underneath synaptic
ribbons, labeled by CtBP2/RIBEYE antibodies, consistent with localization in
invaginating horizontal cell tips at photoreceptor triad synapses. Vertical
sections of retina immunostained for syntaxin-4 and peanut agglutinin (PNA)
established that the prominent patches of syntaxin-4 immunoreactivity were
adjacent to the base of cone pedicles. Horizontal sections through the OPL
indicate a one-to-one co-localization of syntaxin-4 densities at likely all cone 
pedicles, with syntaxin-4 immunoreactivity interdigitating with PNA labeling.
Pre-embedding immuno-electron microscopy confirmed the subcellular localization
of syntaxin-4 labeling to lateral elements at both rod and cone triad synapses.
Finally, co-localization with SNAP-25, a possible binding partner of syntaxin-4, 
indicated co-expression of these SNARE proteins in the same subcellular
compartment of the horizontal cell. Taken together, the strong expression of
these two SNARE proteins in the processes and endings of horizontal cells at rod 
and cone terminals suggests that horizontal cell axons and dendrites are likely
sites of exocytotic activity.

PMCID: PMC2744743
PMID: 17640443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Neurosci. 2007 Jun 13;27(24):6442-51.

Persistence of Ca(v)1.3 Ca2+ channels in mature outer hair cells supports outer
hair cell afferent signaling.

Knirsch M(1), Brandt N, Braig C, Kuhn S, Hirt B, Münkner S, Knipper M, Engel J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology II, University of Tübingen, D-72076 Tübingen, Germany.

Outer hair cells (OHCs) are innervated by type II afferent fibers of as yet
unknown function. It is still a matter of debate whether OHCs perform exocytosis.
If so, they would require presynaptic Ca2+ channels at their basal poles where
the type II fibers make contacts. Here we show that L-type Ca2+ channel currents 
(charge carrier, 10 mM Ba2+) present in neonatal OHCs [postnatal day 1 (P1) to
P7] decreased from approximately 170 to approximately 50 pA at approximately the 
onset of hearing. Ba2+ currents could hardly be measured in mature mouse OHCs
because of their high fragility, whereas in the rat, the average Ba2+ current
amplitude of apical OHCs was 58 +/- 9 pA (n = 20, P19-P30) compared with that of 
the inner hair cells (IHCs) of 181 +/- 50 pA (n = 24, P17-P30). Properties of
Ba2+ currents of mature OHCs resembled those of neonatal OHCs. One exception was 
the voltage dependence of activation that shifted between birth and P12 by +9 mV 
toward positive voltages in OHCs, whereas it remained constant in the IHCs.
Ca(v)1.3-specific mRNA was detected in mature OHCs using cell-specific reverse
transcription (RT)-PCR and in situ hybridization. Ca(v)1.3 protein was stained
exclusively at the base of mature OHCs, in colocalization with the ribbon synapse
protein CtBP2 (C-terminal binding protein 2)/RIBEYE. When current sizes were
normalized to the estimated number of afferent fibers or presynaptic ribbons,
comparable values for IHCs and OHCs were obtained, a finding that together with
the colocalization of Ca(v)1.3 and CtBP2/RIBEYE protein strongly suggests a role 
for Ca(v)1.3 channels in exocytosis of mature OHCs.

PMID: 17567805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Oncogene. 2007 Nov 29;26(54):7544-51. Epub 2007 Jun 4.

PLDLS-dependent interaction of E1A with CtBP: regulation of CtBP nuclear
localization and transcriptional functions.

Zhao LJ(1), Subramanian T, Vijayalingam S, Chinnadurai G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, Saint Louis University Health Sciences
Center, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

C-terminal binding proteins (CtBPs) are cellular corepressors that are targeted
by adenovirus E1A. A conserved motif of E1A (PLDLS) interacts with an N-terminal 
hydrophobic cleft of CtBPs. Many cellular cofactors also interact with CtBPs
through PLDLS-like motifs. E1A interaction with CtBP2 changed the composition of 
the CtBP2 protein complex and enhanced CtBP2 acetylation. We have identified a
mutant of CtBP2 (M48A) that fails to interact with cellular cofactors while
interacting normally with E1A. Other cleft mutations in CtBP2 affected
interaction of both cellular cofactors and E1A. The M48A mutant did not repress
the cellular E-cadherin promoter but inhibited transactivation mediated by the
E1A N-terminal region through interaction with the E1A PLDLS motif. In vitro, E1A
enhanced CtBP2 acetylation by p300 via a mechanism involving dissociation of
acetylated CtBP2 from p300. E1A enhanced nuclear localization of CtBP1 as well as
a cytoplasmically localized acetylation-deficient mutant of CtBP2 (3KR-CtBP2)
through PLDLS-dependent interaction. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
revealed presence of CtBP2 on E-cadherin and c-fos promoters. While E1A did not
significantly alter targeting of CtBP2 to the E-cadherin and c-fos promoters, it 
dramatically enhanced promoter targeting of 3KR-CtBP2. Our results raise a
possibility that E1A may gain access to cellular promoters through
PLDLS-dependent interaction with CtBPs.

PMCID: PMC2928068
PMID: 17546044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2007;39(9):1593-607. Epub 2007 Feb 4.

Transcriptional regulation by C-terminal binding proteins.

Chinnadurai G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, Saint Louis University Health Sciences
Center, 3681 Park Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. chinnag@slu.edu

C-terminal binding protein family members function predominantly as
transcriptional corepressors in association with sequence specific DNA-binding
transcriptional repressors. The vertebrates have two CtBP genes while the
invertebrates contain a single gene. Genetic studies indicate that the CtBP genes
play pivotal roles in animal development. The vertebrate C-terminal binding
proteins (CtBP1 and CtBP2) are highly related and are functionally redundant for 
certain developmental processes and non-redundant for others. The animal
C-terminal binding proteins exhibit structural and functional similarity to
d-isomer-specific 2-hydroxy acid dehydrogenases (D2-HDH). They function as
dimers, recruiting transcriptional regulators through two protein-binding
interfaces in each monomer. The corepressor complex of CtBP1 contains enzymatic
constituents that mediate coordinated histone modification by deacetylation and
methylation of histone H3-Lysine 9 and demethylation of histone H3-Lysine 4. CtBP
also recruits the small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) conjugating E2 enzyme
UBC9 and a SUMO E3 ligase (HPC2), suggesting that CtBP-mediated transcriptional
regulation may also involve SUMOylation of transcription factors. In addition to 
gene-specific transcriptional repression, CtBP1 appears to antagonize the
activity of the global transcriptional coactivators, p300/CBP. Genetic evidence
also suggests that the fly CtBP (dCtBP) and the vertebrate CtBP2 might activate
transcription in a context-dependent manner. The transcriptional regulatory
activity of CtBP is modulated by the nuclear NADH/NAD+ ratio and hence appears to
be influenced by the metabolic status of the cell. The nuclear dinucleotide ratio
may differentially influence the repression activities of factors that recruit
CtBP through PLDLS-like motifs and those through non-PLDLS-motifs.

PMID: 17336131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 30;282(13):9703-12. Epub 2007 Jan 26.

Identification of genes directly regulated by the oncogene ZNF217 using chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-chip assays.

Krig SR(1), Jin VX, Bieda MC, O'Geen H, Yaswen P, Green R, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and the Genome Center, University of California,
Davis, California 95616, USA.

It has been proposed that ZNF217, which is amplified at 20q13 in various tumors, 
plays a key role during neoplastic transformation. ZNF217 has been purified in
complexes that contain repressor proteins such as CtBP2, suggesting that it acts 
as a transcriptional repressor. However, the function of ZNF217 has not been well
characterized due to a lack of known target genes. Using a global chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-chip approach, we identified thousands of ZNF217
binding sites in three tumor cell lines (MCF7, SW480, and Ntera2). Further
analysis of ZNF217 in Ntera2 cells showed that many promoters are bound by ZNF217
and CtBP2 and that a subset of these promoters are activated upon removal of
ZNF217. Thus, our in vivo studies corroborate the in vitro biochemical analyses
of ZNF217-containing complexes and support the hypothesis that ZNF217 functions
as a transcriptional repressor. Gene ontology analysis showed that ZNF217 targets
in Ntera2 cells are involved in organ development, suggesting that one function
of ZNF217 may be to repress differentiation. Accordingly we show that
differentiation of Ntera2 cells with retinoic acid led to down-regulation of
ZNF217. Our identification of thousands of ZNF217 target genes will enable
further studies of the consequences of aberrant expression of ZNF217 during
neoplastic transformation.

PMCID: PMC2269729
PMID: 17259635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Eur J Neurosci. 2006 Dec;24(12):3372-80.

Differential expression of otoferlin in brain, vestibular system, immature and
mature cochlea of the rat.

Schug N(1), Braig C, Zimmermann U, Engel J, Winter H, Ruth P, Blin N, Pfister M, 
Kalbacher H, Knipper M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tübingen, Institute of Human Genetics, Wilhelmstr. 27, 72074
Tübingen, Germany.

Mutations of the human otoferlin gene lead to an autosomal recessive nonsyndromic
form of prelingual, sensorineural deafness (deafness autosomal recessive 9,
DFNB9). Several studies have demonstrated expression of otoferlin in the inner
ear and brain, and suggested a role of otoferlin in Ca(2+)-triggered exocytosis. 
So far, otoferlin expression profiles were solely based on the detection of mRNA.
Here, we analysed the expression of otoferlin protein and mRNA using
immunohistochemistry, in situ hybridization and RT-PCR in neonatal and mature
Wistar rat tissue. In agreement with previous studies, otoferlin expression was
found in the brain and in inner and vestibular hair cells. Otoferlin mRNA and
protein was, however, also detected in mature outer hair cells of low-frequency
processing cochlear turns and in auditory nerve fibres. In outer, inner and
vestibular hair cells, otoferlin was subcellularly localized at a considerable
distance from the presumed active release sites. Double-staining with the
synaptic ribbon marker, C-terminal binding protein 2 (CtBP2), or the presynaptic 
Ca(2+)-channel, Ca(v)1.3, both assumed to mark the sites of vesicle fusion and
transmitter release, did not colocalize with otoferlin expression and thus do not
necessarily support a selected role of otoferlin in Ca(2+)-triggered exocytosis. 
The widespread distribution of otoferlin in neurons, nerve fibres and hair cells,
and its subcellular distribution extending beyond the regions of synaptic vesicle
fusion, i.e. coenrichment with the cytosolic Golgi matrix protein 130 (GM130) in 
inner hair cells or the early endosomal autoantigen 1 (EEA1) in outer hair cells 
support instead the idea of a more ubiquitous role of otoferlin in
early/recycling endosome trans-Golgi network dynamics.

PMID: 17229086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Neuroscience. 2006 Dec;143(3):837-49. Epub 2006 Oct 30.

Two classes of outer hair cells along the tonotopic axis of the cochlea.

Engel J(1), Braig C, Rüttiger L, Kuhn S, Zimmermann U, Blin N, Sausbier M,
Kalbacher H, Münkner S, Rohbock K, Ruth P, Winter H, Knipper M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tübingen, Institute of Physiology II and Department of
Otolaryngology, THRC, Gmelinstrasse 5, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.

The molecular basis of high versus low frequency hearing loss and the differences
in the sensitivity of outer hair cells depending on their cochlear localization
are currently not understood. Here we demonstrate the existence of two different 
outer hair cell phenotypes along the cochlear axis. Outer hair cells in low
frequency regions exhibit early sensitivity for loss of Ca(v)1.3 (alpha1 subunit 
1.3 forming the class D L-type voltage-gated Ca(2+) channel), while high
frequency regions display a progressive susceptibility for loss of the
Ca(2+)-activated large conductance K(+) (BK) channel. Despite deafness, young
Ca(v)1.3-deficient mice displayed distortion-product otoacoustic emissions
(DPOAEs), indicating functional outer hair cells in the higher frequency range of
the cochlea. Considering that DPOAEs are also found in the human deafness
syndrome DFNB9 caused by mutations in the synaptic vesicle protein otoferlin, we 
tested the expression of otoferlin in outer hair cells. Surprisingly, otoferlin
showed a distinct tonotopic expression pattern at both the mRNA and protein
level. Otoferlin-expressing, Ca(v)1.3 deletion-sensitive outer hair cells in the 
low frequency range could be clearly separated from otoferlin-negative, BK
deletion-sensitive outer hair cells in the high frequency range. In addition, BK 
deletion led to a higher noise vulnerability in low frequency regions, which are 
normally unaffected by the BK deletion alone, suggesting that BK currents are
involved in survival mechanisms of outer hair cells under noise conditions. Our
findings propose new mechanisms and candidate genes for explaining high and low
frequency hearing loss.

PMID: 17074442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Biol Chem. 2006 Dec 1;281(48):36613-23. Epub 2006 Oct 4.

Changes in C-terminal binding protein 2 (CtBP2) corepressor complex induced by
E1A and modulation of E1A transcriptional activity by CtBP2.

Zhao LJ(1), Subramanian T, Chinnadurai G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, Saint Louis University Health Sciences
Center, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

The N-terminal region of adenovirus E1A interacts with histone acetyl
transferases (HATs) such as p300, P/CAF, and GCN5. The C-terminal region
interacts with the transcriptional corepressors CtBP1 and CtBP2. The functional
significance of co-recruitment of HATs and CtBPs by E1A is not well understood.
In this study, we have shown that E1A enhanced acetylation of CtBP2 by
recruitment of p300 to the CtBP2 complex. Additionally, E1A also displaced the
histone methyltransferase G9a and the E-box repressor ZEB from the CtBP2 complex 
through the C-terminal CtBP-binding domain. A transcriptional activation function
encoded by the E1A N-terminal region was efficiently inhibited by CtBP2 but not
by a mutant with an N-terminal deletion or by a mutant deficient in interaction
with E1A. Two isoforms of CtBP1 (CtBP1-L and CtBP1-S) poorly inhibited
transcriptional activity of the E1A N-terminal region. Thus, the N-terminal
domain of CtBP2 may contribute a unique transcriptional regulatory activity of
CtBP2. Our results provide new insights by which CtBP might modulate the
biochemical activities of E1A.

PMID: 17023432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Gene. 2006 Dec 15;384:154-62. Epub 2006 Aug 15.

Conservation and expression of a novel alternatively spliced Evi1 exon.

Alzuherri H(1), McGilvray R, Kilbey A, Bartholomew C.

Author information: 
(1)Glasgow Caledonian University, Department of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, City Campus Cowcaddens Road Glasgow, G4 OBA, United Kingdom.

The Evi1 transcriptional repressor protein is expressed in a developmentally
regulated manner, is essential for normal development, participates in regulating
cell proliferation and differentiation of cells of haemopoietic and neuronal
origin and contributes to the progression of leukaemia. In this report we
describe a new murine Evi1 gene transcript (Delta105) that contains two
alternatively spliced regions encoding a 9 amino acid insertion (Rp+9) within the
repressor domain (Rp) and a 105 amino acid C-terminal truncation. Abundant levels
of the 105 amino acid truncated protein are observed in murine leukaemia cells.
The combined primary sequence alterations do not affect the DNA binding,
transcriptional repressor or CtBP2 protein binding properties of Evi1 but they do
reduce its transforming and cell proliferation stimulating activities. Reduced
transforming activity is most likely due to the C-terminal truncation as the
activity of Evi1 containing either Rp or Rp+9 is indistinguishable. Both isoforms
exist in all murine tissues and cell lines examined. However, only the Rp+9
alternative splice variant is also found in humans and other vertebrates. Murine 
and human forms of Evi1 with Rp or Rp+9 exist. The additional 9 amino acids are
encoded by a conserved 27 nucleotide exon, the overall structural organisation of
the gene being preserved in the two species. The function of the Rp+9 and
Delta105 splice variants is unknown although the conservation of Rp+9 throughout 
evolution in vertebrate species suggests it is essential to the broad spectrum of
biological activities attributed to this developmentally essential protein.

PMID: 17014970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. BMC Cell Biol. 2006 Sep 25;7:35.

Role of the unique N-terminal domain of CtBP2 in determining the subcellular
localisation of CtBP family proteins.

Bergman LM(1), Morris L, Darley M, Mirnezami AH, Gunatilake SC, Blaydes JP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Sciences Division, School of Medicine, University of Southampton,
Southampton SO16 6YD, UK. l.m.bergman@soton.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: CtBP1 and CtBP2 are transcriptional co-repressors that modulate the
activity of a large number of transcriptional repressors via the recruitment of
chromatin modifiers. Many CtBP-regulated proteins are involved in pathways
associated with tumorigenesis, including TGF-beta and Wnt signalling pathways and
cell cycle regulators such as RB/p130 and HDM2, as well as adenovirus E1A. CtBP1 
and CtBP2 are highly similar proteins, although evidence is emerging that their
activity can be differentially regulated, particularly through the control of
their subcellular localisation. CtBP2s from diverse species contain a unique
N-terminus, absent in CtBP1 that plays a key role in controlling the
nuclear-cytoplasmic distribution of the protein.
RESULTS: Here we show that amino acids (a.a.) 4-14 of CtBP2 direct CtBP2 into an 
almost exclusively nuclear distribution in cell lines of diverse origins. Whilst 
this sequence contains similarity to known nuclear localisation motifs, it cannot
drive nuclear localisation of a heterologous protein, but rather has been shown
to function as a p300 acetyltransferase-dependent nuclear retention sequence.
Here we define the region of CtBP2 required to co-operate with a.a. 4-14 to
promote CtBP2 nuclear accumulation as being within a.a. 1-119. In addition, we
show that a.a. 120-445 of CtBP2 can also promote CtBP2 nuclear accumulation,
independently of a.a. 4-14. Finally, CtBP1 and CtBP2 can form heterodimers, and
we show that the interaction with CtBP2 is one mechanism whereby CtBP1 can be
recruited to the nucleus.
CONCLUSION: Together, these findings represent key distinctions in the regulation
of the functions of CtBP family members that may have important implications as
to their roles in development, and cell differentiation and survival.

PMCID: PMC1592084
PMID: 16999872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Nov;26(21):8202-13. Epub 2006 Aug 28.

Role of the C-terminal binding protein PXDLS motif binding cleft in protein
interactions and transcriptional repression.

Quinlan KG(1), Verger A, Kwok A, Lee SH, Perdomo J, Nardini M, Bolognesi M,
Crossley M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences, University of Sydney, Sydney,
New South Wales 2006, Australia.

C-terminal binding proteins (CtBPs) are multifunctional proteins that can mediate
gene repression. CtBPs contain a cleft that binds Pro-X-Asp-Leu-Ser (PXDLS)
motifs. PXDLS motifs occur in numerous transcription factors and in effectors of 
gene repression, such as certain histone deacetylases. CtBPs have been depicted
as bridging proteins that self-associate and link PXDLS-containing transcription 
factors to PXDLS-containing chromatin-modifying enzymes. CtBPs also recruit
effectors that do not contain recognizable PXDLS motifs. We have investigated the
importance of the PXDLS binding cleft to CtBP's interactions with various partner
proteins and to its ability to repress transcription. We used CtBP cleft mutant
and cleft-filled fusion derivatives to distinguish between partner proteins that 
bind in the cleft and elsewhere on the CtBP surface. Functional assays
demonstrate that CtBP mutants that carry defective clefts retain repression
activity when fused to heterologous DNA-binding domains. This result suggests
that the cleft is not essential for recruiting effectors. In contrast, when
tested in the absence of a fused DNA-binding domain, disruption of the cleft
abrogates repression activity. These results demonstrate that the PXDLS binding
cleft is functionally important but suggest that it is primarily required for
localization of the CtBP complex to promoter-bound transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC1636740
PMID: 16940173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Nov;26(21):8159-72. Epub 2006 Aug 28.

Specific recognition of ZNF217 and other zinc finger proteins at a surface groove
of C-terminal binding proteins.

Quinlan KG(1), Nardini M, Verger A, Francescato P, Yaswen P, Corda D, Bolognesi
M, Crossley M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences, University of Sydney, Sydney,
NSW 2006, Australia.

Numerous transcription factors recruit C-terminal binding protein (CtBP)
corepressors. We show that the large zinc finger protein ZNF217 contacts CtBP.
ZNF217 is encoded by an oncogene frequently amplified in tumors. ZNF217 contains 
a typical Pro-X-Asp-Leu-Ser (PXDLS) motif that binds in CtBP's PXDLS-binding
cleft. However, ZNF217 also contains a second motif, Arg-Arg-Thr (RRT), that
binds a separate surface on CtBP. The crystal structure of CtBP bound to an
RRTGAPPAL peptide shows that it contacts a surface crevice distinct from the
PXDLS binding cleft. Interestingly, both PXDLS and RRT motifs are also found in
other zinc finger proteins, such as RIZ. Finally, we show that ZNF217 represses
several promoters, including one from a known CtBP target gene, and mutations
preventing ZNF217's contact with CtBP reduce repression. These results identify a
new CtBP interaction motif and establish ZNF217 as a transcriptional repressor
protein that functions, at least in part, by associating with CtBP.

PMCID: PMC1636751
PMID: 16940172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Virology. 2006 Nov 25;355(2):115-26. Epub 2006 Aug 17.

Acetylation at a lysine residue adjacent to the CtBP binding motif within
adenovirus 12 E1A causes structural disruption and limited reduction of CtBP
binding.

Molloy D(1), Mapp KL, Webster R, Gallimore PH, Grand RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Thames Valley University, Faculty of Health and Human Sciences, Walpole House 
18-20 Bond Street, Ealing, London, W5 5AA, UK.

C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) has been shown to bind to a highly conserved
five-amino-acid motif (PXDLS) located very close to the C-terminus of adenovirus 
early region 1A proteins. It has also been demonstrated that amino acids
C-terminal and N-terminal to this original proposed binding site contribute to
the interaction. However, conflicting evidence has been presented to show that
acetylation of an adjacent lysine residue in Ad5E1A may or may not influence
binding. It has now been demonstrated here that acetylation of a lysine,
equivalent to position 261 in Ad12 E1A and position 285 in Ad5E1A, in a synthetic
peptide disrupts the binding to CtBP1 and CtBP2 and alters the K(i) of the
peptide, indicative of a reduction in the affinity of the peptide for CtBP1 and
CtBP2, but only to a rather limited extent (less than 2-fold). The solution
structures of synthetic peptides equivalent to wild-type and acetylated forms of 
the Ad12 E1A peptide have been determined by proton NMR spectroscopy. The
wild-type form of the peptide adopts a series of beta-turns over the region
Val(254)-Arg(262). Within the acetylated isoform, the beta-turn conformation is
less extensive, Val(260)-Arg(262) adopting a random confirmation. We conclude
that secondary structure (beta-turns) and an appropriate series of amino acid
side chains over an extended binding site (PXDLSXK) are necessary for recognition
by CtBP, acetylation of lysine interfering with both of these features, but not
to such an extent as to totally inhibit interaction. Moreover, it is possible
that the beta-turn conformation at the C-terminus of AdE1A contributes to binding
to alpha importin and nuclear import. Acetylation of lysine (261) could disrupt
interaction through structural destabilization as well as charge neutralization
and subsequent nuclear localization.

PMID: 16919702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Neurochem. 2006 Aug;98(4):1290-301. Epub 2006 Jun 19.

Calsenilin interacts with transcriptional co-repressor C-terminal binding
protein(s).

Zaidi NF(1), Kuplast KG, Washicosky KJ, Kajiwara Y, Buxbaum JD, Wasco W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Genetics and Aging Research Unit, MassGeneral
Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, 
Massachusetts 02129, USA.

Calsenilin/potassium channel-interacting protein (KChIP)3/ downstream regulatory 
element sequence antagonist modulator (DREAM) is a neuronal calcium-binding
protein that has been shown to have multiple functions in the cell, including the
regulation of presenilin processing, repression of transcription and modulation
of A-type potassium channels. To gain a better understanding of the precise role 
of calsenilin in specific cellular compartments, an interactor hunt for proteins 
that bind to the N-terminal domain of calsenilin was carried out. Using a yeast
two-hybrid system and co-immunoprecipitation studies, we have identified the
transcriptional co-repressor C-terminal binding protein (CtBP)2 as an interactor 
for calsenilin and have shown that the two proteins can interact in vivo. In
co-immunoprecipitation studies, calsenilin also interacted with CtBP1, a CtBP2
homolog. Our data also showed a calsenilin-dependent increase in c-fos protein
levels in CtBP knockout fibroblasts, suggesting that CtBP may modulate the
transcriptional repression of c-fos by calsenilin. Furthermore, the finding that 
histone deacetylase protein and activity were associated with the calsenilin-CtBP
immunocomplex suggests a mechanism by which calsenilin-CtBP may act to repress
transcription. Finally, we demonstrated that calsenilin and CtBP are present in
synaptic vesicles and can interact in vivo.

PMID: 16787403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Jul;26(13):4882-94.

Mechanisms directing the nuclear localization of the CtBP family proteins.

Verger A(1), Quinlan KG, Crofts LA, Spanò S, Corda D, Kable EP, Braet F, Crossley
M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences, Biochemistry Building G08,
University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2006, Australia.

The C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) family includes four proteins (CtBP1
[CtBP1-L], CtBP3/BARS [CtBP1-S], CtBP2, and RIBEYE) which are implicated both in 
transcriptional repression and in intracellular trafficking. However, the precise
mechanisms by which different CtBP proteins are targeted to different subcellular
regions remains unknown. Here, we report that the nuclear import of the various
CtBP proteins and splice isoforms is differentially regulated. We show that CtBP2
contains a unique nuclear localization signal (NLS) located within its N-terminal
region, which contributes to its nuclear accumulation. Using heterokaryon assays,
we show that CtBP2 is capable of shuttling between the nucleus and cytoplasm of
the cell. Moreover, CtBP2 can heterodimerize with CtBP1-L and CtBP1-S and direct 
them to the nucleus. This effect strongly depends on the CtBP2 NLS. PXDLS
motif-containing transcription factors, such as BKLF, that bind CtBP proteins can
also direct them to the nucleus. We also report the identification of a splice
isoform of CtBP2, CtBP2-S, that lacks the N-terminal NLS and localizes to the
cytoplasm. Finally, we show that mutation of the CtBP NADH binding site impairs
the ability of the proteins to dimerize and to associate with BKLF. This reduces 
the nuclear accumulation of CtBP1. Our results suggest a model in which the
nuclear localization of CtBP proteins is influenced by the CtBP2 NLS, by binding 
to PXDLS motif partner proteins, and through the effect of NADH on CtBP
dimerization.

PMCID: PMC1489157
PMID: 16782877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. FEBS J. 2006 Jul;273(13):2879-90. Epub 2006 Jun 7.

A L225A substitution in the human tumour suppressor HIC1 abolishes its
interaction with the corepressor CtBP.

Stankovic-Valentin N(1), Verger A, Deltour-Balerdi S, Quinlan KG, Crossley M,
Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8526, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
France.

HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer) is a tumour suppressor gene located in 17p13.3, 
a region frequently hypermethylated or deleted in many types of prevalent human
tumour. HIC1 is also a candidate for a contiguous-gene syndrome, the
Miller-Dieker syndrome, a severe form of lissencephaly accompanied by
developmental anomalies. HIC1 encodes a BTB/POZ-zinc finger transcriptional
repressor. HIC1 represses transcription via two autonomous repression domains, an
N-terminal BTB/POZ and a central region, by trichostatin A-insensitive and
trichostatin A-sensitive mechanisms, respectively. The HIC1 central region
recruits the corepressor CtBP (C-terminal binding protein) through a conserved
GLDLSKK motif, a variant of the consensus C-terminal binding protein interaction 
domain PxDLSxK/R. Here, we show that HIC1 interacts with both CtBP1 and CtBP2 and
that this interaction is stimulated by agents increasing NADH levels.
Furthermore, point mutation of two CtBP2 residues forming part of the structure
of the recognition cleft for a PxDLS motif also ablates the interaction with a
GxDLS motif. Conversely, in perfect agreement with the structural data and the
universal conservation of this residue in all C-terminal binding
protein-interacting motifs, mutation of the central leucine residue (leucine 225 
in HIC1) abolishes the interaction between HIC1 and CtBP1 or CtBP2. As expected
from the corepressor activity of CtBP, this mutation also impairs the
HIC1-mediated transcriptional repression. These results thus demonstrate a strong
conservation in the binding of C-terminal binding protein-interacting domains
despite great variability in their amino acid sequences. Finally, this L225A
point mutation could also provide useful knock-in animal models to study the role
of the HIC1-CtBP interaction in tumorigenesis and in development.

PMID: 16762039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Vis Neurosci. 2006 Jan-Feb;23(1):11-24.

The nob2 mouse, a null mutation in Cacna1f: anatomical and functional
abnormalities in the outer retina and their consequences on ganglion cell visual 
responses.

Chang B(1), Heckenlively JR, Bayley PR, Brecha NC, Davisson MT, Hawes NL, Hirano 
AA, Hurd RE, Ikeda A, Johnson BA, McCall MA, Morgans CW, Nusinowitz S, Peachey
NS, Rice DS, Vessey KA, Gregg RG.

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, USA.

Glutamate release from photoreceptor terminals is controlled by voltage-dependent
calcium channels (VDCCs). In humans, mutations in the Cacna1f gene, encoding the 
alpha1F subunit of VDCCs, underlie the incomplete form of X-linked congenital
stationary night blindness (CSNB2). These mutations impair synaptic transmission 
from rod and cone photoreceptors to bipolar cells. Here, we report anatomical and
functional characterizations of the retina in the nob2 (no b-wave 2) mouse, a
naturally occurring mutant caused by a null mutation in Cacna1f. Not
surprisingly, the b-waves of both the light- and dark-adapted electroretinogram
are abnormal in nob2 mice. The outer plexiform layer (OPL) is disorganized, with 
extension of ectopic neurites through the outer nuclear layer that originate from
rod bipolar and horizontal cells, but not from hyperpolarizing bipolar cells.
These ectopic neurites continue to express mGluR6, which is frequently associated
with profiles that label with the presynaptic marker Ribeye, indicating potential
points of ectopic synapse formation. However, the morphology of the presynaptic
Ribeye-positive profiles is abnormal. While cone pedicles are present their
morphology also appears compromised. Characterizations of visual responses in
retinal ganglion cells in vivo, under photopic conditions, demonstrate that
ON-center cells have a reduced dynamic range, although their basic
center-surround organization is retained; no alteration in the responses of
OFF-center cells was evident. These results indicate that nob2 mice are a
valuable model in which to explore the pathophysiological mechanisms associated
with Cacna1f mutations causing CSNB2, and the subsequent effects on visual
information processing. Further, the nob2 mouse represents a model system in
which to define the signals that guide synapse formation and/or maintenance in
the OPL.

PMCID: PMC2831086
PMID: 16597347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Mar;26(6):2360-72.

Targeting of C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) by ARF results in p53-independent 
apoptosis.

Paliwal S(1), Pande S, Kovi RC, Sharpless NE, Bardeesy N, Grossman SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 364 
Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

ARF encodes a potent tumor suppressor that antagonizes MDM2, a negative regulator
of p53. ARF also suppresses the proliferation of cells lacking p53, and loss of
ARF in p53-null mice, compared with ARF or p53 singly null mice, results in a
broadened tumor spectrum and decreased tumor latency. To investigate the
mechanism of p53-independent tumor suppression by ARF, potential interacting
proteins were identified by yeast two-hybrid screen. The antiapoptotic
transcriptional corepressor C-terminal binding protein 2 (CtBP2) was identified, 
and ARF interactions with both CtBP1 and CtBP2 were confirmed in vitro and in
vivo. Interaction with ARF resulted in proteasome-dependent CtBP degradation.
Both ARF-induced CtBP degradation and CtBP small interfering RNA led to
p53-independent apoptosis in colon cancer cells. ARF induction of apoptosis was
dependent on its ability to interact with CtBP, and reversal of ARF-induced CtBP 
depletion by CtBP overexpression abrogated ARF-induced apoptosis. CtBP proteins
represent putative targets for p53-independent tumor suppression by ARF.

PMCID: PMC1430274
PMID: 16508011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Cell Cycle. 2006 Mar;5(5):530-7. Epub 2006 Mar 1.

The transcriptional co-repressor C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) associates
with centrosomes during mitosis.

Spyer M(1), Allday MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, Norfolk 
Place, London, UK.

CtBP is a corepressor of transcription that acts by inhibiting coactivators and
recruiting to promoter control elements (via interactions with DNA-binding
transcription factors) a complex of proteins that modify histones, repress
transcription and silence gene expression. There are two highly homologous genes,
CtBP1 and CtBP2 that encode CtBP. In addition, a CtBP1-related protein has been
described that has 11 fewer amino acids at its N-terminus than CtBP1. This
variant of CtBP1--known as CtBP3 or BARS [Brefeldin A (BFA) ribosylated
substrate]--plays a critical role in the fragmentation of the Golgi complex at
the onset of mitosis. Although there are some reports of CtBP with a cytoplasmic 
distribution after transfection, it is unclear how in normal cells a nuclear
corepressor regulates the behavior of the Golgi complex at the onset of mitosis. 
Using polyclonal rabbit antibodies that were raised against a human CtBP1-GST
fusion-protein, here we show by immunofluorescence laser-scanning confocal
microscopy that in mitotic cells a species of CtBP becomes associated with the
centrosomes at the onset of prophase and then throughout mitosis. The association
can be seen in both cycling mitotic cells and nocodazole-arrested cells. The
interaction was confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation and centrosome isolation.
Since centrosomes are considered to be the organising centre for Golgi
morphogenesis, the interaction demonstrated here may explain how a nuclear
corepressor of transcription can exert a regulatory effect on the Golgi complex
at a specific stage of the cell cycle.

PMID: 16481748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 17;281(7):4183-9. Epub 2005 Dec 14.

Acetylation by p300 regulates nuclear localization and function of the
transcriptional corepressor CtBP2.

Zhao LJ(1), Subramanian T, Zhou Y, Chinnadurai G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, Saint Louis University Health Sciences
Center, Missouri 63110, USA.

CtBP family members, CtBP1 and CtBP2, are unique transcriptional regulators that 
adapt a metabolic enzyme fold, and their activities are regulated by
NAD(H)-binding. CtBP1 is both cytoplasmic and nuclear, and its subcellular
localization is regulated by sumoylation, phosphorylation, and binding to a PDZ
protein. In contrast, we showed that CtBP2 is exclusively nuclear. CtBP1 and
CtBP2 are highly similar, but differ at the N-terminal 20 amino acid region.
Substitution of the N-terminal domain of CtBP1 with the corresponding CtBP2
domain confers a dominant nuclear localization pattern to CtBP1. The N-terminal
domain of CtBP2 contains three Lys residues. Our results show that these Lys
residues are acetylated by the nuclear acetylase p300. Although all three Lys
residues of CtBP2 (Lys-6, Lys-8, and Lys-10) appear to be acetylated, acetylation
of Lys-10 is critical for nuclear localization. CtBP2 with a single amino acid
substitution at Lys-10 (K10R) is predominantly localized in the cytoplasm. The
cytoplasmic localization of the K10R mutant is correlated with enhanced nuclear
export that is inhibited by leptomycin B. Furthermore, lack of acetylation at
Lys-10 renders CtBP2 to be more efficient in repression of the E-cadherin
promoter. Our studies have revealed the important roles of acetylation in
regulating subcellular localization and transcriptional activity of CtBP2.

PMID: 16356938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Vis Neurosci. 2005 Sep-Oct;22(5):561-8.

Photoreceptor calcium channels: insight from night blindness.

Morgans CW(1), Bayley PR, Oesch NW, Ren G, Akileswaran L, Taylor WR.

Author information: 
(1)Neurological Sciences Institute, Oregon Health and Science University,
Beaverton, OR 97006, USA. morgansc@ohsu.edu

The genetic locus for incomplete congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB2)
has been identified as the CACNA1f gene, encoding the alpha 1F calcium channel
subunit, a member of the L-type family of calcium channels. The electroretinogram
associated with CSNB2 implicates alpha 1F in synaptic transmission between
retinal photoreceptors and bipolar cells. Using a recently developed monoclonal
antibody to alpha 1F, we localize the channel to ribbon active zones in rod
photoreceptor terminals of the mouse retina, supporting a role for alpha 1F in
mediating glutamate release from rods. Detergent extraction experiments indicate 
that alpha 1F is part of a detergent-resistant active zone complex, which also
includes the synaptic ribbons. Comparison of native mouse rod calcium currents
with recombinant alpha 1F currents reveals that the current-voltage relationship 
for the native current is shifted approximately 30 mV to more hyperpolarized
potentials than for the recombinant alpha 1F current, suggesting modulation of
the native channel by intracellular factors. Lastly, we present evidence for
L-type alpha 1D calcium channel subunits in cone terminals of the mouse retina.
The presence of alpha 1D channels in cones may explain the residual visual
abilities of individuals with CSNB2.

PMID: 16332266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Dev Dyn. 2006 Feb;235(2):490-5.

Expression of avian C-terminal binding proteins (Ctbp1 and Ctbp2) during
embryonic development.

Van Hateren N(1), Shenton T, Borycki AG.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Developmental Genetics, University of Sheffield, Alfred Denny
Building, Western Bank, Sheffield, United Kingdom.

C-terminal binding proteins (CtBPs) are transcriptional corepressors of mediators
of Notch, Wnt, and other signalling pathways. Thus, they are potential players in
the control of several developmentally important processes, including
segmentation, somitogenesis, and neural tube and limb patterning. We have cloned 
the avian orthologues of Ctbp1 and Ctbp2 and examined their expression pattern by
whole-mount in situ hybridization between Hamburger and Hamilton (HH) stages 3
and 24. Both Ctbp genes show similar expression patterns during embryonic
development, and both are detected from HH stage 3 in the developing central
nervous system, by HH stage 7 in the paraxial mesoderm and later in the limb bud.
In most places, Ctbp1 and Ctbp2 are expressed in overlapping domains. However,
there are interesting domains and/or temporal expression patterns that are
specific to each Ctbp gene. For instance, Ctbp1 is predominantly expressed in the
epiblast, whereas Ctbp2 is in the primitive streak at HH stage 3. However, by HH 
stage 4, both genes are found in the primitive streak and in the ectoderm.
Similarly, although both genes display similar expression patterns in early
somitogenesis, in mature somites, Ctbp1 transcripts are located in myotomal
cells, whereas Ctbp2 transcripts are observed in dermomyotomal cells. Finally, we
found that emigrating neural crest cells express Ctbp2, whereas dorsal root
ganglia express Ctbp1. These data suggest that Ctbp1 and Ctbp2 may be
functionally redundant in some tissues and have unique functions in other
tissues.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16258936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Cell Biol. 2005 Feb 28;168(5):825-36. Epub 2005 Feb 22.

Molecular dissection of the photoreceptor ribbon synapse: physical interaction of
Bassoon and RIBEYE is essential for the assembly of the ribbon complex.

tom Dieck S(1), Altrock WD, Kessels MM, Qualmann B, Regus H, Brauner D, Fejtová
A, Bracko O, Gundelfinger ED, Brandstätter JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, Max Planck Institute for Brain Research, D-60528
Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

The ribbon complex of retinal photoreceptor synapses represents a specialization 
of the cytomatrix at the active zone (CAZ) present at conventional synapses. In
mice deficient for the CAZ protein Bassoon, ribbons are not anchored to the
presynaptic membrane but float freely in the cytoplasm. Exploiting this
phenotype, we dissected the molecular structure of the photoreceptor ribbon
complex. Identifiable CAZ proteins segregate into two compartments at the ribbon:
a ribbon-associated compartment including Piccolo, RIBEYE, CtBP1/BARS, RIM1, and 
the motor protein KIF3A, and an active zone compartment including RIM2, Munc13-1,
a Ca2+ channel alpha1 subunit, and ERC2/CAST1. A direct interaction between the
ribbon-specific protein RIBEYE and Bassoon seems to link the two compartments and
is responsible for the physical integrity of the photoreceptor ribbon complex.
Finally, we found the RIBEYE homologue CtBP1 at ribbon and conventional synapses,
suggesting a novel role for the CtBP/BARS family in the molecular assembly and
function of central nervous system synapses.

PMCID: PMC2171818
PMID: 15728193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Oncogene. 2005 Feb 17;24(8):1467-76.

Expression profiling reveals a distinct transcription signature in follicular
thyroid carcinomas with a PAX8-PPAR(gamma) fusion oncogene.

Lui WO(1), Foukakis T, Lidén J, Thoppe SR, Dwight T, Höög A, Zedenius J, Wallin
G, Reimers M, Larsson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital, Solna, CMM
L8:01, SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden. weng-onn.lui@cmm.ki.se

The demonstration of the PAX8-PPAR(gamma) fusion oncogene in a subset of
follicular thyroid tumors provides a new and promising starting point to dissect 
the molecular genetic events involved in the development of this tumor form. In
the present study, we compared the gene expression profiles of follicular thyroid
carcinomas (FTCs) bearing a PAX8-PPAR(gamma) fusion against FTCs that lack this
fusion. Using unsupervised clustering and multidimensional scaling analyses, we
show that FTCs possessing a PAX8-PPAR(gamma) fusion have a highly uniform and
distinct gene expression signature that clearly distinguishes them from FTCs
without the fusion. The PAX8-PPAR(gamma)(+) FTCs grouped in a defined cluster,
where highly ranked genes were mostly associated with signal transduction, cell
growth and translation control. Notably, a large number of ribosomal protein and 
translation-associated genes were concurrently underexpressed in the FTCs with
the fusion. Taken together, our findings further support that follicular
carcinomas with a PAX8-PPAR(gamma) rearrangement constitute a distinct biological
entity. The current data represent one step to elucidate the molecular pathways
in the development of FTCs with the specific PAX8-PPAR(gamma) fusion.

PMID: 15608688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. EMBO J. 2005 Jan 12;24(1):108-19. Epub 2004 Dec 9.

Multiple activities contribute to Pc2 E3 function.

Kagey MH(1), Melhuish TA, Powers SE, Wotton D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Center for Cell Signaling, 
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Pc2 is a polycomb protein, which has SUMO E3 activity for the corepressors CtBP
and CtBP2. Here we demonstrate that, in vivo, Pc2 adapter function contributes to
enhancement of CtBP sumoylation. Mutation of the CtBP binding site on Pc2
abolishes E3 activity toward CtBP. However, a carboxyl-terminal fragment of Pc2
that recruits both Ubc9 and CtBP lacks E3 activity. We identify a second domain, 
which, when coexpressed with the carboxyl-terminal adapter region, restores E3
function. In vitro, this domain has E3 activity in isolation, suggesting that it 
is a functional domain, and that adapter function is required to selectively
corecruit E2 and substrate in vivo. These results demonstrate the presence of two
domains in Pc2 that contribute to full in vivo E3 activity, and suggest that SUMO
E3s are more than simple platforms to which E2 and substrate bind.

PMCID: PMC544918
PMID: 15592428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Neurosci. 2004 Nov 3;24(44):9752-9.

Visualizing synaptic ribbons in the living cell.

Zenisek D(1), Horst NK, Merrifield C, Sterling P, Matthews G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA. david.zenisek@yale.edu

Visual and auditory information is encoded by sensory neurons that tonically
release neurotransmitter at high rates. The synaptic ribbon is an essential
organelle in nerve terminals of these neurons. Its precise function is unknown,
but if the ribbon could be visualized in a living terminal, both its own dynamics
and its relation to calcium and vesicle dynamics could be studied. We designed a 
short fluorescent peptide with affinity for a known binding domain of RIBEYE, a
protein unique to the ribbon. When introduced via a whole-cell patch pipette, the
peptide labeled structures at the presynaptic plasma membrane of ribbon-type
terminals. The fluorescent spots match in size, location, number, and
distribution the known features of synaptic ribbons. Furthermore, fluorescent
spots mapped by confocal microscopy directly match the ribbons identified by
electron microscopy in the same cell. Clearly the peptide binds to the synaptic
ribbon, but even at saturating concentrations it affects neither the morphology
of the ribbon nor its tethering of synaptic vesicles. It also does not inhibit
exocytosis. Using the peptide label, we observed that the ribbon is immobile over
minutes and that calcium influx is concentrated at the ribbon. Finally, we find
that each ribbon in a retinal bipolar cell contains approximately 4000 molecules 
of RIBEYE, indicating that it is the major component of the synaptic ribbon.

PMID: 15525760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Apr 1;32(6):1957-66. Print 2004.

Multiple domains of the Receptor-Interacting Protein 140 contribute to
transcription inhibition.

Castet A(1), Boulahtouf A, Versini G, Bonnet S, Augereau P, Vignon F, Khochbin S,
Jalaguier S, Cavaillès V.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U540, Endocrinologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire des Cancers and
Université de Montpellier I, 60 rue de Navacelles, 34090 Montpellier, France.

In this study, we have investigated the role of C-terminal binding proteins
(CtBPs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) in the repressive activity of the
nuclear receptor cofactor Receptor-Interacting Protein 140 (RIP140). We have
defined the interaction of both CtBP1 and CtBP2 with RIP140 and delineated two
motifs (PIDLS and PINLS) differentially required for in vitro interaction. Using 
different approaches (titration of endogenous CtBPs, mutagenesis and transfection
in CtBP knock-out cells), we find that recruitment of CtBPs only partially
explains the negative regulation exerted by RIP140. We then demonstrate that
RIP140 associates in vitro not only with class I HDACs but also with class II
enzymes such as HDAC5. This interaction mainly involves the N-terminus of RIP140 
(residues 27-199) and two domains of HDAC5. Moreover, the two proteins
functionally interfere in transfection experiments, and confocal microscopy
indicates that they co-localize in the nucleus. Interestingly, using the specific
HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A, we show that HDAC activity is dispensable for
active transrepression by RIP140. Finally, we demonstrate that the C-terminal
region of RIP140 contains two additional silencing domains and confers strong
active transrepression independently of HDAC activity and CtBPs. Altogether,
these data indicate that transcriptional inhibition by the cofactor RIP140
involves complex mechanisms relying on multiple domains and partners.

PMCID: PMC390375
PMID: 15060175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Mar 22;32(5):1836-47. Print 2004.

The CtBP2 co-repressor is regulated by NADH-dependent dimerization and possesses 
a novel N-terminal repression domain.

Thio SS(1), Bonventre JV, Hsu SI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 119074.

The C-terminal binding protein 2 (CtBP2) is a 48 kDa phosphoprotein reported to
function as a co- repressor for a growing list of transcriptional repressors. It 
was recently demonstrated that CtBP is a dimeric NAD+-regulated d-isomer-specific
2-hydroxy acid dehydrogenase. However, the specific substrate(s) of CtBP
enzymatic activity and the relationship of this activity to its co-repression
function remain unknown. The ability of a human CtBP to bind and serve as a
co-repressor of E1A has been shown to be regulated by nuclear NADH levels. Here
we extend the functional characterization of CtBP by demonstrating that amino
acid substitutions at Gly189 in the conserved NAD+-binding fold both abrogate the
ability of CtBP2 to homodimerize and are associated with a dramatic loss of
co-repressor activity. Consistent with the known enzymatic activity of CtBP2,
mutations at Arg272 in the substrate-binding domain and at His321 in the
catalytic domain result in significant loss of CtBP2 transcriptional co-repressor
activity. High resolution serial C-terminal deletion analysis of CtBP2 also
revealed a novel N-terminal repression domain that is distinct from its
dehydrogenase domain. Our results suggest a model in which CtBP2 co-repressor
function is regulated, at least in part, through the effect of NADH on CtBP2
homodimerization.

PMCID: PMC390340
PMID: 15037661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Dec 1;123A(2):153-63.

Deletion of the distal long arm of chromosome 10; is there a characteristic
phenotype? A report of 15 de novo and familial cases.

Irving M(1), Hanson H, Turnpenny P, Brewer C, Ogilvie CM, Davies A, Berg J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, 7th Floor, New Guy's House, Guy's Hospital,
St. Thomas Street, London SE1 9RT, United Kingdom.
melita.irving@gstt.sthames.nhs.uk

It has been suggested previously that patients with terminal deletions of
chromosome 10q have a recognizable phenotype including a characteristic facial
appearance combined with other abnormalities including mental retardation,
cardiac and anogenital anomalies. We report the largest published series of new
cases of terminal 10q deletion, including eight familial and four de novo cases
and three cases with interstitial deletions involving chromosome bands
10q25.2-26.3. The deleted regions were defined by FISH using YAC probes, as well 
as standard karyotyping. The most consistent clinical features in our cases are
cranial anomalies including facial asymmetry, prominent nose and nasal bridge,
prominent ears, thin upper lip, along with growth retardation, developmental
delay, and digital abnormalities. Visceral abnormalities were only identified in 
a small number of the patients, with renal involvement in three cases and
structural cardiac malformations in two others. Learning difficulties of varying 
severity were found in 11 cases and behavioral problems described in four.
Candidate genes for behavioral and learning difficulties within the deleted
region include Calcyon. Other genes in the region that might have a role in
causing the phenotype include the genes coding for fibroblast growth factor
receptor type 2 (FGFR2) and C-terminal binding protein 2 (CTBP2).

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14598339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Structure. 2003 Jul;11(7):803-13.

Engineering a protein scaffold from a PHD finger.

Kwan AH(1), Gell DA, Verger A, Crossley M, Matthews JM, Mackay JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences, University of Sydney, Sydney,
New South Wales 2006 Australia.

The design of proteins with tailored functions remains a relatively elusive goal.
Small size, a well-defined structure, and the ability to maintain structural
integrity despite multiple mutations are all desirable properties for such
designer proteins. Many zinc binding domains fit this description. We determined 
the structure of a PHD finger from the transcriptional cofactor Mi2beta and
investigated the suitability of this domain as a scaffold for presenting selected
binding functions. The two flexible loops in the structure were mutated
extensively by either substitution or expansion, without affecting the overall
fold of the domain. A binding site for the corepressor CtBP2 was also grafted
onto the domain, creating a new PHD domain that can specifically bind CtBP2 both 
in vitro and in the context of a eukaryotic cell nucleus. These results represent
a step toward designing new regulatory proteins for modulating aberrant gene
expression in vivo.

PMID: 12842043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Mol Cell. 2003 May;11(5):1389-96.

Opposed regulation of corepressor CtBP by SUMOylation and PDZ binding.

Lin X(1), Sun B, Liang M, Liang YY, Gast A, Hildebrand J, Brunicardi FC, Melchior
F, Feng XH.

Author information: 
(1)Michael E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
TX 77030, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell. 2003 Sep;12(3):791.

The transcription corepressor CtBP is often recruited to the target promoter via 
interaction with a conserved PxDLS motif in the interacting repressor. In this
study, we demonstrate that CtBP1 was SUMOylated and that its SUMOylation
profoundly affected its subcellular localization. SUMOylation occurred at a
single Lys residue, Lys428, of CtBP1. CtBP2, a close homolog of CtBP1, lacked the
SUMOylation site and was not modified by SUMO-1. Mutation of Lys428 into Arg
(K428R) shifted CtBP1 from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, while it had little
effect on its interaction with the PxDLS motif. Consistent with a change in
localization, the K428R mutation abolished the ability of CtBP1 to repress the
E-cadherin promoter activity. Notably, SUMOylation of CtBP1 was inhibited by the 
PDZ domain of nNOS, correlating with the known inhibitory effect of nNOS on the
nuclear accumulation of CtBP1. This study identifies SUMOylation as a regulatory 
mechanism underlying CtBP1-dependent transcriptional repression.

PMID: 12769861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 May 1;31(9):2369-80.

HMG box transcription factor TCF-4's interaction with CtBP1 controls the
expression of the Wnt target Axin2/Conductin in human embryonic kidney cells.

Valenta T(1), Lukas J, Korinek V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Videnska 1083, 142 20 Prague 4, Czech Republic.

Members of the Tcf/Lef family of the HMG box transcription factors are nuclear
effectors of the Wnt signal transduction pathway. Upon Wnt signaling, TCF/LEF
proteins interact with beta-catenin and activate transcription of target genes,
while, in the absence of the Wnt signal, TCFs function as transcriptional
repressors. All vertebrate Tcf/Lef transcription factors associate with
TLE/Groucho-related co-repressors, and here we provide evidence for an
interaction between the C-terminus of the TCF-4 HMG box protein and the
C-terminal binding protein 1 (CtBP1) transcriptional co-repressor. Using
Wnt-1-stimulated human embryonic kidney 293 cells, we show that CtBP1 represses
the transcriptional activity of a Tcf/beta-catenin-dependent synthetic promoter
and, furthermore, decreases the expression of the endogenous Wnt target,
Axin2/Conductin. The CtBP1-mediated repression was alleviated by trichostatin A
treatment, indicating that the CtBP inhibitory mechanism is dependent on the
activity of histone deacetylases.

PMCID: PMC154232
PMID: 12711682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 11;278(15):12786-95. Epub 2003 Jan 29.

The LIM protein FHL3 binds basic Krüppel-like factor/Krüppel-like factor 3 and
its co-repressor C-terminal-binding protein 2.

Turner J(1), Nicholas H, Bishop D, Matthews JM, Crossley M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences, G08, University of Sydney, New 
South Wales 2006, Australia.

The ability of DNA-binding transcription factors to recruit specific cofactors is
central to the mechanism by which they regulate gene expression. BKLF/KLF3, a
member of the Krüppel-like factor family of zinc finger proteins, is a potent
transcriptional repressor that recruits a CtBP co-repressor. We show here that
BKLF also recruits the four and a half LIM domain protein FHL3. Different but
closely linked regions of BKLF mediate contact with CtBP2 and FHL3. We present
evidence that CtBP2 also interacts with FHL3 and demonstrate that the three
proteins co-elute in gel filtration experiments. CtBP and FHL proteins have been 
implicated in both nuclear and cytoplasmic functions, but expression of BKLF
promotes the nuclear accumulation of both FHL3 and CtBP2. FHL proteins have been 
shown to act predominantly as co-activators of transcription. However, we find
FHL3 can repress transcription. We suggest that LIM proteins like FHL3 are
important in assembling specific repression or activation complexes, depending on
conditions such as cofactor availability and promoter context.

PMID: 12556451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Bioessays. 2003 Jan;25(1):9-12.

CtBP family proteins: more than transcriptional corepressors.

Chinnadurai G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine,
3681 Park Avenue, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA. chinnag@slu.edu

CtBP family proteins predominantly function as transcriptional corepressors.
Studies with mutant mouse suggest that the two mouse genes, Ctbp1 and Ctbp2, play
unique and redundant gene regulatory roles during development.1 Ctbp1-deficient
mice are viable, but are small and die early, while Ctbp2 deficiency leads to
embryonic lethality. Ctbp2-null mutation causes defects in axial patterning,
heart morphogenesis and neural development. The Ctbp2 mutant phenotype is more
severe in the absence of Ctbp1. The studies with Ctbp2 mutant embryos suggest
that CtBP can also activate transcription. A plant CtBP homolog, Angustifolia
(AN), has recently been identified.2,3 AN controls polar elongation of leaf cells
via the microtubule cytoskeleton. Microarray analysis suggests that AN also
functions as a transcriptional repressor. Thus, the CtBP family proteins control 
cellular processes by serving as transcriptional activators and regulators of the
cytoskeleton as well as transcriptional corepressors.

Copyright 2002 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 12508276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Aug;22(15):5296-307.

Overlapping and unique roles for C-terminal binding protein 1 (CtBP1) and CtBP2
during mouse development.

Hildebrand JD(1), Soriano P.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology and Division of Basic Sciences, Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98108, USA. jeffh@pitt.edu

The C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) family of proteins has been linked to
multiple biological processes through their association with numerous
transcription factors. We generated mice harboring mutations in both Ctbp1 and
Ctbp2 to address the in vivo function of CtBPs during vertebrate development.
Ctbp1 mutant mice are small but viable and fertile, whereas Ctbp2-null mice show 
defects in axial patterning and die by E10.5 due to aberrant extraembryonic
development. Mice harboring various combinations of Ctbp1 and Ctbp2 mutant
alleles exhibit dosage-sensitive defects in a wide range of developmental
processes. The strong genetic interaction, as well as transcription assays with
CtBP-deficient cells, indicates that CtBPs have overlapping roles in regulating
gene expression. We suggest that the observed phenotypes reflect the large number
of transcription factors whose activities are compromised in the absence of CtBP.

PMCID: PMC133942
PMID: 12101226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Restor Neurol Neurosci. 2001;18(2-3):81-8.

A gene expression profile of embryonic stem cells and embryonic stem cell-derived
neurons.

Loring JF(1), Porter JG, Seilhammer J, Kaser MR, Wesselschmidt R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Incyte Genomics, Inc, 3160 Porter Drive, Palo
Alto, CA 94304, USA. jloring@incyte.com

Embryonic stem (ES) cells have the ability to differentiate into a variety of
cell lineages. We are examining ES cell differentiation in vitro by using cDNA
microarrays to generate a molecular phenotype for each cell type. El4 ES cells
induced by retinoic acid after forming embryoid bodies differentiate almost
exclusively to neurons. We obtained expression patterns for about 8500 gene
sequences by comparing mRNAs from undifferentiated ES cells and their
differentiated derivatives in a competitive hybridization. Our results indicate
that the genes expressed by ES cells change dramatically as they differentiate
(58 gene sequences up-regulated, 34 down-regulated). Most notably, totipotent ES 
cells expressed high levels of a repressor of Hox expression (the polycomb
homolog Mphl) and a co-repressor (CTBP2). Expression of these genes was
undetectable in differentiated cells; the ES cell-derived neurons expressed a
different set of transcriptional regulators, as weil as markers of neurogenesis. 
The gene expression profiles indicate that ES cells actively suppress
differentiation by transcriptional repression; cell-cell contact in embryoid
bodies and retinoic acid treatment may overcome this suppression, allowing
expression of Hox genes and inducing a suite of neuronal genes. Gene expression
profiles will be a useful outcome measure for comparing in vitro treatments of
differentiating ES cells and other stem cells. Also, knowing the molecule
phenotype of transplantable cells will allow correlation of phenotype with the
success of the transplant.

PMID: 11847430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Trends Neurosci. 2001 Oct;24(10):555-7.

Dual use of the transcriptional repressor (CtBP2)/ribbon synapse (RIBEYE) gene:
how prevalent are multifunctional genes?

Piatigorsky J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, National Eye Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. joramp@intra.nei.nih.gov

Vertebrates have ribbon synapses in the retina and in other sensory structures
that are specialized for rapid, tonic release of synaptic vesicles (1). The
lamellar sheets of the ribbon situated at right angles to the plasma membrane are
lined with synaptic vesicles that undergo exocytosis under the influence of
Ca(2+). Synaptic ribbons act as a conveyer belt to accelerate the release of this
ready supply of synaptic vesicles at the presynaptic membranes. Although the
protein composition of the terminals of ribbon synapses is generally similar to
that of ordinary synapses in nervous tissue, much less is known about the
composition of the ribbons themselves. RIM, a universal component of presynaptic 
active zones that interacts with rab3 on the synaptic vesicle, has been localized
to the ribbons (2). In addition, the kinesin motor protein, KIF3A, is associated 
with the ribbons and other organelles in presynaptic nerve terminals (3).
Recently, an approximately 120 kDa protein called RIBEYE has been identified in
purified ribbons of bovine retina. The RIBEYE cDNA was cloned and its gene
identified in the database.

PMID: 11576649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Aug 15;29(16):3347-55.

SOX6 binds CtBP2 to repress transcription from the Fgf-3 promoter.

Murakami A(1), Ishida S, Thurlow J, Revest JM, Dickson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, 
Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Fgf-3 is expressed in a complex pattern during mouse development. Previously, an 
essential regulatory element PS4A was identified in the promoter region, and
shown to bind at least three factors. To identify the transcription factor(s), we
used a yeast one-hybrid screen and obtained a novel Sox6 cDNA (SOX6D). When
introduced into cells it strongly repressed activity from both an Fgf-3 reporter 
gene as well as an artificial promoter containing three PS4A elements. In situ
hybridisation analysis showed that Sox6 and Fgf-3 are co-expressed in the otic
vesicle of E9.5 mouse embryos in a mutually exclusive pattern, consistent with a 
repression of Fgf-3 transcription by SOX6. To characterise additional factor(s)
involved in Fgf-3 gene repression, a yeast two-hybrid screen was used with the
N-terminal portion of SOX6D. Mouse CtBP2 cDNA clones were isolated and shown to
bind SOX6 in yeast and mammalian cells. Furthermore, mutational analysis of SOX6 
showed that binding to CtBP2, and its responsiveness to this co-repressor, were
dependent on a short amino acid sequence motif PLNLSS. Co-expression studies in
NIH3T3 cells showed that SOX6 and CtBP2 co-operate to repress activity from the
Fgf-3 promoter through the enhancer element PS4A. These results show that SOX6
can recruit CtBP2 to repress transcription from the Fgf-3 promoter.

PMCID: PMC55854
PMID: 11504872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Neuron. 2000 Dec;28(3):857-72.

RIBEYE, a component of synaptic ribbons: a protein's journey through evolution
provides insight into synaptic ribbon function.

Schmitz F(1), Königstorfer A, Südhof TC.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Center for Basic Neuroscience, Department of 
Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, 
TX 75390, USA.

Photoreceptor cells utilize ribbon synapses to transmit sensory signals at high
resolution. Ribbon synapses release neurotransmitters tonically, with a high
release rate made possible by continuous docking of synaptic vesicles on
presynaptic ribbons. We have partially purified synaptic ribbons from retina and 
identified a major protein component called RIBEYE. RIBEYE is composed of a
unique A domain specific for ribbons, and a B domain identical with CtBP2, a
transcriptional repressor that in turn is related to 2-hydroxyacid
dehydrogenases. The A domain mediates assembly of RIBEYE into large structures,
whereas the B domain binds NAD(+) with high affinity, similar to 2-hydroxyacid
dehydrogenases. Our results define a unique component of synaptic ribbons and
suggest that RIBEYE evolved in vertebrates under utilization of a preexisting
protein to build a unique scaffold for a specialized synapse.

PMID: 11163272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Dev Biol. 2000 Dec 1;228(1):29-40.

Kheper, a novel ZFH/deltaEF1 family member, regulates the development of the
neuroectoderm of zebrafish (Danio rerio).

Muraoka O(1), Ichikawa H, Shi H, Okumura S, Taira E, Higuchi H, Hirano T, Hibi M,
Miki N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Division of Molecular Oncology, Department of
Oncology, Biomedical Research Center, Osaka University Medical School, 2-2
Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan. omuraoka@med.niigata-u.ac.jp

Kheper is a novel member of the ZFH (zinc-finger and homeodomain
protein)/deltaEF1 family in zebrafish. kheper transcripts are first detected in
the epiblast of the dorsal blastoderm margin at the early gastrula stage and
kheper is expressed in nearly all the neuroectoderm at later stages. kheper
expression was expanded in noggin RNA-injected embryos and also in swirl mutant
embryos and was reduced in bmp4 RNA-injected embryos and chordino mutant embryos,
suggesting that kheper acts downstream of the neural inducers Noggin and
Chordino. Overexpression of Kheper elicited ectopic expansion of the
neuroectoderm-specific genes fkd3, hoxa-1, and eng3, and the ectopic expression
of hoxa-1 was not inhibited by BMP4 overexpression. Kheper interacted with the
transcriptional corepressors CtBP1 and CtBP2. Overexpression of a Kheper mutant
lacking the homeodomain or of a VP16-Kheper fusion protein disturbed the
development of the neuroectoderm and head structures. These data underscore the
role of Kheper in the development of the neuroectoderm and indicate that Kheper
acts as a transcriptional repressor.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11087624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Dec;19(12):8581-90.

Identification of CtBP1 and CtBP2 as corepressors of zinc finger-homeodomain
factor deltaEF1.

Furusawa T(1), Moribe H, Kondoh H, Higashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Osaka
565-0871, Japan.

deltaEF1, a representative of the zinc finger-homeodomain protein family, is a
transcriptional repressor which binds E2-box (CACCTG) and related sequences and
counteracts the activators through transrepression mechanisms. It has been shown 
that the N-proximal region of the protein is involved in the transrepression.
Here we demonstrate that deltaEF1 has a second mechanism of transrepression
recruiting CtBP1 or CtBP2 as its corepressor. A two-hybrid screen of mouse cDNAs 
with various portions of deltaEF1 identified these proteins, which bind to
deltaEF1 in a manner dependent on the PLDLSL sequence located in the short medial
(MS) portion of deltaEF1. CtBP1 is the mouse orthologue of human CtBP, known as
the C-terminal binding protein of adenovirus E1A, while CtBP2 is the second
homologue. Fusion of mouse CtBP1 or CtBP2 to Gal4DBD (Gal4 DNA binding domain)
made them Gal4 binding site-dependent transcriptional repressors in transfected
10T1/2 cells, indicating their involvement in a transcriptional repression
mechanism. When the MS portion of deltaEF1 was used to Gal4DBD and used to
transfect cells, a strong transrepression activity was generated, but this
activity was totally dependent on the PLDLSL sequence which served as the site
for interaction with endogenous CtBP proteins, indicating that CtBP1 and -2 can
act as corepressors. Exogenous CtBP1/2 significantly enhanced transcriptional
repression by deltaEF1, and this enhancement was lost if the PLDLSL sequence was 
altered, demonstrating that CtBP1 and -2 act as corepressors of deltaEF1. In the 
mouse, CtBP1 is expressed from embryo to adult, but CtBP2 is mainly expressed
during embryogenesis. In developing embryos, CtBP1 and CtBP2 are expressed
broadly with different tissue preferences. Remarkably, their high expression
occurs in subsets of deltaEF1-expressing tissues, e.g., cephalic and dorsal root 
ganglia, spinal cord, posterior-distal halves of the limb bud mesenchyme, and
perichondrium of forming digits, supporting the conclusion that CtBP1 and -2 play
crucial roles in the repressor action of deltaEF1 in these tissues.

PMCID: PMC84984
PMID: 10567582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 13;274(33):23491-8.

hFOG-2, a novel zinc finger protein, binds the co-repressor mCtBP2 and modulates 
GATA-mediated activation.

Holmes M(1), Turner J, Fox A, Chisholm O, Crossley M, Chong B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Thrombosis and Vascular Research, School of Pathology, University
of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia.

We have identified a novel human zinc finger protein, hFOG-2, which is related to
but distinct from the murine transcription factor Friend-of-GATA-1 (mFOG-1). The 
hFOG-2 gene was initially detected in K562 cells using a polymerase chain
reaction approach with degenerate primers corresponding to zinc finger regions of
mFOG-1. A murine homologue of hFOG-2 was also identified in the mouse expressed
sequence tag data banks, indicating that a family of FOG genes exists in mammals.
hFOG-2 appears to be widely expressed, while mFOG-1 is expressed primarily in
erythroid and megakaryocytic cells and plays a fundamental role in the
development of these lineages. Sequencing of the full-length hFOG-2 cDNA
indicates that the interaction domains for transcription factors GATA-1 and
mCtBP2 are both conserved and we have shown that this new FOG protein also
physically interacts with these factors. We have demonstrated that hFOG-2, like
mFOG-1, can act in concert with GATA-1 to activate gene expression from the p45
NF-E2 promoter region, but that it can also act to repress GATA-mediated
activation of additional reporter constructs. Finally, we have identified a
repression domain in hFOG-2 and show that repression is dependent upon the
integrity of the mCtBP2 interaction motif Pro-Ile-Asp-Leu-Ser.

PMID: 10438528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 18;274(25):17705-10.

Molecular cloning and functional characterization of brefeldin A-ADP-ribosylated 
substrate. A novel protein involved in the maintenance of the Golgi structure.

Spanò S(1), Silletta MG, Colanzi A, Alberti S, Fiucci G, Valente C, Fusella A,
Salmona M, Mironov A, Luini A, Corda D.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche "Mario Negri", Department of Cell Biology 
and Oncology, Consorzio Mario Negri Sud, 66030 Santa Maria Imbaro (Chieti), 20157
Milano, Italy.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem 1999 Aug 27;274(35):25188. Spanfò S [corrected to Spanò S].

Brefeldin A (BFA) is a fungal metabolite that disassembles the Golgi apparatus
into tubular networks and causes the dissociation of coatomer proteins from Golgi
membranes. We have previously shown that an additional effect of BFA is to
stimulate the ADP-ribosylation of two cytosolic proteins of 38 and 50 kDa
(brefeldin A-ADP-riboslyated substrate (BARS)) and that this effect greatly
facilitates the Golgi-disassembling activity of the toxin. In this study, BARS
has been purified from rat brain cytosol and microsequenced, and the BARS cDNA
has been cloned. BARS shares high homology with two known proteins,
C-terminal-binding protein 1 (CtBP1) and CtBP2. It is therefore a third member of
the CtBP family. The role of BARS in Golgi disassembly by BFA was verified in
permeabilized cells. In the presence of dialyzed cytosol that had been previously
depleted of BARS or treated with an anti-BARS antibody, BFA potently disassembled
the Golgi. However, in cytosol complemented with purified BARS, or even in
control cytosols containing physiological levels of BARS, the action of BFA on
Golgi disassembly was strongly inhibited. These results suggest that BARS exerts 
a negative control on Golgi tubulation, with important consequences for the
structure and function of the Golgi complex.

PMID: 10364211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. EMBO J. 1999 May 17;18(10):2812-22.

Transcriptional cofactors of the FOG family interact with GATA proteins by means 
of multiple zinc fingers.

Fox AH(1), Liew C, Holmes M, Kowalski K, Mackay J, Crossley M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, G08, University of Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia.

Friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1) is a zinc finger protein that has been shown to interact
physically with the erythroid DNA-binding protein GATA-1 and modulate its
transcriptional activity. Recently, two new members of the FOG family have been
identified: a mammalian protein, FOG-2, that also associates with GATA-1 and
other mammalian GATA factors; and U-shaped, a Drosophila protein that interacts
with the Drosophila GATA protein Pannier. FOG proteins contain multiple zinc
fingers and it has been shown previously that the sixth finger of FOG-1 interacts
specifically with the N-finger but not the C-finger of GATA-1. Here we show that 
fingers 1, 5 and 9 of FOG-1 also interact with the N-finger of GATA-1 and that
FOG-2 and U-shaped also contain multiple GATA-interacting fingers. We define the 
key contact residues and show that these residues are highly conserved in
GATA-interacting fingers. We examine the effect of selectively mutating the four 
interacting fingers of FOG-1 and show that each contributes to FOG-1's ability to
modulate GATA-1 activity. Finally, we show that FOG-1 can repress GATA-1-mediated
activation and present evidence that this ability involves the recently described
CtBP co-repressor proteins that recognize all known FOG proteins.

PMCID: PMC1171362
PMID: 10329627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. EMBO J. 1998 Sep 1;17(17):5129-40.

Cloning and characterization of mCtBP2, a co-repressor that associates with basic
Krüppel-like factor and other mammalian transcriptional regulators.

Turner J(1), Crossley M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, G08, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia, 2006.

Basic Krüppel-like factor (BKLF) is a zinc finger protein that recognizes CACCC
elements in DNA. It is expressed highly in erythroid tissues, the brain and other
selected cell types. We have studied the activity of BKLF and found that it is
capable of repressing transcription, and have mapped its repression domain to the
N-terminus. We carried out a two-hybrid screen against BKLF and isolated a novel 
clone encoding murine C-terminal-binding protein 2 (mCtBP2). mCtBP2 is related to
human CtBP, a cellular protein which binds to a Pro-X-Asp-Leu-Ser motif in the
C-terminus of the adenoviral oncoprotein, E1a. We show that mCtBP2 recognizes a
related motif in the minimal repression domain of BKLF, and the integrity of this
motif is required for repression activity. Moreover, when tethered to a promoter 
by a heterologous DNA-binding domain, mCtBP2 functions as a potent repressor.
Finally, we demonstrate that mCtBP2 also interacts with the mammalian
transcripition factors Evi-1, AREB6, ZEB and FOG. These results establish a new
member of the CtBP family, mCtBP2, as a mammalian co-repressor targeting diverse 
transcriptional regulators.

PMCID: PMC1170841
PMID: 9724649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Genomics. 1998 Jan 15;47(2):294-9.

A novel C-terminal binding protein (CTBP2) is closely related to CTBP1, an
adenovirus E1A-binding protein, and maps to human chromosome 21q21.3.

Katsanis N(1), Fisher EM.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics Unit, Imperial College of Medicine at St. Mary's, London, United
Kingdom.

A region of the C-terminus of adenovirus type 2/5 E1A protein has been associated
with negative modulation of tumorigenicity, as well as the extent of oncogenic
transformation. In contrast with the N-terminus of the E1A protein, which has
been extensively characterized and shown to associate with a number of cellular
proteins, the function of the C-terminus is poorly understood. To date, a single 
48-kDa protein, CTBP1, has been shown to associate with this region. Here we
report the identification and sequence of a novel gene in human (CTBP2) and mouse
(Ctbp2), both highly related to CTBP1 and thus also likely to bind to the E1A
protein. We found that CTBP2 is expressed in all tissues tested, with a higher
level of expression in the heart, skeletal muscle, and pancreas. We mapped CTBP1 
and CTBP2 to human chromosomes 4p16 and 21q21.3, respectively.

PMID: 9479502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Mol Immunol. 1988 Mar;25(3):223-30.

Induction of polyclonal and monoclonal antibody responses to cholera toxin by the
synthetic peptide approach.

Ghose AC(1), Karush F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, National Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases,
Calcutta, India.

The induction of an antibody response to cholera toxin (CT) was studied by using 
the synthetic peptide approach. Two peptides, corresponding to the amino acid
sequences from residues 57 to 69 (CTBP1) and 47 to 60 (CTBP2) of the cholera
toxin B subunit, were synthesized by the solid-phase method. These peptides were 
primarily chosen on the basis of their hydrophilicity and sequence identity with 
the B subunit of E. coli toxin (LTh). Synthesized peptides were coupled to
carrier proteins through additional cysteine residues at the carboxyl (CTBP1) or 
amino terminal ends (CTBP2). Rabbit antisera to the peptide-carrier conjugates
were found to react with the free peptides as well as intact CT, its B subunit
and LTh as determined by the conventional enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA). On the other hand, anti-peptide sera failed to react with CT and LTh in 
GM1 (ganglioside)--ELISA, thereby suggesting the possible involvement of CTBP1
and CTBP2 peptide regions of the toxin molecule in GM1 receptor binding. Both
anti-peptide sera possessed rather weak toxin neutralizing activity in the rabbit
ileal loop assay. However, such activity was statistically significant (0.02 less
than P less than 0.05) only in the case of anti-CTBP2 serum. Similar results were
also obtained with mouse polyclonal anti-peptide sera. Ten mouse monoclonal
antibodies were obtained against the CTBP1 peptide, five of which reacted to CT, 
the B subunit and LTh in ELISA. Interestingly, one monoclonal showed strong
reactivity against CT and LTh although it reacted very weakly against the
immunizing peptide CTBP1. It appears that the immunizing peptide probably exists 
in multiple conformers in the conjugated form, some of which may mimic more
closely its structural features in the intact protein than in the free state.
Results obtained in this study suggest that synthetic peptides can serve as
useful probes for the structural analysis of CT or related toxins and may be
useful in vaccine development.

PMID: 3374493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


