
1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2016 Mar 30. [Epub ahead of print]

Chromatin remodeling effects on enhancer activity.

García-González E(1), Escamilla-Del-Arenal M(2), Arzate-Mejía R(1),
Recillas-Targa F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Circuito Exterior S/N, Ciudad
Universitaria, C.P. 04510, Mexico City, México. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biophysics, Mortimer B. Zuckerman Mind Brain and Behavior Institute,
Columbia University, New York City, NY, 10027, USA. (3)Departamento de Genética
Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, Circuito Exterior S/N, Ciudad Universitaria, C.P. 04510, Mexico City,
México. frecilla@ifc.unam.mx.

During organism development, a diversity of cell types emerges with disparate,
yet stable profiles of gene expression with distinctive cellular functions. In
addition to gene promoters, the genome contains enhancer regulatory sequences,
which are implicated in cellular specialization by facilitating cell-type and
tissue-specific gene expression. Enhancers are DNA binding elements characterized
by highly sophisticated and various mechanisms of action allowing for the
specific interaction of general and tissue-specific transcription factors (TFs). 
However, eukaryotic organisms package their genetic material into chromatin,
generating a physical barrier for TFs to interact with their cognate sequences.
The ability of TFs to bind DNA regulatory elements is also modulated by changes
in the chromatin structure, including histone modifications, histone variants,
ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling, and the methylation status of DNA.
Furthermore, it has recently been revealed that enhancer sequences are also
transcribed into a set of enhancer RNAs with regulatory potential. These
interdependent processes act in the context of a complex network of chromatin
interactions, which together contributes to a renewed vision of how gene
activation is coordinated in a cell-type-dependent manner. In this review, we
describe the interplay between genetic and epigenetic aspects associated with
enhancers and discuss their possible roles on enhancer function.

PMID: 27026300  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Mar 24;17(4). pii: E440. doi: 10.3390/ijms17040440.

Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms of Myelodysplastic Syndrome: Implications on
Targeted Therapy.

Gill H(1), Leung AY(2), Kwong YL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong, China. gillhsh@hku.hk.
(2)Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong, China.
ayhleung@hku.hk. (3)Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong,
China. ylkwong@hkucc.hku.hk.

Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is a group of heterogeneous clonal hematopoietic
stem cell disorders characterized by cytopenia, ineffective hematopoiesis, and
progression to secondary acute myeloid leukemia in high-risk cases. Conventional 
prognostication relies on clinicopathological parameters supplemented by
cytogenetic information. However, recent studies have shown that genetic
aberrations also have critical impacts on treatment outcome. Moreover, these
genetic alterations may themselves be a target for treatment. The mutation
landscape in MDS is shaped by gene aberrations involved in DNA methylation (TET2,
DNMT3A, IDH1/2), histone modification (ASXL1, EZH2), the RNA splicing machinery
(SF3B1, SRSF2, ZRSR2, U2AF1/2), transcription (RUNX1, TP53, BCOR, PHF6, NCOR,
CEBPA, GATA2), tyrosine kinase receptor signaling (JAK2, MPL, FLT3, GNAS, KIT),
RAS pathways (KRAS, NRAS, CBL, NF1, PTPN11), DNA repair (ATM, BRCC3, DLRE1C,
FANCL), and cohesion complexes (STAG2, CTCF, SMC1A, RAD21). A detailed
understanding of the pathogenetic mechanisms leading to transformation is
critical for designing single-agent or combinatorial approaches in target therapy
of MDS.

PMID: 27023522  [PubMed - in process]


3. PLoS Genet. 2016 Mar 28;12(3):e1005940. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005940.
eCollection 2016.

The Chromatin Remodelling Enzymes SNF2H and SNF2L Position Nucleosomes adjacent
to CTCF and Other Transcription Factors.

Wiechens N(1), Singh V(1), Gkikopoulos T(1), Schofield P(1,)(2), Rocha S(1),
Owen-Hughes T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression, College of Life Sciences,
University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom. (2)Division of Biological Chemistry
and Drug Discovery, College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee,
United Kingdom.

Within the genomes of metazoans, nucleosomes are highly organised adjacent to the
binding sites for a subset of transcription factors. Here we have sought to
investigate which chromatin remodelling enzymes are responsible for this. We find
that the ATP-dependent chromatin remodelling enzyme SNF2H plays a major role
organising arrays of nucleosomes adjacent to the binding sites for the
architectural transcription factor CTCF sites and acts to promote CTCF binding.
At many other factor binding sites SNF2H and the related enzyme SNF2L contribute 
to nucleosome organisation. The action of SNF2H at CTCF sites is functionally
important as depletion of CTCF or SNF2H affects transcription of a common group
of genes. This suggests that chromatin remodelling ATPase's most closely related 
to the Drosophila ISWI protein contribute to the function of many human gene
regulatory elements.

PMID: 27019336  [PubMed - in process]


4. BMC Genomics. 2016 Mar 22;17(1):252. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2516-6.

CTCF-mediated chromatin loops enclose inducible gene regulatory domains.

Oti M(1,)(2), Falck J(3), Huynen MA(3), Zhou H(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Developmental Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud
Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. m.oti@science.ru.nl. (2)Present address: Institute of Biophysics
Carlos Chagas Filho (IBCCF), Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de 
Janeiro, Brazil. m.oti@science.ru.nl. (3)Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular
Informatics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud university
medical center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Molecular
Developmental Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life
Sciences, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. j.zhou@science.ru.nl.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences,
Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
j.zhou@science.ru.nl.

BACKGROUND: The CCTC-binding factor (CTCF) protein is involved in genome
organization, including mediating three-dimensional chromatin interactions. Human
patient lymphocytes with mutations in a single copy of the CTCF gene have reduced
expression of enhancer-associated genes involved in response to stimuli. We
hypothesize that CTCF interactions stabilize enhancer-promoter chromatin
interaction domains, facilitating increased expression of genes in response to
stimuli. Here we systematically investigate this model using computational
analyses.
RESULTS: We use CTCF ChIA-PET data from the ENCODE project to show that
CTCF-associated chromatin loops have a tendency to enclose regions of
enhancer-regulated stimulus responsive genes, insulating them from neighboring
regions of constitutively expressed housekeeping genes. To facilitate cell
type-specific CTCF loop identification, we develop an algorithm to predict CTCF
loops from ChIP-seq data alone by exploiting the CTCF motif directionality in
loop anchors. We apply this algorithm to a hundred ENCODE cell line datasets,
confirming the universality of our observations as well as identifying a general 
distinction between primary and immortal cells in loop-enclosed gene content.
Finally, we combine the existing evidence to propose a model for the formation of
CTCF loops in which partner sites are brought together by chromatin template
reeling through stationary RNA polymerases, consistent with the transcription
factory hypothesis.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide computational evidence that CTCF-mediated chromatin
interactions enclose domains of stimulus responsive enhancer-regulated genes,
insulating them from nearby housekeeping genes.

PMCID: PMC4804521
PMID: 27004515  [PubMed - in process]


5. J Autoimmun. 2016 Mar 13. pii: S0896-8411(16)30014-2. doi:
10.1016/j.jaut.2016.03.001. [Epub ahead of print]

Increased 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in CD4(+) T cells in systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Zhao M(1), Wang J(1), Liao W(1), Li D(1), Li M(1), Wu H(1), Zhang Y(1), Gershwin 
ME(2), Lu Q(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South
University, Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenomics, Changsha, Hunan, PR
China. (2)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University
of California, Davis, CA, USA. (3)Department of Dermatology, The Second Xiangya
Hospital of Central South University, Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical
Epigenomics, Changsha, Hunan, PR China. Electronic address: qianlu5860@gmail.com.

One of the major disappointments in autoimmunity has been the relative lack of
informative data when genomewide associations (GWAS) have been applied to
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Indeed, there is increasing
evidence that SLE is characterized by widespread epigenetic changes.
5-Hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC) is a newly discovered modified form of cytosine
suspected to be an important epigenetic modification in embryonic development,
cell differentiation and cancer. DNA methylation dynamics have already been
implicated in the pathogenesis of SLE, while little is known about
hydroxymethylation in this process. Here, we show an increased 5-hmC level in
genomic DNA in CD4(+) T cells of patients with SLE compared with healthy
controls, accompanied by the up-regulated expression of the Ten-eleven
translocation TET2 and TET3, which can enzymatically convert 5-methylcytosine
(5-mC) to 5-hmC. Moreover, we present the differential patterns of DNA
hydroxymethylation in genome-wide promoter regions in SLE CD4(+) T cells compared
with healthy controls. We identified 2748 genes with increased 5-hmC levels in
promoter regions in SLE CD4(+) T cells, which were enriched in critical pathways,
including neurotrophin signaling, WNT signaling, MAPK signaling, calcium
signaling and the mTOR signaling pathway. Through a combined analysis of
differential DNA hydroxymethylation profile and gene expression profile in SLE
CD4(+) T cells, we found 131 genes with the increased 5-hmC in promoter regions
and up-regulated expression in SLE CD4(+) T cells compared with healthy controls,
including selected immune-related genes, i.e. SOCS1, NR2F6 and IL15RA, which were
also confirmed by ChIP-qPCR. Furthermore, we demonstrate that CTCF, as a
transcription factor, can mediate DNA hydroxymethylation and contribute to
overexpression of SOCS1 in CD4(+) T cells through binding to the promoter region 
of SOCS1. Taken together, our study reveals a critical differential 5-hmC in the 
genome-wide promoter regions of SLE CD4(+) T cells and provides a novel mechanism
that suggests that DNA hydroxymethylation contributes to the aberrant regulation 
of genes transcription in the pathogenesis of SLE.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26984631  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. BMC Cancer. 2016 Mar 16;16(1):226. doi: 10.1186/s12885-016-2273-6.

Epigenetic silencing of miR-181c by DNA methylation in glioblastoma cell lines.

Ayala-Ortega E(1), Arzate-Mejía R(1), Pérez-Molina R(1), González-Buendía E(1),
Meier K(1), Guerrero G(1), Recillas-Targa F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Departamento de Genética Molecular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad de México, México. (2)Instituto
de Fisiología Celular, Departamento de Genética Molecular, Universidad Nacional
Autónoma de México, Ciudad de México, México. frecilla@ifc.unam.mx.

BACKGROUND: Post-transcriptional regulation by microRNAs is recognized as one of 
the major pathways for the control of cellular homeostasis. Less well understood 
is the transcriptional and epigenetic regulation of genes encoding microRNAs. In 
the present study we addressed the epigenetic regulation of the miR-181c in
normal and malignant brain cells.
METHODS: To explore the epigenetic regulation of the miR-181c we evaluated its
expression using RT-qPCR and the in vivo binding of the CCCTC-binding factor
(CTCF) to its regulatory region in different glioblastoma cell lines. DNA
methylation survey, chromatin immunoprecipitation and RNA interference assays
were used to assess the role of CTCF in the miR-181c epigenetic silencing.
RESULTS: We found that miR-181c is downregulated in glioblastoma cell lines, as
compared to normal brain tissues. Loss of expression correlated with a notorious 
gain of DNA methylation at the miR-181c promoter region and the dissociation of
the multifunctional nuclear factor CTCF. Taking advantage of the genomic
distribution of CTCF in different cell types we propose that CTCF has a local and
cell type specific regulatory role over the miR-181c and not an architectural one
through chromatin loop formation. This is supported by the depletion of CTCF in
glioblastoma cells affecting the expression levels of NOTCH2 as a target of
miR-181c.
CONCLUSION: Together, our results point to the epigenetic role of CTCF in the
regulation of microRNAs implicated in tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4794844
PMID: 26983574  [PubMed - in process]


7. Cell. 2016 Mar 10;164(6):1110-21. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.02.007.

The 3D Genome as Moderator of Chromosomal Communication.

Dekker J(1), Mirny L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Program in Systems Biology, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, 368 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA, 01605-0103, USA. Electronic
address: job.dekker@umassmed.edu. (2)Institute for Medical Engineering and
Science and Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77
Massachusetts Avenue, E25-526C, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. Electronic address:
leonid@mit.edu.

Proper expression of genes requires communication with their regulatory elements 
that can be located elsewhere along the chromosome. The physics of chromatin
fibers imposes a range of constraints on such communication. The molecular and
biophysical mechanisms by which chromosomal communication is established, or
prevented, have become a topic of intense study, and important roles for the
spatial organization of chromosomes are being discovered. Here we present a view 
of the interphase 3D genome characterized by extensive physical
compartmentalization and insulation on the one hand and facilitated long-range
interactions on the other. We propose the existence of topological machines
dedicated to set up and to exploit a 3D genome organization to both promote and
censor communication along and between chromosomes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4788811 [Available on 2017-03-10]
PMID: 26967279  [PubMed - in process]


8. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 10;6:22892. doi: 10.1038/srep22892.

A transducible nuclear/nucleolar protein, mLLP, regulates neuronal morphogenesis 
and synaptic transmission.

Yu NK(1), Kim HF(1,)(2), Shim J(1), Kim S(1), Kim DW(3), Kwak C(1), Sim SE(1),
Choi JH(1), Ahn S(1), Yoo J(1), Choi SL(1), Jang DJ(4), Lim CS(1), Lee YS(5),
Kang C(6), Choi SY(3), Kaang BK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul, South Korea. (2)Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, South Korea. (3)Department of Biomedical Science 
and Research Institute for Bioscience and Biotechnology, Hallym University,
Chunchon, South Korea. (4)Applied Biology, College of Ecological Environment,
Kyungpook National University, 386, Gajang-dong, Sang-Ju, South Korea.
(5)Department of Life Science, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, South Korea.
(6)Graduate School of East-West Medical Science, Kyung Hee University,
Kyungkee-do, South Korea.

Cell-permeable proteins are emerging as unconventional regulators of signal
transduction and providing a potential for therapeutic applications. However,
only a few of them are identified and studied in detail. We identify a novel
cell-permeable protein, mouse LLP homolog (mLLP), and uncover its roles in
regulating neural development. We found that mLLP is strongly expressed in
developing nervous system and that mLLP knockdown or overexpression during
maturation of cultured neurons affected the neuronal growth and synaptic
transmission. Interestingly, extracellular addition of mLLP protein enhanced
dendritic arborization, demonstrating the non-cell-autonomous effect of mLLP.
Moreover, mLLP interacts with CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) as well as
transcriptional machineries and modulates gene expression involved in neuronal
growth. Together, these results illustrate the characteristics and roles of
previously unknown cell-permeable protein mLLP in modulating neural development.

PMCID: PMC4790632
PMID: 26961175  [PubMed - in process]


9. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Mar 6. pii: ddw076. [Epub ahead of print]

DNA Methylation Profiling in Human Huntington's Disease Brain.

De Souza RA(1), Islam SA(2), McEwen LM(2), Mathelier A(2), Hill A(2), Mah SM(2), 
Wasserman WW(2), Kobor MS(2), Leavitt BR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Centre for Molecular Medicine and
Therapeutics, Child and Family Research Institute, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, V5Z 4H4, Phone: 604 875 3837 Fax: 604 875 3840
rdesouza@cmmt.ubc.ca. (2)Department of Medical Genetics, Centre for Molecular
Medicine and Therapeutics, Child and Family Research Institute, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, V5Z 4H4, Phone: 604 875 3837 Fax: 604
875 3840.

Despite extensive progress in Huntington's Disease (HD) research, very little is 
known about the association of epigenetic variation and HD pathogenesis in human 
brain tissues. Moreover, its contribution to the tissue-specific transcriptional 
regulation of the huntingtin gene (HTT), in which HTT expression levels are
highest in brain and testes, is currently unknown. To investigate the role of DNA
methylation in HD pathogenesis and tissue-specific expression of HTT, we utilized
the Illumina HumanMethylation450K BeadChip array to measure DNA methylation in a 
cohort of age-matched HD and control human cortex and liver tissues. In cortex
samples, we found minimal evidence of HD-associated DNA methylation at probed
sites after correction for cell heterogeneity but did observe an association to
age of disease onset. By contrast, comparison of matched cortex and liver samples
revealed tissue-specific DNA methylation of the HTT gene region at 38 sites
(FDR<0.05). Importantly, we identified a novel differentially methylated binding 
site in the HTT proximal promoter for the transcription factor CTCF. This CTCF
site displayed increased occupancy in cortex, where HTT expression is higher,
compared to liver. Additionally, CTCF silencing reduced the activity of a HTT
promoter-reporter construct, suggesting that CTCF plays a role in regulating HTT 
promoter function. Overall, although we were unable to detect HD-associated DNA
methylation alterations at queried sites, we found that DNA methylation may be
correlated to age of disease onset in cortex tissues. Moreover, our data suggest 
that DNA methylation may, in part, contribute to tissue-specific HTT
transcription through differential CTCF occupancy.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26953320  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 7;6:22656. doi: 10.1038/srep22656.

A systematic method to identify modulation of transcriptional regulation via
chromatin activity reveals regulatory network during mESC differentiation.

Duren Z(1), Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, National Center for Mathematics
and Interdisciplinary Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190,
China.

Chromatin regulators (CRs) are crucial for connecting the chromatin level and
transcriptome level by modulating chromatin structures, establishing, and
maintaining epigenetic modifications. We present a systematic method to identify 
MOdulation of transcriptional regulation via CHromatin Activity (MOCHA) from gene
expression data and demonstrate its advantage in associating CRs to their
chromatin localization and understand CRs' function. We first re-construct the
CRs modulation network by integrating the correlation and conditional correlation
concepts. Then we quantify the chromatin activity as hidden variable in network
by integrating the upstream and downstream information. We applied MOCHA to
systematically explore the interplay of CRs, TFs, and target genes in mouse
embryonic stem cells (ESC). As a result, MOCHA identified 420 chromatin
regulators with modulation preference, including Pou5f1 and Eed. We found that
BAF complex, NuRD complex, and polycomb-group proteins, regulate the delicate
balance between pluripotency and differentiation by modulating key TFs including 
Klf4, Tcf3, and Max; NuRD complex members Mbd3 and Hdac1 may modulate Klf4 to
achieve its dual functional roles in pluripotent and differentiation
stages;Imprinted gene H19 and Igf2 are modulated by DNA methylation, histone
acetylation, and insulator CTCF. Finally, we analyzed CR's combinational
modulation pattern by constructing a CR-CR interaction network.

PMCID: PMC4780077
PMID: 26949222  [PubMed - in process]


11. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 3;11(3):e0150382. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150382.
eCollection 2016.

Role of CTCF in Regulating SLC45A3-ELK4 Chimeric RNA.

Qin F(1), Song Y(1), Zhang Y(2), Facemire L(1), Frierson H(1), Li H(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America. (2)Zhejiang Academy of
Medical Sciences, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. (3)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, 
Virginia, United States of America.

The chimeric RNA, SLC45A3-ELK4, was found to be a product of cis-splicing between
the two adjacent genes (cis-SAGe). Despite the biological and clinical
significance of SLC45A3-ELK4, its generating mechanism has not been elucidated.
It was shown in one cell line that the binding of transcription factor CTCF to
the insulators located at or near the gene boundaries, inversely correlates with 
the level of the chimera. To investigate the mechanism of such cis-SAGe events,
we sequenced potential regions that may play a role in such transcriptional
read-through. We could not detect mutations at the transcription termination
site, insulator sites, splicing sites, or within CTCF itself in LNCaP cells, thus
suggesting a "soft-wired" mechanism in regulating the cis-SAGe event. To
investigate the role CTCF plays in regulating the chimeric RNA expression, we
compared the levels of CTCF binding to the insulators in different cell lines, as
well as clinical samples. Surprisingly, we did not find an inverse correlation
between CTCF level, or its bindings to the insulators and SLC45A3-ELK4 expression
among different samples. However, in three prostate cancer cell lines, different 
environmental factors can cause the expression levels of the chimeric RNA to
change, and these changes do inversely correlate with CTCF level, and/or its
bindings to the insulators. We thus conclude that CTCF and its bindings to the
insulators are not the primary reasons for differential SLC45A3-ELK4 expression
in different cell lines, or clinical cases. However, they are the likely
mechanism for the same cells to respond to different environmental cues, in order
to regulate the expression of SLC45A3-ELK4 chimeric RNA. This response to
different environmental cues is not general to other cis-SAGe events, as we only 
found one out of 16 newly identified chimeric RNAs showing a pattern similar to
SLC45A3-ELK4.

PMCID: PMC4777538
PMID: 26938874  [PubMed - in process]


12. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Feb 29. pii: 201423199. [Epub ahead of print]

The retrovirus HTLV-1 inserts an ectopic CTCF-binding site into the human genome.

Satou Y(1), Miyazato P(2), Ishihara K(3), Yaguchi H(4), Melamed A(4), Miura M(4),
Fukuda A(2), Nosaka K(5), Watanabe T(6), Rowan AG(4), Nakao M(7), Bangham CR(8).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Virology, Division of Infectious Diseases, Imperial College, London
W2 1PG, United Kingdom; Centre for AIDS Research, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto
860-0811, Japan; Priority Organization for Innovation and Excellence, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan; International Research Centre for Medical
Science, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan; Core Research for
Evolutionary Science and Technology, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Saitama
332-0012, Japan; c.bangham@imperial.ac.uk y-satou@kumamoto-u.ac.jp. (2)Centre for
AIDS Research, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan; Priority
Organization for Innovation and Excellence, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto
860-0811, Japan; International Research Centre for Medical Science, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan; (3)Priority Organization for Innovation and
Excellence, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan; Core Research for
Evolutionary Science and Technology, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Saitama
332-0012, Japan; (4)Section of Virology, Division of Infectious Diseases,
Imperial College, London W2 1PG, United Kingdom; (5)Cancer Centre, Kumamoto
University Hospital, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan; (6)Department
of Medical Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan. (7)Core Research for Evolutionary Science
and Technology, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Saitama 332-0012, Japan;
Department of Medical Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan. (8)Section of Virology, 
Division of Infectious Diseases, Imperial College, London W2 1PG, United Kingdom;
c.bangham@imperial.ac.uk y-satou@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.

Human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is a retrovirus that causes malignant 
and inflammatory diseases in ~10% of infected people. A typical host has between 
10(4) and 10(5) clones of HTLV-1-infected T lymphocytes, each clone distinguished
by the genomic integration site of the single-copy HTLV-1 provirus. The HTLV-1
bZIP (HBZ) factor gene is constitutively expressed from the minus strand of the
provirus, whereas plus-strand expression, required for viral propagation to
uninfected cells, is suppressed or intermittent in vivo, allowing escape from
host immune surveillance. It remains unknown what regulates this pattern of
proviral transcription and latency. Here, we show that CTCF, a key regulator of
chromatin structure and function, binds to the provirus at a sharp border in
epigenetic modifications in the pX region of the HTLV-1 provirus in T cells
naturally infected with HTLV-1. CTCF is a zinc-finger protein that binds to an
insulator region in genomic DNA and plays a fundamental role in controlling
higher order chromatin structure and gene expression in vertebrate cells. We show
that CTCF bound to HTLV-1 acts as an enhancer blocker, regulates HTLV-1 mRNA
splicing, and forms long-distance interactions with flanking host chromatin.
CTCF-binding sites (CTCF-BSs) have been propagated throughout the genome by
transposons in certain primate lineages, but CTCF binding has not previously been
described in present-day exogenous retroviruses. The presence of an ectopic
CTCF-BS introduced by the retrovirus in tens of thousands of genomic locations
has the potential to cause widespread abnormalities in host cell chromatin
structure and gene expression.

PMCID: PMC4801255 [Available on 2016-09-15]
PMID: 26929370  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2016 Feb 12. pii: S0002-9378(16)00306-9. doi:
10.1016/j.ajog.2016.01.194. [Epub ahead of print]

Alterations in expression of imprinted genes from the H19/IGF2 loci in a
multigenerational model of intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR).

Gonzalez-Rodriguez P(1), Cantu J(1), O'Neil D(1), Seferovic MD(1), Goodspeed
DM(1), Suter MA(1), Aagaard KM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas. (2)Department of Obstetrics &
Gynecology, Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas; Department of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas; Department of Molecular & Cell Biology, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, Texas; Department of Molecular & Cellular Physiology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas. Electronic address: aagaardt@bcm.edu.

BACKGROUND: The H19/IGF2 imprinted loci have attracted recent attention because
of their role in cellular differentiation and proliferation, heritable gene
regulation, and in utero or early postnatal growth and development. Expression
from the imprinted H19/IGF2 locus involves a complex interplay of 3 means of
epigenetic regulation: proper establishment of DNA methylation, promoter
occupancy of CTCF, and expression of microRNA-675. We have demonstrated
previously in a multigenerational rat model of intrauterine growth restriction
the epigenetic heritability of adult metabolic syndrome in a F2 generation. We
have further demonstrated abrogation of the F2 adult metabolic syndrome phenotype
with essential nutrient supplementation of intermediates along the 1-carbon
pathway and shown that alterations in the metabolome precede the adult onset of
metabolic syndrome. The upstream molecular and epigenomic mediators underlying
these observations, however, have yet to be elucidated fully.
OBJECTIVE: In the current study, we sought to characterize the impact of the
intrauterine growth-restricted lineage and essential nutrient supplementation on 
both levels and molecular mediators of H19 and IGF2 gene expression in the F2
generation.
STUDY DESIGN: F2 intrauterine growth-restricted and sham lineages were obtained
by exposing P1 (grandmaternal) pregnant dams to bilateral uterine artery ligation
or sham surgery at gestational day 19.5. F1 pups were allocated to the essential 
nutrient supplemented or control diet at postnatal day 21, and bred at 6-7 weeks 
of age. Hepatic tissues from the resultant F2 offspring at birth and at weaning
(day 21) were obtained. Bisulfite modification and sequencing was employed for
methylation analysis. H19 and IGF2 expression was measured by quantitative
polymerase chain reaction. Promoter occupancy was quantified by the use of
chromatin immunoprecipitation, or ChIP, against CTCF insulator proteins.
RESULTS: Growth-restricted F2 on control diet demonstrated significant
down-regulation in H19 expression compared with sham lineage (0.7831 vs 1.287; P 
< .05); however, essential nutrient supplementation diet abrogates this
difference (4.995 vs 5.100; P > .05). Conversely, Igf2 was up-regulated by
essential nutrient supplemented diet on the sham lineage (2.0 fold, P = .01), an 
effect that was not observed in the growth restricted offspring. A significant
differential methylation was observed in the promoter region of region H19 among 
the intrauterine growth-restricted lineage (18% vs 25%; P < .05) on a control
diet, whereas the essential nutrient supplemented diet was alternately associated
with hypermethylation in both lineages (sham: 50%; intrauterine growth
restriction: 84%, P < .05). Consistent with essential nutrient supplementation
impacting the epigenome, a decrease of CTCF promoter occupancy was observed in
CTCF4 of the growth restricted lineage (2.45% vs 0.56%; P < .05) on the control
diet, an effect that was repressed with essential nutrient supplementation.
CONCLUSION: Heritable growth restriction is associated with changes in H19 gene
expression; these changes are reversible with diet supplementation to favorably
impact adult metabolic syndrome.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26880735  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Elife. 2016 Feb 15;5. pii: e12089. doi: 10.7554/eLife.12089.

Regulatory polymorphisms modulate the expression of HLA class II molecules and
promote autoimmunity.

Raj P(1), Rai E(1,)(2), Song R(1), Khan S(1), Wakeland BE(1), Viswanathan K(1),
Arana C(1), Liang C(1), Zhang B(1), Dozmorov I(1), Carr-Johnson F(1), Mitrovic
M(3), Wiley GB(4), Kelly JA(4), Lauwerys BR(5), Olsen NJ(6), Cotsapas C(3),
Garcia CK(7,)(8), Wise CA(8,)(9,)(10,)(11), Harley JB(12,)(13), Nath SK(4), James
JA(4), Jacob CO(14), Tsao BP(15), Pasare C(1), Karp DR(16), Li QZ(1), Gaffney
PM(4), Wakeland EK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, United States. (2)School of Biotechnology, Shri Mata Vaishno Devi
University, Katra, India. (3)Department of Neurology, Yale School of Medicine,
New Haven, United States. (4)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Program, Oklahoma 
Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, United States. (5)Pole de pathologies
rhumatismales, Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique, Université
catholique de Louvain, Bruxelles, Belgium. (6)Division of Rheumatology,
Department of Medicine, Penn State Medical School, Hershey, United States.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, United States. (8)Eugene McDermott Center for Human Growth and
Development, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, United
States. (9)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, United States. (10)Sarah M. and Charles E. Seay Center
for Musculoskeletal Research, Texas Scottish Rite Hospital for Children, Dallas, 
United States. (11)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, United States. (12)Cincinnati VA Medical Center,
Cincinnati, United States. (13)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, United States. (14)Department of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, United States. (15)Department of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, United States. (16)Rheumatic Diseases
Division, Department of Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, United States.

Targeted sequencing of sixteen SLE risk loci among 1349 Caucasian cases and
controls produced a comprehensive dataset of the variations causing
susceptibility to systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Two independent disease
association signals in the HLA-D region identified two regulatory regions
containing 3562 polymorphisms that modified thirty-seven transcription factor
binding sites. These extensive functional variations are a new and potent facet
of HLA polymorphism. Variations modifying the consensus binding motifs of IRF4
and CTCF in the XL9 regulatory complex modified the transcription of HLA-DRB1,
HLA-DQA1 and HLA-DQB1 in a chromosome-specific manner, resulting in a 2.5-fold
increase in the surface expression of HLA-DR and DQ molecules on dendritic cells 
with SLE risk genotypes, which increases to over 4-fold after stimulation.
Similar analyses of fifteen other SLE risk loci identified 1206 functional
variants tightly linked with disease-associated SNPs and demonstrated that common
disease alleles contain multiple causal variants modulating multiple immune
system genes.

PMID: 26880555  [PubMed - in process]


15. Gene. 2016 May 15;582(2):168-72. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.02.009. Epub 2016 Feb
9.

Molecular characterization of a human matrix attachment region that improves
transgene expression in CHO cells.

Sun QL(1), Zhao CP(1), Chen SN(1), Wang L(1), Wang TY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Xinxiang Medical University,
Henan 453003, China; (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Xinxiang Medical University, Henan 453003, China;; Henan Collaborative Innovation
Center of Molecular Diagnosis and Laboratory Medicine, Xinxiang, 453003, Henan,
China. Electronic address: wtianyuncn@126.com.

Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells offer many advantages for recombinant gene
expression, including proper folding and post-translational modification of the
recombinant protein. However, due to positional effects resulting from the
neighboring chromatin, transgenes are often expressed at low levels in these
cells. While previous studies demonstrated that matrix attachment regions (MARs) 
can be utilized to increase transgene expression by buffering transgene
silencing, the mechanism by which this occurs is poorly understood. We therefore 
performed a deletion analysis of the human ß-globin MAR sequence to characterize 
the regions that are necessary to enhance transgene expression in CHO cells. Our 
results indicate that of the six ß-globin MAR fragments tested (MAR-1-6;
nucleotides 1-540, 420-1020, 900-1500, 1380-1980, 1860-2460, and 2340-2999,
respectively), MAR-2, followed by MAR-3, was the most effective region for
promoting stable and elevated transgene expression. Meanwhile, bioinformatic
analyses demonstrated that these fragments encode a MAR-like motif and several
transcription factor binding sites, including special AT-rich binding protein 1
(SATB1), CCAAT-enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBP), CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF),
and Glutathione (GSH) binding motifs, indicating that these elements may
contribute to the MAR-mediated enhancement of transgene expression. In addition, 
we found that truncated MAR derivatives yield more stable transgene expression
levels than transgenes lacking the MAR. We concluded that the MAR-mediated
transcriptional activation of transgenes requires a specific AT-rich sequence, as
well as specific transcription factor-binding motifs.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26869318  [PubMed - in process]


16. BMC Cancer. 2016 Feb 11;16(1):88. doi: 10.1186/s12885-016-2128-1.

Distinct genomic and epigenomic features demarcate hypomethylated blocks in colon
cancer.

Sharmin M(1), Bravo HC(2), Hannenhalli S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Center for Bioinformatics and Computational
Biology, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 20742, USA.
msharmin@umiacs.umd.edu. (2)Department of Computer Science, Center for
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Maryland, College Park,
MD, 20742, USA. hcorrada@umiacs.umd.edu. (3)Department of Cell and Molecular
Biology, Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of
Maryland, College Park, MD, 20742, USA. sridhar@umiacs.umd.edu.

BACKGROUND: Large mega base-pair genomic regions show robust alterations in DNA
methylation levels in multiple cancers. A vast majority of these regions are
hypomethylated in cancers. These regions are generally enriched for CpG islands, 
Lamin Associated Domains and Large organized chromatin lysine modification
domains, and are associated with stochastic variability in gene expression. Given
the size and consistency of hypomethylated blocks (HMB) across cancer types, we
hypothesized that the immediate causes of methylation instability are likely to
be encoded in the genomic region near HMB boundaries, in terms of specific
genomic or epigenomic signatures. However, a detailed characterization of the HMB
boundaries has not been reported.
METHOD: Here, we focused on ~13 k HMBs, encompassing approximately half of the
genome, identified in colon cancer. We modeled the genomic features of HMB
boundaries by Random Forest to identify their salient features, in terms of
transcription factor (TF) binding motifs. Additionally we analyzed various
epigenomic marks, and chromatin structural features of HMB boundaries relative to
the non-HMB genomic regions.
RESULT: We found that the classical promoter epigenomic mark - H3K4me3, is highly
enriched at HMB boundaries, as are CTCF bound sites. HMB boundaries harbor
distinct combinations of TF motifs. Our Random Forest model based on TF motifs
can accurately distinguish boundaries not only from regions inside and outside
HMBs, but surprisingly, from active promoters as well. Interestingly, the
distinguishing TFs and their interacting proteins are involved in chromatin
modification. Finally, HMB boundaries significantly coincide with the boundaries 
of Topologically Associating Domains of the chromatin.
CONCLUSION: Our analyses suggest that the overall architecture of HMBs is guided 
by pre-existing chromatin architecture, and are associated with aberrant activity
of promoter-like sequences at the boundary.

PMCID: PMC4750190
PMID: 26868017  [PubMed - in process]


17. Cancer Cell. 2016 Feb 8;29(2):139-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2016.01.010.

Bringing IDH into the Fold.

Zadeh G(1), Aldape K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, ON M5G
2M9, Canada; Division of Neurosurgery, University Health Network, Toronto, ON M5T
2S8, Canada. Electronic address: gelareh.zadeh@uhn.ca. (2)Princess Margaret
Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, ON M5G 2M9, Canada; Department
of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5T 2S8,
Canada.

Glioma-associated mutations in IDH1 or IDH2 lead to aberrant DNA methylation. A
recent paper shows that loss of methylation-sensitive CTCF binding in IDH mutant 
cells leads to disruption of enhancer boundary function, which results in
aberrant activation of PDGFRA expression via an enhancer associated with an
adjacent gene.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26859452  [PubMed - in process]


18. Trends Mol Med. 2016 Mar;22(3):185-7. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2016.01.008. Epub
2016 Feb 5.

Oncometabolite Tinkers with Genome Folding, Boosting Oncogene Expression.

Ing-Simmons E(1), Merkenschlager M(2).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College London, Du Cane Road, London
W12 0NN, UK. Electronic address: liz.ing-simmons@csc.mrc.ac.uk. (2)MRC Clinical
Sciences Centre, Imperial College London, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK.
Electronic address: matthias.merkenschlager@csc.mrc.ac.uk.

A recent article makes a compelling case for a new mechanism by which
heterozygous mutations in isocitrate dehydrogenases (IDH1/2) - implicated in
cancer - undermine gene regulation. 2-Hydroxyglutarate (2HG) produced by mutant
IDH alters the binding of the chromosomal organizer protein CTCF, disrupting the 
spatial and regulatory organization of the genome.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26856236  [PubMed - in process]


19. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 8;6:20462. doi: 10.1038/srep20462.

Corrigendum: Epigenetic silencing of the XAF1 gene is mediated by the loss of
CTCF binding.

Victoria-Acosta G, Vazquez-Santillan K, Jimenez-Hernandez L, Muñoz-Galindo L,
Maldonado V, Martinez-Ruiz GU, Melendez-Zajgla J.

PMCID: PMC4745567
PMID: 26855026  [PubMed - in process]


20. BMC Cancer. 2016 Feb 1;16(1):49. doi: 10.1186/s12885-016-2087-6.

The dual specificity phosphatase 2 gene is hypermethylated in human cancer and
regulated by epigenetic mechanisms.

Haag T(1), Richter AM(2), Schneider MB(3), Jiménez AP(4), Dammann RH(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, Justus-Liebig-University, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 58-62,
D-35392, Giessen, Germany. Tanjahaag2408@gmail.com. (2)Institute for Genetics,
Justus-Liebig-University, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 58-62, D-35392, Giessen, Germany.
Antje.M.Richter@gen.bio.uni-giessen.de. (3)Institute for Genetics,
Justus-Liebig-University, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 58-62, D-35392, Giessen, Germany.
Martin.bernd.schneider@onlinehome.de. (4)Institute for Genetics,
Justus-Liebig-University, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 58-62, D-35392, Giessen, Germany.
Adriana.Jimenez@gen.bio.uni-giessen.de. (5)Institute for Genetics,
Justus-Liebig-University, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 58-62, D-35392, Giessen, Germany.
reinhard.dammann@gen.bio.uni-giessen.de. (6)Universities of Giessen and Marburg
Lung Center, 35392, Giessen, Germany. reinhard.dammann@gen.bio.uni-giessen.de.

BACKGROUND: Dual specificity phosphatases are a class of tumor-associated
proteins involved in the negative regulation of the MAP kinase pathway.
Downregulation of the dual specificity phosphatase 2 (DUSP2) has been reported in
cancer. Epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor genes by abnormal promoter
methylation is a frequent mechanism in oncogenesis. It has been shown that the
epigenetic factor CTCF is involved in the regulation of tumor suppressor genes.
METHODS: We analyzed the promoter hypermethylation of DUSP2 in human cancer,
including primary Merkel cell carcinoma by bisulfite restriction analysis and
pyrosequencing. Moreover we analyzed the impact of a DNA methyltransferase
inhibitor (5-Aza-dC) and CTCF on the epigenetic regulation of DUSP2 by qRT-PCR,
promoter assay, chromatin immuno-precipitation and methylation analysis.
RESULTS: Here we report a significant tumor-specific hypermethylation of DUSP2 in
primary Merkel cell carcinoma (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.05). An increase in methylation of DUSP2 was
also found in 17 out of 24 (71 %) cancer cell lines, including skin and lung
cancer. Treatment of cancer cells with 5-Aza-dC induced DUSP2 expression by its
promoter demethylation, Additionally we observed that CTCF induces DUSP2
expression in cell lines that exhibit silencing of DUSP2. This reactivation was
accompanied by increased CTCF binding and demethylation of the DUSP2 promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that aberrant epigenetic inactivation of DUSP2 occurs 
in carcinogenesis and that CTCF is involved in the epigenetic regulation of DUSP2
expression.

PMCID: PMC4736155
PMID: 26833217  [PubMed - in process]


21. BMC Bioinformatics. 2016 Jan 11;17 Suppl 1:4. doi: 10.1186/s12859-015-0846-z.

Predicting transcription factor site occupancy using DNA sequence intrinsic and
cell-type specific chromatin features.

Kumar S(1,)(2), Bucher P(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), School of Life
Sciences, EPFL, Station 15, Lausanne, CH-1015, Switzerland. kumar.sunil@epfl.ch. 
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), EPFL, Station 15, Lausanne, CH-1015, 
Switzerland. kumar.sunil@epfl.ch. (3)Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer
Research (ISREC), School of Life Sciences, EPFL, Station 15, Lausanne, CH-1015,
Switzerland. philipp.bucher@epfl.ch. (4)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), 
EPFL, Station 15, Lausanne, CH-1015, Switzerland. philipp.bucher@epfl.ch.

BACKGROUND: Understanding the mechanisms by which transcription factors (TF) are 
recruited to their physiological target sites is crucial for understanding gene
regulation. DNA sequence intrinsic features such as predicted binding affinity
are often not very effective in predicting in vivo site occupancy and in any case
could not explain cell-type specific binding events. Recent reports show that
chromatin accessibility, nucleosome occupancy and specific histone
post-translational modifications greatly influence TF site occupancy in vivo. In 
this work, we use machine-learning methods to build predictive models and assess 
the relative importance of different sequence-intrinsic and chromatin features in
the TF-to-target-site recruitment process.
METHODS: Our study primarily relies on recent data published by the ENCODE
consortium. Five dissimilar TFs assayed in multiple cell-types were selected as
examples: CTCF, JunD, REST, GABP and USF2. We used two types of candidate target 
sites: (a) predicted sites obtained by scanning the whole genome with a position 
weight matrix, and (b) cell-type specific peak lists provided by ENCODE.
Quantitative in vivo occupancy levels in different cell-types were based on
ChIP-seq data for the corresponding TFs. In parallel, we computed a number of
associated sequence-intrinsic and experimental features (histone modification,
DNase I hypersensitivity, etc.) for each site. Machine learning algorithms were
then used in a binary classification and regression framework to predict site
occupancy and binding strength, for the purpose of assessing the relative
importance of different contextual features.
RESULTS: We observed striking differences in the feature importance rankings
between the five factors tested. PWM-scores were amongst the most important
features only for CTCF and REST but of little value for JunD and USF2. Chromatin 
accessibility and active histone marks are potent predictors for all factors
except REST. Structural DNA parameters, repressive and gene body associated
histone marks are generally of little or no predictive value.
CONCLUSIONS: We define a general and extensible computational framework for
analyzing the importance of various DNA-intrinsic and chromatin-associated
features in determining cell-type specific TF binding to target sites. The
application of our methodology to ENCODE data has led to new insights on
transcription regulatory processes and may serve as example for future studies
encompassing even larger datasets.

PMID: 26818008  [PubMed - in process]


22. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2016 Jan 20;37:17-26. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2015.11.009. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Insulators and domains of gene expression.

Ali T(1), Renkawitz R(2), Bartkuhn M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, Justus-Liebig-University, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 58,
D35392 Giessen, Germany. (2)Institute for Genetics, Justus-Liebig-University,
Heinrich-Buff-Ring 58, D35392 Giessen, Germany. Electronic address:
rainer.renkawitz@gen.bio.uni-giessen.de.

The genomic organization into active and inactive chromatin domains imposes
specific requirements for having domain boundaries to prohibit interference
between the opposing activities of neighbouring domains. These boundaries provide
an insulator function by binding architectural proteins that mediate long-range
interactions. Among these, CTCF plays a prominent role in establishing chromatin 
loops (between pairs of CTCF binding sites) through recruiting cohesin.
CTCF-mediated long-range interactions are integral for a multitude of topological
features of interphase chromatin, such as the formation of topologically
associated domains, domain insulation, enhancer blocking and even enhancer
function.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26802288  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


23. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2016 Jan 22. pii: 027318. [Epub ahead of print]

Genome Organization and Chromosome Architecture.

Bernardi G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Science Department, Roma Tre University, 00146 Rome, Italy Stazione Zoologica 
Anton Dohrn, 80121 Naples, Italy gbernardi@uniroma3.it.

How the same DNA sequences can function in the three-dimensional architecture of 
interphase nucleus, fold in the very compact structure of metaphase chromosomes, 
and go precisely back to the original interphase architecture in the following
cell cycle remains an unresolved question to this day. The solution to this
question presented here rests on the correlations that were found to hold between
the isochore organization of the genome and the architecture of chromosomes from 
interphase to metaphase. The key points are the following: (1) The transition
from the looped domains and subdomains of interphase chromatin to the 30-nm fiber
loops of early prophase chromosomes goes through their unfolding into an extended
chromatin structure (probably a 10-nm "beads-on-a-string" structure); (2) the
architectural proteins of interphase chromatin, such as CTCF and cohesin
subunits, are retained in mitosis and are part of the discontinuous protein
scaffold of mitotic chromosomes; and (3) the conservation of the link between
architectural proteins and their binding sites on DNA through the cell cycle
explains the reversibility of the interphase to mitosis process and the "mitotic 
memory" of interphase architecture.

Copyright © 2015 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

PMID: 26801160  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


24. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Feb 2;113(5):1357-62. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1525001113. Epub 2016 Jan 19.

Autoimmune vitiligo is associated with gain-of-function by a transcriptional
regulator that elevates expression of HLA-A*02:01 in vivo.

Hayashi M(1), Jin Y(2), Yorgov D(3), Santorico SA(4), Hagman J(5), Ferrara TM(2),
Jones KL(6), Cavalli G(7), Dinarello CA(8), Spritz RA(9).

Author information: 
(1)Human Medical Genetics and Genomics Program, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045; (2)Human Medical Genetics and Genomics Program,
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045; Department of
Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045;
(3)Department of Mathematical & Statistical Science, University of Colorado
Denver, Denver, CO 80217; (4)Human Medical Genetics and Genomics Program,
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045; Department of
Mathematical & Statistical Science, University of Colorado Denver, Denver, CO
80217; (5)Department of Biomedical Research, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO
80206; Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School
of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045; (6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Genetics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045;
(7)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 
80045; Internal Medicine and Clinical Immunology, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a
Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS) San Raffaele Scientific Institute and Vita-Salute
San Raffaele University, 20129 Milan, Italy. (8)Department of Medicine,
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045; cdinare333@aol.com
richard.spritz@ucdenver.edu. (9)Human Medical Genetics and Genomics Program,
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045; Department of
Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045;
cdinare333@aol.com richard.spritz@ucdenver.edu.

HLA-A is a class I major histocompatibility complex receptor that presents
peptide antigens on the surface of most cells. Vitiligo, an autoimmune disease in
which skin melanocytes are destroyed by cognate T cells, is associated with
variation in the HLA-A gene; specifically HLA-A*02:01, which presents multiple
vitiligo melanocyte autoantigens. Refined genetic mapping localizes vitiligo risk
in the HLA-A region to an SNP haplotype ~20-kb downstream, spanning an ENCODE
element with many characteristics of a transcriptional enhancer. Convergent CTCF 
insulator sites flanking the HLA-A gene promoter and the predicted
transcriptional regulator, with apparent interaction between these sites,
suggests this element regulates the HLA-A promoter. Peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells from healthy subjects homozygous for the high-risk haplotype expressed 39% 
more HLA-A RNA than cells from subjects carrying nonhigh-risk haplotypes (P =
0.0048). Similarly, RNAseq analysis of 1,000 Genomes Project data showed more
HLA-A mRNA expressed in subjects homozygous for the high-risk allele of lead SNP 
rs60131261 than subjects homozygous for the low-risk allele (P = 0.006). Reporter
plasmid transfection and genomic run-on sequence analyses confirm that the HLA-A 
transcriptional regulator contains multiple bidirectional promoters, with
greatest activity on the high-risk haplotype, although it does not behave as a
classic enhancer. Vitiligo risk associated with the MHC class I region thus
derives from combined quantitative and qualitative phenomena: a SNP haplotype in 
a transcriptional regulator that induces gain-of-function, elevating expression
of HLA-A RNA in vivo, in strong linkage disequilibrium with an HLA-A allele that 
confers *02:01 specificity.

PMCID: PMC4747738 [Available on 2016-08-02]
PMID: 26787886  [PubMed - in process]


25. J Clin Invest. 2016 Feb 1;126(2):527-42. doi: 10.1172/JCI80937. Epub 2016 Jan 19.

TGF-ß/ß2-spectrin/CTCF-regulated tumor suppression in human stem cell disorder
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome.

Chen J, Yao ZX, Chen JS, Gi YJ, Muñoz NM, Kundra S, Herlong HF, Jeong YS, Goltsov
A, Ohshiro K, Mistry NA, Zhang J, Su X, Choufani S, Mitra A, Li S, Mishra B,
White J, Rashid A, Wang AY, Javle M, Davila M, Michaely P, Weksberg R, Hofstetter
WL, Finegold MJ, Shay JW, Machida K, Tsukamoto H, Mishra L.

Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is a human stem cell disorder, and individuals 
with this disease have a substantially increased risk (~800-fold) of developing
tumors. Epigenetic silencing of ß2-spectrin (ß2SP, encoded by SPTBN1), a SMAD
adaptor for TGF-ß signaling, is causally associated with BWS; however, a role of 
TGF-ß deficiency in BWS-associated neoplastic transformation is unexplored. Here,
we have reported that double-heterozygous Sptbn1+/- Smad3+/- mice, which have
defective TGF-ß signaling, develop multiple tumors that are phenotypically
similar to those of BWS patients. Moreover, tumorigenesis-associated genes IGF2
and telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) were overexpressed in fibroblasts
from BWS patients and TGF-ß-defective mice. We further determined that chromatin 
insulator CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is TGF-ß inducible and facilitates
TGF-ß-mediated repression of TERT transcription via interactions with ß2SP and
SMAD3. This regulation was abrogated in TGF-ß-defective mice and BWS, resulting
in TERT overexpression. Imprinting of the IGF2/H19 locus and the CDKN1C/KCNQ1
locus on chromosome 11p15.5 is mediated by CTCF, and this regulation is lost in
BWS, leading to aberrant overexpression of growth-promoting genes. Therefore, we 
propose that loss of CTCF-dependent imprinting of tumor-promoting genes, such as 
IGF2 and TERT, results from a defective TGF-ß pathway and is responsible at least
in part for BWS-associated tumorigenesis as well as sporadic human cancers that
are frequently associated with SPTBN1 and SMAD3 mutations.

PMCID: PMC4731168 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 26784546  [PubMed - in process]


26. PLoS Comput Biol. 2016 Jan 15;12(1):e1004716. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004716. 
eCollection 2016.

Correction: Depletion of the Chromatin Looping Proteins CTCF and Cohesin Causes
Chromatin Compaction: Insight into Chromatin Folding by Polymer Modelling.

PLOS Computational Biology Staff.

Erratum for
    PLoS Comput Biol. 2014 Oct 9;10(10):e1003877. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003877. 
eCollection 2014 Oct..

[This corrects the article DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003877.].

PMCID: PMC4714947
PMID: 26771514  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


27. BMC Genomics. 2016 Jan 14;17(1):52. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2384-0.

Pateamine A-sensitive ribosome profiling reveals the scope of translation in
mouse embryonic stem cells.

Popa A(1), Lebrigand K(1), Barbry P(2), Waldmann R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IPMC), University Nice
Sophia Antipolis, CNRS, F06560, Sophia-Antipolis, France. (2)Institut de
Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IPMC), University Nice Sophia Antipolis,
CNRS, F06560, Sophia-Antipolis, France. barbry@ipmc.cnrs.fr.

BACKGROUND: Open reading frames are common in long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) and
5'UTRs of protein coding transcripts (uORFs). The question of whether those ORFs 
are translated was recently addressed by several groups using ribosome profiling.
Most of those studies concluded that certain lncRNAs and uORFs are translated,
essentially based on computational analysis of ribosome footprints. However,
major discrepancies remain on the scope of translation and the translational
status of individual ORFs. In consequence, further criteria are required to
reliably identify translated ORFs from ribosome profiling data.
RESULTS: We examined the effect of the translation inhibitors pateamine A,
harringtonine and puromycin on murine ES cell ribosome footprints. We found that 
pateamine A, a drug that targets eIF4A, allows a far more accurate identification
of translated sequences than previously used drugs and computational scoring
schemes. Our data show that at least one third but less than two thirds of ES
cell lncRNAs are translated. We also identified translated uORFs in hundreds of
annotated coding transcripts including key pluripotency transcripts, such as
dicer, lin28, trim71, and ctcf.
CONCLUSION: Pateamine A inhibition data clearly increase the precision of the
detection of translated ORFs in ribosome profiling experiments. Our data show
that translation of lncRNAs and uORFs in murine ES cells is rather common
although less pervasive than previously suggested. The observation of translated 
uORFs in several key pluripotency transcripts suggests that translational
regulation by uORFs might be part of the network that defines mammalian stem cell
identity.

PMCID: PMC4712605
PMID: 26764022  [PubMed - in process]


28. Epigenomics. 2016 Jan;8(1):13-31. doi: 10.2217/epi.15.104. Epub 2016 Jan 12.

Epigenetics of the myotonic dystrophy-associated DMPK gene neighborhood.

Buckley L(1), Lacey M(2), Ehrlich M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Program, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans,
LA 70112, USA. (2)Tulane Cancer Center & Department of Mathematics, Tulane
University, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. (3)Human Genetics Program, Center for
Bioinformatics & Genomics, Tulane Cancer Center, Tulane University Health
Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

AIM: Identify epigenetic marks in the vicinity of DMPK (linked to myotonic
dystrophy, DM1) that help explain tissue-specific differences in its expression.
MATERIALS & METHODS: At DMPK and its flanking genes (DMWD, SIX5, BHMG1 and
RSPH6A), we analyzed many epigenetic and transcription profiles from myoblasts,
myotubes, skeletal muscle, heart and 30 nonmuscle samples.
RESULTS: In the DMPK gene neighborhood, muscle-associated DNA hypermethylation
and hypomethylation, enhancer chromatin, and CTCF binding were seen. Myogenic
DMPK hypermethylation correlated with high expression and decreased alternative
promoter usage. Testis/sperm hypomethylation of BHMG1 and RSPH6A was associated
with testis-specific expression. G-quadruplex (G4) motifs and sperm-specific
hypomethylation were found near the DM1-linked CTG repeats within DMPK.
CONCLUSION: Tissue-specific epigenetic features in DMPK and neighboring genes
help regulate its expression. G4 motifs in DMPK DNA and RNA might contribute to
DM1 pathology.

PMID: 26756355  [PubMed - in process]


29. BMC Genomics. 2016 Jan 8;17(1):38. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-2359-6.

IL-10 and integrin signaling pathways are associated with head and neck cancer
progression.

Bornstein S(1), Schmidt M(2), Choonoo G(3), Levin T(4), Gray J(5,)(6), Thomas CR 
Jr(7,)(8), Wong M(9,)(10), McWeeney S(11,)(12,)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW 
Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR, 97239, USA. bornstei@ohsu.edu. (2)Department
of Cell, Developmental & Cancer Biology, Oregon Health & Science University 3,
3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR, 97239, USA. schmidma@ohsu.edu.
(3)OHSU Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW Sam 
Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR, 97239, USA. choonoo@ohsu.edu. (4)Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson
Park Road, Portland, OR, 97239, USA. levint@ohsu.edu. (5)OHSU Knight Cancer
Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road,
Portland, OR, 97239, USA. grayjo@ohsu.edu. (6)Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road,
Portland, OR, 97239, USA. grayjo@ohsu.edu. (7)Department of Radiation Medicine,
Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR, 
97239, USA. thomasch@ohsu.edu. (8)OHSU Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health &
Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR, 97239, USA.
thomasch@ohsu.edu. (9)Department of Cell, Developmental & Cancer Biology, Oregon 
Health & Science University 3, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR,
97239, USA. wongme@ohsu.edu. (10)OHSU Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health &
Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR, 97239, USA.
wongme@ohsu.edu. (11)OHSU Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health & Science
University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR, 97239, USA.
mcweeney@ohsu.edu. (12)Division of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology,
Department of Medical Informatics & Clinical Epidemiology, Oregon Health &
Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR, 97239, USA.
mcweeney@ohsu.edu. (13)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health and
Preventive Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park
Road, Portland, OR, 97239, USA. mcweeney@ohsu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Head and neck cancer is morbid with a poor prognosis that has not
significantly improved in the past several decades. The purpose of this study was
to identify biological pathways underlying progressive head and neck cancer to
inform prognostic and adjuvant strategies. We identified 235 head and neck cancer
patients in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) with sufficient clinical annotation
regarding therapeutic treatment and disease progression to identify progressors
and non-progressors. We compared primary tumor gene expression and mutational
status between these two groups.
RESULTS: 105 genes were differentially expressed between progressors and
nonprogressors (FDR<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Pathway analyses revealed deregulation (FDR<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) 
of multiple pathways related to integrin signaling as well as IL-10 signaling. A 
number of genes were uniquely mutated in the progressor cohort including
increased frequency of truncating mutations in CTCF (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.007). An 11-gene
signature derived from a combination of unique mutations and differential
expression was identified (PAGE4, SMTNL1, VTN, CA5A, C1orf43, KRTAP19-1, LEP,
HRH4, PAGE5, SEZ6L, CREB3). This signature was associated with decreased overall 
survival (Logrank Test; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03443). Cox modeling of both key clinical features 
and the signature was significant (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.032) with the greatest prognostic
improvement seen in the model based on nodal extracapsular spread and alcohol use
alone (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004).
CONCLUSIONS: Molecular analyses of head and neck cancer tumors that progressed
despite treatment, identified IL-10 and integrin pathways to be strongly
associated with cancer progression. In addition, we identified an 11-gene
signature with implications for patient prognostication. Mutational analysis
highlighted a potential role for CTCF, a crucial regulator of long-range
chromatin interactions, in head and neck cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC4706689
PMID: 26747525  [PubMed - in process]


30. Cancer Discov. 2016 Feb;6(2):119. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-RW2016-003. Epub 2016
Jan 7.

IDH Mutations Promote Glioma through Epigenetic Insulator Disruption.

[No authors listed]

Disrupted CTCF binding at the PDGFRA boundary element enhances its expression,
promoting glioma growth.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26743889  [PubMed - in process]


31. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Dec 28. pii: gkv1519. [Epub ahead of print]

Epigenome-wide effects of vitamin D and their impact on the transcriptome of
human monocytes involve CTCF.

Seuter S(1), Neme A(1), Carlberg C(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland,
FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland. (2)School of Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Eastern Finland, FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland carsten.carlberg@uef.fi.

The physiological functions of vitamin D are mediated by its metabolite
1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2D3) activating the transcription factor
vitamin D receptor (VDR). In THP-1 human monocytes we demonstrated epigenome-wide
effects of 1,25(OH)2D3 at 8979 loci with significantly modulated chromatin
accessibility. Maximal chromatin opening was observed after 24 h, while after 48 
h most sites closed again. The chromatin-organizing protein CTCF bound to 14% of 
the 1,25(OH)2D3-sensitive chromatin regions. Interestingly, 1,25(OH)2D3 affected 
the chromatin association of CTCF providing an additional mechanism for the
epigenome-wide effects of the VDR ligand. The 1,25(OH)2D3-modulated transcriptome
of THP-1 cells comprised 1284 genes, 77.5% of which responded only 24 h after
stimulation. During the 1,25(OH)2D3 stimulation time course the proportion of
down-regulated genes increased from 0% to 44.9% and the top-ranking physiological
function of the respective genes shifted from anti-microbial response to
connective tissue disorders. The integration of epigenomic and transcriptomic
data identified 165 physiologically important 1,25(OH)2D3 target genes, including
HTT and NOD2, whose expression can be predicted primarily from epigenomic data of
their genomic loci. Taken together, a large number of 1,25(OH)2D3-triggered
epigenome-wide events precede and accompany the transcriptional activation of
target genes of the nuclear hormone.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMID: 26715761  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


32. Genetics. 2016 Feb;202(2):601-17. doi: 10.1534/genetics.115.179309. Epub 2015 Dec
29.

Distinct Roles of Chromatin Insulator Proteins in Control of the Drosophila
Bithorax Complex.

Savitsky M(1), Kim M(2), Kravchuk O(3), Schwartz YB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, 90187 Umeå, Sweden Koltzov
Institute of Developmental Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 119334 Moscow,
Russia. (2)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, 90187 Umeå, Sweden. 
(3)Koltzov Institute of Developmental Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences,
119334 Moscow, Russia. (4)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, 90187
Umeå, Sweden yuri.schwartz@umu.se.

Chromatin insulators are remarkable regulatory elements that can bring distant
genomic sites together and block unscheduled enhancer-promoter communications.
Insulators act via associated insulator proteins of two classes:
sequence-specific DNA binding factors and "bridging" proteins. The latter are
required to mediate interactions between distant insulator elements. Chromatin
insulators are critical for correct expression of complex loci; however, their
mode of action is poorly understood. Here, we use the Drosophila bithorax complex
as a model to investigate the roles of the bridging proteins Cp190 and Mod(mdg4).
The bithorax complex consists of three evolutionarily conserved homeotic genes
Ubx, abd-A, and Abd-B, which specify anterior-posterior identity of the last
thoracic and all abdominal segments of the fly. Looking at effects of CTCF,
mod(mdg4), and Cp190 mutations on expression of the bithorax complex genes, we
provide the first functional evidence that Mod(mdg4) acts in concert with the DNA
binding insulator protein CTCF. We find that Mod(mdg4) and Cp190 are not
redundant and may have distinct functional properties. We, for the first time,
demonstrate that Cp190 is critical for correct regulation of the bithorax complex
and show that Cp190 is required at an exceptionally strong Fub insulator to
partition the bithorax complex into two topological domains.

Copyright © 2016 by the Genetics Society of America.

PMCID: PMC4788238 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26715665  [PubMed - in process]


33. Hum Gene Ther. 2016 Mar;27(3):255-66. doi: 10.1089/hum.2015.110. Epub 2016 Mar
15.

Insulated Foamy Viral Vectors.

Browning DL(1), Collins CP(2), Hocum JD(2), Leap DJ(2), Rae DT(2), Trobridge
GD(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, Pullman. (2)2 
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Washington State University , Spokane,
Washington.

Retroviral vector-mediated gene therapy is promising, but genotoxicity has
limited its use in the clinic. Genotoxicity is highly dependent on the retroviral
vector used, and foamy viral (FV) vectors appear relatively safe. However,
internal promoters may still potentially activate nearby genes. We developed
insulated FV vectors, using four previously described insulators: a version of
the well-studied chicken hypersensitivity site 4 insulator (650cHS4), two
synthetic CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)-based insulators, and an insulator based on
the CCAAT box-binding transcription factor/nuclear factor I (7xCTF/NF1). We
directly compared these insulators for enhancer-blocking activity, effect on FV
vector titer, and fidelity of transfer to both proviral long terminal repeats.
The synthetic CTCF-based insulators had the strongest insulating activity, but
reduced titers significantly. The 7xCTF/NF1 insulator did not reduce titers but
had weak insulating activity. The 650cHS4-insulated FV vector was identified as
the overall most promising vector. Uninsulated and 650cHS4-insulated FV vectors
were both significantly less genotoxic than gammaretroviral vectors. Integration 
sites were evaluated in cord blood CD34(+) cells and the 650cHS4-insulated FV
vector had fewer hotspots compared with an uninsulated FV vector. These data
suggest that insulated FV vectors are promising for hematopoietic stem cell gene 
therapy.

PMID: 26715244  [PubMed - in process]


34. EMBO J. 2016 Jan 1;35(3):335-55. doi: 10.15252/embj.201593235. Epub 2015 Dec 28.

TET-catalyzed oxidation of intragenic 5-methylcytosine regulates CTCF-dependent
alternative splicing.

Marina RJ(1), Sturgill D(1), Bailly MA(1), Thenoz M(1), Varma G(1), Prigge MF(1),
Nanan KK(1), Shukla S(1), Haque N(1), Oberdoerffer S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene
Expression, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA. (2)Center for Cancer
Research, Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA shalini.oberdoerffer@nih.gov.

Intragenic 5-methylcytosine and CTCF mediate opposing effects on pre-mRNA
splicing: CTCF promotes inclusion of weak upstream exons through RNA polymerase
II pausing, whereas 5-methylcytosine evicts CTCF, leading to exon exclusion.
However, the mechanisms governing dynamic DNA methylation at CTCF-binding sites
were unclear. Here, we reveal the methylcytosine dioxygenases TET1 and TET2 as
active regulators of CTCF-mediated alternative splicing through conversion of
5-methylcytosine to its oxidation derivatives. 5-hydroxymethylcytosine and
5-carboxylcytosine are enriched at an intragenic CTCF-binding sites in
the CD45 model gene and are associated with alternative exon inclusion. Reduced
TET levels culminate in increased 5-methylcytosine, resulting in CTCF eviction
and exon exclusion. In vitro analyses establish the oxidation derivatives are not
sufficient to stimulate splicing, but efficiently promote CTCF association. We
further show genomewide that reciprocal exchange of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine and
5-methylcytosine at downstream CTCF-binding sites is a general feature of
alternative splicing in naïve and activated CD4(+) T cells. These findings
significantly expand our current concept of the pre-mRNA "splicing code" to
include dynamic intragenic DNA methylation catalyzed by the TET proteins.

Published 2015. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

PMCID: PMC4741300 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26711177  [PubMed - in process]


35. EMBO J. 2016 Mar 15;35(6):580-94. doi: 10.15252/embj.201592383. Epub 2015 Dec 23.

Cytokine-induced megakaryocytic differentiation is regulated by genome-wide loss 
of a uSTAT transcriptional program.

Park HJ(1), Li J(1), Hannah R(1), Biddie S(1), Leal-Cervantes AI(1), Kirschner
K(1), Flores Santa Cruz D(1), Sexl V(2), Göttgens B(3), Green AR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Wellcome Trust/MRC Stem Cell
Institute, Cambridge, UK Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK. (2)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Veterinary University
Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (3)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Wellcome
Trust/MRC Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, UK Department of Haematology,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK bg200@cam.ac.uk arg1000@cam.ac.uk.
(4)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Wellcome Trust/MRC Stem Cell
Institute, Cambridge, UK Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK Department of Haematology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK
bg200@cam.ac.uk arg1000@cam.ac.uk.

Metazoan development is regulated by transcriptional networks, which must respond
to extracellular cues including cytokines. The JAK/STAT pathway is a highly
conserved regulatory module, activated by many cytokines, in which
tyrosine-phosphorylated STATs (pSTATs) function as transcription factors.
However, the mechanisms by which STAT activation modulates lineage-affiliated
transcriptional programs are unclear. We demonstrate that in the absence of
thrombopoietin (TPO), tyrosine-unphosphorylated STAT5 (uSTAT5) is present in the 
nucleus where it colocalizes with CTCF and represses a megakaryocytic
transcriptional program. TPO-mediated phosphorylation of STAT5 triggers its
genome-wide relocation to STAT consensus sites with two distinct transcriptional 
consequences, loss of a uSTAT5 program that restrains megakaryocytic
differentiation and activation of a canonical pSTAT5-driven program which
includes regulators of apoptosis and proliferation. Transcriptional repression by
uSTAT5 reflects restricted access of the megakaryocytic transcription factor ERG 
to target genes. These results identify a previously unrecognized mechanism of
cytokine-mediated differentiation.

© 2015 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

PMID: 26702099  [PubMed - in process]


36. Nature. 2016 Jan 7;529(7584):110-4. doi: 10.1038/nature16490. Epub 2015 Dec 23.

Insulator dysfunction and oncogene activation in IDH mutant gliomas.

Flavahan WA(1,)(2,)(3), Drier Y(1,)(2,)(3), Liau BB(1,)(2,)(3), Gillespie
SM(1,)(2,)(3), Venteicher AS(1,)(2,)(4), Stemmer-Rachamimov AO(1), Suvà
ML(1,)(2), Bernstein BE(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA. (2)Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA. (3)Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland 20815, USA. (4)Department of
Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2016 Jan 7;529(7584):34-5.

Gain-of-function IDH mutations are initiating events that define major clinical
and prognostic classes of gliomas. Mutant IDH protein produces a new
onco-metabolite, 2-hydroxyglutarate, which interferes with iron-dependent
hydroxylases, including the TET family of 5'-methylcytosine hydroxylases. TET
enzymes catalyse a key step in the removal of DNA methylation. IDH mutant gliomas
thus manifest a CpG island methylator phenotype (G-CIMP), although the functional
importance of this altered epigenetic state remains unclear. Here we show that
human IDH mutant gliomas exhibit hypermethylation at cohesin and CCCTC-binding
factor (CTCF)-binding sites, compromising binding of this methylation-sensitive
insulator protein. Reduced CTCF binding is associated with loss of insulation
between topological domains and aberrant gene activation. We specifically
demonstrate that loss of CTCF at a domain boundary permits a constitutive
enhancer to interact aberrantly with the receptor tyrosine kinase gene PDGFRA, a 
prominent glioma oncogene. Treatment of IDH mutant gliomaspheres with a
demethylating agent partially restores insulator function and downregulates
PDGFRA. Conversely, CRISPR-mediated disruption of the CTCF motif in IDH wild-type
gliomaspheres upregulates PDGFRA and increases proliferation. Our study suggests 
that IDH mutations promote gliomagenesis by disrupting chromosomal topology and
allowing aberrant regulatory interactions that induce oncogene expression.

PMID: 26700815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Data Brief. 2015 Nov 3;5:761-9. doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2015.10.033. eCollection 2015.

Identification of genes escaping X inactivation by allelic expression analysis in
a novel hybrid mouse model.

Berletch JB(1), Ma W(2), Yang F(1), Shendure J(2), Noble WS(2), Disteche CM(3),
Deng X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA ;
Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.

X chromosome inactivation (XCI) is a female-specific mechanism that serves to
balance gene dosage between the sexes whereby one X chromosome in females is
inactivated during early development. Despite this silencing, a small portion of 
genes escape inactivation and remain expressed from the inactive X (Xi). Little
is known about the distribution of escape from XCI in different tissues in vivo
and about the mechanisms that control tissue-specific differences. Using a new
binomial model in conjunction with a mouse model with identifiable alleles and
skewed X inactivation we are able to survey genes that escape XCI in vivo. We
show that escape from X inactivation can be a common feature of some genes,
whereas others escape in a tissue specific manner. Furthermore, we characterize
the chromatin environment of escape genes and show that expression from the Xi
correlates with factors associated with open chromatin and that CTCF co-localizes
with escape genes. Here, we provide a detailed description of the experimental
design and data analysis pipeline we used to assay allele-specific expression and
epigenetic characteristics of genes escaping X inactivation. The data is publicly
available through the GEO database under ascension numbers GSM1014171, GSE44255, 
and GSE59779. Interpretation and discussion of these data are included in a
previously published study (Berletch et al., 2015) [1].

PMCID: PMC4659812
PMID: 26693509  [PubMed]


38. Cell. 2015 Dec 17;163(7):1611-27. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.11.024. Epub 2015 Dec 
10.

CTCF-Mediated Human 3D Genome Architecture Reveals Chromatin Topology for
Transcription.

Tang Z(1), Luo OJ(1), Li X(2), Zheng M(1), Zhu JJ(3), Szalaj P(4), Trzaskoma
P(5), Magalska A(5), Wlodarczyk J(5), Ruszczycki B(5), Michalski P(1), Piecuch
E(3), Wang P(1), Wang D(1), Tian SZ(1), Penrad-Mobayed M(6), Sachs LM(7), Ruan
X(1), Wei CL(8), Liu ET(1), Wilczynski GM(5), Plewczynski D(9), Li G(10), Ruan
Y(11).

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, 10 Discovery Drive, Farmington,
CT 06030, USA. (2)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, 10 Discovery
Drive, Farmington, CT 06030, USA; National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic
Improvement, College of Life Sciences and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, Hubei 430070, China. (3)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic
Medicine, 10 Discovery Drive, Farmington, CT 06030, USA; Department of Genetics
and Genome Sciences, University of Connecticut Health Center, 400 Farmington
Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030, USA. (4)Center for Bioinformatics and Data
Analysis, Medical University of Bialystok, ul. Jana Kilinskiego 1, 15-089
Bialystok, Poland; I-BioStat, Hasselt University, Agoralaan Building D, 3590
Diepenbeek, Belgium; Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, S. Banacha
2c, 02-097 Warsaw, Poland. (5)Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, 3 Pasteur
Street, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland. (6)Université Paris-Diderot-Paris 7, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique and Institut Jacques Monod, 15 rue Hélène
Brion, 75205 Paris Cedex, France. (7)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
and Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, 57 Rue Cuvier, 75231 Paris Cedex,
France. (8)Joint Genome Institute, 2800 Mitchell Drive, Walnut Creek, CA 94598,
USA. (9)Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, S. Banacha 2c, 02-097
Warsaw, Poland. (10)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, College 
of Life Sciences and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei
430070, China; College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan,
Hubei 430070, China. (11)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, 10
Discovery Drive, Farmington, CT 06030, USA; National Key Laboratory of Crop
Genetic Improvement, College of Life Sciences and Technology, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei 430070, China; Department of Genetics and
Genome Sciences, University of Connecticut Health Center, 400 Farmington Avenue, 
Farmington, CT 06030, USA. Electronic address: yijun.ruan@jax.org.

Spatial genome organization and its effect on transcription remains a fundamental
question. We applied an advanced chromatin interaction analysis by paired-end tag
sequencing (ChIA-PET) strategy to comprehensively map higher-order chromosome
folding and specific chromatin interactions mediated by CCCTC-binding factor
(CTCF) and RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) with haplotype specificity and nucleotide
resolution in different human cell lineages. We find that CTCF/cohesin-mediated
interaction anchors serve as structural foci for spatial organization of
constitutive genes concordant with CTCF-motif orientation, whereas RNAPII
interacts within these structures by selectively drawing cell-type-specific genes
toward CTCF foci for coordinated transcription. Furthermore, we show that
haplotype variants and allelic interactions have differential effects on
chromosome configuration, influencing gene expression, and may provide
mechanistic insights into functions associated with disease susceptibility. 3D
genome simulation suggests a model of chromatin folding around chromosomal axes, 
where CTCF is involved in defining the interface between condensed and open
compartments for structural regulation. Our 3D genome strategy thus provides
unique insights in the topological mechanism of human variations and diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4734140 [Available on 2016-12-17]
PMID: 26686651  [PubMed - in process]


39. Cell Stem Cell. 2016 Feb 4;18(2):262-75. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.11.007. Epub
2015 Dec 10.

3D Chromosome Regulatory Landscape of Human Pluripotent Cells.

Ji X(1), Dadon DB(2), Powell BE(1), Fan ZP(3), Borges-Rivera D(2), Shachar S(4), 
Weintraub AS(2), Hnisz D(1), Pegoraro G(5), Lee TI(1), Misteli T(4), Jaenisch
R(6), Young RA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA. (2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. (3)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical
Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Computational and Systems
Biology Program, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
(4)National Cancer Institute (NCI), NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (5)High
Throughput Imaging Facility (HiTIF), NCI, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(6)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. Electronic address: jaenisch@wi.mit.edu. (7)Whitehead
Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; 
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139, USA. Electronic address: young@wi.mit.edu.

In this study, we describe the 3D chromosome regulatory landscape of human naive 
and primed embryonic stem cells. To devise this map, we identified
transcriptional enhancers and insulators in these cells and placed them within
the context of cohesin-associated CTCF-CTCF loops using cohesin ChIA-PET data.
The CTCF-CTCF loops we identified form a chromosomal framework of insulated
neighborhoods, which in turn form topologically associating domains (TADs) that
are largely preserved during the transition between the naive and primed states. 
Regulatory changes in enhancer-promoter interactions occur within insulated
neighborhoods during cell state transition. The CTCF anchor regions we identified
are conserved across species, influence gene expression, and are a frequent site 
of mutations in cancer cells, underscoring their functional importance in
cellular regulation. These 3D regulatory maps of human pluripotent cells
therefore provide a foundation for future interrogation of the relationships
between chromosome structure and gene control in development and disease.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26686465  [PubMed - in process]


40. Oncoscience. 2015 Sep 14;2(10):783-4. eCollection 2015.

The epigenetic regulator CTCF modulates BCL6 in lymphoma.

Batlle-López A(1), Cortiguera MG(1), Delgado MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina y Biotecnología de Cantabria, IBBTEC
(CSIC-Universidad de Cantabria) Santander, Spain.

PMCID: PMC4671918
PMID: 26682243  [PubMed]


41. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Dec 15. pii: gkv1358. [Epub ahead of print]

Differential contribution of cis-regulatory elements to higher order chromatin
structure and expression of the CFTR locus.

Yang R(1), Kerschner JL(1), Gosalia N(1), Neems D(2), Gorsic LK(1), Safi A(3),
Crawford GE(3), Kosak ST(2), Leir SH(1), Harris A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie Children's Research Center, Chicago,
IL 60614, USA Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School
of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. (2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
(3)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics and Center for Genomic 
and Computational Biology, Duke University Medical School, Durham, NC 27708, USA.
(4)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie Children's Research Center, Chicago,
IL 60614, USA Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School
of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA ann-harris@northwestern.edu.

Higher order chromatin structure establishes domains that organize the genome and
coordinate gene expression. However, the molecular mechanisms controlling
transcription of individual loci within a topological domain (TAD) are not fully 
understood. The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene
provides a paradigm for investigating these mechanisms. CFTR occupies a TAD
bordered by CTCF/cohesin binding sites within which are cell-type-selective
cis-regulatory elements for the locus. We showed previously that intronic and
extragenic enhancers, when occupied by specific transcription factors, are
recruited to the CFTR promoter by a looping mechanism to drive gene expression.
Here we use a combination of CRISPR/Cas9 editing of cis-regulatory elements and
siRNA-mediated depletion of architectural proteins to determine the relative
contribution of structural elements and enhancers to the higher order structure
and expression of the CFTR locus. We found the boundaries of the CFTR TAD are
conserved among diverse cell types and are dependent on CTCF and cohesin complex.
Removal of an upstream CTCF-binding insulator alters the interaction profile, but
has little effect on CFTR expression. Within the TAD, intronic enhancers recruit 
cell-type selective transcription factors and deletion of a pivotal enhancer
element dramatically decreases CFTR expression, but has minor effect on its 3D
structure.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMID: 26673704  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


42. Am J Transplant. 2016 Feb;16(2):497-508. doi: 10.1111/ajt.13509. Epub 2015 Dec
11.

Enhanced B Cell Alloantigen Presentation and Its Epigenetic Dysregulation in
Liver Transplant Rejection.

Ningappa M(1), Ashokkumar C(1), Higgs BW(1), Sun Q(1), Jaffe R(2), Mazariegos
G(1), Li D(3), Weeks DE(4), Subramaniam S(5), Ferrell R(4), Hakonarson H(3),
Sindhi R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hillman Center for Pediatric Transplantation, Thomas E. Starzl Transplantation
Institute, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of the University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center Pittsburgh, PA. (2)Department of Pathology, University of
Pittsburgh, Division of Pediatric Pathology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of
the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA. (3)Center for
Applied Genomics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
(5)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
CA.

T cell suppression prevents acute cellular rejection but causes life-threatening 
infections and malignancies. Previously, liver transplant (LTx) rejection in
children was associated with the single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs9296068
upstream of the HLA-DOA gene. HLA-DOA inhibits B cell presentation of antigen, a 
potentially novel antirejection drug target. Using archived samples from 122
white pediatric LTx patients (including 77 described previously), we confirmed
the association between rs9296068 and LTx rejection (p = 0.001, odds ratio [OR]
2.55). Next-generation sequencing revealed that the putative transcription factor
(CCCTC binding factor [CTCF]) binding SNP locus rs2395304, in linkage
disequilibrium with rs9296068 (D' 0.578, r(2)  = 0.4), is also associated with
LTx rejection (p = 0.008, OR 2.34). Furthermore, LTx rejection is associated with
enhanced B cell presentation of donor antigen relative to HLA-nonidentical
antigen in a novel cell-based assay and with a downregulated HLA-DOA gene in a
subset of these children. In lymphoblastoid B (Raji) cells, rs2395304
coimmunoprecipitates with CTCF, and CTCF knockdown with morpholino antisense
oligonucleotides enhances alloantigen presentation and downregulates the HLA-DOA 
gene, reproducing observations made with HLA-DOA knockdown and clinical
rejection. Alloantigen presentation is suppressed by inhibitors of methylation
and histone deacetylation, reproducing observations made during resolution of
rejection. Enhanced donor antigen presentation by B cells and its epigenetic
dysregulation via the HLA-DOA gene represent novel opportunities for surveillance
and treatment of transplant rejection.

© Copyright 2015 The American Society of Transplantation and the American Society
of Transplant Surgeons.

PMID: 26663361  [PubMed - in process]


43. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2015 Dec 3. pii: S1084-9521(15)30011-2. doi:
10.1016/j.semcdb.2015.11.013. [Epub ahead of print]

Towards a predictive model of chromatin 3D organization.

Xu C(1), Corces VG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, 1510 Clifton Road NE, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA. (2)Department of Biology, Emory University, 1510 Clifton Road NE,
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. Electronic address: vcorces@emory.edu.

Architectural proteins mediate interactions between distant regions in the genome
to bring together different regulatory elements while establishing a specific
three-dimensional organization of the genetic material. Depletion of specific
architectural proteins leads to miss regulation of gene expression and
alterations in nuclear organization. The specificity of interactions mediated by 
architectural proteins depends on the nature, number, and orientation of their
binding site at individual genomic locations. Knowledge of the mechanisms and
rules governing interactions among architectural proteins may provide a code to
predict the 3D organization of the genome.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26658098  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


44. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 11;5:18100. doi: 10.1038/srep18100.

Analysis of histone modifications at human ribosomal DNA in liver cancer cell.

Yu F(1), Shen X(2), Fan L(2), Yu Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The People's Hospital of Shaanxi Province,
Xi'an, P.R. China. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, P.R. China.

Human liver cancer is the cancer commonly seen clinically. The transcription of
ribosomal DNA (rDNA) is a critical step for cells, and epigenetic marks such as
post-translational histone modifications have been involved in the regulation of 
rDNA transcription. But less is known about the pathogenesis of the liver cancers
concerning the rDNA transcription regulation. Here we aligned the ChIP-seq data
of histone modification markers and CTCF to the human genome assembly which
contains a single rDNA repeat in human liver cancer cell and validated their
distribution with ChIP-QPCR. Human liver cancer cell possesses a higher
enrichment of H3K4me1 and H3K27me3 at ~28<U+2009>kb within the intergenic spacer (IGS)
of rDNA and a higher enrichment of H3K4me3 and H3K27ac upstream of TSS.
Furtherly, we studied whether UBF could affect histone modification markers and
CTCF at rDNA in human liver cancer cell. UBF depletion leads to a decrease of
gene activation mark H3K4me3 across the rDNA promoter. And other histone
modification marks and CTCF were not altered after UBF depletion. Taken together,
our data showed a high resolution map of histone modification marks at rDNA in
human liver cancer cell and provide novel evidence to decipher chromatin-mediated
regulation of rDNA in liver cancer.

PMCID: PMC4676023
PMID: 26657029  [PubMed - in process]


45. Neoplasma. 2016;63(1):114-20. doi: 10.4149/neo_2016_014.

Loss at 16q22.1 identified as a risk factor for intrahepatic recurrence in
hepatocellular carcinoma and screening of differentially expressed genes.

Chen L, Zhu ZZ, Liu SF, Wan X, Wen BJ, Jiang H, Zhu J, Cong WM.

Copy number alteration (CNA) of chromosome 16, a frequent genetic event in tumors
including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), has been associated with HCC etiology
of hepatitis B virus (HBV) and with clinical outcomes in multiple types of
cancer. This study identified CNAs in chromosome 16 in relation to intrahepatic
recurrence of HCC in a population with high HBV prevalence, and further screened 
for differentially expressed genes in recurrence-related CNAs. Array comparative 
genomic hybridization and expression arrays were used to detect CNAs and gene
expression differences, respectively. The associations between CNAs and
intrahepatic recurrence were analyzed on 66 patients, follow-up period of 3-73
months. One hundred and nine cases were further evaluated regarding the
differentially expressed genes. Losses at 16q and 16p were detected in 62.1% and 
51.5% of the 66 cases, respectively. The most recurrent CNAs (with frequency
>20%) were losses at 16p13.3-13.2, 16p13.11, 16q11.2-22.1, 16q22.1, 16q22.2-24.2 
and 16q24.2. Of the CNAs, 16q22.1 loss was significantly associated with
unfavorable intrahepatic recurrence-free survival (P = 0.025). Multivariate Cox
analysis identified 16q22.1 loss as an independent risk factor for intrahepatic
recurrence (HR = 2.32, 95% CI = 1.26-4.27). A panel of 21 genes, including TRADD,
PSMB10, THAP11, CTCF and ESRP2, were significantly downregulated in HCCs with
16q22.1 loss compared to those without the loss. These results suggest that loss 
at 16q22.1 was associated with increased risk for intrahepatic recurrence of HCC,
at least in the HBV-prevalence population. Multiple downregulated genes
correlated with the loss were screened.

PMID: 26639241  [PubMed - in process]


46. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 30;10(11):e0143739. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143739.
eCollection 2015.

Chromosome Architecture and Genome Organization.

Bernardi G(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Science Department, Roma Tre University, Marconi, Rome, Italy. (2)Stazione
Zoologica Anton Dohrn, Villa Comunale, Naples, Italy.

How the same DNA sequences can function in the three-dimensional architecture of 
interphase nucleus, fold in the very compact structure of metaphase chromosomes
and go precisely back to the original interphase architecture in the following
cell cycle remains an unresolved question to this day. The strategy used to
address this issue was to analyze the correlations between chromosome
architecture and the compositional patterns of DNA sequences spanning a size
range from a few hundreds to a few thousands Kilobases. This is a critical range 
that encompasses isochores, interphase chromatin domains and boundaries, and
chromosomal bands. The solution rests on the following key points: 1) the
transition from the looped domains and sub-domains of interphase chromatin to the
30-nm fiber loops of early prophase chromosomes goes through the unfolding into
an extended chromatin structure (probably a 10-nm "beads-on-a-string" structure);
2) the architectural proteins of interphase chromatin, such as CTCF and cohesin
sub-units, are retained in mitosis and are part of the discontinuous protein
scaffold of mitotic chromosomes; 3) the conservation of the link between
architectural proteins and their binding sites on DNA through the cell cycle
explains the "mitotic memory" of interphase architecture and the reversibility of
the interphase to mitosis process. The results presented here also lead to a
general conclusion which concerns the existence of correlations between the
isochore organization of the genome and the architecture of chromosomes from
interphase to metaphase.

PMCID: PMC4664426
PMID: 26619076  [PubMed - in process]


47. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Nov 28. pii: gkv1300. [Epub ahead of print]

Analysis of long-range interactions in primary human cells identifies cooperative
CFTR regulatory elements.

Moisan S(1), Berlivet S(2), Ka C(1), Gac GL(1), Dostie J(3), Férec C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire et d'Histocompatibilité, Inserm U1078,
Université de Brest, SFR ScInBioS, CHRU de Brest, Établissement Français du Sang 
- Bretagne, Brest, France. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Goodman Cancer
Research Center, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, H3G 1Y6, Canada.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Goodman Cancer Research Center, McGill
University, Montréal, Québec, H3G 1Y6, Canada josee.dostie@mcgill.ca.
(4)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire et d'Histocompatibilité, Inserm U1078,
Université de Brest, SFR ScInBioS, CHRU de Brest, Établissement Français du Sang 
- Bretagne, Brest, France josee.dostie@mcgill.ca.

A mechanism by which control DNA elements regulate transcription over large
linear genomic distances is by achieving close physical proximity with genes, and
looping of the intervening chromatin paths. Alterations of such regulatory
'chromatin looping' systems are likely to play a critical role in human genetic
disease at large. Here, we studied the spatial organization of a 790 kb locus
encompassing the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene.
Dysregulation of CFTR is responsible for cystic fibrosis, which is the most
common lethal genetic disorder in Caucasian populations. CFTR is a relatively
large gene of 189 kb with a rather complex tissue-specific and temporal
expression profile. We used chromatin conformation at the CFTR locus to identify 
new DNA sequences that regulate its transcription. By comparing 5C chromatin
interaction maps of the CFTR locus in expressing and non-expressing human primary
cells, we identified several new contact points between the CFTR promoter and its
surroundings, in addition to regions featuring previously described regulatory
elements. We demonstrate that two of these novel interacting regions
cooperatively increase CFTR expression, and suggest that the new enhancer
elements located on either side of the gene are brought together through
chromatin looping via CTCF.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMID: 26615198  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


48. Diagn Pathol. 2015 Nov 25;10:207. doi: 10.1186/s13000-015-0438-2.

A promising hypothesis of c-KIT methylation/ expression paradox in c-KIT (+)
squamous cell carcinoma of uterine cervix ----- CTCF transcriptional repressor
regulates c-KIT proto-oncogene expression.

Chang SW(1), Chao WR(2), Ruan A(3), Wang PH(4), Lin JC(5), Han CP(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Chung-Shan Medical University and
Chung-Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. tyouzoa@yahoo.co.jp.
(2)Department of Pathology, Chung-Shan Medical University and Chung-Shan Medical 
University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. littleuni@hotmail.com. (3)Keck School of
Medicine of the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
alexruan08@gmail.com. (4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of
Medicine, Chung-Shan Medical University and Chung-Shan Medical University
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. wang082160@yahoo.com.tw. (5)Department of Respiratory
Therapy, Fu-Jen Catholic University, New Taipei, Taiwan. 080659@mail.fju.edu.tw. 
(6)Department of Pathology, Chung-Shan Medical University and Chung-Shan Medical 
University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. hanhaly@gmail.com. (7)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, Chung-Shan Medical University and 
Chung-Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. hanhaly@gmail.com.

We recently reported one interesting case showing mutation-free c-KIT
proto-oncogene overexpression and paradoxical hypermethylation in 54 cases of
primary squamous cell carcinoma of uterine cervix (SCC). However, its molecular
mechanisms still remain unknown. We propose the hypothesis that increased
methylation at the CpG islands on the promoter near the first exon region might
interfere with the binding of CTCF repressor with c-KIT promoter that regulates
c-KIT proto-oncogene expression in such case. Further studies focusing on the
status of epigenetic modifications of mutation-free c-KIT (+) tumors are
encouraged.

PMCID: PMC4660683
PMID: 26607501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Cell. 2015 Nov 5;163(4):947-59. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.10.016. Epub 2015 Oct
22.

Chromosomal Loop Domains Direct the Recombination of Antigen Receptor Genes.

Hu J(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhao L(1), Frock RL(1), Du Z(1), Meyers RM(1), Meng FL(1),
Schatz DG(2), Alt FW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute; Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Genetics,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Howard Hughes Medical
Institute; Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, 300
Cedar Street, Box 208011, New Haven, CT 06520-8011, USA. (3)Howard Hughes Medical
Institute; Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address: alt@enders.tch.harvard.edu.

RAG initiates antibody V(D)J recombination in developing lymphocytes by
generating "on-target" DNA breaks at matched pairs of bona fide recombination
signal sequences (RSSs). We employ bait RAG-generated breaks in endogenous or
ectopically inserted RSS pairs to identify huge numbers of RAG "off-target"
breaks. Such breaks occur at the simple CAC motif that defines the RSS cleavage
site and are largely confined within convergent CTCF-binding element
(CBE)-flanked loop domains containing bait RSS pairs. Marked orientation
dependence of RAG off-target activity within loops spanning up to 2 megabases
implies involvement of linear tracking. In this regard, major RAG off-targets in 
chromosomal translocations occur as convergent RSS pairs at enhancers within a
loop. Finally, deletion of a CBE-based IgH locus element disrupts V(D)J
recombination domains and, correspondingly, alters RAG on- and off-target
distributions within IgH. Our findings reveal how RAG activity is developmentally
focused and implicate mechanisms by which chromatin domains harness biological
processes within them.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4660266 [Available on 2016-11-05]
PMID: 26593423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. BMC Genomics. 2015 Nov 21;16:982. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-2137-5.

Quantitative analysis of chromatin interaction changes upon a 4.3 Mb deletion at 
mouse 4E2.

Zepeda-Mendoza CJ(1), Mukhopadhyay S(2), Wong ES(3), Harder N(4), Splinter E(5), 
de Wit E(6), Eckersley-Maslin MA(7,)(8), Ried T(9), Eils R(10), Rohr K(11), Mills
A(12,)(13), de Laat W(14), Flicek P(15), Sengupta AM(16), Spector DL(17,)(18).

Author information: 
(1)Watson School of Biological Sciences, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1
Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 11724, USA.
czepedamendoza@bwh.harvard.edu. (2)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown
Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 11724, USA. swagatam.mukhopadhyay@gmail.com. (3)The
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute,
Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SD, UK. em6@ebi.ac.uk.
(4)Department Bioinformatics and Functional Genomics, Biomedical Computer Vision 
Group, University of Heidelberg, BioQuant, IPMB, and German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 267, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
N.Harder@dkfz-heidelberg.de. (5)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW & University Medical
Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584, CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.
e.splinter@hubrecht.eu. (6)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW & University Medical Center
Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584, CT Utrecht, The Netherlands. e.wit@hubrecht.eu.
(7)Watson School of Biological Sciences, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1
Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 11724, USA. eckersleymaslin@gmail.com.
(8)Epigenetics Programme, Babraham Institute, Babraham Research Campus,
Cambridge, CB22 3AT, UK. eckersleymaslin@gmail.com. (9)Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 50 South
Drive, Bldg. 50, Rm. 1408, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA. riedt@mail.nih.gov.
(10)Department Bioinformatics and Functional Genomics, Biomedical Computer Vision
Group, University of Heidelberg, BioQuant, IPMB, and German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 267, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
r.eils@dkfz-heidelberg.de. (11)Department Bioinformatics and Functional Genomics,
Biomedical Computer Vision Group, University of Heidelberg, BioQuant, IPMB, and
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 267, 69120, Heidelberg,
Germany. k.rohr@dkfz.de. (12)Watson School of Biological Sciences, Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 11724, USA.
mills@cshl.edu. (13)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring
Harbor, NY, 11724, USA. mills@cshl.edu. (14)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW & University 
Medical Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584, CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.
w.laat@hubrecht.eu. (15)The European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European
Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 
1SD, UK. flicek@ebi.ac.uk. (16)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rutgers, The 
State University of New Jersey, 136 Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, NJ,
08854-8019, USA. anirvan.m.sengupta@gmail.com. (17)Watson School of Biological
Sciences, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY,
11724, USA. spector@cshl.edu. (18)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown Road,
Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 11724, USA. spector@cshl.edu.

BACKGROUND: Circular chromosome conformation capture (4C) has provided important 
insights into three dimensional (3D) genome organization and its critical impact 
on the regulation of gene expression. We developed a new quantitative framework
based on polymer physics for the analysis of paired-end sequencing 4C (PE-4Cseq) 
data. We applied this strategy to the study of chromatin interaction changes upon
a 4.3 Mb DNA deletion in mouse region 4E2.
RESULTS: A significant number of differentially interacting regions (DIRs) and
chromatin compaction changes were detected in the deletion chromosome compared to
a wild-type (WT) control. Selected DIRs were validated by 3D DNA FISH
experiments, demonstrating the robustness of our pipeline. Interestingly,
significant overlaps of DIRs with CTCF/Smc1 binding sites and differentially
expressed genes were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, our PE-4Cseq analysis pipeline provides a comprehensive 
characterization of DNA deletion effects on chromatin structure and function.

PMCID: PMC4654810
PMID: 26589460  [PubMed - in process]


51. Brief Bioinform. 2015 Nov 19. pii: bbv097. [Epub ahead of print]

In the loop: promoter-enhancer interactions and bioinformatics.

Mora A, Sandve GK, Gabrielsen OS, Eskeland R.

Enhancer-promoter regulation is a fundamental mechanism underlying differential
transcriptional regulation. Spatial chromatin organization brings remote
enhancers in contact with target promoters in cis to regulate gene expression.
There is considerable evidence for promoter-enhancer interactions (PEIs). In the 
recent years, genome-wide analyses have identified signatures and mapped novel
enhancers; however, being able to precisely identify their target gene(s)
requires massive biological and bioinformatics efforts. In this review, we give a
short overview of the chromatin landscape and transcriptional regulation. We
discuss some key concepts and problems related to chromatin interaction detection
technologies, and emerging knowledge from genome-wide chromatin interaction data 
sets. Then, we critically review different types of bioinformatics analysis
methods and tools related to representation and visualization of PEI data, raw
data processing and PEI prediction. Lastly, we provide specific examples of how
PEIs have been used to elucidate a functional role of non-coding
single-nucleotide polymorphisms. The topic is at the forefront of epigenetic
research, and by highlighting some future bioinformatics challenges in the field,
this review provides a comprehensive background for future PEI studies.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMID: 26586731  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


52. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Mar 18;44(5):2125-35. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv1219. Epub 2015
Nov 17.

The CSB chromatin remodeler and CTCF architectural protein cooperate in response 
to oxidative stress.

Lake RJ(1), Boetefuer EL(2), Won KJ(3), Fan HY(4).

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics Program, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104,USA Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(2)Epigenetics Program, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104,USA Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
Biology Graduate Program, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (3)Institute for Diabetes Obesity and 
Metabolism, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA Department of Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (4)Epigenetics Program, 
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104,USA Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA Department of Genetics,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA hfan@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Cockayne syndrome is a premature aging disease associated with numerous
developmental and neurological abnormalities, and elevated levels of reactive
oxygen species have been found in cells derived from Cockayne syndrome patients. 
The majority of Cockayne syndrome cases contain mutations in the ATP-dependent
chromatin remodeler CSB; however, how CSB protects cells from oxidative stress
remains largely unclear. Here, we demonstrate that oxidative stress alters the
genomic occupancy of the CSB protein and increases CSB occupancy at promoters.
Additionally, we found that the long-range chromatin-structure regulator CTCF
plays a pivotal role in regulating sites of genomic CSB occupancy upon oxidative 
stress. We show that CSB directly interacts with CTCF in vitro and that oxidative
stress enhances the CSB-CTCF interaction in cells. Reciprocally, we demonstrate
that CSB facilitates CTCF-DNA interactions in vitro and regulates CTCF-chromatin 
interactions in oxidatively stressed cells. Together, our results indicate that
CSB and CTCF can regulate each other's chromatin association, thereby modulating 
chromatin structure and coordinating gene expression in response to oxidative
stress.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4797267
PMID: 26578602  [PubMed - in process]


53. BMC Bioinformatics. 2015 Nov 17;16:387. doi: 10.1186/s12859-015-0767-x.

DiffLogo: a comparative visualization of sequence motifs.

Nettling M(1), Treutler H(2), Grau J(3), Keilwagen J(4), Posch S(5), Grosse
I(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Computer Science, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg,
Halle (Saale), Germany. martin.nettling@informatik.uni-halle.de. (2)Leibniz
Institute of Plant Biochemistry, Halle (Saale), Germany.
hendrik.treutler@ipb-halle.de. (3)Institute of Computer Science, Martin Luther
University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle (Saale), Germany.
jan.grau@informatik.uni-halle.de. (4)Institute for Biosafety in Plant
Biotechnology, Julius Kühn-Institut (JKI), Federal Research Centre for Cultivated
Plants, Quedlinburg, Germany. jens.keilwagen@jki.bund.de. (5)Institute of
Computer Science, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle (Saale),
Germany. stefan.posch@informatik.uni-halle.de. (6)Institute of Computer Science, 
Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle (Saale), Germany.
ivo.grosse@informatik.uni-halle.de. (7)German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity
Research (iDiv) Halle-Jena-Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
ivo.grosse@informatik.uni-halle.de.

BACKGROUND: For three decades, sequence logos are the de facto standard for the
visualization of sequence motifs in biology and bioinformatics. Reasons for this 
success story are their simplicity and clarity. The number of inferred and
published motifs grows with the number of data sets and motif extraction
algorithms. Hence, it becomes more and more important to perceive differences
between motifs. However, motif differences are hard to detect from individual
sequence logos in case of multiple motifs for one transcription factor, highly
similar binding motifs of different transcription factors, or multiple motifs for
one protein domain.
RESULTS: Here, we present DiffLogo, a freely available, extensible, and
user-friendly R package for visualizing motif differences. DiffLogo is capable of
showing differences between DNA motifs as well as protein motifs in a pair-wise
manner resulting in publication-ready figures. In case of more than two motifs,
DiffLogo is capable of visualizing pair-wise differences in a tabular form. Here,
the motifs are ordered by similarity, and the difference logos are colored for
clarity. We demonstrate the benefit of DiffLogo on CTCF motifs from different
human cell lines, on E-box motifs of three basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factors as examples for comparison of DNA motifs, and on F-box domains from three
different families as example for comparison of protein motifs.
CONCLUSIONS: DiffLogo provides an intuitive visualization of motif differences.
It enables the illustration and investigation of differences between highly
similar motifs such as binding patterns of transcription factors for different
cell types, treatments, and algorithmic approaches.

PMCID: PMC4650857
PMID: 26577052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Nov 24;112(47):14404-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1519849112. Epub 2015 Nov 13.

Predictive model of 3D domain formation via CTCF-mediated extrusion.

Yardimci GG(1), Noble WS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195;
(2)Departments of Genome Sciences and Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195 william-noble@uw.edu.

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Nov 24;112(47):E6456-65.

PMCID: PMC4664329 [Available on 2016-05-24]
PMID: 26567152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Oncogene. 2015 Nov 9. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.423. [Epub ahead of print]

DNA methylation reactivates GAD1 expression in cancer by preventing CTCF-mediated
polycomb repressive complex 2 recruitment.

Yan H(1), Tang G(2), Wang H(3), Hao L(3), He T(4), Sun X(1), Ting AH(5), Deng
A(1), Sun S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Changhai Hospital, The Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, China. (2)Institute of Genetics, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Colorectal Surgery,
Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Division of Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery, Changhai Hospital, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, China. (5)Genomic Medicine Institute, Lerner
Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Levels of <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glutamic acid decarboxylase 1 (GAD1),
the enzyme that synthesizes GABA, are significantly increased in neoplastic
tissues. However, the mechanism underlying this increase remains elusive. Instead
of silencing gene transcription, we showed that the GAD1 promoter was
hypermethylated in both colon and liver cancer cells, leading to the production
of high levels of GAD1. GAD1 is a target gene that is silenced by H3K27me3. The
key locus responsible for GAD1 reactivation was mapped to a DNA
methylation-sensitive CTCF-binding site (CTCF-BS3) within the third intron of
GAD1. Chromosome configuration capture (3C) analysis indicated that an
intrachromosomal loop was formed by CTCF self-dimerisation in normal cells (CTCF 
binds to both unmethylated CTCF-BS3 and CTCF-BS2). The CTCF dimer then interacted
with suppressor of zeste 12 homologue (SUZ12), which is a domain of Polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2), promoting the methylation of H3K27 and the silencing
of GAD1 expression. This silencing was shown to be inhibited by DNA methylation
in cancer cells. These findings strongly suggest that GAD1 is reactivated by DNA 
methylation, which provided a model for DNA methylation and the active
orchestration of oncogenic gene expression by CTCF in cancer cells.Oncogene
advance online publication, 9 November 2015; doi:10.1038/onc.2015.423.

PMID: 26549033  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


56. Oncogene. 2015 Nov 9. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.422. [Epub ahead of print]

CTCF cooperates with noncoding RNA MYCNOS to promote neuroblastoma progression
through facilitating MYCN expression.

Zhao X(1), Li D(1), Pu J(1), Mei H(1), Yang D(1), Xiang X(1), Qu H(1), Huang
K(2,)(3), Zheng L(2,)(4), Tong Q(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.
(2)Clinical Center of Human Genomic Research, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, People's Republic 
of China. (3)Department of Cardiology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.

Previous studies have indicated the important roles of MYCN in tumorigenesis and 
progression of neuroblastoma (NB), the most common extracranial solid tumor
derived from neural crest in childhood. However, the regulatory mechanisms of
MYCN expression in NB still remain largely unknown. In this study, through mining
public microarray databases and analyzing the cis-regulatory elements and
chromatin immunoprecipitation data sets, we identified CCCTC-binding factor
(CTCF) as a crucial transcription factor facilitating the MYCN expression in NB. 
RNA immunoprecipitation, RNA electrophoretic mobility shift assay, RNA pull down 
and in vitro binding assay indicated the physical interaction between CTCF and
MYCN opposite strand (MYCNOS), a natural noncoding RNA surrounding the MYNC
promoter. Gain- and loss-of-function studies revealed that MYCNOS facilitated the
recruitment of CTCF to its binding sites within the MYCN promoter to induce
chromatin remodeling, resulting in enhanced MYCN levels and altered downstream
gene expression, in cultured NB cell lines. CTCF cooperated with MYCNOS to
suppress the differentiation and promote the growth, invasion and metastasis of
NB cells in vitro and in vivo. In clinical NB tissues and cell lines, CTCF and
MYCNOS were upregulated and positively correlated with MYCN expression. CTCF was 
an independent prognostic factor for unfavorable outcome of NB, and patients with
high MYCNOS expression had lower survival probability. Taken together, these
results demonstrate that CTCF cooperates with noncoding RNA MYCNOS to exhibit
oncogenic activity that affects the aggressiveness and progression of NB through 
transcriptional upregulation of MYCN.Oncogene advance online publication, 9
November 2015; doi:10.1038/onc.2015.422.

PMID: 26549029  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


57. Oncol Rep. 2016 Feb;35(2):725-30. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4402. Epub 2015 Nov 5.

A novel somatic MAPK1 mutation in primary ovarian mixed germ cell tumors.

Zou Y(1), Deng W(1), Wang F(1), Yu XH(2), Liu FY(1), Yang BC(1), Huang MZ(1), Guo
JB(1), Xie QH(1), He M(3), Huang OP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Women's Reproductive Health of Jiangxi, Jiangxi Provincial
Maternal and Child Health Hospital, Nanchang, Jiangxi 330006, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Jiangxi Provincial Maternal and Child Health
Hospital, Nanchang, Jiangxi 330006, P.R. China. (3)Department of Pharmacology and
Molecular Therapeutics, Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi 330006, P.R.
China.

A recent exome-sequencing study revealed prevalent mitogen-activated protein
kinase 1 (MAPK1) p.E322K mutation in cervical carcinoma. It remains largely
unknown whether ovarian carcinomas also harbor MAPK1 mutations. As paralogous
gene mutations co-occur frequently in human malignancies, we analyzed here a
total of 263 ovarian carcinomas for the presence of MAPK1 and paralogous MAPK3
mutations by DNA sequencing. A previously unreported MAPK1 p.D321N somatic
mutation was identified in 2 out of 18 (11.1%) ovarian mixed germ cell tumors,
while no other MAPK1 or MAPK3 mutation was detected in our samples. Of note,
OCC-115, the MAPK1-mutated sample with bilateral cancerous ovaries affected,
harbored MAPK1 mutation in the right ovary while retained the left ovary intact, 
implicating that the genetic alterations underlying ovarian mixed germ cell tumor
may be different, even in patients with similar genetic backgrounds and tumor
microenvironments. The results of evolutionary conservation and protein structure
modeling analysis implicated that MAPK1 p.D321N mutation may be pathogenic.
Additionally, mutations in protein phosphatase 2 regulatory subunit a (PPP2R1A), 
ring finger protein 43 (RNF43), DNA directed polymerase e (POLE1), ribonuclease
type III (DICER1), CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), ribosomal protein L22 (RPL22),
DNA methyltransferase 3a (DNMT3A), transformation/transcription domain-associated
protein (TRRAP), isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH)1 and IDH2 were not detected in
ovarian mixed germ cell tumors, implicating these genetic alterations may be not 
associated with MAPK1 mutation in the development of this malignancy. The present
study identified a previously unreported MAPK1 mutation in ovarian mixed germ
cell tumors for the first time, and this mutation may be actively involved in the
tumorigenesis of this disease.

PMID: 26548627  [PubMed - in process]


58. Mol Cell. 2015 Nov 19;60(4):676-84. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.09.023. Epub 2015 
Oct 29.

CTCF Binding Polarity Determines Chromatin Looping.

de Wit E(1), Vos ES(1), Holwerda SJ(1), Valdes-Quezada C(1), Verstegen MJ(1),
Teunissen H(1), Splinter E(1), Wijchers PJ(1), Krijger PH(1), de Laat W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, 
3584 CT Utrecht, the Netherlands. (2)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University
Medical Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, the Netherlands.
Electronic address: w.delaat@hubrecht.eu.

CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is an architectural protein involved in the
three-dimensional (3D) organization of chromatin. In this study, we assayed the
3D genomic contact profiles of a large number of CTCF binding sites with
high-resolution 4C-seq. As recently reported, our data also suggest that
chromatin loops preferentially form between CTCF binding sites oriented in a
convergent manner. To directly test this, we used CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing to
delete core CTCF binding sites in three loci, including the CTCF site in the Sox2
super-enhancer. In all instances, CTCF and cohesin recruitment were lost, and
chromatin loops with distal, convergent CTCF sites were disrupted or
destabilized. Re-insertion of oppositely oriented CTCF recognition sequences
restored CTCF and cohesin recruitment, but did not re-establish chromatin loops. 
We conclude that CTCF binding polarity plays a functional role in the formation
of higher-order chromatin structure.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26527277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2015 Oct 30. pii: S0960-0760(15)30120-5. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2015.10.018. [Epub ahead of print]

The vitamin D-dependent transcriptome of human monocytes.

Neme A(1), Nurminen V(1), Seuter S(1), Carlberg C(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland,
FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland. (2)School of Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Eastern Finland, FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland. Electronic address:
carsten.carlberg@uef.fi.

Monocytes are important cells of the innate immune system that can differentiate 
into macrophages and dendritic cells. The biologically active form of vitamin D, 
1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2D3), serves as a ligand of the nuclear
receptor vitamin D receptor (VDR). A key physiological function of 1,25(OH)2D3 is
the defense against pathogens, such as those causing tuberculosis, that involves 
the modulation of the monocyte transcriptome. THP-1 cells are an established
model of human monocytes, for which the at present largest set of
1,25(OH)2D3-affected genome-wide data are available. Here we summarize the
insight obtained from the recent transcriptome of 1,25(OH)2D3-stimulated THP-1
cells, that was determined by triplicate RNA sequencing (RNA-seq). Primary and
secondary vitamin D target genes being up- and down-regulated were related to
changes in the epigenome of THP-1 cells, such as 1,25(OH)2D3-dependent chromatin 
opening and modulation of the genome-wide association of the transcription
factors VDR and CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) with their respective genomic binding
sites. The anti-microbial response is the top-ranking early physiological
function represented by 1,25(OH)2D3-stimulated genomic regions and genes, but
also other immunity-related pathways, such as IL10 signaling, are activated.
Taken together, the epigenomic and transcriptomic responses of THP-1 cells to
1,25(OH)2D3 represent a master example of the impact of vitamin D on human
physiology.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26523676  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


60. Oncotarget. 2015 Dec 1;6(38):40775-98. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5805.

CUDR promotes liver cancer stem cell growth through upregulating TERT and C-Myc.

Pu H(1), Zheng Q(1), Li H(1), Wu M(1), An J(1), Gui X(1), Li T(1), Lu D(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092,
China.

Cancer up-regulated drug resistant (CUDR) is a novel non-coding RNA gene. Herein,
we demonstrate excessive CUDR cooperates with excessive CyclinD1 or PTEN
depletion to accelerate liver cancer stem cells growth and liver stem cell
malignant transformation in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, we reveal the
decrease of PTEN in cells may lead to increase binding capacity of CUDR to
CyclinD1. Therefore, CUDR-CyclinD1 complex loads onto the long noncoding RNA H19 
promoter region that may lead to reduce the DNA methylation on H19 promoter
region and then to enhance the H19 expression. Strikingly, the overexpression of 
H19 increases the binding of TERT to TERC and reduces the interplay between TERT 
with TERRA, thus enhancing the cell telomerase activity and extending the
telomere length. On the other hand, insulator CTCF recruits the CUDR-CyclinD1
complx to form the composite CUDR-CyclinD1-insulator CTCF complex which
occupancied on the C-myc gene promoter region, increasing the outcome of oncogene
C-myc. Ultimately, excessive TERT and C-myc lead to liver cancer stem cell and
hepatocyte-like stem cell malignant proliferation. To understand the novel
functions of long noncoding RNA CUDR will help in the development of new liver
cancer therapeutic and diagnostic approaches.

PMCID: PMC4747368
PMID: 26513297  [PubMed - in process]


61. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Nov 24;112(47):E6456-65. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1518552112. Epub 2015 Oct 23.

Chromatin extrusion explains key features of loop and domain formation in
wild-type and engineered genomes.

Sanborn AL(1), Rao SS(2), Huang SC(3), Durand NC(3), Huntley MH(3), Jewett AI(3),
Bochkov ID(3), Chinnappan D(3), Cutkosky A(3), Li J(4), Geeting KP(3), Gnirke
A(5), Melnikov A(5), McKenna D(6), Stamenova EK(7), Lander ES(8), Aiden EL(9).

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Genome Architecture, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030; Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice University, Houston, TX
77030; Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305;
(2)The Center for Genome Architecture, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030; School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305; (3)The Center
for Genome Architecture, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030; (4)The
Center for Genome Architecture, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030;
Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice University, Houston, TX 77030;
(5)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139; (6)The Center for
Genome Architecture, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030;
Mathemaesthetics, Inc., Boulder, CO 80306; (7)The Center for Genome Architecture,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030; Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139; (8)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
MA 02139; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139; Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115 lander@broadinstitute.org erez@erez.com. (9)The Center for
Genome Architecture, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030; Center for
Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice University, Houston, TX 77030; Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139; lander@broadinstitute.org
erez@erez.com.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Nov 24;112(47):14404-5.

We recently used in situ Hi-C to create kilobase-resolution 3D maps of mammalian 
genomes. Here, we combine these maps with new Hi-C, microscopy, and
genome-editing experiments to study the physical structure of chromatin fibers,
domains, and loops. We find that the observed contact domains are inconsistent
with the equilibrium state for an ordinary condensed polymer. Combining Hi-C data
and novel mathematical theorems, we show that contact domains are also not
consistent with a fractal globule. Instead, we use physical simulations to study 
two models of genome folding. In one, intermonomer attraction during polymer
condensation leads to formation of an anisotropic "tension globule." In the
other, CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) and cohesin act together to extrude unknotted 
loops during interphase. Both models are consistent with the observed contact
domains and with the observation that contact domains tend to form inside loops. 
However, the extrusion model explains a far wider array of observations, such as 
why loops tend not to overlap and why the CTCF-binding motifs at pairs of loop
anchors lie in the convergent orientation. Finally, we perform 13 genome-editing 
experiments examining the effect of altering CTCF-binding sites on chromatin
folding. The convergent rule correctly predicts the affected loops in every case.
Moreover, the extrusion model accurately predicts in silico the 3D maps resulting
from each experiment using only the location of CTCF-binding sites in the WT.
Thus, we show that it is possible to disrupt, restore, and move loops and domains
using targeted mutations as small as a single base pair.

PMCID: PMC4664323
PMID: 26499245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 23;10(10):e0113168. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113168.
eCollection 2015.

A Common Polymorphism within the IGF2 Imprinting Control Region Is Associated
with Parent of Origin Specific Effects in Infantile Hemangiomas.

Schultz B(1), Yao X(2), Deng Y(2), Waner M(3), Spock C(4), Tom L(5), Persing
J(6), Narayan D(6).

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington, Division of Plastic Surgery, Seattle, WA, United
States of America. (2)Yale Center for Analytic Sciences at YSPH, New Haven, CT,
United States of America. (3)Vascular Birthmark Institute, New York, NY, United
States of America. (4)University of Miami Hospital, Miami, FL, United States of
America. (5)Division of Plastic Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle, WA,
United States of America. (6)Yale Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, New Haven, 
United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(11):e0143806.

Infantile hemangioma (IH) is the most common tumor of the pediatric age group,
affecting up to 4% of newborns ranging from inconsequential blemishes, to highly 
aggressive tumors. Following well defined growth phases (proliferative, plateau
involutional) IH usually regress into a fibro-fatty residuum. Despite the high
prevalence of IH, little is known regarding the pathogenesis of disease. A
reported six fold decrease in IGF2 expression (correlating with transformation of
proliferative to involuted lesions) prompted us to study the IGF-2 axis further. 
We demonstrate that IGF2 expression in IH is strongly related to the expression
of a cancer testes and suspected oncogene BORIS (paralog of CTCF), placing IH in 
the unique category of being the first known benign BORIS positive tumor. IGF2
expression was strongly and positively related to BORIS transcript expression.
Furthermore, a stronger association was made when comparing BORIS levels against 
the expression of CTCF via either a percentage or difference between the two. A
common C/T polymorphism at CTCF BS6 appeared to modify the correlation between
CTCF/BORIS and IGF2 expression in a parent of origin specific manner. Moreover,
these effects may have phenotypic consequences as tumor growth also correlates
with the genotype at CTCF BS6. This may provide a framework for explaining the
clinical variability seen in IH and suggests new insights regarding CTCF and
BORIS related functionality in both normal and malignant states.

PMCID: PMC4619854
PMID: 26496499  [PubMed - in process]


63. PLoS Genet. 2015 Oct 23;11(10):e1005615. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005615.
eCollection 2015.

Association of the Long Non-coding RNA Steroid Receptor RNA Activator (SRA) with 
TrxG and PRC2 Complexes.

Wongtrakoongate P(1), Riddick G(2), Fucharoen S(3), Felsenfeld G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United
States of America; Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand. (2)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America. (3)Thalassemia Research
Center, Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Mahidol University, Nakhonpathom,
Thailand.

Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been recognized as key players in
transcriptional regulation. We show that the lncRNA steroid receptor RNA
activator (SRA) participates in regulation through complex formation with
trithorax group (TrxG) and polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) complexes.
Binding of the SRA-associated RNA helicase p68 preferentially stabilizes complex 
formation between SRA and a TrxG complex but not PRC2. In human pluripotent stem 
cells NTERA2, SRA binding sites that are also occupied by p68 are significantly
enriched for H3K4 trimethylation. Consistent with its ability to interact with
TrxG and PRC2 complexes, some SRA binding sites in human pluripotent stem cells
overlap with bivalent domains. CTCF sites associated with SRA appear also to be
enriched for bivalent modifications. We identify NANOG as a transcription factor 
directly interacting with SRA and co-localizing with it genome-wide in NTERA2.
Further, we show that SRA is important for maintaining the stem cell state and
for reprogramming of human fibroblasts to achieve the pluripotent state. Our
results suggest a mechanism whereby the lncRNA SRA interacts with either TrxG or 
PRC2. These complexes may then be recruited by various DNA binding factors to
deliver either activating or silencing signals, or both, to establish bivalent
domains.

PMCID: PMC4619771
PMID: 26496121  [PubMed - in process]


64. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 21;10(10):e0140991. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140991.
eCollection 2015.

EAST Organizes Drosophila Insulator Proteins in the Interchromosomal Nuclear
Compartment and Modulates CP190 Binding to Chromatin.

Golovnin A(1), Melnikova L(1), Shapovalov I(1), Kostyuchenko M(1), Georgiev P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drosophila Molecular Genetics, Institute of Gene Biology,
Russian Academy of Sciences, 34/5 Vavilov St., 119334, Moscow, Russia.
(2)Department of the Control of Genetic Processes, Institute of Gene Biology,
Russian Academy of Sciences, 34/5 Vavilov St., 119334, Moscow, Russia.

Recent data suggest that insulators organize chromatin architecture in the
nucleus. The best studied Drosophila insulator proteins, dCTCF (a homolog of the 
vertebrate insulator protein CTCF) and Su(Hw), are DNA-binding zinc finger
proteins. Different isoforms of the BTB-containing protein Mod(mdg4) interact
with Su(Hw) and dCTCF. The CP190 protein is a cofactor for the dCTCF and Su(Hw)
insulators. CP190 is required for the functional activity of insulator proteins
and is involved in the aggregation of the insulator proteins into specific
structures named nuclear speckles. Here, we have shown that the nuclear
distribution of CP190 is dependent on the level of EAST protein, an essential
component of the interchromatin compartment. EAST interacts with CP190 and
Mod(mdg4)-67.2 proteins in vitro and in vivo. Over-expression of EAST in S2 cells
leads to an extrusion of the CP190 from the insulator bodies containing Su(Hw),
Mod(mdg4)-67.2, and dCTCF. In consistent with the role of the insulator bodies in
assembly of protein complexes, EAST over-expression led to a striking decrease of
the CP190 binding with the dCTCF and Su(Hw) dependent insulators and promoters.
These results suggest that EAST is involved in the regulation of CP190 nuclear
localization.

PMCID: PMC4638101
PMID: 26489095  [PubMed - in process]


65. Genom Data. 2015 May 30;5:89-93. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2015.05.018. eCollection
2015.

Genome-wide mapping of hot spots of DNA double-strand breaks in human cells as a 
tool for epigenetic studies and cancer genomics.

Tchurikov NA(1), Kretova OV(1), Fedoseeva DM(1), Chechetkin VR(1), Gorbacheva
MA(1), Snezhkina AV(1), Alembekov IR(1), Kravatskaya GI(1), Kravatsky YV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russia.

Hot spots of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are associated with coordinated
expression of genes in chromosomal domains (Tchurikov et al., 2011 [1]; 2013).
These 50-150-kb DNA domains (denoted "forum domains") can be visualized by
separation of undigested chromosomal DNA in pulsed-field agarose gels (Tchurikov 
et al., 1988; 1992) and used for genome-wide mapping of the DSBs that produce
them. Recently, we described nine hot spots of DSBs in human rDNA genes and
observed that, in rDNA units, the hot spots coincide with CTCF binding sites and 
H3K4me3 marks (Tchurikov et al., 2014), suggesting a role for DSBs in active
transcription. Here we have used Illumina sequencing to map DSBs in chromosomes
of human HEK293T cells, and describe in detail the experimental design and
bioinformatics analysis of the data deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus with
accession number GSE53811 and associated with the study published in DNA Research
(Kravatsky et al., 2015). Our data indicate that H3K4me3 marks often coincide
with hot spots of DSBs in HEK293T cells and that the mapping of these hot spots
is important for cancer genomic studies.

PMCID: PMC4583641
PMID: 26484232  [PubMed]


66. Genom Data. 2014 Oct 18;4:17-21. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2014.09.012. eCollection
2015.

Analysis of changes to mRNA levels and CTCF occupancy upon TFII-I knockdown.

Marques M(1), Hernández RP(1), Witcher M(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Lady Davis Institute of the Jewish General Hospital, Departments of
Oncology and Experimental Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

CTCF is a key regulator of nuclear chromatin structure, chromatin organization
and gene regulation. The impact of CTCF on transcriptional output is quite
varied, ranging from repression, to transcriptional pausing and transactivation. 
The multifunctional nature of CTCF is mediated, in part, through differential
association with protein partners having unique properties. We identified the
general transcription factor TFII-I as an interacting partner of CTCF. To gain an
understanding of the function of TFII-I in regulating gene expression and CTCF
binding genome wide, we conducted microarray experiments following TFII-I
knockdown and chromatin immunoprecipitation of CTCF followed by next generation
sequencing (ChIP-seq) from the same TFII-I depleted cells. Here, we described the
experimental design and the quality control and analysis that were performed on
the dataset. The data is publicly available through the GEO database with
accession number GSE60918. The interpretation and description of these data are
included in a manuscript in revision (1).

PMCID: PMC4535928
PMID: 26484167  [PubMed]


67. Genom Data. 2014 May 10;2:82-4. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2014.05.002. eCollection
2014.

CTCF regulates positioning of the human cystic fibrosis gene in association with 
a histone deacetylase.

Muck J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (IBN), Department of Cell and
Tissue Engineering, 31 Biopolis Way, The Nanos, 138669, Singapore.

The nuclear positioning of mammalian genes often correlates with their functional
state. For instance, the human cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
regulator (CFTR) gene associates with the nuclear periphery in its inactive
state, but occupies interior positions when active. Treatment with the histone
deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin a (TSA) changes the radial positioning of the 
CFTR gene in HeLa S3 cells. The gene relocates from the nuclear periphery to the 
nuclear interior. In Calu-3 cells the gene is located in the nuclear interior. To
identify potential regulatory elements for the positioning of CFTR, the histone
H3 and H4 acetylation patterns of untreated and TSA-treated HeLa S3 and untreated
Calu-3 cells were determined by ChIP-chip. Here is a detailed description of the 
datasets associated with the study by Muck et al. published in the Journal of
Cellular Biochemistry in 2012.

PMCID: PMC4535900
PMID: 26484076  [PubMed]


68. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Nov 27;467(4):828-34. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.10.058. Epub 2015 Oct 23.

CTCF negatively regulates HOXA10 expression in breast cancer cells.

Mustafa M(1), Lee JY(1), Kim MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology Laboratory, and Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project 
for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, South
Korea. (2)Department of Anatomy, Embryology Laboratory, and Brain Korea 21 PLUS
Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, 
South Korea. Electronic address: mhkim1@yuhs.ac.

HOX genes not only play important roles in defining body patterning during
embryonic development, but also control numerous cellular events in adult cells. 
Deregulated HOX gene expression in different cancers including breast cancer is
now increasingly being reported. Given that human HOXA cluster is marked with
several CTCF binding sites, we investigated whether the presence of CTCF is
associated directly with expression of HOXA genes in breast cancer cells. Several
HOX genes, such as HOXA4, HOXA5 and HOXA10, were deregulated by CTCF
overexpression and knockdown in MCF-7 cells. Among these genes, HOXA10 is an
emerging tumor suppressor for its role in activation of p53 and in countering
tumorigenesis in breast cancer. Here we provided evidences that CTCF functions as
a negative regulator of HOXA10 in breast cancer cells. The putative promoter
region of HOXA10 lies between 5.3 and 6.1 kb upstream of its start codon and its 
promoter activity was negatively regulated by CTCF. Together with in-silico
analysis and in vitro mutation assay we identified a 20 bp CTCF binding motif
flanking with core promoter element of HOXA10. HOXA10 promoter region was kept
inactivated by maintaining H3K27me3 inactivation marks in the presence of CTCF.
Epigenetic silencing of HOXA10 by CTCF in breast cancer cells may contribute
towards tumorigenesis by decreasing apoptosis and promoting metastasis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26478432  [PubMed - in process]


69. Adv Immunol. 2015;128:183-271. doi: 10.1016/bs.ai.2015.07.004. Epub 2015 Aug 14.

Dynamic Control of Long-Range Genomic Interactions at the Immunoglobulin <U+03BA>
Light-Chain Locus.

Ribeiro de Almeida C(1), Hendriks RW(2), Stadhouders R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom. (2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: r.hendriks@erasmusmc.nl. (3)Gene Regulation,
Stem Cells and Cancer Programme, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, 
Spain. Electronic address: ralph.stadhouders@crg.eu.

The Ig<U+03BA> locus, which is spread over 3Mb of genomic DNA and contains >100 variable
(V) genes, serves as an important model system to study long-range chromatin
interactions. Here, we will discuss how in developing B cells in the bone marrow 
the accessibility of individual V<U+03BA> segments is controlled by many
lineage-specific and ubiquitously expressed transcription factors that act on
various cis-regulatory elements, including promoters, enhancers, and insulators. 
This dynamic control furthermore involves changes in subnuclear localization,
histone modification, DNA demethylation, and three-dimensional locus compaction. 
In pro-B cells, the Ig<U+03BA> locus adopts a poised conformation as full contraction
has been achieved and many key transcription factors already occupy the locus.
Subsequently, the combined activation of pre-B cell antigen receptor signaling
pathways and attenuation of IL-7R signaling in small resting pre-B cells
dramatically modifies the transcription factor landscape, supporting the
induction of monoallelic Ig<U+03BA> gene rearrangements. Hereby, the intronic and 3' Ig<U+03BA>
enhancer elements coordinately focus their activities in the V<U+03BA> region toward
frequently used V<U+03BA> genes. Recent work has drawn attention to the intriguing role 
of the CTCF-associated regulatory elements Cer and Sis, which are located in the 
V<U+03BA>-J<U+03BA> intervening region and control Ig<U+03BA> locus contraction and V<U+03BA> repertoire
diversity. This involves CTCF-mediated locus insulation, restricting enhancer
activity to the V<U+03BA> region and suppressing the preferential recombination to
proximal V<U+03BA> genes. A picture emerges in which the dynamic control of long-range
genomic interactions ensures correct timing of Ig<U+03BA> locus recombination and
provides appropriate opportunities for individual V<U+03BA> gene segments to engage in
V<U+03BA>-J<U+03BA> rearrangement.

© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26477368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Adv Immunol. 2015;128:123-82. doi: 10.1016/bs.ai.2015.07.003. Epub 2015 Aug 20.

Long-Range Regulation of V(D)J Recombination.

Proudhon C(1), Hao B(1), Raviram R(1), Chaumeil J(2), Skok JA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York,
USA. (2)Institut Curie, CNRS UMR3215, INSERM U934, Paris, France. (3)Department
of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, USA. Electronic
address: jane.skok@nyumc.org.

Given their essential role in adaptive immunity, antigen receptor loci have been 
the focus of analysis for many years and are among a handful of the most
well-studied genes in the genome. Their investigation led initially to a detailed
knowledge of linear structure and characterization of regulatory elements that
confer control of their rearrangement and expression. However, advances in DNA
FISH and imaging combined with new molecular approaches that interrogate
chromosome conformation have led to a growing appreciation that linear structure 
is only one aspect of gene regulation and in more recent years, the focus has
switched to analyzing the impact of locus conformation and nuclear organization
on control of recombination. Despite decades of work and intense effort from
numerous labs, we are still left with an incomplete picture of how the assembly
of antigen receptor loci is regulated. This chapter summarizes our advances to
date and points to areas that need further investigation.

© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4660984
PMID: 26477367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Adv Immunol. 2015;128:93-121. doi: 10.1016/bs.ai.2015.07.006. Epub 2015 Aug 13.

Spatial Regulation of V-(D)J Recombination at Antigen Receptor Loci.

Ebert A(1), Hill L(1), Busslinger M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna Biocenter (VBC),
Vienna, Austria. (2)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna
Biocenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria. Electronic address: busslinger@imp.ac.at.

Lymphocytes express a diverse repertoire of antigen receptors, which are able to 
recognize a large variety of foreign pathogens. Functional antigen receptor genes
are assembled by V(D)J recombination in immature B cells (Igh and Igk) and T
cells (Tcr b and Tcra/d). V(D)J recombination takes place in the 3' proximal
domain containing the D, J, and C gene segments, whereas 31 (Tcrb) to 200 (Igh) V
genes are spread over a large region of 0.67 (Tcrb) to 3 (Igk) megabase pairs.
The spatial regulation of V(D)J recombination has been best studied for the Igh
locus, which undergoes reversible contraction by long-range looping in pro-B
cells. This large-scale contraction brings distantly located VH genes into close 
proximity of the DJH-rearranged gene segment, which facilitates VH-DJH
recombination. The B-cell-specific Pax5, ubiquitous YY1, and architectural
CTCF/cohesin proteins regulate Igh locus contraction in pro-B cells by binding to
multiple sites in the VH gene cluster. These regulators also control the
pro-B-cell-specific activity of the distally located PAIR elements, which may be 
involved in the regulation of VH-DJH recombination by promoting locus
contraction. Moreover, the large VH gene cluster of the Igh locus undergoes
flexible long-range looping, which guarantees similar participation of all VH
genes in VH-DJH recombination to generate a diverse antibody repertoire.
Importantly, long-range looping is a more general regulatory principle, as other 
antigen receptor loci also undergo reversible contraction at the developmental
stage, where they engage in V-(D)J recombination.

© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26477366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Tumour Biol. 2015 Oct 17. [Epub ahead of print]

P50-associated COX-2 extragenic RNA (PACER) overexpression promotes proliferation
and metastasis of osteosarcoma cells by activating COX-2 gene.

Qian M(1), Yang X(1), Li Z(1), Jiang C(1), Song D(1), Yan W(1), Liu T(1), Wu
Z(1), Kong J(1), Wei H(2), Xiao J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Spine Tumor Center, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical University,
Fengyang Rd 415#, Huangpu District, Shanghai, China. (2)Spine Tumor Center,
Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Fengyang Rd 415#,
Huangpu District, Shanghai, China. drhfwei@126.com. (3)Spine Tumor Center,
Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Fengyang Rd 415#,
Huangpu District, Shanghai, China. drxiaojianru@163.com.

P50-associated cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) extragenic RNA (PACER) is a novel long
noncoding RNA that has been found to activate the COX-2 gene, which may function 
as an oncogene in osteosarcoma. However, the role of PACER and the relationship
between PACER and COX-2 in osteosarcoma progression have been unknown until now. 
Here, we examined the expression levels of PACER in clinical tumor samples and
human osteosarcoma cell lines, assessed the functions of PACER in osteosarcoma
cell proliferation and invasion, and then explored the mechanism of PACER
dysregulation in osteosarcoma. The results showed that PACER was overexpressed in
osteosarcoma tissues and cell lines compared with normal tissues and osteoblasts,
respectively. PACER knockdown inhibited the proliferation and invasion of human
osteosarcoma cells. Downregulation of PACER significantly suppressed the
expression of COX-2, and the effects of PACER on cell proliferation and invasion 
were rescued by COX-2 overexpression. Furthermore, COX-2 activation by PACER was 
NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent. The regulation of PACER by CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) was
associated with DNA methylation status. Taken together, these findings suggest
that PACER promotes proliferation and metastasis of osteosarcoma cells by
activating the COX-2 gene and its own expression was influenced by DNA
methylation.

PMID: 26476537  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


73. Biol Open. 2015 Oct 12;4(11):1436-47. doi: 10.1242/bio.014308.

Genome-wide ChIP-seq analysis of human TOP2B occupancy in MCF7 breast cancer
epithelial cells.

Manville CM(1), Smith K(1), Sondka Z(1), Rance H(1), Cockell S(2), Cowell IG(1), 
Lee KC(1), Morris NJ(3), Padget K(4), Jackson GH(5), Austin CA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK. (2)The Bioinformatics Support Unit, Faculty of
Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK.
(3)School of Biomedical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2
4HH, UK. (4)Department of Applied Biology, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon
Tyne NE1 8ST, UK. (5)Institute for Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK. (6)Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biosciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK
caroline.austin@ncl.ac.uk.

We report the whole genome ChIP seq for human TOP2B from MCF7 cells. Using three 
different peak calling methods, regions of binding were identified in the
presence or absence of the nuclear hormone estradiol, as TOP2B has been reported 
to play a role in ligand-induced transcription. TOP2B peaks were found across the
whole genome, 50% of the peaks fell either within a gene or within 5 kb of a
transcription start site. TOP2B peaks coincident with gene promoters were less
frequently associated with epigenetic features marking active promoters in
estradiol treated than in untreated cells. Significantly enriched transcription
factor motifs within the DNA sequences underlying the peaks were identified.
These included SP1, KLF4, TFAP2A, MYF, REST, CTCF, ESR1 and ESR2. Gene ontology
analysis of genes associated with TOP2B peaks found neuronal development terms
including axonogenesis and axon guidance were significantly enriched. In the
absence of functional TOP2B there are errors in axon guidance in the zebrafish
eye. Specific heparin sulphate structures are involved in retinal axon targeting.
The glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis-heparin sulphate/heparin pathway is
significantly enriched in the TOP2B gene ontology analysis, suggesting changes in
this pathway in the absence of TOP2B may cause the axon guidance faults.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4728365
PMID: 26459242  [PubMed]


74. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2016 Jan 5;419:83-91. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.10.002. Epub
2015 Oct 9.

The genetic and regulatory architecture of ERBB3-type 1 diabetes susceptibility
locus.

Kaur S(1), Mirza AH(2), Brorsson CA(3), Fløyel T(3), Størling J(3), Mortensen
HB(1), Pociot F(4); Hvidoere International Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Copenhagen Diabetes Research Center (CPH-DIRECT), Department of Pediatrics,
Herlev University Hospital, Herlev Ringvej 75, DK-2730 Herlev, Denmark; Faculty
of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark. (2)Copenhagen 
Diabetes Research Center (CPH-DIRECT), Department of Pediatrics, Herlev
University Hospital, Herlev Ringvej 75, DK-2730 Herlev, Denmark; Faculty of
Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark; Center for
Non-coding RNA in Technology and Health, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Copenhagen Diabetes Research Center (CPH-DIRECT), Department of Pediatrics,
Herlev University Hospital, Herlev Ringvej 75, DK-2730 Herlev, Denmark.
(4)Copenhagen Diabetes Research Center (CPH-DIRECT), Department of Pediatrics,
Herlev University Hospital, Herlev Ringvej 75, DK-2730 Herlev, Denmark; Faculty
of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark; Center for
Non-coding RNA in Technology and Health, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
Electronic address: flemming.pociot.01@regionh.dk.

The study aimed to explore the role of ERBB3 in type 1 diabetes (T1D). We
examined whether genetic variation of ERBB3 (rs2292239) affects residual ß-cell
function in T1D cases. Furthermore, we examined the expression of ERBB3 in human 
islets, the effect of ERBB3 knockdown on apoptosis in insulin-producing INS-1E
cells and the genetic and regulatory architecture of the ERBB3 locus to provide
insights to how rs2292239 may confer disease susceptibility. rs2292239 strongly
correlated with residual ß-cell function and metabolic control in children with
T1D. ERBB3 locus associated lncRNA (NONHSAG011351) was found to be expressed in
human islets. ERBB3 was expressed and down-regulated by pro-inflammatory
cytokines in human islets and INS-1E cells; knockdown of ERBB3 in INS-1E cells
decreased basal and cytokine-induced apoptosis. Our data suggests an important
functional role of ERBB3 and its potential regulators in the ß-cells and may
constitute novel targets to prevent ß-cell destruction in T1D.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26450151  [PubMed - in process]


75. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 7;5:14838. doi: 10.1038/srep14838.

Epigenetic silencing of the XAF1 gene is mediated by the loss of CTCF binding.

Victoria-Acosta G(1), Vazquez-Santillan K(2), Jimenez-Hernandez L(2),
Muñoz-Galindo L(2), Maldonado V(2), Martinez-Ruiz GU(1,)(3), Melendez-Zajgla
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Functional Cancer Genomics Laboratory, National Institute of Genomic Medicine,
Mexico D.F., 14610, Mexico. (2)Epigenetics Laboratory, National Institute of
Genomic Medicine, Mexico D.F., 14610, México. (3)Unit of Investigative Research
on Oncological Disease, Children's Hospital of Mexico "Federico Gomez", Mexico
City, Mexico.

XAF1 is a tumour suppressor gene that compromises cell viability by modulating
different cellular events such as mitosis, cell cycle progression and apoptosis. 
In cancer, the XAF1 gene is commonly silenced by CpG-dinucleotide
hypermethylation of its promoter. DNA demethylating agents induce transcriptional
reactivation of XAF1, sensitizing cancer cells to therapy. The molecular
mechanisms that mediate promoter CpG methylation have not been previously
studied. Here, we demonstrate that CTCF interacts with the XAF1 promoter in vivo 
in a methylation-sensitive manner. By transgene assays, we demonstrate that CTCF 
mediates the open-chromatin configuration of the XAF1 promoter, inhibiting both
CpG-dinucleotide methylation and repressive histone posttranslational
modifications. In addition, the absence of CTCF in the XAF1 promoter inhibits
transcriptional activation induced by well-known apoptosis activators. We report 
for the first time that epigenetic silencing of the XAF1 gene is a consequence of
the loss of CTCF binding.

PMCID: PMC4595840
PMID: 26443201  [PubMed - in process]


76. Trends Genet. 2015 Nov;31(11):651-60. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2015.09.004. Epub 2015
Oct 1.

Genetic Tailors: CTCF and Cohesin Shape the Genome During Evolution.

Vietri Rudan M(1), Hadjur S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Department of Cancer Biology, Cancer Institute, University College
London, 72 Huntley Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK. (2)Research Department of Cancer 
Biology, Cancer Institute, University College London, 72 Huntley Street, London
WC1E 6BT, UK. Electronic address: s.hadjur@ucl.ac.uk.

Research into chromosome structure and organization is an old field that has seen
some fascinating progress in recent years. Modern molecular methods that can
describe the shape of chromosomes have begun to revolutionize our understanding
of genome organization and the mechanisms that regulate gene activity. A picture 
is beginning to emerge of chromatin loops representing a widespread organizing
principle of the chromatin fiber and the proteins cohesin and CCCTC-binding
factor (CTCF) as key players anchoring such chromatin loops. Here we review our
current understanding of the features of CTCF- and cohesin-mediated genome
organization and how their evolution may have helped to shape genome structure.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26439501  [PubMed - in process]


77. Nucleus. 2015 Nov 2;6(6):430-4. doi: 10.1080/19491034.2015.1096467. Epub 2015 Sep
29.

Topologically Associating Domains: An invariant framework or a dynamic scaffold?

Cubeñas-Potts C(1), Corces VG(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biology ; Emory University ; Atlanta , GA USA.

Metazoan genomes are organized into regions of topologically associating domains 
(TADs). TADs are demarcated by border elements, which are enriched for active
genes and high occupancy architectural protein binding sites. We recently
demonstrated that 3D chromatin architecture is dynamic in response to heat shock,
a physiological stress that downregulates transcription and causes a global
redistribution of architectural proteins. We utilized a quantitative measure of
border strength after heat shock, transcriptional inhibition, and architectural
protein knockdown to demonstrate that changes in both transcription and
architectural protein occupancy contribute to heat shock-induced TAD dynamics.
Notably, architectural proteins appear to play a more important role in altering 
3D chromatin architecture. Here, we discuss the implications of our findings on
previous studies evaluating the dynamics of TAD structure during cellular
differentiation. We propose that the subset of variable TADs observed after
differentiation are representative of cell-type specific gene expression and are 
biologically significant.

PMID: 26418477  [PubMed - in process]


78. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Oct 13;112(41):12776-81. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1512995112. Epub 2015 Sep 28.

New roles for DNA cytosine modification, eRNA, anchors, and superanchors in
developing B cell progenitors.

Benner C(1), Isoda T(2), Murre C(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Integrative Genomics and Bioinformatics Core, The Salk Institute for
Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037; murre@biomail.ucsd.edu cbenner@salk.edu. 
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, University of California at San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093. (3)Department of Molecular Biology, University of California at 
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 murre@biomail.ucsd.edu cbenner@salk.edu.

B-cell fate is orchestrated by a series of well-characterized developmental
regulators. Here, we found that the onset of B-cell development was accompanied
by large-scale changes in DNA cytosine modifications associated with promoters,
enhancers, and anchors. These changes were tightly linked to alterations in
transcription factor occupancy and nascent RNA (eRNA) transcription. We found
that the prepro-B to the pro-B-cell transition was associated with a global
exchange of DNA cytosine modifications for polycomb-mediated repression at CpG
islands. Hypomethylated regions were found exclusively in the active/permissive
compartment of the nucleus and were predominantly associated with regulatory
elements or anchors that orchestrate the folding patterns of the genome. We
identified superanchors, characterized by clusters of hypomethylated
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)-bound elements, which were predominantly located at
boundaries that define topological associated domains. A particularly prominent
hypomethylated superanchor was positioned down-stream of the Ig heavy chain (Igh)
locus. Analysis of global formaldehyde-cross-linking studies indicated that the
Igh locus superanchor interacts with the VH region repertoire across vast genomic
distances. We propose that the Igh locus superanchor sequesters the VH and DHJH
regions into a spatial confined geometric environment to promote rapid
first-passage times. Collectively, these studies demonstrate how, in developing B
cells, DNA cytosine modifications associated with regulatory and architectural
elements affect patterns of gene expression, folding patterns of the genome, and 
antigen receptor assembly.

PMCID: PMC4611620 [Available on 2016-04-13]
PMID: 26417104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Cell Rep. 2015 Oct 13;13(2):337-49. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.08.075. Epub 2015 
Sep 24.

Chromatin Architecture of the Pitx2 Locus Requires CTCF- and Pitx2-Dependent
Asymmetry that Mirrors Embryonic Gut Laterality.

Welsh IC(1), Kwak H(2), Chen FL(1), Werner M(1), Shopland LS(3), Danko CG(4), Lis
JT(2), Zhang M(5), Martin JF(6), Kurpios NA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Biology and
Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. (3)The Jackson Laboratory,
Bar Harbor, ME, 04609, USA; Eastern Maine Medical Center Cancer Care, 33 Whiting 
Hill Road, Brewer, ME 04412, USA. (4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, The Baker
Institute for Animal Health, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. (6)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Texas Heart Institute,
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Cardiovascular Research Institute, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (7)Department of Molecular Medicine,
College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.
Electronic address: nk378@cornell.edu.

Expression of Pitx2 on the left side of the embryo patterns left-right (LR)
organs including the dorsal mesentery (DM), whose asymmetric cell behavior
directs gut looping. Despite the importance of organ laterality, chromatin-level 
regulation of Pitx2 remains undefined. Here, we show that genes immediately
neighboring Pitx2 in chicken and mouse, including a long noncoding RNA (Pitx2
locus-asymmetric regulated RNA or Playrr), are expressed on the right side and
repressed by Pitx2. CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing of Playrr, 3D fluorescent in situ 
hybridization (FISH), and variations of chromatin conformation capture (3C)
demonstrate that mutual antagonism between Pitx2 and Playrr is coordinated by
asymmetric chromatin interactions dependent on Pitx2 and CTCF. We demonstrate
that transcriptional and morphological asymmetries driving gut looping are
mirrored by chromatin architectural asymmetries at the Pitx2 locus. We propose a 
model whereby Pitx2 auto-regulation directs chromatin topology to coordinate LR
transcription of this locus essential for LR organogenesis.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4617833
PMID: 26411685  [PubMed - in process]


80. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Nov 1;338(2):214-21. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.09.016. Epub
2015 Sep 25.

Restoration of IGF2 imprinting by polycomb repressive complex 2 docking factor
SUZ12 in colon cancer cells.

Wang H(1), Ge S(2), Qian G(2), Li W(3), Cui J(3), Wang G(3), Hoffman AR(4), Hu
JF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, PR China; Stanford University
Medical School, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.
(2)Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200025, PR China. (3)Stem Cell and Cancer Center, First Affiliated
Hospital, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130061, PR China. (4)Stanford
University Medical School, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA 94304, 
USA. Electronic address: arhoffman@stanford.edu. (5)Stem Cell and Cancer Center, 
First Affiliated Hospital, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130061, PR China;
Stanford University Medical School, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto,
CA 94304, USA. Electronic address: jifan@stanford.edu.

The insulin-like growth factor II (IGF2) gene is aberrantly expressed in tumors
as a result of loss of imprinting (LOI). Reactivation of the normally-suppressed 
maternal allele may lead to IGF2 upregulation and increased tumor growth,
particularly in colon cancer. However, the mechanisms underlying IGF2 LOI in
tumors are poorly defined. In this report, we identified polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2) docking factor SUZ12 as a critical factor in regulating IGF2
imprinting in tumors. Human colon cancer cell lines (HRT18 and HT29) show loss of
IGF2 imprinting. Ectopic expression of SUZ12 restored normal monoallelic
expression of IGF2 in these two colon cancer cell lines. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and chromatin conformation capture (3C), we found that
the virally-expressed SUZ12 bound to IGF2 promoters, coordinating with endogenous
CTCF to orchestrate a long range intrachromosomal loop between the imprinting
control region (ICR) and the IGF2 promoters. The histone methyltransferase EZH2
was recruited to the IGF2 promoters, where it induced H3K27 hypermethylation,
suppressing one allele, leading to the restoration of IGF2 imprinting. These data
demonstrate that SUZ12 is a key molecule in the regulation of monoallelic
expression of IGF2, suggesting a novel epigenetic therapeutic strategy for
modulating IGF2 production in human tumors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26407907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Transcription. 2015 Oct 20;6(5):79-90. doi: 10.1080/21541264.2015.1095269. Epub
2015 Sep 23.

CTCF regulates NELF, DSIF and P-TEFb recruitment during transcription.

Laitem C(1,)(2), Zaborowska J(1), Tellier M(1), Yamaguchi Y(3), Cao Q(3), Egloff 
S(4), Handa H(5), Murphy S(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Sir William Dunn School of Pathology; University of Oxford ; Oxford , UK.
(2)e Current address: Immunocore Limited; Milton Park , Abingdon , Oxon , UK.
(3)b Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology; Tokyo Institute of
Technology ; Yokohama , Japan. (4)c Université de Toulouse; UPS; Laboratoire de
Biologie Moléculaire Eucaryote ; Toulouse , France. (5)d Department of
Nanoparticle Translational Research ; Tokyo Medical University ; Tokyo , Japan.

CTCF is a versatile transcription factor with well-established roles in chromatin
organization and insulator function. Recent findings also implicate CTCF in the
control of elongation by RNA polymerase (RNAP) II. Here we show that CTCF
knockdown abrogates RNAP II pausing at the early elongation checkpoint of c-myc
by affecting recruitment of DRB-sensitivity-inducing factor (DSIF). CTCF
knockdown also causes a termination defect on the U2 snRNA genes (U2), by
affecting recruitment of negative elongation factor (NELF). In addition, CTCF is 
required for recruitment of positive elongation factor b (P-TEFb), which
phosphorylates NELF, DSIF, and Ser2 of the RNAP II CTD to activate elongation of 
transcription of c-myc and recognition of the snRNA gene-specific 3' box RNA
processing signal. These findings implicate CTCF in a complex network of
protein:protein/protein:DNA interactions and assign a key role to CTCF in
controlling RNAP II transcription through the elongation checkpoint of the
protein-coding c-myc and the termination site of the non-coding U2, by regulating
the recruitment and/or activity of key players in these processes.

PMID: 26399478  [PubMed - in process]


82. Sci China Life Sci. 2015 Sep;58(9):860-6. doi: 10.1007/s11427-015-4913-5. Epub
2015 Sep 16.

Exploring CTCF and cohesin related chromatin architecture at HOXA gene cluster in
primary human fibroblasts.

Wang X(1), Xu M(1), Zhao G(1), Liu G(1), Hao D(1), Lv X(2), Liu D(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100005, China. (2)State
Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100005, China.
lvxiang@pumc.edu.cn. (3)State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology,
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, 100005, China. liudp@pumc.edu.cn.

Spatial expression patterns of homeobox (HOX) genes delineate positional identity
of primary fibroblasts from different topographic sites. The molecular mechanism 
underlying the establishing or maintaining of HOX gene expression pattern remains
an attractive developmental issue to be addressed. Our previous work suggested a 
critical role of CTCF/cohesin-mediated higher- order chromatin structure in
RA-induced HOXA activation in human teratocarcinoma NT2/D1 cells. This study
investigated the recruitment of CTCF and cohesin, and the higher-order chromatin 
structure of the HOXA locus in fetal lung and adult foreskin fibroblasts, which
display complementary HOXA gene expression patterns. Chromatin contacts between
the CTCF-binding sites were observed with lower frequency in human foreskin
fibroblasts. This observation is consistent with the lower level of cohesin
recruitment and 5' HOXA gene expression in the same cells. We also showed that
CTCF-binding site A56 (CBSA56) related chromatin structures exhibit the most
notable changes in between the two types of cell, and hence may stand for one of 
the key CTCF-binding sites for cell-type specific chromatin structure
organization. Together, these results imply that CTCF/cohesin coordinates HOXA
cluster higher-order chromatin structure and expression during development, and
provide insight into the relationship between cell-type specific chromatin
organization and the spatial collinearity.

PMID: 26376810  [PubMed - in process]


83. Mol Ther. 2015 Dec;23(12):1843-53. doi: 10.1038/mt.2015.166. Epub 2015 Sep 8.

Long Noncoding RNA CUDR Regulates HULC and ß-Catenin to Govern Human Liver Stem
Cell Malignant Differentiation.

Gui X(1), Li H(1), Li T(1), Pu H(1), Lu D(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.

Long noncoding RNA cancer upregulated drug resistant (CUDR) is overexpressed in
many tumors and promotes tumorigenesis. Herein, we demonstrate CUDR could enhance
the human embryonic stem cells (ESC) differentiation into hepatocyte-like cells
by reducing trimethylation on histone H3 twenty-seventh lysine (H3K27me3). On the
other hand, excessive CUDR triggers hepatocyte-like cells malignant
transformation. Mechanistically, we identify CUDR causes highly upregulated in
liver cancer (HULC) and ß-catenin abnormal expression by inhibiting HULC promoter
methylation and promoting ß-catenin promoter-enhancer chromatin looping formation
mediated by CUDR-ccctc-binding factor (CTCF) complex, which recruits more RNA
polII and P300. Strikingly, HULC and ß-catenin activity are crucial for CUDR
oncogenic function. These findings provide the first demonstration that CUDR
plays a positive potential role in liver cancer stem cell through the cascade of 
CUDR-HULC/CUDR-ß-catenin signaling, and offer insights into a novel link between 
long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) and the epigenetic modification in cancer stem cells.

PMCID: PMC4700108 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26347501  [PubMed - in process]


84. Pharmacogenomics. 2015;16(14):1565-83. doi: 10.2217/pgs.15.105. Epub 2015 Sep 4.

Epigenomic mapping and effect sizes of noncoding variants associated with
psychotropic drug response.

Higgins GA(1,)(2), Allyn-Feuer A(1), Athey BD(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Medicine & Bioinformatics, University of Michigan 
Medical School, 1301 Catherine Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (2)Pharmacogenomic
Science, Assurex Health, Inc., Mason, OH, USA. (3)Department of Psychiatry,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

AIM: To provide insight into potential regulatory mechanisms of gene expression
underlying addiction, analgesia, psychotropic drug response and adverse drug
events, genome-wide association studies searching for variants associated with
these phenotypes has been undertaken with limited success. We undertook analysis 
of these results with the aim of applying epigenetic knowledge to aid variant
discovery and interpretation.
METHODS: We applied conditional imputation to results from 26 genome-wide
association studies and three candidate gene-association studies. The analysis
workflow included data from chromatin conformation capture, chromatin state
annotation, DNase I hypersensitivity, hypomethylation, anatomical localization
and biochronicity. We also made use of chromatin state data from the epigenome
roadmap, transcription factor-binding data, spatial maps from published Hi-C
datasets and 'guilt by association' methods.
RESULTS: We identified 31 pharmacoepigenomic SNPs from a total of 2024 variants
in linkage disequilibrium with lead SNPs, of which only 6% were coding variants. 
Interrogation of chromatin state using our workflow and the epigenome roadmap
showed agreement on 34 of 35 tissue assignments to regulatory elements including 
enhancers and promoters. Loop boundary domains were inferred by association with 
CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor) and cohesin, suggesting proximity to topologically
associating domain boundaries and enhancer clusters. Spatial interactions between
enhancer-promoter pairs detected both known and previously unknown mechanisms.
Addiction and analgesia SNPs were common in relevant populations and exhibited
large effect sizes, whereas a SNP located in the promoter of the SLC1A2 gene
exhibited a moderate effect size for lithium response in bipolar disorder in
patients of European ancestry. SNPs associated with drug-induced organ injury
were rare but exhibited the largest effect sizes, consistent with the published
literature.
CONCLUSION: This work demonstrates that an in silico bioinformatics-based
approach using integrative analysis of a diversity of molecular and morphological
data types can discover pharmacoepigenomic variants that are suitable candidates 
for further validation in cell lines, animal models and human clinical trials.

PMID: 26340055  [PubMed - in process]


85. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Oct 15;43(18):8694-712. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv865. Epub
2015 Sep 3.

A predictive modeling approach for cell line-specific long-range regulatory
interactions.

Roy S(1), Siahpirani AF(2), Chasman D(3), Knaack S(3), Ay F(4), Stewart R(5),
Wilson M(6), Sridharan R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, 330 N.
Orchard Street, Madison, WI, USA sroy@biostat.wisc.edu. (2)Department of Computer
Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA. (3)Wisconsin
Institute for Discovery, 330 N. Orchard Street, Madison, WI, USA. (4)Department
of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. (5)Morgridge
Institute for Research, Madison, WI 53715, USA. (6)Genetics & Genome Biology
Program, Hospital for Sick Children (SickKids) and Department of Molecular
Genetics, University of Toronto,Toronto, ON, Canada Department of Molecular
Genetics, University of Toronto, ON, Canada. (7)Department of Biostatistics and
Medical Informatics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA Department
of Cell and Regenerative biology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53715,
USA.

Erratum in
    Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Feb 29;44(4):1977-8.

Long range regulatory interactions among distal enhancers and target genes are
important for tissue-specific gene expression. Genome-scale identification of
these interactions in a cell line-specific manner, especially using the fewest
possible datasets, is a significant challenge. We develop a novel computational
approach, Regulatory Interaction Prediction for Promoters and Long-range
Enhancers (RIPPLE), that integrates published Chromosome Conformation Capture
(3C) data sets with a minimal set of regulatory genomic data sets to predict
enhancer-promoter interactions in a cell line-specific manner. Our results
suggest that CTCF, RAD21, a general transcription factor (TBP) and activating
chromatin marks are important determinants of enhancer-promoter interactions. To 
predict interactions in a new cell line and to generate genome-wide interaction
maps, we develop an ensemble version of RIPPLE and apply it to generate
interactions in five human cell lines. Computational validation of these
predictions using existing ChIA-PET and Hi-C data sets showed that RIPPLE
accurately predicts interactions among enhancers and promoters. Enhancer-promoter
interactions tend to be organized into subnetworks representing coordinately
regulated sets of genes that are enriched for specific biological processes and
cis-regulatory elements. Overall, our work provides a systematic approach to
predict and interpret enhancer-promoter interactions in a genome-wide cell-type
specific manner using a few experimentally tractable measurements.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4605315
PMID: 26338778  [PubMed - in process]


86. Mol Vis. 2015 Aug 28;21:955-73. eCollection 2015.

Chromatin features, RNA polymerase II and the comparative expression of lens
genes encoding crystallins, transcription factors, and autophagy mediators.

Sun J(1), Rockowitz S(2), Chauss D(3), Wang P(4), Kantorow M(3), Zheng D(5),
Cvekl A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY ; Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY. (2)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY. (3)Department of Biomedical Science, Florida Atlantic
University, Boca Raton, FL. (4)Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, Bronx, NY. (5)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY ; Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY ; Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY.

PURPOSE: Gene expression correlates with local chromatin structure. Our studies
have mapped histone post-translational modifications, RNA polymerase II (pol II),
and transcription factor Pax6 in lens chromatin. These data represent the first
genome-wide insights into the relationship between lens chromatin structure and
lens transcriptomes and serve as an excellent source for additional data analysis
and refinement. The principal lens proteins, the crystallins, are encoded by
predominantly expressed mRNAs; however, the regulatory mechanisms underlying
their high expression in the lens remain poorly understood.
METHODS: The formaldehyde-assisted identification of regulatory regions
(FAIRE-Seq) was employed to analyze newborn lens chromatin. ChIP-seq and RNA-seq 
data published earlier (GSE66961) have been used to assist in FAIRE-seq data
interpretation. RNA transcriptomes from murine lens epithelium, lens fibers,
erythrocytes, forebrain, liver, neurons, and pancreas were compared to establish 
the gene expression levels of the most abundant mRNAs versus median gene
expression across other differentiated cells.
RESULTS: Normalized RNA expression data from multiple tissues show that
crystallins rank among the most highly expressed genes in mammalian cells. These 
findings correlate with the extremely high abundance of pol II all across the
crystallin loci, including crystallin genes clustered on chromosomes 1 and 5, as 
well as within regions of "open" chromatin, as identified by FAIRE-seq. The
expression levels of mRNAs encoding DNA-binding transcription factors (e.g.,
Foxe3, Hsf4, Maf, Pax6, Prox1, Sox1, and Tfap2a) revealed that their transcripts 
form "clusters" of abundant mRNAs in either lens fibers or lens epithelium. The
expression of three autophagy regulatory mRNAs, encoding Tfeb, FoxO1, and Hif1a, 
was found within a group of lens preferentially expressed transcription factors
compared to the E12.5 forebrain.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals novel features of lens chromatin, including the
remarkably high abundance of pol II at the crystallin loci that exhibit features 
of "open" chromatin. Hsf4 ranks among the most abundant fiber cell-preferred
DNA-binding transcription factors. Notable transcripts, including Atf4, Ctcf,
E2F4, Hey1, Hmgb1, Mycn, RXRß, Smad4, Sp1, and Taf1 (transcription factors) and
Ctsd, Gabarapl1, and Park7 (autophagy regulators) have been identified with high 
levels of expression in lens fibers, which suggests specific roles in lens fiber 
cell terminal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4551281
PMID: 26330747  [PubMed - in process]


87. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015 Sep 1;107(11). pii: djv249. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djv249.
Print 2015 Nov.

Patterns of CTCF and ZFHX3 Mutation and Associated Outcomes in Endometrial
Cancer.

Walker CJ(1), Miranda MA(1), O'Hern MJ(1), McElroy JP(1), Coombes KR(1),
Bundschuh R(1), Cohn DE(1), Mutch DG(1), Goodfellow PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Gynecology Oncology (CJW,
MAM, MJO, DEC, PJG), Department of Biomedical Informatics, Center for
Biostatistics, College of Medicine (JPM, KRC), The Ohio State University
Comprehensive Cancer Center - James Cancer Hospital and Solove Research Institute
(CJW, MAM, MJO, JPM, KRC, DEC, PJG), Department of Physics, Department of
Chemistry & Biochemistry, Department of Internal Medicine, Division of
Hematology, Center for RNA Biology (RB), The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH;
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Gynecology Oncology,
Washington University, St. Louis, MO (DGM). (2)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Division of Gynecology Oncology (CJW, MAM, MJO, DEC, PJG), Department
of Biomedical Informatics, Center for Biostatistics, College of Medicine (JPM,
KRC), The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center - James Cancer
Hospital and Solove Research Institute (CJW, MAM, MJO, JPM, KRC, DEC, PJG),
Department of Physics, Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, Department of
Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology, Center for RNA Biology (RB), The Ohio 
State University, Columbus, OH; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division
of Gynecology Oncology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO (DGM).
paul.goodfellow@osumc.edu.

BACKGROUND: The genetic events responsible for tumor aggressiveness in
endometrioid endometrial cancer (EEC) remain poorly understood. The chromosome
16q22 tumor suppressor genes CTCF and ZFHX3 are both frequently mutated in EEC,
but their respective roles in outcome have not been determined.
METHODS: Targeted deep sequencing of CTCF and ZFHX3 was performed for 542 EEC
samples. Copy number loss (CNL) was determined using microsatellite typing of
paired tumor and normal DNA and a novel Bayesian method based on variant allele
frequencies of germline polymorphisms. All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: Mutation rates for CTCF and ZFHX3 were 25.3% and 20.4%, respectively,
and there was a statistically significant excess of tumors with mutation in both 
genes (P = .003). CNL rates were 17.4% for CTCF and 17.2% for ZFHX3, and the
majority of CNLs included both CTCF and ZFHX3. Mutations were more frequent in
tumors with microsatellite instability, and CNLs were more common in
microsatellite-stable tumors (P < .001). Patients with ZFHX3 mutation and/or CNL 
had higher-grade tumors (P = .001), were older (P < .001), and tended to have
more frequent lymphovascular space invasion (P = .07). These patients had reduced
recurrence-free and overall survival (RFS: hazard ratio [HR] = 2.35, 95%
confidence interval [CI] = 1.38 to 3.99, P = .007; OS: HR = 1.51, 95% CI = 1.11
to 2.07, P = .04).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate there is strong selection for inactivation of
both CTCF and ZFHX3 in EEC. Mutation occurs at high frequency in
microsatellite-unstable tumors, whereas CNLs are common in microsatellite-stable 
cancers. Loss of these two tumor suppressors is a frequent event in endometrial
tumorigenesis, and ZFHX3 defects are associated with poor outcome.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4643635 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26330387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. BMC Biol. 2015 Sep 2;13:71. doi: 10.1186/s12915-015-0182-9.

In vivo studies of the Drosophila insulator factor CTCF reach a Catch 22.

Karch F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Evolution, University of Geneva, 30 quai Ernest
Ansermet, 1211, Geneva, Switzerland. Franois.Karch@unige.ch.

Comment on
    BMC Biol. 2015;13:63.

Mutations in the proteins that bind insulator DNA elements that define the
boundaries of chromatin domains can give morphogenetic readouts in Drosophila, as
recently reported in BMC Biology by Bonchuk et al. in the Georgiev laboratory.
But disentangling the effects on the phenotype may not be simple.See research
article: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/13/63.

PMCID: PMC4557222
PMID: 26329471  [PubMed - in process]


89. Cell Rep. 2015 Sep 8;12(10):1704-14. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.08.005. Epub 2015
Aug 28.

CTCF Recruits Centromeric Protein CENP-E to the Pericentromeric/Centromeric
Regions of Chromosomes through Unusual CTCF-Binding Sites.

Xiao T(1), Wongtrakoongate P(2), Trainor C(1), Felsenfeld G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892-0540, USA. (2)Laboratory of
Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892-0540, USA; Department of Biochemistry, Faculty 
of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok 10400, Thailand. (3)Laboratory of
Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892-0540, USA. Electronic address:
gary.felsenfeld@nih.gov.

The role of CTCF in stabilizing long-range interactions between chromatin sites
essential for maintaining nuclear architecture is well established. Most of these
interactions involve recruitment of the cohesin complex to chromatin via CTCF. We
find that CTCF also interacts with the centromeric protein CENP-E both in vitro
and in vivo. We identified CTCF sites in pericentric/centromeric DNA and found
that, early in mitosis, CTCF binds and recruits CENP-E to these sites. Unlike
most known CTCF genomic sites, the CTCF-binding sites in the
pericentric/centromeric regions interact strongly with the C-terminal fingers of 
CTCF. Overexpression of a small CENP-E fragment, targeted to these CTCF sites,
results in a delay in alignment of some chromosomes during mitosis, suggesting
that the recruitment of CENP-E by CTCF is physiologically important. We conclude 
that CTCF helps recruit CENP-E to the centromere during mitosis and that it may
do so through a structure stabilized by the CTCF/CENP-E complex.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4633288
PMID: 26321640  [PubMed - in process]


90. Mol Cell. 2015 Sep 17;59(6):984-97. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.07.019. Epub 2015 
Aug 27.

PARP1- and CTCF-Mediated Interactions between Active and Repressed Chromatin at
the Lamina Promote Oscillating Transcription.

Zhao H(1), Sifakis EG(1), Sumida N(1), Millán-Ariño L(1), Scholz BA(1), Svensson 
JP(2), Chen X(1), Ronnegren AL(1), Mallet de Lima CD(1), Varnoosfaderani FS(1),
Shi C(1), Loseva O(3), Yammine S(1), Israelsson M(1), Rathje LS(1), Németi B(4), 
Fredlund E(1), Helleday T(3), Imreh MP(1), Göndör A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Nobels väg 16, Karolinska 
Institutet, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, 
Novum, Karolinska Institutet, 14183 Huddinge, Sweden. (3)Science for Life
Laboratory, Division of Translational Medicine and Chemical Biology, Department
of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 17121 Stockholm,
Sweden. (4)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Nobels väg 16,
Karolinska Institutet, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Pharmacology and
Pharmacotherapy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Pécs, Szigeti út 12, 7624
Pécs, Hungary. (5)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Nobels väg 
16, Karolinska Institutet, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address:
anita.gondor@ki.se.

Transcriptionally active and inactive chromatin domains tend to segregate into
separate sub-nuclear compartments to maintain stable expression patterns.
However, here we uncovered an inter-chromosomal network connecting active loci
enriched in circadian genes to repressed lamina-associated domains (LADs). The
interactome is regulated by PARP1 and its co-factor CTCF. They not only mediate
chromatin fiber interactions but also promote the recruitment of circadian genes 
to the lamina. Synchronization of the circadian rhythm by serum shock induces
oscillations in PARP1-CTCF interactions, which is accompanied by oscillating
recruitment of circadian loci to the lamina, followed by the acquisition of
repressive H3K9me2 marks and transcriptional attenuation. Furthermore, depletion 
of H3K9me2/3, inhibition of PARP activity by olaparib, or downregulation of PARP1
or CTCF expression counteracts both recruitment to the envelope and circadian
transcription. PARP1- and CTCF-regulated contacts between circadian loci and the 
repressive chromatin environment at the lamina therefore mediate circadian
transcriptional plasticity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26321255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Int J Oncol. 2015 Oct;47(4):1393-404. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3136. Epub 2015 Aug
27.

Multifaceted roles of 5'-regulatory region of the cancer associated gene B4GALT1 
and its comparison with the gene family.

Al-Obaide MA(1), Alobydi H(2), Abdelsalam AG(3), Zhang R(4), Srivenugopal KS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Texas Tech University
Health Sciences Center, Amarillo, TX 79106, USA. (2)Biomedica, LLC, Sterling
Heights, MI, USA. (3)Department of Mathematics, Statistics and Physics, College
of Arts and Sciences, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar. (4)Department of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Amarillo, TX 79106, USA.

ß1,4-Galactosylransferases are a family of enzymes encoded by seven B4GALT genes 
and are involved in the development of anticancer drug resistance and metastasis.
Among these genes, the B4GALT1 shows significant variations in the transcript
origination sites in different cell types/tissues and encodes an interesting
dually partitioning ß-1, 4-galactosyltransferase protein. We identified at 5'-end
of B4GALT1 a 1.454 kb sequence forming a transcription regulatory region,
referred to by us as the TR1-PE1, had all characteristics of a bidirectional
promoter directing the transcription of B4GALT1 in a divergent manner along with 
its long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) antisense counterpart B4GALT1-AS1. The TR1-PE1
showed unique dinucleotide base-stacking energy values specific to transcription 
factor binding sites (TFBSs), INR and BRE, and harbored CpG Island (CGI) that
showed GC skew with potential for R-loop formation at the transcription starting 
sites (TSSs). The 5'-regulatory axis of B4GALT1 also included five more novel
TFBSs for CTCF, GLI1, TCF7L2, GATA3 and SOX5, in addition to unique (TG)18
repeats in conjunction with 22 nucleotide TG-associated sequence (TGAS). The five
lncRNA B4GALT1-AS1 transcripts showed significant complementarity with B4GALT1
mRNA. In contrast, the rest of B4GALT genes showed fewer lncRNAs, and all lacked 
the (TG)18 and TGAS. Our results are strongly supported by the FANTOM5 study
which showed tissue-specific variations in transcript origination sites for this 
gene. We suggest that the unique expression patterns for the B4GALT1 in normal
and malignant tissues are controlled by a differential usage of 5'-B4GALT1
regulatory units along with a post-transcriptional regulation by the antisense
RNA, which in turn govern the cell-matrix interactions, neoplastic progression,
anticancer drug sensitivity, and could be utilized in personalized therapy.

PMID: 26315939  [PubMed - in process]


92. Bioinformatics. 2015 Aug 26. pii: btv485. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of hierarchical chromatin domains.

Weinreb C(1), Raphael BJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Computational Molecular Biology and. (2)Center for Computational
Molecular Biology and Department of Computer Science, Brown University,
Providence, RI 02912, USA.

MOTIVATION: The three-dimensional structure of the genome is an important
regulator of many cellular processes including differentiation and gene
regulation. Recently, technologies such as Hi-C that combine proximity ligation
with high-throughput sequencing have revealed domains of self-interacting
chromatin, called topologically associating domains (TADs), in many organisms.
Current methods for identifying TADs using Hi-C data assume that TADs are
non-overlapping, despite evidence for a nested structure in which TADs and
sub-TADs form a complex hierarchy.
RESULTS: We introduce a model for decomposition of contact frequencies into a
hierarchy of nested TADs. This model is based on empirical distributions of
contact frequencies within TADs, where positions that are far apart have a
greater enrichment of contacts than positions that are close together. We find
that the increase in contact enrichment with distance is stronger for the inner
TAD than for the outer TAD in a TAD/sub-TAD pair. Using this model, we develop
the TADtree algorithm for detecting hierarchies of nested TADs. TADtree compares 
favorably with previous methods, finding TADs with a greater enrichment of
chromatin marks such as CTCF at their boundaries.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: A python implementation of TADtree is available 
at http://compbio.cs.brown.edu/software/ CONTACT:
braphael@cs.brown.eduSupplementary information: Supplementary data are available 
at Bioinformatics online.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26315910  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


93. BMC Genomics. 2015 Aug 28;16:649. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1824-6.

Functional diversity of CTCFs is encoded in their binding motifs.

Fang R(1), Wang C(2), Skogerbo G(3), Zhang Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of
Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, China.
r3fang@eng.ucsd.edu. (2)CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information,
Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101,
China. charleywangcq@gmail.com. (3)Bioinformatics Laboratory and National
Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China. geirsk2000@yahoo.com. (4)CAS Key Laboratory of Genome
Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, 100101, China. zhangzhihua@big.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: The CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) has diverse regulatory functions.
However, the definitive characteristics of the CTCF binding motif required for
its functional diversity still remains elusive.
RESULTS: Here, we describe a new motif discovery workflow by which we have
identified three CTCF binding motif variations with highly divergent
functionalities. Supported by transcriptomic, epigenomic and
chromatin-interactomic data, we show that the functional diversity of the CTCF
binding motifs is strongly associated with their GC content, CpG dinucleotide
coverage and relative DNA methylation level at the 12th position of the motifs.
Further analysis suggested that the co-localization of cohesin, the key factor in
cohesion of sister chromatids, is negatively correlated with the CpG coverage and
the relative DNA methylation level at the 12th position. Finally, we present
evidences for a hypothetical model in which chromatin interactions between
promoters and distal regulatory regions are likely mediated by CTCFs binding to
sequences with high CpG.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate the existence of definitive CTCF binding
motifs corresponding to CTCF's diverse functions, and that the functional
diversity of the motifs is strongly associated with genetic and epigenetic
features at the 12th position of the motifs.

PMCID: PMC4552278
PMID: 26315019  [PubMed - in process]


94. Andrology. 2015 Sep;3(5):979-90. doi: 10.1111/andr.12075.

Rapamycin (Sirolimus) alters mechanistic target of rapamycin pathway regulation
and microRNA expression in mouse meiotic spermatocytes.

Mukherjee A(1), Koli S(1), Reddy KV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology and Microbiology, National Institute for
Research in Reproductive Health, Indian Council of Medical Research, Mumbai,
India.

Mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a signal transduction pathway that
modulates translation initiation in several animals including mammals.
Rapamaycin, an allosteric inhibitor of mTOR pathway, is often used as an
immunosuppressive drug following kidney transplantation and causes gonadal
dysfunction and defects in spermatogenesis. The molecular mechanism behind
rapamycin-mediated testicular dysfunction is not known. We have therefore
explored the contribution of rapamycin in mTOR regulation and microRNA (miRNA)
expression in mouse spermatocytes, the intermediate stage of spermatogenesis,
where meiosis takes place. In the present study, we optimized the isolation of
highly pure and viable spermatocytes by flow sorting, treated them with
rapamycin, and investigated the expression of mTOR and downstream effector
molecules. Western blot and immunocytochemical analysis confirm that rapamycin
treatment suppresses mTOR and phopsphorylated P70S6 kinase activities in
spermatocytes, but not that of phosphorylated 4E-binding protein 1. Also,
rapamycin treatment modulates the expression of several spermatocyte-specific
miRNAs. To complement these finding an in vivo study was also performed. In
silico prediction of target genes of these miRNAs and their functional pathway
analysis revealed that, several of them are involved in crucial biological
process, cellular process and catalytic activities. miRNA-transcription factor
(TF) network analysis enlisted different TFs propelling the transcription
machineries of these miRNAs. In silico prediction followed by quatitative
real-time PCR revealed two of these TFs namely, PU.1 and CCCTC binding factor
(CTCF) are down and upregulated, respectively, which may be the reason of the
altered expression of miRNAs following rapamycin treatment. In conclusion, for
the first time, the present study provides insight into how rapamycin regulates
mTOR pathway and spermatocyte-specific miRNA expression which in turn, regulate
expression of target genes post-transcriptionally.

© 2015 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

PMID: 26311343  [PubMed - in process]


95. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Oct;16(10):578-9. doi: 10.1038/nrm4057. Epub 2015 Aug
26.

Chromosome biology: CTCF-binding site orientation shapes the genome.

Zlotorynski E.

Comment on
    Cell. 2015 Aug 13;162(4):900-10.

PMID: 26307237  [PubMed - in process]


96. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 25;10(8):e0135410. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135410.
eCollection 2015.

Genome-Wide Profiling of PARP1 Reveals an Interplay with Gene Regulatory Regions 
and DNA Methylation.

Nalabothula N(1), Al-jumaily T(1), Eteleeb AM(2), Flight RM(1), Xiaorong S(3),
Moseley H(1), Rouchka EC(4), Fondufe-Mittendorf YN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, Kentucky, United States of America. (2)Department of Computer
Engineering and Computer Science, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky,
United States of America; McDonnell Genome Institute, Washington University in
St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America. (3)Division of
Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley,
California, United States of America. (4)Department of Computer Engineering and
Computer Science, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky, United States
of America.

Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP1) is a nuclear enzyme involved in DNA
repair, chromatin remodeling and gene expression. PARP1 interactions with
chromatin architectural multi-protein complexes (i.e. nucleosomes) alter
chromatin structure resulting in changes in gene expression. Chromatin structure 
impacts gene regulatory processes including transcription, splicing, DNA repair, 
replication and recombination. It is important to delineate whether PARP1
randomly associates with nucleosomes or is present at specific nucleosome regions
throughout the cell genome. We performed genome-wide association studies in
breast cancer cell lines to address these questions. Our studies show that PARP1 
associates with epigenetic regulatory elements genome-wide, such as active
histone marks, CTCF and DNase hypersensitive sites. Additionally, the binding of 
PARP1 to chromatin genome-wide is mutually exclusive with DNA methylation pattern
suggesting a functional interplay between PARP1 and DNA methylation. Indeed,
inhibition of PARylation results in genome-wide changes in DNA methylation
patterns. Our results suggest that PARP1 controls the fidelity of gene
transcription and marks actively transcribed gene regions by selectively binding 
to transcriptionally active chromatin. These studies provide a platform for
developing our understanding of PARP1's role in gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC4549251
PMID: 26305327  [PubMed - in process]


97. Genes Dev. 2015 Aug 15;29(16):1683-95. doi: 10.1101/gad.263871.115.

A structural hierarchy mediated by multiple nuclear factors establishes IgH locus
conformation.

Gerasimova T(1), Guo C(1), Ghosh A(1), Qiu X(1), Montefiori L(1), Verma-Gaur
J(2), Choi NM(2), Feeney AJ(2), Sen R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Immunology, National Institute on Aging,
Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA; (2)The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

Conformation of antigen receptor gene loci spatially juxtaposes rearranging gene 
segments in the appropriate cell lineage and developmental stage. We describe a
three-step pathway that establishes the structure of the 2.8-Mb immunoglobulin
heavy chain gene (IgH) locus in pro-B cells. Each step uses a different
transcription factor and leads to increasing levels of structural organization.
CTCF mediates one level of compaction that folds the locus into several 250- to
400-kb subdomains, and Pax5 further compacts the 2-Mb region that encodes
variable (VH) gene segments. The 5' and 3' domains are brought together by the
transcription factor YY1 to establish the configuration within which gene
recombination initiates. Such stepwise mechanisms may apply more generally to
establish regulatory fine structure within megabase-sized topologically
associated domains.

© 2015 Gerasimova et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4561478
PMID: 26302788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 24;10(8):e0136104. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136104.
eCollection 2015.

Boundary Associated Long Noncoding RNA Mediates Long-Range Chromosomal
Interactions.

Nwigwe IJ(1), Kim YJ(2), Wacker DA(3), Kim TH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT, 06520, United States of America. (2)Center for Systems
Biology and Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson, TX, 75080, United States of America. (3)Departments of Internal and
Emergency Medicine, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD,
21201, United States of America.

CCCTC binding factor (CTCF) is involved in organizing chromosomes into mega
base-sized, topologically associated domains (TADs) along with other factors that
define sub-TAD organization. CTCF-Cohesin interactions have been shown to be
critical for transcription insulation activity as it stabilizes long-range
interactions to promote proper gene expression. Previous studies suggest that
heterochromatin boundary activity of CTCF may be independent of Cohesin, and
there may be additional mechanisms for defining topological domains. Here, we
show that a boundary site we previously identified known as CTCF binding site 5
(CBS5) from the homeotic gene cluster A (HOXA) locus exhibits robust promoter
activity. This promoter activity from the CBS5 boundary element generates a long 
noncoding RNA that we designate as boundary associated long noncoding RNA-1
(blncRNA1). Functional characterization of this RNA suggests that the transcript 
stabilizes long-range interactions at the HOXA locus and promotes proper
expression of HOXA genes. Additionally, our functional analysis also shows that
this RNA is not needed in the stabilization of CTCF-Cohesin interactions however 
CTCF-Cohesin interactions are critical in the transcription of blncRNA1. Thus,
the CTCF-associated boundary element, CBS5, employs both Cohesin and noncoding
RNA to establish and maintain topologically associated domains at the HOXA locus.

PMCID: PMC4547746
PMID: 26302455  [PubMed - in process]


99. Cell. 2015 Aug 13;162(4):900-10. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.07.038.

CRISPR Inversion of CTCF Sites Alters Genome Topology and Enhancer/Promoter
Function.

Guo Y(1), Xu Q(1), Canzio D(2), Shou J(1), Li J(1), Gorkin DU(3), Jung I(3), Wu
H(1), Zhai Y(1), Tang Y(1), Lu Y(1), Wu Y(1), Jia Z(1), Li W(1), Zhang MQ(4), Ren
B(3), Krainer AR(5), Maniatis T(6), Wu Q(7).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Biomedicine, MOE Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine,
Institute of Systems Biomedicine, Collaborative Innovation Center of Systems
Biomedicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU), Shanghai 200240, China; State 
Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer Institute, Renji
Hospital, School of Medicine, SJTU, Shanghai 200240, China; Key Laboratory for
the Genetics of Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders (MOE), Bio-X Center,
School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, SJTU, Shanghai 200240, China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University
Medical Center, 701 West 168(th) Street, New York, NY 10032, USA. (3)Ludwig
Institute for Cancer Research and Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, 
University of California, San Diego School of Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, La
Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (4)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Center for
Systems Biology, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX 75080, USA; MOE
Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics and Bioinformatics Division, Center for
Synthetic and System Biology, TNLIST/Department of Automation, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China. (5)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown
Rd, NY 11724, USA. (6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics,
Columbia University Medical Center, 701 West 168(th) Street, New York, NY 10032, 
USA. Electronic address: tm2472@cumc.columbia.edu. (7)Center for Comparative
Biomedicine, MOE Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine, Institute of Systems
Biomedicine, Collaborative Innovation Center of Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University (SJTU), Shanghai 200240, China; State Key Laboratory of
Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer Institute, Renji Hospital, School of
Medicine, SJTU, Shanghai 200240, China; Key Laboratory for the Genetics of
Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders (MOE), Bio-X Center, School of Life 
Sciences and Biotechnology, SJTU, Shanghai 200240, China. Electronic address:
qwu123@gmail.com.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Oct;16(10):578-9.
    Cell. 2015 Aug 13;162(4):703-5.

CTCF and the associated cohesin complex play a central role in insulator function
and higher-order chromatin organization of mammalian genomes. Recent studies
identified a correlation between the orientation of CTCF-binding sites (CBSs) and
chromatin loops. To test the functional significance of this observation, we
combined CRISPR/Cas9-based genomic-DNA-fragment editing with
chromosome-conformation-capture experiments to show that the location and
relative orientations of CBSs determine the specificity of long-range chromatin
looping in mammalian genomes, using protocadherin (Pcdh) and ß-globin as model
genes. Inversion of CBS elements within the Pcdh enhancer reconfigures the
topology of chromatin loops between the distal enhancer and target promoters and 
alters gene-expression patterns. Thus, although enhancers can function in an
orientation-independent manner in reporter assays, in the native chromosome
context, the orientation of at least some enhancers carrying CBSs can determine
both the architecture of topological chromatin domains and enhancer/promoter
specificity. These findings reveal how 3D chromosome architecture can be encoded 
by linear genome sequences.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4642453 [Available on 2016-08-13]
PMID: 26276636  [PubMed - in process]


100. Cell. 2015 Aug 13;162(4):703-5. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.07.053.

A CTCF Code for 3D Genome Architecture.

Nichols MH(1), Corces VG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, 1510 Clifton Road NE, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA. (2)Department of Biology, Emory University, 1510 Clifton Road NE,
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. Electronic address: vcorces@emory.edu.

Comment on
    Cell. 2015 Aug 13;162(4):900-10.

The architectural protein CTCF plays a complex role in decoding the functional
output of the genome. Guo et al. now show that the orientation of a CTCF site
restricts its choice of interacting partner, thus creating a code that predicts
the three-dimensional organization of the genome. We propose a DNA extrusion
model to account for orientation-specific loop formation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4745123 [Available on 2016-08-13]
PMID: 26276625  [PubMed - in process]


101. Genome Biol. 2015 Aug 14;16:161. doi: 10.1186/s13059-015-0736-8.

Comparative analyses of CTCF and BORIS occupancies uncover two distinct classes
of CTCF binding genomic regions.

Pugacheva EM(1), Rivero-Hinojosa S(1), Espinoza CA(2,)(3), Méndez-Catalá CF(1),
Kang S(1), Suzuki T(1,)(4), Kosaka-Suzuki N(1), Robinson S(1), Nagarajan V(5), Ye
Z(2), Boukaba A(6), Rasko JE(7,)(8,)(9), Strunnikov AV(6), Loukinov D(1), Ren
B(10,)(11), Lobanenkov VV(12).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Section, Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute 
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD,
20852, USA. (2)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla,
CA, 92093, USA. (3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Institute of
Genomic Medicine, Moores Cancer Center, San Diego School of Medicine, University 
of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA. (4)Stem Cell Project, Tokyo
Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Kamikitazawa, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo,
Japan. (5)Bioinformatics and Computational Biosciences Branch, Office of Cyber
Infrastructure and Computational Biology, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.
(6)Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Molecular Epigenetics
Laboratory, 190 Kai Yuan Avenue, Science Park, Guangzhou, 510530, China. (7)Gene 
and Stem Cell Therapy Program, Centenary Institute, Camperdown, NSW, 2050,
Australia. (8)Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 2006,
Australia. (9)Cell and Molecular Therapies, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital,
Camperdown, NSW, 2050, Australia. (10)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, 9500 
Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA. biren@ucsd.edu. (11)Department of
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Institute of Genomic Medicine, Moores Cancer
Center, San Diego School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA, 92093, USA. biren@ucsd.edu. (12)Molecular Pathology Section,
Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, 20852, USA.
vlobanenkov@mail.nih.gov.

BACKGROUND: CTCF and BORIS (CTCFL), two paralogous mammalian proteins sharing
nearly identical DNA binding domains, are thought to function in a mutually
exclusive manner in DNA binding and transcriptional regulation.
RESULTS: Here we show that these two proteins co-occupy a specific subset of
regulatory elements consisting of clustered CTCF binding motifs (termed 2xCTSes).
BORIS occupancy at 2xCTSes is largely invariant in BORIS-positive cancer cells,
with the genomic pattern recapitulating the germline-specific BORIS binding to
chromatin. In contrast to the single-motif CTCF target sites (1xCTSes), the 2xCTS
elements are preferentially found at active promoters and enhancers, both in
cancer and germ cells. 2xCTSes are also enriched in genomic regions that escape
histone to protamine replacement in human and mouse sperm. Depletion of the BORIS
gene leads to altered transcription of a large number of genes and the
differentiation of K562 cells, while the ectopic expression of this CTCF paralog 
leads to specific changes in transcription in MCF7 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: We discover two functionally and structurally different classes of
CTCF binding regions, 2xCTSes and 1xCTSes, revealed by their predisposition to
bind BORIS. We propose that 2xCTSes play key roles in the transcriptional program
of cancer and germ cells.

PMCID: PMC4562119
PMID: 26268681  [PubMed - in process]


102. Genome Biol. 2015 Jul 28;16:153. doi: 10.1186/s13059-015-0717-y.

Global SUMOylation on active chromatin is an acute heat stress response
restricting transcription.

Niskanen EA(1), Malinen M(2), Sutinen P(3), Toropainen S(4), Paakinaho V(5,)(6), 
Vihervaara A(7,)(8), Joutsen J(9,)(10), Kaikkonen MU(11), Sistonen L(12,)(13),
Palvimo JJ(14).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland, P.O. Box 1627,
FI-70211, Kuopio, Finland. einari.niskanen@uef.fi. (2)Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Eastern Finland, P.O. Box 1627, FI-70211, Kuopio, Finland.
marjo.malinen@uef.fi. (3)Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland,
P.O. Box 1627, FI-70211, Kuopio, Finland. paivi.sutinen@uef.fi. (4)Institute of
Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland, P.O. Box 1627, FI-70211, Kuopio,
Finland. sari.toropainen@uef.fi. (5)Institute of Biomedicine, University of
Eastern Finland, P.O. Box 1627, FI-70211, Kuopio, Finland.
ville.paakinaho@uef.fi. (6)Present Address: Laboratory of Receptor Biology and
Gene Expression, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Building 41, 41 Library Drive,
Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA. ville.paakinaho@uef.fi. (7)Department of Biosciences,
Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland. anniina.vihervaara@abo.fi. (8)Turku
Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, P.O.
Box 123, FI-20521, Turku, Finland. anniina.vihervaara@abo.fi. (9)Department of
Biosciences, Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland. jenny.joutsen@abo.fi.
(10)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi
University, P.O. Box 123, FI-20521, Turku, Finland. jenny.joutsen@abo.fi.
(11)Department of Biotechnology and Molecular Medicine, A.I. Virtanen Institute, 
University of Eastern Finland, P.O. Box 1627, FI-70211, Kuopio, Finland.
minna.kaikkonen@uef.fi. (12)Department of Biosciences, Åbo Akademi University,
Turku, Finland. lea.sistonen@abo.fi. (13)Turku Centre for Biotechnology,
University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, P.O. Box 123, FI-20521, Turku,
Finland. lea.sistonen@abo.fi. (14)Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern
Finland, P.O. Box 1627, FI-70211, Kuopio, Finland. jorma.palvimo@uef.fi.

BACKGROUND: Cells have developed many ways to cope with external stress. One
distinctive feature in acute proteotoxic stresses, such as heat shock (HS), is
rapid post-translational modification of proteins by SUMOs (small ubiquitin-like 
modifier proteins; SUMOylation). While many of the SUMO targets are chromatin
proteins, there is scarce information on chromatin binding of SUMOylated proteins
in HS and the role of chromatin SUMOylation in the regulation of transcription.
RESULTS: We mapped HS-induced genome-wide changes in chromatin occupancy of
SUMO-2/3-modified proteins in K562 and VCaP cells using ChIP-seq. Chromatin
SUMOylation was further correlated with HS-induced global changes in
transcription using GRO-seq and RNA polymerase II (Pol2) ChIP-seq along with
ENCODE data for K562 cells. HS induced a rapid and massive rearrangement of
chromatin SUMOylation pattern: SUMOylation was gained at active promoters and
enhancers associated with multiple transcription factors, including heat shock
factor 1. Concomitant loss of SUMOylation occurred at inactive intergenic
chromatin regions that were associated with CTCF-cohesin complex and SETDB1
methyltransferase complex. In addition, HS triggered a dynamic chromatin binding 
of SUMO ligase PIAS1, especially onto promoters. The HS-induced SUMOylation on
chromatin was most notable at promoters of transcribed genes where it positively 
correlated with active transcription and Pol2 promoter-proximal pausing.
Furthermore, silencing of SUMOylation machinery either by depletion of UBC9 or
PIAS1 enhanced expression of HS-induced genes.
CONCLUSIONS: HS-triggered SUMOylation targets promoters and enhancers of actively
transcribed genes where it restricts the transcriptional activity of the
HS-induced genes. PIAS1-mediated promoter SUMOylation is likely to regulate
Pol2-associated factors in HS.

PMCID: PMC4531811
PMID: 26259101  [PubMed - in process]


103. Nat Immunol. 2015 Oct;16(10):1085-93. doi: 10.1038/ni.3232. Epub 2015 Aug 10.

A discrete chromatin loop in the mouse Tcra-Tcrd locus shapes the TCRd and TCRa
repertoires.

Chen L(1), Carico Z(1), Shih HY(1), Krangel MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.

The locus encoding the T cell antigen receptor (TCR) a-chain and d-chain
(Tcra-Tcrd) undergoes recombination of its variable-diversity-joining (V(D)J)
segments in CD4(-)CD8(-) double-negative thymocytes and CD4(+)CD8(+)
double-positive thymocytes to generate diverse TCRd repertoires and TCRa
repertoires, respectively. Here we identified a chromatin-interaction network in 
the Tcra-Tcrd locus in double-negative thymocytes that was formed by interactions
between binding elements for the transcription factor CTCF. Disruption of a
discrete chromatin loop encompassing the D, J and constant (C) segments of Tcrd
allowed a single V segment to frequently contact and rearrange to D and J
segments and dominate the adult TCRd repertoire. Disruption of this loop also
narrowed the TCRa repertoire, which, we believe, followed as a consequence of the
restricted TCRd repertoire. Hence, a single CTCF-mediated chromatin loop directly
regulated TCRd diversity and indirectly regulated TCRa diversity.

PMCID: PMC4575630
PMID: 26258942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Cell Rep. 2015 Aug 18;12(7):1184-95. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.07.024. Epub 2015
Aug 6.

Role of DNA Methylation in Modulating Transcription Factor Occupancy.

Maurano MT(1), Wang H(2), John S(2), Shafer A(2), Canfield T(2), Lee K(2),
Stamatoyannopoulos JA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195,
USA. Electronic address: matthew.maurano@nyumc.org. (2)Department of Genome
Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. (3)Department of
Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; Division of
Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195,
USA. Electronic address: jstam@uw.edu.

Although DNA methylation is commonly invoked as a mechanism for transcriptional
repression, the extent to which it actively silences transcription factor (TF)
occupancy sites in vivo is unknown. To study the role of DNA methylation in the
active modulation of TF binding, we quantified the effect of DNA methylation
depletion on the genomic occupancy patterns of CTCF, an abundant TF with known
methylation sensitivity that is capable of autonomous binding to its target sites
in chromatin. Here, we show that the vast majority (>98.5%) of the tens of
thousands of unoccupied, methylated CTCF recognition sequences remain unbound
upon abrogation of DNA methylation. The small fraction of sites that show
methylation-dependent binding in vivo are in turn characterized by highly
variable CTCF occupancy across cell types. Our results suggest that DNA
methylation is not a primary groundskeeper of genomic TF landscapes, but rather a
specialized mechanism for stabilizing intrinsically labile sites.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26257180  [PubMed - in process]


105. Mech Dev. 2015 Nov;138 Pt 2:160-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2015.07.015. Epub 2015 Aug 
6.

Epigenetic mechanisms and boundaries in the regulation of mammalian Hox clusters.

Srivastava S(1), Dhawan J(2), Mishra RK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Uppal Road, Hyderabad 500007,
India. Electronic address: ssurabhi@ccmb.res.in. (2)Centre for Cellular and
Molecular Biology, Uppal Road, Hyderabad 500007, India.

Hox gene expression imparts segment identity to body structures along the
anterior-posterior axis and is tightly governed by higher order chromatin
mechanisms. Chromatin regulatory features of the homeotic complex are best
defined in Drosophila melanogaster, where multiple cis-regulatory elements have
been identified that ensure collinear Hox gene expression patterns in accordance 
with their genomic organization. Recent studies focused on delineating the
epigenetic features of the vertebrate Hox clusters have helped reveal their
dynamic chromatin organization and its impact on gene expression. Enrichment for 
the 'activating' H3K4me3 and 'repressive' H3K27me3 histone modifications is a
particularly strong read-out for transcriptional status and correlates well with 
the evidence for chromatin loop domain structures and stage specific topological 
changes at these loci. However, it is not clear how such distinct domains are
imposed and regulated independent of each other. Comparative analysis of the
chromatin structure and organization of the homeotic gene clusters in fly and
mammals is increasingly revealing the functional conservation of chromatin
mediated mechanisms. Here we discuss the case for interspersed boundary elements 
existing within mammalian Hox clusters along with their possible roles and
mechanisms of action. Recent studies suggest a role for factors other than the
well characterized vertebrate boundary factor CTCF, such as the GAGA binding
factor (GAF), in maintaining chromatin domains at the Hox loci. We also present
data demonstrating how such regulatory elements may be involved in organizing
higher order structure and demarcating active domains of gene expression at the
mammalian Hox clusters.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26254900  [PubMed - in process]


106. Neuropharmacology. 2015 Dec;99:328-36. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.08.006.
Epub 2015 Aug 6.

Regulation of alternative gene transcription in the striatum in response to
antidepressant drugs.

Piechota M(1), Golda S(1), Ficek J(1), Jantas D(2), Przewlocki R(3), Korostynski 
M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neuropharmacology, Institute of Pharmacology PAS,
Krakow, Poland. (2)Department of Experimental Neuroendocrinology, Institute of
Pharmacology PAS, Krakow, Poland. (3)Department of Molecular Neuropharmacology,
Institute of Pharmacology PAS, Krakow, Poland; Department of Neurobiology and
Neuropsychology, IPS, UJ, Krakow, Poland. (4)Department of Molecular
Neuropharmacology, Institute of Pharmacology PAS, Krakow, Poland. Electronic
address: michkor@if-pan.krakow.pl.

The mechanisms that control the selection of transcription initiation and
termination sites in response to pharmacological stimulation of neuronal cells
are poorly understood. We used next-generation sequencing and bioinformatics to
construct a genome-wide inventory of protein-coding and non-coding transcripts
altered by antidepressant treatment. We analyzed available ChIP-seq data to
identify mechanisms that control drug-inducible expression of alternative gene
variants in the brain. We identified 153 transcripts of various biotypes
regulated in the mouse striatum in response to tranylcypromine or mianserin (at a
0.1% FDR threshold). Five drug-responsive gene patterns are enriched in
protein-coding variants (77%), regulated by different sets of transcriptional
factors (including SRF/CREB1 and GR/CTCF) and expressed in separate cellular
compartments of the brain. We found that alterations mediated by proximal
promoters in neurons are more specific in the selection of regulated
transcriptional isoforms compared with enhancer-dependent alterations in glia.
The change in transcriptional programs, from housekeeping to inducible, provides 
cells with the resource of functionally distinct proteins. We conclude that the
regulation of drug-induced brain plasticity may occur at the level of transcripts
rather than genes. The expression of specific isoforms in response to
antidepressants may constitute a trigger that initiates the long-lasting effects 
of these drugs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26254862  [PubMed - in process]


107. Genome Biol. 2015 Aug 7;16:152. doi: 10.1186/s13059-015-0728-8.

Bipartite structure of the inactive mouse X chromosome.

Deng X(1), Ma W(2), Ramani V(2), Hill A(2), Yang F(1), Ay F(2), Berletch JB(1),
Blau CA(3,)(4), Shendure J(2), Duan Z(5,)(6), Noble WS(7,)(8), Disteche
CM(9,)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
USA. (3)Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. (4)Division of Hematology, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. (5)Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative
Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. zjduan@uw.edu.
(6)Division of Hematology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
zjduan@uw.edu. (7)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, USA. william-noble@uw.edu. (8)Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
william-noble@uw.edu. (9)Department of Pathology, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, USA. cdistech@u.washington.edu. (10)Department of Medicine, 
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. cdistech@u.washington.edu.

BACKGROUND: In mammals, one of the female X chromosomes and all imprinted genes
are expressed exclusively from a single allele in somatic cells. To evaluate
structural changes associated with allelic silencing, we have applied a recently 
developed Hi-C assay that uses DNase I for chromatin fragmentation to mouse F1
hybrid systems.
RESULTS: We find radically different conformations for the two female mouse X
chromosomes. The inactive X has two superdomains of frequent intrachromosomal
contacts separated by a boundary region. Comparison with the recently reported
two-superdomain structure of the human inactive X shows that the genomic content 
of the superdomains differs between species, but part of the boundary region is
conserved and located near the Dxz4/DXZ4 locus. In mouse, the boundary region
also contains a minisatellite, Ds-TR, and both Dxz4 and Ds-TR appear to be
anchored to the nucleolus. Genes that escape X inactivation do not cluster but
are located near the periphery of the 3D structure, as are regions enriched in
CTCF or RNA polymerase. Fewer short-range intrachromosomal contacts are detected 
for the inactive alleles of genes subject to X inactivation compared with the
active alleles and with genes that escape X inactivation. This pattern is also
evident for imprinted genes, in which more chromatin contacts are detected for
the expressed allele.
CONCLUSIONS: By applying a novel Hi-C method to map allelic chromatin contacts,
we discover a specific bipartite organization of the mouse inactive X chromosome 
that probably plays an important role in maintenance of gene silencing.

PMCID: PMC4539712
PMID: 26248554  [PubMed - in process]


108. BMC Biol. 2015 Aug 7;13:63. doi: 10.1186/s12915-015-0168-7.

Functional role of dimerization and CP190 interacting domains of CTCF protein in 
Drosophila melanogaster.

Bonchuk A(1), Maksimenko O(2), Kyrchanova O(1), Ivlieva T(1), Mogila V(1,)(3),
Deshpande G(4), Wolle D(4), Schedl P(5,)(6), Georgiev P(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of the Control of Genetic Processes, Institute of Gene Biology,
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia. (2)Laboratory of Gene Expression
Regulation in Development, Institute of Gene Biology, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Moscow, Russia. (3)Department of Biology, Nikolaev V.A. Sukhomlinsky
National University, Nikolaev, Ukraine. (4)Department of Molecular Biology,
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA. (5)Laboratory of Gene Expression
Regulation in Development, Institute of Gene Biology, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Moscow, Russia. pschedl@Princeton.EDU. (6)Department of Molecular
Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA. pschedl@Princeton.EDU.
(7)Department of the Control of Genetic Processes, Institute of Gene Biology,
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia. georgiev_p@mail.ru.

Comment in
    BMC Biol. 2015;13:71.

BACKGROUND: Insulators play a central role in gene regulation, chromosomal
architecture and genome function in higher eukaryotes. To learn more about how
insulators carry out their diverse functions, we have begun an analysis of the
Drosophila CTCF (dCTCF). CTCF is one of the few insulator proteins known to be
conserved from flies to man.
RESULTS: In the studies reported here we have focused on the identification and
characterization of two dCTCF protein interaction modules. The first mediates
dCTCF multimerization, while the second mediates dCTCF-CP190 interactions. The
multimerization domain maps in the N-terminus of the dCTCF protein and likely
mediates the formation of tetrameric complexes. The CP190 interaction module
encompasses a sequence ~200 amino acids long that spans the C-terminal and
mediates interactions with the N-terminal BTB domain of the CP190 protein.
Transgene rescue experiments showed that a dCTCF protein lacking sequences
critical for CP190 interactions was almost as effective as wild type in rescuing 
the phenotypic effects of a dCTCF null allele. The mutation did, however, affect 
CP190 recruitment to specific Drosophila insulator elements and had a modest
effect on dCTCF chromatin association. A protein lacking the N-terminal dCTCF
multimerization domain incompletely rescued the zygotic and maternal effect
lethality of the null and did not rescue the defects in Abd-B regulation evident 
in surviving adult dCTCF mutant flies. Finally, we show that elimination of
maternally contributed dCTCF at the onset of embryogenesis has quite different
effects on development and Abd-B regulation than is observed when the homozygous 
mutant animals develop in the presence of maternally derived dCTCF activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that dCTCF-CP190 interactions are less critical
for the in vivo functions of the dCTCF protein than the N-terminal dCTCF-dCTCF
interaction domain. We also show that the phenotypic consequences of dCTCF
mutations differ depending upon when and how dCTCF activity is lost.

PMCID: PMC4528719
PMID: 26248466  [PubMed - in process]


109. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Oct;35(20):3504-16. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00514-15. Epub 2015 Aug 
3.

Influence of a CTCF-Dependent Insulator on Multiple Aspects of Enhancer-Mediated 
Chromatin Organization.

Varma G(1), Rawat P(1), Jalan M(1), Vinayak M(1), Srivastava M(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi, India. (2)National Institute of
Immunology, New Delhi, India madhus@nii.res.in.

Developmental stage-specific enhancer-promoter-insulator interactions regulate
the chromatin configuration necessary for transcription at various loci and
additionally for VDJ recombination at antigen receptor loci that encode
immunoglobulins and T-cell receptors. To investigate these regulatory
interactions, we analyzed the epigenetic landscape of the murine T-cell receptor 
ß (TCRß) locus in the presence and absence of an ectopic CTCF-dependent
enhancer-blocking insulator, H19-ICR, in genetically manipulated mice. Our
analysis demonstrated the ability of the H19-ICR insulator to restrict several
aspects of enhancer-based chromatin alterations that are observed during
activation of the TCRß locus for transcription and recombination. The H19-ICR
insulator abrogated enhancer-promoter contact-dependent chromatin alterations and
additionally prevented Eß-mediated histone modifications that have been suggested
to be independent of enhancer-promoter interaction. Observed
enhancer-promoter-insulator interactions, in conjunction with the chromatin
structure of the Eß-regulated domain at the nucleosomal level, provide useful
insights regarding the activity of the regulatory elements in addition to
supporting the accessibility hypothesis of VDJ recombination. Analysis of H19-ICR
in the heterologous context of the developmentally regulated TCRß locus suggests 
that different mechanisms proposed for CTCF-dependent insulator action might be
manifested simultaneously or selectively depending on the genomic context and the
nature of enhancer activity being curtailed.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4573707
PMID: 26240285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Genes (Basel). 2015 Jul 27;6(3):734-50. doi: 10.3390/genes6030734.

Contribution of Topological Domains and Loop Formation to 3D Chromatin
Organization.

Ea V(1), Baudement MO(2), Lesne A(3,)(4), Forné T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier, UMR5535, CNRS, Université de
Montpellier, 1919 Route de Mende, 34293 Montpellier cedex 5, France.
vuthy.ea@igmm.cnrs.fr. (2)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier,
UMR5535, CNRS, Université de Montpellier, 1919 Route de Mende, 34293 Montpellier 
cedex 5, France. mbaudement@igmm.cnrs.fr. (3)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de
Montpellier, UMR5535, CNRS, Université de Montpellier, 1919 Route de Mende, 34293
Montpellier cedex 5, France. annick.lesne@lptmc.jussieu.fr. (4)Laboratoire de
Physique de la Matière Condensée, CNRS UMR 7600, UPMC, Sorbonne Universités,
75252 Paris, France. annick.lesne@lptmc.jussieu.fr. (5)Institut de Génétique
Moléculaire de Montpellier, UMR5535, CNRS, Université de Montpellier, 1919 Route 
de Mende, 34293 Montpellier cedex 5, France. thierry.forne@igmm.cnrs.fr.

Recent investigations on 3D chromatin folding revealed that the eukaryote genomes
are both highly compartmentalized and extremely dynamic. This review presents the
most recent advances in topological domains' organization of the eukaryote
genomes and discusses the relationship to chromatin loop formation. CTCF protein 
appears as a central factor of these two organization levels having either a
strong insulating role at TAD borders, or a weaker architectural role in
chromatin loop formation. TAD borders directly impact on chromatin dynamics by
restricting contacts within specific genomic portions thus confining chromatin
loop formation within TADs. We discuss how sub-TAD chromatin dynamics,
constrained into a recently described statistical helix conformation, can produce
functional interactions by contact stabilization.

PMCID: PMC4584327
PMID: 26226004  [PubMed]


111. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Aug 11;112(32):E4428-37. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1507253112. Epub 2015 Jul 27.

MIR retrotransposon sequences provide insulators to the human genome.

Wang J(1), Vicente-García C(2), Seruggia D(2), Moltó E(2), Fernandez-Miñán A(3), 
Neto A(3), Lee E(4), Gómez-Skarmeta JL(3), Montoliu L(2), Lunyak VV(4), Jordan
IK(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332;
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Centro Nacional de
Biotecnología, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), 28049
Madrid, Spain; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras
(CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), 28029 Madrid, Spain; (3)Centro
Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo CSIC-Universidad Pablo de Olavide (UPO), 41013
Sevilla, Spain; (4)Aelan Cell Technologies, Inc., San Francisco, CA 94107;
(5)School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332;
PanAmerican Bioinformatics Institute, Santa Marta, Magdalena, Colombia
king.jordan@biology.gatech.edu.

Insulators are regulatory elements that help to organize eukaryotic chromatin via
enhancer-blocking and chromatin barrier activity. Although there are several
examples of transposable element (TE)-derived insulators, the contribution of TEs
to human insulators has not been systematically explored. Mammalian-wide
interspersed repeats (MIRs) are a conserved family of TEs that have substantial
regulatory capacity and share sequence characteristics with tRNA-related
insulators. We sought to evaluate whether MIRs can serve as insulators in the
human genome. We applied a bioinformatic screen using genome sequence and
functional genomic data from CD4(+) T cells to identify a set of 1,178 predicted 
MIR insulators genome-wide. These predicted MIR insulators were computationally
tested to serve as chromatin barriers and regulators of gene expression in CD4(+)
T cells. The activity of predicted MIR insulators was experimentally validated
using in vitro and in vivo enhancer-blocking assays. MIR insulators are enriched 
around genes of the T-cell receptor pathway and reside at T-cell-specific
boundaries of repressive and active chromatin. A total of 58% of the MIR
insulators predicted here show evidence of T-cell-specific chromatin barrier and 
gene regulatory activity. MIR insulators appear to be CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)
independent and show a distinct local chromatin environment with marked peaks for
RNA Pol III and a number of histone modifications, suggesting that MIR insulators
recruit transcriptional complexes and chromatin modifying enzymes in situ to help
establish chromatin and regulatory domains in the human genome. The provisioning 
of insulators by MIRs across the human genome suggests a specific mechanism by
which TE sequences can be used to modulate gene regulatory networks.

PMCID: PMC4538669
PMID: 26216945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Haematologica. 2015 Oct;100(10):1301-10. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2015.130179. Epub 
2015 Jul 23.

Targeted sequencing identifies associations between IL7R-JAK mutations and
epigenetic modulators in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Vicente C(1), Schwab C(2), Broux M(1), Geerdens E(1), Degryse S(1), Demeyer S(1),
Lahortiga I(1), Elliott A(2), Chilton L(2), La Starza R(3), Mecucci C(3),
Vandenberghe P(4), Goulden N(5), Vora A(6), Moorman AV(2), Soulier J(7), Harrison
CJ(8), Clappier E(9), Cools J(10).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Belgium Center for the Biology of
Disease, VIB, Leuven, Belgium. (2)Leukaemia Research Cytogenetics Group, Northern
Institute for Cancer Research, Newcastle University, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK.
(3)Hematology Unit, University of Perugia, Polo Unico S.M. Misericordia, Italy.
(4)Center for Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Belgium. (5)Department of Haematology,
Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK. (6)Department of Haematology, Sheffield
Children's Hospital, Sheffield, UK. (7)U944 INSERM and Hematology Laboratory,
St-Louis Hospital, APHP, Hematology University Institute, University
Paris-Diderot, Paris, France. (8)Leukaemia Research Cytogenetics Group, Northern 
Institute for Cancer Research, Newcastle University, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK
jan.cools@cme.vib-kuleuven.be christine.harrison@newcastle.ac.uk
emmanuelle.clappier@sls.aphp.fr. (9)U944 INSERM and Hematology Laboratory,
St-Louis Hospital, APHP, Hematology University Institute, University
Paris-Diderot, Paris, France jan.cools@cme.vib-kuleuven.be
christine.harrison@newcastle.ac.uk emmanuelle.clappier@sls.aphp.fr. (10)Center
for Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Belgium Center for the Biology of Disease, VIB,
Leuven, Belgium jan.cools@cme.vib-kuleuven.be christine.harrison@newcastle.ac.uk 
emmanuelle.clappier@sls.aphp.fr.

T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia is caused by the accumulation of multiple
oncogenic lesions, including chromosomal rearrangements and mutations. To
determine the frequency and co-occurrence of mutations in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia, we performed targeted re-sequencing of 115 genes across
155 diagnostic samples (44 adult and 111 childhood cases). NOTCH1 and CDKN2A/B
were mutated/deleted in more than half of the cases, while an additional 37 genes
were mutated/deleted in 4% to 20% of cases. We found that IL7R-JAK pathway genes 
were mutated in 27.7% of cases, with JAK3 mutations being the most frequent event
in this group. Copy number variations were also detected, including deletions of 
CREBBP or CTCF and duplication of MYB. FLT3 mutations were rare, but a novel
extracellular mutation in FLT3 was detected and confirmed to be transforming.
Furthermore, we identified complex patterns of pairwise associations, including a
significant association between mutations in IL7R-JAK genes and epigenetic
regulators (WT1, PRC2, PHF6). Our analyses showed that IL7R-JAK genetic lesions
did not confer adverse prognosis in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia cases
enrolled in the UK ALL2003 trial. Overall, these results identify
interconnections between the T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia genome and
disease biology, and suggest a potential clinical application for JAK inhibitors 
in a significant proportion of patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMCID: PMC4591762
PMID: 26206799  [PubMed - in process]


113. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 17;10(7):e0132977. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132977.
eCollection 2015.

Different Effects of BORIS/CTCFL on Stemness Gene Expression, Sphere Formation
and Cell Survival in Epithelial Cancer Stem Cells.

Alberti L(1), Losi L(2), Leyvraz S(3), Benhattar J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena,
Italy. (3)Department of Oncology, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne,
Switzerland. (4)Institute of Pathology, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne,
Switzerland; Biopath Lab, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Cancer stem cells are cancer cells characterized by stem cell properties and
represent a small population of tumor cells that drives tumor development,
progression, metastasis and drug resistance. To date, the molecular mechanisms
that generate and regulate cancer stem cells are not well defined. BORIS (Brother
of Regulator of Imprinted Sites) or CTCFL (CTCF-like) is a DNA-binding protein
that is expressed in normal tissues only in germ cells and is re-activated in
tumors. Recent evidences have highlighted the correlation of BORIS/CTCFL
expression with poor overall survival of different cancer patients. We have
previously shown an association of BORIS-expressing cells with stemness gene
expression in embryonic cancer cells. Here, we studied the role of BORIS in
epithelial tumor cells. Using BORIS-molecular beacon that was already validated, 
we were able to show the presence of BORIS mRNA in cancer stem cell-enriched
populations (side population and spheres) of cervical, colon and breast tumor
cells. BORIS silencing studies showed a decrease of sphere formation capacity in 
breast and colon tumor cells. Importantly, BORIS-silencing led to down-regulation
of hTERT, stem cell (NANOG, OCT4, SOX2 and BMI1) and cancer stem cell markers
(ABCG2, CD44 and ALDH1) genes. Conversely, BORIS-induction led to up-regulation
of the same genes. These phenotypes were observed in cervical, colon and invasive
breast tumor cells. However, a completely different behavior was observed in the 
non-invasive breast tumor cells (MCF7). Indeed, these cells acquired an
epithelial mesenchymal transition phenotype after BORIS silencing. Our results
demonstrate that BORIS is associated with cancer stem cell-enriched populations
of several epithelial tumor cells and the different phenotypes depend on the
origin of tumor cells.

PMCID: PMC4506091
PMID: 26185996  [PubMed - in process]


114. Genes (Basel). 2015 Jul 13;6(3):543-58. doi: 10.3390/genes6030543.

Chromatin Dynamics in the Regulation of CFTR Expression.

Gosalia N(1,)(2), Harris A(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie Children's Research Center, Chicago,
IL 60614, USA. nehalgosalia2014@u.northwestern.edu. (2)Department of Pediatrics, 
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
nehalgosalia2014@u.northwestern.edu. (3)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie
Children's Research Center, Chicago, IL 60614, USA. ann-harris@northwestern.edu. 
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL 60611, USA. ann-harris@northwestern.edu.

The contribution of chromatin dynamics to the regulation of human
disease-associated loci such as the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
regulator (CFTR) gene has been the focus of intensive experimentation for many
years. Recent technological advances in the analysis of transcriptional
mechanisms across the entire human genome have greatly facilitated these studies.
In this review we describe the complex machinery of tissue-specific regulation of
CFTR expression, and put earlier observations in context by incorporating them
into datasets generated by the most recent genomics methods. Though the gene
promoter is required for CFTR expression, cell-type specific regulatory elements 
are located elsewhere in the gene and in flanking intergenic regions. Probably
within its own topological domain established by the architectural proteins CTCF 
and cohesin, the CFTR locus utilizes chromatin dynamics to remodel nucleosomes,
recruit cell-selective transcription factors, and activate intronic enhancers.
These cis-acting elements are then brought to the gene promoter by chromatin
looping mechanisms, which establish long-range interactions across the locus.
Despite its complexity, the CFTR locus provides a paradigm for elucidating the
critical role of chromatin dynamics in the transcription of individual human
genes.

PMCID: PMC4584316
PMID: 26184320  [PubMed]


115. Epigenomics. 2015 Dec;7(8):1259-74. doi: 10.2217/epi.15.60. Epub 2015 Jul 16.

Associative DNA methylation changes in children with prenatal alcohol exposure.

Laufer BI(1), Kapalanga J(2), Castellani CA(1), Diehl EJ(1), Yan L(3), Singh
SM(1,)(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Unit, Department of Biology, The University of Western
Ontario, London, ON, N6A 5B7, Canada. (2)Department of Pediatrics, The University
of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada. (3)EpigenDx Inc., Hopkinton, MA 01748,
USA. (4)Program in Neuroscience, The University of Western Ontario, London, ON,
Canada.

AIM: Prenatal alcohol exposure (PAE) can cause fetal alcohol spectrum disorders
(FASD). Previously, we assessed PAE in brain tissue from mouse models, however
whether these changes are present in humans remains unknown.
MATERIALS & METHODS: In this report, we show some identical changes in DNA
methylation in the buccal swabs of six children with FASD using the 450K array.
RESULTS: The changes occur in genes related to protocadherins, glutamatergic
synapses, and hippo signaling. The results were found to be similar in another
heterogeneous replication group of six FASD children.
CONCLUSION: The replicated results suggest that children born with FASD have
unique DNA methylation defects that can be influenced by sex and medication
exposure. Ultimately, with future clinical development, assessment of DNA
methylation from buccal swabs can provide a novel strategy for the diagnosis of
FASD.

PMID: 26178076  [PubMed - in process]


116. Chromosoma. 2015 Jul 15. [Epub ahead of print]

Grabbing the genome by the NADs.

Matheson TD(1), Kaufman PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts 
Medical School, Worcester, MA, 01605, USA.

The regions of the genome that interact frequently with the nucleolus have been
termed nucleolar-associated domains (NADs). Deep sequencing and DNA-fluorescence 
in situ hybridization (FISH) experiments have revealed that these domains are
enriched for repetitive elements, regions of the inactive X chromosome (Xi), and 
several RNA polymerase III-transcribed genes. NADs are often marked by chromatin 
modifications characteristic of heterochromatin, including H3K27me3, H3K9me3, and
H4K20me3, and artificial targeting of genes to this area is correlated with
reduced expression. It has therefore been hypothesized that NAD localization to
the nucleolar periphery contributes to the establishment and/or maintenance of
heterochromatic silencing. Recently published studies from several multicellular 
eukaryotes have begun to reveal the trans-acting factors involved in NAD
localization, including the insulator protein CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF),
chromatin assembly factor (CAF)-1 subunit p150, several nucleolar proteins, and
two long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs). The mechanisms by which these factors
coordinate with one another in regulating NAD localization and/or silencing are
still unknown. This review will summarize recently published studies, discuss
where additional research is required, and speculate about the mechanistic and
functional implications of genome organization around the nucleolus.

PMCID: PMC4714962 [Available on 2017-01-15]
PMID: 26174338  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


117. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Oct;35(19):3436-45. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00381-15. Epub 2015 Jul 
13.

Expression of the CTCFL Gene during Mouse Embryogenesis Causes Growth
Retardation, Postnatal Lethality, and Dysregulation of the Transforming Growth
Factor ß Pathway.

Sati L(1), Zeiss C(2), Yekkala K(2), Demir R(1), McGrath J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Akdeniz University School of Medicine,
Antalya, Turkey. (2)Department of Comparative Medicine, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA. (3)Department of Comparative Medicine,
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA
james.mcgrath@yale.edu.

CTCFL, a paralog of CTCF, also known as BORIS (brother of regulator of imprinted 
sites), is a testis-expressed gene whose function is largely unknown. Its product
is a cancer testis antigen (CTA), and it is often expressed in tumor cells and
also seen in two benign human vascular malformations, juvenile angiofibromas and 
infantile hemangiomas. To understand the function of Ctcfl, we created
tetracycline-inducible Ctcfl transgenic mice. We show that Ctcfl expression
during embryogenesis results in growth retardation, eye malformations, multiorgan
pathologies, vascular defects, and neonatal death. This phenotype resembles prior
mouse models that perturb the transforming growth factor ß (TGFB) pathway.
Embryonic stem (ES) cells with the Ctcfl transgene reproduce the phenotype in ES 
cell-tetraploid chimeras. Transcriptome sequencing of the Ctcfl ES cells revealed
14 genes deregulated by Ctcfl expression. Bioinformatic analysis revealed the
TGFB pathway as most affected by embryonic Ctcfl expression. Understanding the
consequence of Ctcfl expression in nontesticular cells and elucidating downstream
targets of Ctcfl could explain the role of its product as a CTA and its
involvement in two, if not more, human vascular malformations.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4561735
PMID: 26169830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Am J Hum Genet. 2015 Aug 6;97(2):216-27. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.05.019. Epub
2015 Jul 9.

Symmetrical Dose-Dependent DNA-Methylation Profiles in Children with Deletion or 
Duplication of 7q11.23.

Strong E(1), Butcher DT(2), Singhania R(3), Mervis CB(4), Morris CA(5), De
Carvalho D(6), Weksberg R(7), Osborne LR(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, 
Canada. (2)Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
ON M5G 0A4, Canada. (3)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health
Network, Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada. (4)Department of Psychological and Brain
Sciences, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292, USA. (5)Department of
Pediatrics, University of Nevada School of Medicine, Las Vegas, NV 89102, USA.
(6)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, ON M5G
1L7, Canada; Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, ON M5G 1L7,
Canada. (7)Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
ON M5G 0A4, Canada; Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada; Department of Pediatrics, University of
Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada. (8)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada; Department of Medicine, University of
Toronto, ON M5G 2C4, Canada. Electronic address: lucy.osborne@utoronto.ca.

Epigenetic dysfunction has been implicated in a growing list of disorders that
include cancer, neurodevelopmental disorders, and neurodegeneration. Williams
syndrome (WS) and 7q11.23 duplication syndrome (Dup7) are rare neurodevelopmental
disorders with broad phenotypic spectra caused by deletion and duplication,
respectively, of a 1.5-Mb region that includes several genes with a role in
epigenetic regulation. We have identified striking differences in DNA methylation
across the genome between blood cells from children with WS or Dup7 and blood
cells from typically developing (TD) children. Notably, regions that were
differentially methylated in both WS and Dup7 displayed a significant and
symmetrical gene-dose-dependent effect, such that WS typically showed increased
and Dup7 showed decreased DNA methylation. Differentially methylated genes were
significantly enriched with genes in pathways involved in neurodevelopment,
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) candidate genes, and imprinted genes. Using
alignment with ENCODE data, we also found the differentially methylated regions
to be enriched with CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) binding sites. These findings
suggest that gene(s) within 7q11.23 alter DNA methylation at specific sites
across the genome and result in dose-dependent DNA-methylation profiles in WS and
Dup7. Given the extent of DNA-methylation changes and the potential impact on
CTCF binding and chromatin regulation, epigenetic mechanisms most likely
contribute to the complex neurological phenotypes of WS and Dup7. Our findings
highlight the importance of DNA methylation in the pathogenesis of WS and Dup7
and provide molecular mechanisms that are potentially shared by WS, Dup7, and
ASD.

Copyright © 2015 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4573259
PMID: 26166478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Viruses. 2015 Jul 6;7(7):3574-85. doi: 10.3390/v7072791.

Targeting CTCF to Control Virus Gene Expression: A Common Theme amongst Diverse
DNA Viruses.

Pentland I(1), Parish JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Cancer Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham,
B15 2TT, UK. ixp370@bham.ac.uk. (2)School of Cancer Sciences, University of
Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK. j.l.parish@bham.ac.uk.

All viruses target host cell factors for successful life cycle completion.
Transcriptional control of DNA viruses by host cell factors is important in the
temporal and spatial regulation of virus gene expression. Many of these factors
are recruited to enhance virus gene expression and thereby increase virus
production, but host cell factors can also restrict virus gene expression and
productivity of infection. CCCTC binding factor (CTCF) is a host cell DNA binding
protein important for the regulation of genomic chromatin boundaries,
transcriptional control and enhancer element usage. CTCF also functions in RNA
polymerase II regulation and in doing so can influence co-transcriptional
splicing events. Several DNA viruses, including Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus (KSHV), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and human papillomavirus (HPV)
utilize CTCF to control virus gene expression and many studies have highlighted a
role for CTCF in the persistence of these diverse oncogenic viruses. CTCF can
both enhance and repress virus gene expression and in some cases CTCF increases
the complexity of alternatively spliced transcripts. This review article will
discuss the function of CTCF in the life cycle of DNA viruses in the context of
known host cell CTCF functions.

PMCID: PMC4517120
PMID: 26154016  [PubMed - in process]


120. Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Jul 2;17(1):101-15. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.05.015.

Quantification of Retinogenesis in 3D Cultures Reveals Epigenetic Memory and
Higher Efficiency in iPSCs Derived from Rod Photoreceptors.

Hiler D(1), Chen X(2), Hazen J(3), Kupriyanov S(4), Carroll PA(5), Qu C(2), Xu
B(2), Johnson D(6), Griffiths L(1), Frase S(7), Rodriguez AR(4), Martin G(4),
Zhang J(1), Jeon J(1), Fan Y(2), Finkelstein D(2), Eisenman RN(5), Baldwin K(3), 
Dyer MA(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA. (2)Department of Computational Biology, St.
Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA. (3)Department of Cell 
Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (4)Mouse
Genetics Core Facility, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. 
(5)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA 98108, USA. (6)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Tennessee Health
Science Center, Memphis, TN 38163, USA. (7)Cell and Tissue Imaging Shared
Resource, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.
(8)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA; Department of Ophthalmology, University of
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN 38163, USA; Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA. Electronic address:
michael.dyer@stjude.org.

Cell-based therapies to treat retinal degeneration are now being tested in
clinical trials. However, it is not known whether the source of stem cells is
important for the production of differentiated cells suitable for
transplantation. To test this, we generated induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSCs) from murine rod photoreceptors (r-iPSCs) and scored their ability to make
retinae by using a standardized quantitative protocol called STEM-RET. We
discovered that r-iPSCs more efficiently produced differentiated retinae than did
embryonic stem cells (ESCs) or fibroblast-derived iPSCs (f-iPSCs). Retinae
derived from f-iPSCs had fewer amacrine cells and other inner nuclear layer
cells. Integrated epigenetic analysis showed that DNA methylation contributes to 
the defects in f-iPSC retinogenesis and that rod-specific CTCF insulator
protein-binding sites may promote r-iPSC retinogenesis. Together, our data
suggest that the source of stem cells is important for producing retinal neurons 
in three-dimensional (3D) organ cultures.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4547539 [Available on 2016-07-02]
PMID: 26140606  [PubMed - in process]


121. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Jun 10;14(2):6094-100. doi: 10.4238/2015.June.8.7.

BORIS and CTCF are overexpressed in squamous intraepithelial lesions and cervical
cancer.

Velázquez-Hernández N(1), Reyes-Romero MA(2), Barragán-Hernández M(3),
Guerrero-Romero F(4), Rodríguez-Moran M(4), Aguilar-Durán M(1), Lazalde Medina
B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Scientific Research Institute, Juarez University of Durango State, Durango,
Mexico. (2)Department of Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Nutrition,
Juarez University of Durango State, Durango, Mexico. (3)Clinic of Dysplasia,
General Hospital of the Ministry of Health of Durango State, Durango, Mexico.
(4)Biomedical Research Unit, Mexican Institute of Social Security, Durango,
Mexico. (5)Biomedical Research Unit, Mexican Institute of Social Security,
Durango, Mexico brissial@hotmail.com.

We investigated the expression of Brother of Regulator of Imprinted Sites (BORIS)
and CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) in squamous intraepithelial lesions and cervical 
cancer. To analyze BORIS and CTCF expression, an endocervical cytobrush sample
was taken for total RNA isolation. CTCF and BORIS mRNA was quantified from total 
RNA using quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. A total
of 71 samples were collected and classified according to the Bethesda
Classification of squamous intraepithelial lesions. BORIS expression was observed
in 9 (12.7%) samples; of these, 5.3, 5.9, 14.8, and 37.5% in the groups that were
cytology negative for intraepithelial lesion or malignancy, low-grade squamous
intraepithelial lesions (LSIL), high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions
(HSIL), and invasive cervical carcinoma, respectively. The expression level of
BORIS was significantly higher in the group with invasive cervical carcinoma as
compared with the groups negative for intraepithelial lesion or malignancy, LSIL,
and HSIL (P < 0.0005). CTCF mRNA was expressed in all samples. CTCF expression
was significantly higher in carcinoma groups compared with LSIL, HSIL, and
negative for intraepithelial lesion or malignancy groups. We found that BORIS and
CTCF expressions in the LSIL and invasive cervical carcinoma groups were higher
than expression in cytological normal samples. Additional studies should be
conducted to examine the function of transcription factors during different
stages of the transformation of cervical cancer cells.

PMID: 26125810  [PubMed - in process]


122. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(16):2677-87. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1053670.

CTCF-dependent co-localization of canonical Smad signaling factors at
architectural protein binding sites in D. melanogaster.

Van Bortle K(1), Peterson AJ, Takenaka N, O'Connor MB, Corces VG.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biology ; Emory University , Atlanta , GA USA.

The transforming growth factor ß (TGF-ß) and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)
pathways transduce extracellular signals into tissue-specific transcriptional
responses. During this process, signaling effector Smad proteins translocate into
the nucleus to direct changes in transcription, but how and where they localize
to DNA remain important questions. We have mapped Drosophila TGF-ß signaling
factors Mad, dSmad2, Medea, and Schnurri genome-wide in Kc cells and find that
numerous sites for these factors overlap with the architectural protein CTCF.
Depletion of CTCF by RNAi results in the disappearance of a subset of Smad sites,
suggesting Smad proteins localize to CTCF binding sites in a CTCF-dependent
manner. Sensitive Smad binding sites are enriched at low occupancy CTCF peaks
within topological domains, rather than at the physical domain boundaries where
CTCF may function as an insulator. In response to Decapentaplegic, CTCF binding
is not significantly altered, whereas Mad, Medea, and Schnurri are redirected
from CTCF to non-CTCF binding sites. These results suggest that CTCF participates
in the recruitment of Smad proteins to a subset of genomic sites and in the
redistribution of these proteins in response to BMP signaling.

PMCID: PMC4613847 [Available on 2016-06-30]
PMID: 26125535  [PubMed - in process]


123. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jul 7;112(27):E3535-44. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1504232112. Epub 2015 Jun 19.

Genome-wide binding and mechanistic analyses of Smchd1-mediated epigenetic
regulation.

Chen K(1), Hu J(2), Moore DL(1), Liu R(3), Kessans SA(4), Breslin K(3), Lucet
IS(1), Keniry A(1), Leong HS(1), Parish CL(5), Hilton DJ(1), Lemmers RJ(6), van
der Maarel SM(6), Czabotar PE(1), Dobson RC(7), Ritchie ME(1), Kay GF(8), Murphy 
JM(1), Blewitt ME(9).

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, VIC 3052, 
Australia; University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia; (2)Queensland
Institute of Medical Research Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD
4006, Australia; Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation, School of
Biomolecular Sciences, Faculty of Health, Queensland University of Technology,
Brisbane, QLD 4000, Australia; (3)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical 
Research, Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia; (4)Biomolecular Interaction Centre and 
School of Biological Sciences, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, Private
Bag 4800, New Zealand; (5)The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health,
Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia; (6)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden
University Medical Center, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands; (7)Biomolecular
Interaction Centre and School of Biological Sciences, University of Canterbury,
Christchurch, Private Bag 4800, New Zealand; Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Bio21 Institute, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia. (8)Queensland
Institute of Medical Research Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD
4006, Australia; (9)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia; University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010,
Australia; blewitt@wehi.edu.au.

Structural maintenance of chromosomes flexible hinge domain containing 1 (Smchd1)
is an epigenetic repressor with described roles in X inactivation and genomic
imprinting, but Smchd1 is also critically involved in the pathogenesis of
facioscapulohumeral dystrophy. The underlying molecular mechanism by which Smchd1
functions in these instances remains unknown. Our genome-wide transcriptional and
epigenetic analyses show that Smchd1 binds cis-regulatory elements, many of which
coincide with CCCTC-binding factor (Ctcf) binding sites, for example, the
clustered protocadherin (Pcdh) genes, where we show Smchd1 and Ctcf act in
opposing ways. We provide biochemical and biophysical evidence that
Smchd1-chromatin interactions are established through the homodimeric hinge
domain of Smchd1 and, intriguingly, that the hinge domain also has the capacity
to bind DNA and RNA. Our results suggest Smchd1 imparts epigenetic regulation via
physical association with chromatin, which may antagonize Ctcf-facilitated
chromatin interactions, resulting in coordinated transcriptional control.

PMCID: PMC4500281
PMID: 26091879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Elife. 2015 Jun 16;4:e09225. doi: 10.7554/eLife.09225.

A simple method for generating high-resolution maps of genome-wide protein
binding.

Skene PJ(1), Henikoff S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, United States.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and its derivatives are the main techniques 
used to determine transcription factor binding sites. However, conventional ChIP 
with sequencing (ChIP-seq) has problems with poor resolution, and newer
techniques require significant experimental alterations and complex
bioinformatics. Previously, we have used a new crosslinking ChIP-seq protocol
(X-ChIP-seq) to perform high-resolution mapping of RNA Polymerase II (Skene et
al., 2014). Here, we build upon this work and compare X-ChIP-seq to existing
methodologies. By using micrococcal nuclease, which has both endo- and
exo-nuclease activity, to fragment the chromatin and thereby generate precise
protein-DNA footprints, high-resolution X-ChIP-seq achieves single base-pair
resolution of transcription factor binding. A significant advantage of this
protocol is the minimal alteration to the conventional ChIP-seq workflow and
simple bioinformatic processing.

PMCID: PMC4480131
PMID: 26079792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Aug;1849(8):955-65. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.05.011.
Epub 2015 Jun 14.

A novel chromatin insulator regulates the chicken folate receptor gene from the
influence of nearby constitutive heterochromatin and the ß-globin locus.

González-Buendía E(1), Escamilla-Del-Arenal M(2), Pérez-Molina R(1), Tena JJ(3), 
Guerrero G(1), Suaste-Olmos F(1), Ayala-Ortega E(1), Gómez-Skarmeta JL(3),
Recillas-Targa F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Departamento de Genética Molecular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad de México, D.F., Mexico.
(2)Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Departamento de Genética Molecular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad de México, D.F., Mexico;
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Mortimer B. Zuckerman Mind, 
Brain, and Behavior Institute, Columbia University, NY, USA. (3)Centro Andaluz de
Biología del Desarrollo, CSIC-Universidad Pablo de Olavide, Campus UPO, Sevilla, 
Spain. (4)Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Departamento de Genética Molecular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad de México, D.F., Mexico.
Electronic address: frecilla@ifc.unam.mx.

The three-dimensional architecture of genomes provides new insights about genome 
organization and function, but many aspects remain unsolved at the local genomic 
scale. Here we investigate the regulation of two erythroid-specific loci, a
folate receptor gene (FOLR1) and the ß-globin gene cluster, which are separated
by 16kb of constitutive heterochromatin. We found that in early erythroid
differentiation the FOLR1 gene presents a permissive chromatin configuration that
allows its expression. Once the transition to the next differentiation state
occurs, the heterochromatin spreads into the FOLR1 domain, concomitant with the
dissociation of CTCF from a novel binding site, thereby resulting in irreversible
silencing of the FOLR1 gene. We demonstrate that the sequences surrounding the
CTCF-binding site possess classical insulator properties in vitro and in vivo. In
contrast, the chicken cHS4 ß-globin insulator present on the other side of the
heterochromatic segment is in a constitutive open chromatin configuration, with
CTCF constantly bound from the early stages of erythroid differentiation.
Therefore, this study demonstrates that the 16kb of constitutive heterochromatin 
contributes to silencing of the FOLR1 gene during erythroid differentiation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26079690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Proteins. 2015 Sep;83(9):1604-15. doi: 10.1002/prot.24845. Epub 2015 Jul 1.

A multiscale approach to simulating the conformational properties of unbound
multi-C2H2 zinc finger proteins.

Liu L(1,)(2), Wade RC(2,)(3,)(4), Heermann DW(1,)(2,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Theoretical Physics Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany. 
(2)Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing Heidelberg University,
Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Molecular and Cellular Modeling Group, Heidelberg
Institute for Theoretical Studies, Heidelberg, Germany. (4)Center for Molecular
Biology (ZMBH), DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Shanghai Institute of Biological Sciences Chinese Academy of Science,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

The conformational properties of unbound multi-Cys2 His2 (mC2H2) zinc finger
proteins, in which zinc finger domains are connected by flexible linkers, are
studied by a multiscale approach. Three methods on different length scales are
utilized. First, atomic detail molecular dynamics simulations of one zinc finger 
and its adjacent flexible linker confirmed that the zinc finger is more rigid
than the flexible linker. Second, the end-to-end distance distributions of mC2H2 
zinc finger proteins are computed using an efficient atomistic pivoting
algorithm, which only takes excluded volume interactions into consideration. The 
end-to-end distance distribution gradually changes its profile, from left-tailed 
to right-tailed, as the number of zinc fingers increases. This is explained by
using a worm-like chain model. For proteins of a few zinc fingers, an effective
bending constraint favors an extended conformation. Only for proteins containing 
more than nine zinc fingers, is a somewhat compacted conformation preferred.
Third, a mesoscale model is modified to study both the local and the global
conformational properties of multi-C2H2 zinc finger proteins. Simulations of the 
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), an important mC2H2 zinc finger protein for genome
spatial organization, are presented.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26062035  [PubMed - in process]


127. Nat Genet. 2015 Jul;47(7):818-21. doi: 10.1038/ng.3335. Epub 2015 Jun 8.

CTCF/cohesin-binding sites are frequently mutated in cancer.

Katainen R(1), Dave K(2), Pitkänen E(1), Palin K(1), Kivioja T(3), Välimäki N(1),
Gylfe AE(1), Ristolainen H(1), Hänninen UA(1), Cajuso T(1), Kondelin J(1),
Tanskanen T(1), Mecklin JP(4), Järvinen H(5), Renkonen-Sinisalo L(6), Lepistö
A(5), Kaasinen E(1), Kilpivaara O(1), Tuupanen S(1), Enge M(2), Taipale J(7),
Aaltonen LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Genome-Scale Biology Research Program, Research Programs Unit, University
of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. [2] Department of Medical and Clinical Genetics, 
Medicum, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (2)Department of Biosciences 
and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Genome-Scale Biology 
Research Program, Research Programs Unit, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland. (4)Department of Surgery, Jyväskylä Central Hospital, University of
Eastern Finland, Jyväskylä, Finland. (5)Department of Surgery, Helsinki
University Central Hospital, Hospital District of Helsinki and Uusimaa, Helsinki,
Finland. (6)1] Genome-Scale Biology Research Program, Research Programs Unit,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. [2] Department of Surgery, Helsinki
University Central Hospital, Hospital District of Helsinki and Uusimaa, Helsinki,
Finland. (7)1] Genome-Scale Biology Research Program, Research Programs Unit,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. [2] Department of Biosciences and
Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Cohesin is present in almost all active enhancer regions, where it is associated 
with transcription factors. Cohesin frequently colocalizes with CTCF
(CCCTC-binding factor), affecting genomic stability, expression and epigenetic
homeostasis. Cohesin subunits are mutated in cancer, but CTCF/cohesin-binding
sites (CBSs) in DNA have not been examined for mutations. Here we report frequent
mutations at CBSs in cancers displaying a mutational signature where mutations in
AT base pairs predominate. Integration of whole-genome sequencing data from 213 
colorectal cancer (CRC) samples and chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing
(ChIP-exo) data identified frequent point mutations at CBSs. In contrast, CRCs
showing an ultramutator phenotype caused by defects in the exonuclease domain of 
DNA polymerase <U+025B> (POLE) displayed significantly fewer mutations at and adjacent
to CBSs. Analysis of public data showed that multiple cancer types accumulate CBS
mutations. CBSs are a major mutational hotspot in the noncoding cancer genome.

PMID: 26053496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Exp Mol Med. 2015 Jun 5;47:e166. doi: 10.1038/emm.2015.33.

CTCF as a multifunctional protein in genome regulation and gene expression.

Kim S(1), Yu NK(1), Kaang BK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Korea.

CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a highly conserved zinc finger protein and is best
known as a transcription factor. It can function as a transcriptional activator, 
a repressor or an insulator protein, blocking the communication between enhancers
and promoters. CTCF can also recruit other transcription factors while bound to
chromatin domain boundaries. The three-dimensional organization of the eukaryotic
genome dictates its function, and CTCF serves as one of the core architectural
proteins that help establish this organization. The mapping of CTCF-binding sites
in diverse species has revealed that the genome is covered with CTCF-binding
sites. Here we briefly describe the diverse roles of CTCF that contribute to
genome organization and gene expression.

PMCID: PMC4491725
PMID: 26045254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jun 16;112(24):7542-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1505463112. Epub 2015 Jun 1.

Evolutionary comparison reveals that diverging CTCF sites are signatures of
ancestral topological associating domains borders.

Gómez-Marín C(1), Tena JJ(1), Acemel RD(1), López-Mayorga M(1), Naranjo S(1), de 
la Calle-Mustienes E(1), Maeso I(1), Beccari L(2), Aneas I(3), Vielmas E(4),
Bovolenta P(2), Nobrega MA(3), Carvajal J(1), Gómez-Skarmeta JL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas/Universidad Pablo de Olavide, Seville 41013, Spain; (2)Centro de
Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas/Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid 28049, Spain; Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras, 28049 Madrid, Spain;
(3)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, IL 60637; (4)Division of 
Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125. (5)Centro
Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas/Universidad Pablo de Olavide, Seville 41013, Spain; jlgomska@upo.es.

Increasing evidence in the last years indicates that the vast amount of
regulatory information contained in mammalian genomes is organized in precise 3D 
chromatin structures. However, the impact of this spatial chromatin organization 
on gene expression and its degree of evolutionary conservation is still poorly
understood. The Six homeobox genes are essential developmental regulators
organized in gene clusters conserved during evolution. Here, we reveal that the
Six clusters share a deeply evolutionarily conserved 3D chromatin organization
that predates the Cambrian explosion. This chromatin architecture generates two
largely independent regulatory landscapes (RLs) contained in two adjacent
topological associating domains (TADs). By disrupting the conserved TAD border in
one of the zebrafish Six clusters, we demonstrate that this border is critical
for preventing competition between promoters and enhancers located in separated
RLs, thereby generating different expression patterns in genes located in close
genomic proximity. Moreover, evolutionary comparison of Six-associated TAD
borders reveals the presence of CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) sites with diverging 
orientations in all studied deuterostomes. Genome-wide examination of mammalian
HiC data reveals that this conserved CTCF configuration is a general signature of
TAD borders, underscoring that common organizational principles underlie TAD
compartmentalization in deuterostome evolution.

PMCID: PMC4475986
PMID: 26034287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Bioinformatics. 2015 Oct 1;31(19):3092-8. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv336.
Epub 2015 Jun 1.

Mango: a bias-correcting ChIA-PET analysis pipeline.

Phanstiel DH(1), Boyle AP(2), Heidari N(1), Snyder MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305 and. (2)Department of Computational Medicine & Bioinformatics, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

MOTIVATION: Chromatin Interaction Analysis by Paired-End Tag sequencing
(ChIA-PET) is an established method for detecting genome-wide looping
interactions at high resolution. Current ChIA-PET analysis software packages
either fail to correct for non-specific interactions due to genomic proximity or 
only address a fraction of the steps required for data processing. We present
Mango, a complete ChIA-PET data analysis pipeline that provides statistical
confidence estimates for interactions and corrects for major sources of bias
including differential peak enrichment and genomic proximity.
RESULTS: Comparison to the existing software packages, ChIA-PET Tool and ChiaSig 
revealed that Mango interactions exhibit much better agreement with
high-resolution Hi-C data. Importantly, Mango executes all steps required for
processing ChIA-PET datasets, whereas ChiaSig only completes 20% of the required 
steps. Application of Mango to multiple available ChIA-PET datasets permitted the
independent rediscovery of known trends in chromatin loops including enrichment
of CTCF, RAD21, SMC3 and ZNF143 at the anchor regions of interactions and strong 
bias for convergent CTCF motifs.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: Mango is open source and distributed through
github at https://github.com/dphansti/mango.
CONTACT: mpsnyder@standford.edu
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4592333 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26034063  [PubMed - in process]


131. Cell Biol Int. 2015 Nov;39(11):1234-41. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10496. Epub 2015 Jul 8.

Disruption of human vigilin impairs chromosome condensation and segregation.

Wei L(1), Xie X(1), Li J(1), Li R(1), Shen W(1), Duan S(1), Zhao R(1), Yang W(1),
Liu Q(1), Fu Q(1), Qin Y(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, West China School of
Preclinical and Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610041, Sichuan, 
China. (2)Sichuan University "985 Project-Science and Technology Innovation
Platform for Novel Drug Development", Chengdu, 610041, Sichuan, China.

Appropriate packaging and condensation are critical for eukaryotic chromatin's
accommodation and separation during cell division. Human vigilin, a
multi-KH-domain nucleic acid-binding protein, is associated with alpha satellites
of centromeres. DDP1, a vigilin's homolog, is implicated with chromatin
condensation and segregation. The expression of vigilin was previously reported
to elevate in highly proliferating tissues and increased in a subset of
hepatocellular carcinoma patients. Other studies showed that vigilin interacts
with CTCF, contributes to regulation of imprinted genes Igf2/H19, and colocalizes
with HP1a on heterochromatic satellite 2 and ß-satellite repeats. These studies
indicate that human vigilin might be involved in chromatin remodeling and regular
cell growth. To investigate the potential role of human vigilin in cell cycle,
the correlations between vigilin and chromosomal condensation and segregation
were studied. Depletion of human vigilin by RNA interference in HepG2 cells
resulted in chromosome undercondensation and various chromosomal defects during
mitotic phase, including chromosome misalignments, lagging chromosomes, and
chromosome bridges. Aberrant polyploid nucleus in telophase was also observed.
Unlike the abnormal staining pattern of chromosomes, the shape of spindle was
normal. Furthermore, the chromatin showed a greater sensitivity to MNase
digestion. Collectively, our findings show that human vigilin apparently
participates in chromatin condensation and segregation.

© 2015 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 26032007  [PubMed - in process]


132. Dongwuxue Yanjiu. 2015 May 18;36(3):142-51.

Selective recruitment of host factors by HSV-1 replication centers.

Lang FC(1), Li X(1), Vladmirova O(2), Li ZR(1), Chen GJ(3), Xiao Y(3), Li LH(3), 
Lu DF(1), Han HB(4), Zhou JM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of Chinese
Academy of Sciences & Yunnan Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Kunming Yunnan 650223, China;University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China. (2)The Wistar Institute, Gene Expression and 
Regulation Program, Philadelphia PA 19104, USA. (3)Key Laboratory of Animal
Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of Chinese Academy of Sciences & Yunnan
Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming
Yunnan 650223, China. (4)Biology & Chemistry Engineering College, Panzhihua
University, Panzhihua Sichuan 617000, China. (5)Key Laboratory of Animal Models
and Human Disease Mechanisms of Chinese Academy of Sciences & Yunnan Province,
Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming Yunnan 650223,
China. zhoujm@mail.kiz.ac.cn.

Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) enters productive infection after infecting
epithelial cells, where it controls the host nucleus to make viral proteins,
starts viral DNA synthesis and assembles infectious virions. In this process,
replicating viral genomes are organized into replication centers to facilitate
viral growth. HSV-1 is known to use host factors, including host chromatin and
host transcription regulators, to transcribe its genes; however, the invading
virus also encounters host defense and stress responses to inhibit viral growth. 
Recently, we found that HSV-1 replication centers recruit host factor CTCF but
exclude <U+03B3>H2A.X. Thus, HSV-1 replication centers may selectively recruit cellular 
factors needed for viral growth, while excluding host factors that are
deleterious for viral transcription or replication. Here we report that the viral
replication centers selectively excluded modified histone H3, including
heterochromatin mark H3K9me3, H3S10P and active chromatin mark H3K4me3, but not
unmodified H3. We found a dynamic association between the viral replication
centers and host RNA polymerase II. The centers also recruited components of the 
DNA damage response pathway, including 53BP1, BRCA1 and host antiviral protein
SP100. Importantly, we found that ATM kinase was needed for the recruitment of
CTCF to the viral centers. These results suggest that the HSV-1 replication
centers took advantage of host signaling pathways to actively recruit or exclude 
host factors to benefit viral growth.

PMID: 26018857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Prostate. 2015 Sep;75(12):1264-76. doi: 10.1002/pros.23008. Epub 2015 May 25.

Systematic enrichment analysis of potentially functional regions for 103 prostate
cancer risk-associated loci.

Chen H(1,)(2,)(3), Yu H(1), Wang J(4), Zhang Z(2), Gao Z(2), Chen Z(2), Lu Y(1), 
Liu W(5), Jiang D(1,)(5), Zheng SL(2,)(5), Wei GH(6), Issacs WB(7), Feng J(2), Xu
J(1,)(2,)(3,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan
University, Shanghai, P.R. China. (2)Center for Cancer Genomics, Wake Forest
University School of Medicine, Winston Salem, North Carolina. (3)Center for
Genomic Translational Medicine and Prevention, Fudan School of Public Health,
Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China. (4)Fudan Institute of Urology, Huashan
Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China. (5)Program for Personalized
Cancer Care and Department of Surgery, North Shore University Health System,
Evanston, Illinois. (6)Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Biocenter 
Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. (7)Department of Urology, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.

BACKGROUND: More than 100 prostate cancer (PCa) risk-associated single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) have been identified by genome wide association studies
(GWAS). However, the molecular mechanisms are unclear for most of these SNPs.
METHODS: All reported PCa risk-associated SNPs reaching the genome-wide
significance level of P < 1 × 10(-7) (index SNPs), as well as SNPs in linkage
disequilibrium (LD, r(2) = 0.5) with them were cataloged. Genomic regions with
potentially functional impact were also identified, including UCSC annotated
coding regions (exon and snoRNA/miRNA) and regulatory regions, as well as binding
regions for transcription factors (TFs), histone modifications (HMs), DNase I
hypersensitivity (DHSs), and RNA Polymerase IIA (POLR2A) defined by ChIP-Seq in
prostate cell lines and tissues. Enrichment analysis was performed to test
whether PCa risk-associated SNPs are located in these functional regions more
than expected.
RESULTS: A total of 103 PCa risk-associated index SNPs and 7,244 SNPs in LD with 
these index SNPs were cataloged. Genomic regions with potentially functional
impact, grouped in 30 different categories of functionalities, were identified.
Enrichment analysis indicated that genomic regions in the following 15 categories
were enriched for the PCa risk-associated SNPs: exons, CpG regions, 6 TFs (AR,
ERG, FOXA1, HOXB13, CTCF, and NR3C1), 5 HMs (H3K4me1, H3K4me2, H3K4me3, H3K27AC, 
and H3T11P), DHSs and POLR2A. In contrast, significantly fewer PCa risk SNPs were
mapped to binding regions for H3K27me3, a repressive chromatin marker.
CONCLUSIONS: The PCa risk-associated SNPs discovered to date may affect PCa risk 
through multiple different mechanisms, especially by affecting binding regions of
TFs/HMs.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26015065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Genome Biol. 2015 May 27;16:110. doi: 10.1186/s13059-015-0661-x.

Integrative modeling reveals the principles of multi-scale chromatin boundary
formation in human nuclear organization.

Moore BL(1), Aitken S(2), Semple CA(3).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine,
University of Edinburgh, Crewe Road, Edinburgh, EH4 2XU, UK.
ben.moore@igmm.ed.ac.uk. (2)MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute of Genetics
and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Crewe Road, Edinburgh, EH4 2XU, 
UK. stuart.aitken@igmm.ed.ac.uk. (3)MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute of
Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Crewe Road, Edinburgh, 
EH4 2XU, UK. colin.semple@igmm.ed.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Interphase chromosomes adopt a hierarchical structure, and recent
data have characterized their chromatin organization at very different scales,
from sub-genic regions associated with DNA-binding proteins at the order of tens 
or hundreds of bases, through larger regions with active or repressed chromatin
states, up to multi-megabase-scale domains associated with nuclear positioning,
replication timing and other qualities. However, we have lacked detailed,
quantitative models to understand the interactions between these different
strata.
RESULTS: Here we collate large collections of matched locus-level chromatin
features and Hi-C interaction data, representing higher-order organization,
across three human cell types. We use quantitative modeling approaches to assess 
whether locus-level features are sufficient to explain higher-order structure,
and identify the most influential underlying features. We identify structurally
variable domains between cell types and examine the underlying features to
discover a general association with cell-type-specific enhancer activity. We also
identify the most prominent features marking the boundaries of two types of
higher-order domains at different scales: topologically associating domains and
nuclear compartments. We find parallel enrichments of particular chromatin
features for both types, including features associated with active promoters and 
the architectural proteins CTCF and YY1.
CONCLUSIONS: We show that integrative modeling of large chromatin dataset
collections using random forests can generate useful insights into chromosome
structure. The models produced recapitulate known biological features of the cell
types involved, allow exploration of the antecedents of higher-order structures
and generate testable hypotheses for further experimental studies.

PMCID: PMC4443654
PMID: 26013771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Biol Res. 2015 May 27;48:27. doi: 10.1186/s40659-015-0019-6.

A possible role of Drosophila CTCF in mitotic bookmarking and maintaining
chromatin domains during the cell cycle.

Shen W(1), Wang D(2), Ye B(3,)(4), Shi M(5), Zhang Y(6), Zhao Z(7).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, No. 20, Dongdajie Street, Beijing, Fengtai
District, 100071, China. shenwl1988@gmail.com. (2)Beijing Institute of
Biotechnology, No. 20, Dongdajie Street, Beijing, Fengtai District, 100071,
China. wdong.run1112@gmail.com. (3)Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, No. 20,
Dongdajie Street, Beijing, Fengtai District, 100071, China. byy0804@gmail.com.
(4)College of Life Science, Capital Normal University, 105 Xisihuanbei Road,
Beijing, Haidian District, 100048, China. byy0804@gmail.com. (5)Beijing Institute
of Biotechnology, No. 20, Dongdajie Street, Beijing, Fengtai District, 100071,
China. shiml79@126.com. (6)Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, No. 20, Dongdajie 
Street, Beijing, Fengtai District, 100071, China. zany1983@gmail.com. (7)Beijing 
Institute of Biotechnology, No. 20, Dongdajie Street, Beijing, Fengtai District, 
100071, China. zhaozh@nic.bmi.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: The CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a highly conserved insulator
protein that plays various roles in many cellular processes. CTCF is one of the
main architecture proteins in higher eukaryotes, and in combination with other
architecture proteins and regulators, also shapes the three-dimensional
organization of a genome. Experiments show CTCF partially remains associated with
chromatin during mitosis. However, the role of CTCF in the maintenance and
propagation of genome architectures throughout the cell cycle remains elusive.
RESULTS: We performed a comprehensive bioinformatics analysis on public datasets 
of Drosophila CTCF (dCTCF). We characterized dCTCF-binding sites according to
their occupancy status during the cell cycle, and identified three classes:
interphase-mitosis-common (IM), interphase-only (IO) and mitosis-only (MO) sites.
Integrated function analysis showed dCTCF-binding sites of different classes
might be involved in different biological processes, and IM sites were more
conserved and more intensely bound. dCTCF-binding sites of the same class
preferentially localized closer to each other, and were highly enriched at
chromatin syntenic and topologically associating domains boundaries.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results revealed different functions of dCTCF during the cell
cycle and suggested that dCTCF might contribute to the establishment of the
three-dimensional architecture of the Drosophila genome by maintaining local
chromatin compartments throughout the whole cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC4485355
PMID: 26013116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Biol Open. 2015 May 15;4(7):852-7. doi: 10.1242/bio.012344.

The insulator protein CTCF regulates Drosophila steroidogenesis.

Fresán U(1), Cuartero S(1), O'Connor MB(2), Espinàs ML(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology of Barcelona, IBMB-CSIC, and Institute for
Research in Biomedicine IRB, Barcelona 08028, Spain. (2)Department of Genetics,
Cell Biology and Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455,
USA. (3)Institute of Molecular Biology of Barcelona, IBMB-CSIC, and Institute for
Research in Biomedicine IRB, Barcelona 08028, Spain Department of Genetics, Cell 
Biology and Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
mlebmc@ibmb.csic.es.

The steroid hormone ecdysone is a central regulator of insect development. In
this report we show that CTCF expression in the prothoracic gland is required for
full transcriptional activation of the Halloween genes spookier, shadow and
noppera-bo, which encode ecdysone biosynthetic enzymes, and for proper timing of 
ecdysone-responsive gene expression. Loss of CTCF results in delayed and less
synchronized larval development that can only be rescued by feeding larvae with
both, the steroid hormone 20-hydroxyecdysone and cholesterol. Moreover,
CTCF-knockdown in prothoracic gland cells leads to increased lipid accumulation. 
In conclusion, the insulator protein CTCF is required for Halloween gene
expression and cholesterol homeostasis in ecdysone-producing cells controlling
steroidogenesis.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4571099
PMID: 25979705  [PubMed]


137. IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. 2015 Jul;19(4):1293-300. doi:
10.1109/JBHI.2015.2431640. Epub 2015 May 11.

Regulatory elements in low-methylated regions predict directional change of gene 
expression.

Hu H, Xu J, Dai Y.

Recent studies on methylomes obtained from the whole genome bisulfite sequencing 
(WGBS) indicate that low-methylated regions (LMRs) are related to potential
active distal regulatory regions such as enhancers in mammalian genomes. To
investigate the potential effect of regulatory elements in LMRs on gene
expression, we proposed penalized logistic regression models to predict the
directional change of differentially expressed genes using predicted
transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) in LMRs that are distinctive between
two cell types. We evaluated our models on four cell types where the WGBS and
RNA-seq data were available. The average area under the ROC curve (AUC) from the 
tenfold cross validation was computed over the six pairs of cell types in each
model. The models using TFBSs in LMRs in intergenic or genebody region are more
predictive (AUC 0.71 and 0.66, respectively) compared with the one using TFBSs
from promoter regions alone (AUC 0.62). When using a model that combines TFBSs in
LMRs from both intergenic and genebody regions, the best prediction was obtained 
(AUC 0.78). Our models are capable of identifying subsets of LMRs that are
significantly enriched for the ChIP-seq binding sites of the insulator protein
CTCF and p300 co-activator and other transcription factors. Our framework
provides further evidence of putative distal regulatory elements from LMRs
located in intergenic and genebody regions.

PMID: 25974955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Cell. 2015 May 21;161(5):1012-25. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.04.004. Epub 2015 May 
7.

Disruptions of topological chromatin domains cause pathogenic rewiring of
gene-enhancer interactions.

Lupiáñez DG(1), Kraft K(1), Heinrich V(2), Krawitz P(1), Brancati F(3), Klopocki 
E(4), Horn D(2), Kayserili H(5), Opitz JM(6), Laxova R(6), Santos-Simarro F(7),
Gilbert-Dussardier B(8), Wittler L(9), Borschiwer M(10), Haas SA(11), Osterwalder
M(12), Franke M(1), Timmermann B(13), Hecht J(14), Spielmann M(15), Visel A(16), 
Mundlos S(17).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, RG Development & Disease, 14195
Berlin, Germany; Institute for Medical and Human Genetics, Charité
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany. (2)Institute for Medical and
Human Genetics, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany.
(3)Medical Genetics Unit, Policlinico Tor Vergata University Hospital, 00133
Rome, Italy. (4)Institute of Human Genetics Biozentrum, Julius Maximilian
University of Würzburg, 97070 Würzburg, Germany. (5)Medical Genetics Department, 
Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, 34093 Istanbul, Turkey.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, UT 84108, USA. (7)Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM),
IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz, 28046 Madrid, Spain; U753 Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Instituto de
Salud Carlos III, 28046 Madrid, Spain. (8)Service de Génétique, C.H.U. de
Poitiers, 86021 Poitiers, France. (9)Department Developmental Genetics, Max
Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 14195 Berlin, Germany. (10)Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Genetics, RG Development & Disease, 14195 Berlin,
Germany. (11)Department of Computational Molecular Biology, Max Planck Institute 
for Molecular Genetics, 14195 Berlin, Germany. (12)Genomics Division, MS 84-171, 
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. (13)Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Genetics, Sequencing Core Facility, 14195 Berlin,
Germany. (14)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, RG Development &
Disease, 14195 Berlin, Germany; Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative
Therapies (BCRT), Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany.
(15)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, RG Development & Disease, 14195 
Berlin, Germany; Institute for Medical and Human Genetics, Charité
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany; Berlin-Brandenburg Center for 
Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353 Berlin, 
Germany. (16)Genomics Division, MS 84-171, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA; U.S. Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute, Walnut
Creek, CA 94598, USA; School of Natural Sciences, University of California,
Merced, CA 95343, USA. (17)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, RG
Development & Disease, 14195 Berlin, Germany; Institute for Medical and Human
Genetics, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany;
Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Charité
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany. Electronic address:
mundlos@molgen.mpg.de.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2015 Jul;16(7):378.
    Cell. 2015 May 21;161(5):955-7.

Mammalian genomes are organized into megabase-scale topologically associated
domains (TADs). We demonstrate that disruption of TADs can rewire long-range
regulatory architecture and result in pathogenic phenotypes. We show that
distinct human limb malformations are caused by deletions, inversions, or
duplications altering the structure of the TAD-spanning WNT6/IHH/EPHA4/PAX3
locus. Using CRISPR/Cas genome editing, we generated mice with corresponding
rearrangements. Both in mouse limb tissue and patient-derived fibroblasts,
disease-relevant structural changes cause ectopic interactions between promoters 
and non-coding DNA, and a cluster of limb enhancers normally associated with
Epha4 is misplaced relative to TAD boundaries and drives ectopic limb expression 
of another gene in the locus. This rewiring occurred only if the variant
disrupted a CTCF-associated boundary domain. Our results demonstrate the
functional importance of TADs for orchestrating gene expression via genome
architecture and indicate criteria for predicting the pathogenicity of human
structural variants, particularly in non-coding regions of the human genome.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4791538 [Available on 2016-05-21]
PMID: 25959774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Genome Biol Evol. 2015 May 7;7(6):1432-54. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evv081.

Transposable Elements and DNA Methylation Create in Embryonic Stem Cells
Human-Specific Regulatory Sequences Associated with Distal Enhancers and
Noncoding RNAs.

Glinsky GV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Engineering in Medicine, University of California, San Diego The 
Stanford University School of Medicine, Department of Surgery, Stanford,
California gglinskii@ucsd.edu gglinsky@stanfrod.edu.

Despite significant progress in the structural and functional characterization of
the human genome, understanding of the mechanisms underlying the genetic basis of
human phenotypic uniqueness remains limited. Here, I report that transposable
element-derived sequences, most notably LTR7/HERV-H, LTR5_Hs, and L1HS, harbor
99.8% of the candidate human-specific regulatory loci (HSRL) with putative
transcription factor-binding sites in the genome of human embryonic stem cells
(hESC). A total of 4,094 candidate HSRL display selective and site-specific
binding of critical regulators (NANOG [Nanog homeobox], POU5F1 [POU class 5
homeobox 1], CCCTC-binding factor [CTCF], Lamin B1), and are preferentially
located within the matrix of transcriptionally active DNA segments that are
hypermethylated in hESC. hESC-specific NANOG-binding sites are enriched near the 
protein-coding genes regulating brain size, pluripotency long noncoding RNAs,
hESC enhancers, and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine-harboring regions immediately
adjacent to binding sites. Sequences of only 4.3% of hESC-specific NANOG-binding 
sites are present in Neanderthals' genome, suggesting that a majority of these
regulatory elements emerged in Modern Humans. Comparisons of estimated creation
rates of novel TF-binding sites revealed that there was 49.7-fold acceleration of
creation rates of NANOG-binding sites in genomes of Chimpanzees compared with the
mouse genomes and further 5.7-fold acceleration in genomes of Modern Humans
compared with the Chimpanzees genomes. Preliminary estimates suggest that
emergence of one novel NANOG-binding site detectable in hESC required 466 years
of evolution. Pathway analysis of coding genes that have hESC-specific
NANOG-binding sites within gene bodies or near gene boundaries revealed their
association with physiological development and functions of nervous and
cardiovascular systems, embryonic development, behavior, as well as development
of a diverse spectrum of pathological conditions such as cancer, diseases of
cardiovascular and reproductive systems, metabolic diseases, multiple
neurological and psychological disorders. A proximity placement model is proposed
explaining how a 33-47% excess of NANOG, CTCF, and POU5F1 proteins immobilized on
a DNA scaffold may play a functional role at distal regulatory elements.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

PMCID: PMC4494056
PMID: 25956794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. BMC Med Genet. 2015 May 6;16:30. doi: 10.1186/s12881-015-0173-2.

A novel large deletion of the ICR1 region including H19 and putative enhancer
elements.

Fryssira H(1), Amenta S(2), Kanber D(3), Sofocleous C(4), Lykopoulou E(5),
Kanaka-Gantenbein C(6), Cerrato F(7), Lüdecke HJ(8), Bens S(9), Riccio A(10),
Buiting K(11).

Author information: 
(1)Aghia Sophia Children's Hospital, University of Athens Medical School, Athens,
Goudi, 11527, Greece. efrysira@yahoo.gr. (2)Mitera Maternity Hospital, Athens,
Greece. amenta@hol.gr. (3)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Essen,
University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. deniz.kanber@uni-due.de. (4)Aghia
Sophia Children's Hospital, University of Athens Medical School, Athens, Goudi,
11527, Greece. csofokl@med.uoa.gr. (5)First Pediatric Clinic, Aghia Sophia"
Children's Hospital, University of Athens School of Medicine, Athens, Greece.
lilialykopoulou@gmail.com. (6)First Pediatric Clinic, Aghia Sophia" Children's
Hospital, University of Athens School of Medicine, Athens, Greece.
c.kanaka-gantenbein@med.uoa.gr. (7)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics A.
Buzzati-Traverso, CNR, DiSTABiF, 2nd University of Naples, Naples, Italy.
flavia.cerrato@unima2.it. (8)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital
Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
Hermann-josef.luedecke@uni-due.de. (9)Institute of Human Genetics, University
Hospital Schleswig-Hostein Campus Kiel/Christian-Albrechts University Kiel, Kiel,
Germany. sbens@medgen.uni-kiel.de. (10)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics A.
Buzzati-Traverso, CNR, DiSTABiF, 2nd University of Naples, Naples, Italy.
andrea.riccio@unima2.it. (11)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital
Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. Karin.buiting@uni-due.de.

BACKGROUND: Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is a rare pediatric overgrowth
disorder with a variable clinical phenotype caused by deregulation affecting
imprinted genes in the chromosomal region 11p15. Alterations of the imprinting
control region 1 (ICR1) at the IGF2/H19 locus resulting in biallelic expression
of IGF2 and biallelic silencing of H19 account for approximately 10% of patients 
with BWS. The majority of these patients have epimutations of the ICR1 without
detectable DNA sequence changes. Only a few patients were found to have
deletions. Most of these deletions are small affecting different parts of the
ICR1 differentially methylated region (ICR1-DMR) removing target sequences for
CTCF. Only a very few deletions reported so far include the H19 gene in addition 
to the CTCF binding sites. None of these deletions include IGF2.
CASE PRESENTATION: A male patient was born with hypotonia, facial dysmorphisms
and hypoglycemia suggestive of Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. Using
methylation-specific (MS)-MLPA (Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification)
we have identified a maternally inherited large deletion of the ICR1 region in a 
patient and his mother. The deletion results in a variable clinical expression
with a classical BWS in the mother and a more severe presentation of BWS in her
son. By genome-wide SNP array analysis the deletion was found to span ~100 kb
genomic DNA including the ICR1DMR, H19, two adjacent non-imprinted genes and two 
of three predicted enhancer elements downstream to H19. Methylation analysis by
deep bisulfite next generation sequencing revealed hypermethylation of the
maternal allele at the IGF2 locus in both, mother and child, although IGF2 is not
affected by the deletion.
CONCLUSIONS: We here report on a novel large familial deletion of the ICR1 region
in a BWS family. Due to the deletion of the ICR1-DMR CTCF binding cannot take
place and the residual enhancer elements have access to the IGF2 promoters. The
aberrant methylation (hypermethylation) of the maternal IGF2 allele in both
affected family members may reflect the active state of the normally silenced
maternal IGF2 copy and can be a consequence of the deletion. The deletion results
in a variable clinical phenotype and expression.

PMCID: PMC4630834
PMID: 25943194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 Sep;136(3):713-24. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2015.03.033. 
Epub 2015 May 1.

CCCTC-binding factor controls the homeostatic maintenance and migration of
Langerhans cells.

Kim TG(1), Kim M(2), Lee JJ(1), Kim SH(3), Je JH(3), Lee Y(4), Song MJ(2), Choi
Y(1), Chung YW(2), Park CG(5), Cho JW(4), Lee MG(6), Lee YS(7), Kim HP(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medical Biology, Institute of Tropical Medicine,
Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project 
for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Environmental Medical Biology, Institute of Tropical Medicine,
Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of
Dermatology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (4)Department
of Integrated OMICS for Biomedical Science, Graduate School, Yonsei University,
Seoul, Korea. (5)Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project for Medical Science, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Severance Biomedical Science
Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (6)Brain Korea 21
PLUS Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea; Department of Dermatology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea. (7)Cancer Genomics Branch, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Korea.
(8)Department of Environmental Medical Biology, Institute of Tropical Medicine,
Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project 
for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
Electronic address: kimhp@yuhs.ac.

BACKGROUND: Langerhans cells (LCs) are skin-resident dendritic cells (DCs) that
orchestrate skin immunity. CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a highly conserved
DNA-binding protein that regulates higher-order chromatin organization and is
involved in various gene regulation processes.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to clarify a possible role for CTCF in LC homeostasis and
function in vivo.
METHODS: We used a conditional gene deletion mouse system to generate DC- and
LC-specific CTCF-ablated mice. Short hairpin RNA-mediated RNA interference was
used to silence CTCF expression in human monocyte-derived Langerhans cells. DC
populations were assessed by using flow cytometry and immunofluorescence. Gene
expression arrays were performed to identify genes regulated by CTCF in LCs.
Contact hypersensitivity and epicutaneous sensitization responses were measured
to examine the functional significance of CTCF ablation.
RESULTS: DC-specific CTCF deletion led to a reduced pool of systemic DCs, with
LCs most severely affected. Decreases in epidermal LC numbers were specifically
associated with self-turnover defects. Interestingly, CTCF-deficient LCs
demonstrated impaired migration out of the epidermis. Whole-transcriptome
analyses revealed that genes that promoted cell adhesion were highly expressed,
but CCR7 was downregulated in CTCF-depleted LCs. Hapten-induced contact
hypersensitivity responses were more sustained in LC-specific CTCF-deficient
mice, whereas epicutaneous sensitization to protein antigen was attenuated,
indicating that CTCF-dependent LC homeostasis is required for optimal immune
function of LCs in a context-dependent manner.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that CTCF positively regulates the homeostatic pool 
and the efficient emigration of LCs, which are required for modulating the
functional immune network of the skin.

Copyright © 2015 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25936568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. BMC Biol. 2015 May 2;13:31. doi: 10.1186/s12915-015-0141-5.

A chromatin code for alternative splicing involving a putative association
between CTCF and HP1a proteins.

Agirre E(1,)(2), Bellora N(3,)(4), Alló M(5,)(6), Pagès A(7,)(8), Bertucci
P(9,)(10), Kornblihtt AR(11), Eyras E(12,)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Universitat Pompeu Fabra, E08003, Barcelona, Spain.
eneritz.agirre@igh.cnrs.fr. (2)Present address: Institute of Human Genetics, CNRS
UPR 1142, Montpellier, France. eneritz.agirre@igh.cnrs.fr. (3)Universitat Pompeu 
Fabra, E08003, Barcelona, Spain. nbellora@comahue-conicet.gob.ar. (4)Present
address: INIBIOMA, CONICET-UNComahue, Bariloche, Río Negro, Argentina.
nbellora@comahue-conicet.gob.ar. (5)IFIBYNE-UBA-CONICET, Departamento de
Fisiología, Biología Molecular y Celular, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y
Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires, (C1428EHA), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
mariano.allo@embl.de. (6)Present address: European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 
Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117, Heidelberg, Germany. mariano.allo@embl.de.
(7)Universitat Pompeu Fabra, E08003, Barcelona, Spain. amadis.pages@upf.edu.
(8)Centre for Genomic Regulation, E08003, Barcelona, Spain. amadis.pages@upf.edu.
(9)IFIBYNE-UBA-CONICET, Departamento de Fisiología, Biología Molecular y Celular,
Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires,
(C1428EHA), Buenos Aires, Argentina. bertucci@embl.de. (10)Present address:
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117, Heidelberg,
Germany. bertucci@embl.de. (11)IFIBYNE-UBA-CONICET, Departamento de Fisiología,
Biología Molecular y Celular, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales,
Universidad de Buenos Aires, (C1428EHA), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
ark@fbmc.fcen.uba.ar. (12)Universitat Pompeu Fabra, E08003, Barcelona, Spain.
eduardo.eyras@upf.edu. (13)Catalan Institution of Research and Advanced Studies
(ICREA), E08010, Barcelona, Spain. eduardo.eyras@upf.edu.

BACKGROUND: Alternative splicing is primarily controlled by the activity of
splicing factors and by the elongation of the RNA polymerase II (RNAPII). Recent 
experiments have suggested a new complex network of splicing regulation involving
chromatin, transcription and multiple protein factors. In particular, the
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), the Argonaute protein AGO1, and members of the
heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) family have been implicated in the regulation of 
splicing associated with chromatin and the elongation of RNAPII. These results
raise the question of whether these proteins may associate at the chromatin level
to modulate alternative splicing.
RESULTS: Using chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-Seq) data for CTCF,
AGO1, HP1a, H3K27me3, H3K9me2, H3K36me3, RNAPII, total H3 and 5metC and
alternative splicing arrays from two cell lines, we have analyzed the
combinatorial code of their binding to chromatin in relation to the alternative
splicing patterns between two cell lines, MCF7 and MCF10. Using Machine Learning 
techniques, we identified the changes in chromatin signals that are most
significantly associated with splicing regulation between these two cell lines.
Moreover, we have built a map of the chromatin signals on the pre-mRNA, that is, 
a chromatin-based RNA-map, which can explain 606 (68.55%) of the regulated events
between MCF7 and MCF10. This chromatin code involves the presence of HP1a, CTCF, 
AGO1, RNAPII and histone marks around regulated exons and can differentiate
patterns of skipping and inclusion. Additionally, we found a significant
association of HP1a and CTCF activities around the regulated exons and a putative
DNA binding site for HP1a.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that a considerable number of alternative splicing 
events could have a chromatin-dependent regulation involving the association of
HP1a and CTCF near regulated exons. Additionally, we find further evidence for
the involvement of HP1a and AGO1 in chromatin-related splicing regulation.

PMCID: PMC4446157
PMID: 25934638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. PLoS Genet. 2015 Apr 28;11(4):e1005177. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005177.
eCollection 2015.

Correction: Quantitative genetics of CTCF binding reveal local sequence effects
and different modes of X-chromosome association.

Ding Z, Ni Y, Timmer SW, Lee BK, Battenhouse A, Louzada S, Yang F, Dunham I,
Crawford GE, Lieb JD, Durbin R, Iyer VR, Birney E.

Erratum for
    PLoS Genet. 2014 Nov;10(11):e1004798.

[This corrects the article DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004798.].

PMCID: PMC4412500
PMID: 25919664  [PubMed]


144. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jul;35(13):2278-94.

Argonaute 2 Binds Directly to tRNA Genes and Promotes Gene Repression in cis.

Woolnough JL, Atwood BL, Giles KE.

To further our understanding of the RNAi machinery within the human nucleus, we
analyzed the chromatin and RNA binding of Argonaute 2 (AGO2) within human cancer 
cell lines. Our data indicated that AGO2 binds directly to nascent tRNA and 5S
rRNA, and to the genomic loci from which these RNAs are transcribed, in a small
RNA- and DICER-independent manner. AGO2 chromatin binding was not observed at
non-TFIIIC-dependent RNA polymerase III (Pol III) genes or at extra-TFIIIC (ETC) 
sites, indicating that the interaction is specific for TFIIIC-dependent Pol III
genes. A genome-wide analysis indicated that loss of AGO2 caused a global
increase in mRNA expression level among genes that flank AGO2-bound tRNA genes.
This effect was shown to be distinct from that of the disruption of DICER,
DROSHA, or CTCF. We propose that AGO2 binding to tRNA genes has a novel and
important regulatory role in human cells.

PMCID: PMC4456445
PMID: 25918241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Genome Res. 2015 Jun;25(6):907-17. doi: 10.1101/gr.183749.114. Epub 2015 Apr 24.

A pooling-based approach to mapping genetic variants associated with DNA
methylation.

Kaplow IM(1), MacIsaac JL(2), Mah SM(2), McEwen LM(3), Kobor MS(3), Fraser HB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, California
94305, USA; Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California
94305, USA; (2)Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, Child and Family
Research Institute, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia
V5Z 4H4, Canada; (3)Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, Child and
Family Research Institute, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia V5Z 4H4, Canada; Department of Medical Genetics, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 4H4, Canada. (4)Department of Biology, 
Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA;

DNA methylation is an epigenetic modification that plays a key role in gene
regulation. Previous studies have investigated its genetic basis by mapping
genetic variants that are associated with DNA methylation at specific sites, but 
these have been limited to microarrays that cover <2% of the genome and cannot
account for allele-specific methylation (ASM). Other studies have performed
whole-genome bisulfite sequencing on a few individuals, but these lack
statistical power to identify variants associated with DNA methylation. We
present a novel approach in which bisulfite-treated DNA from many individuals is 
sequenced together in a single pool, resulting in a truly genome-wide map of DNA 
methylation. Compared to methods that do not account for ASM, our approach
increases statistical power to detect associations while sharply reducing cost,
effort, and experimental variability. As a proof of concept, we generated deep
sequencing data from a pool of 60 human cell lines; we evaluated almost twice as 
many CpGs as the largest microarray studies and identified more than 2000 genetic
variants associated with DNA methylation. We found that these variants are highly
enriched for associations with chromatin accessibility and CTCF binding but are
less likely to be associated with traits indirectly linked to DNA, such as gene
expression and disease phenotypes. In summary, our approach allows genome-wide
mapping of genetic variants associated with DNA methylation in any tissue of any 
species, without the need for individual-level genotype or methylation data.

© 2015 Kaplow et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4448686
PMID: 25910490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 24;10(4):e0124588. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124588.
eCollection 2015.

Functional validation of a constitutive autonomous silencer element.

Qi H(1), Liu M(2), Emery DW(3), Stamatoyannopoulos G(2).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of
Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China; University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China; Department of Medicine, Division of Medical 
Genetics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States of America.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, United States of America. (3)Department of Medicine,
Division of Medical Genetics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United
States of America; Institutional Biosafety Committee Services, WIRB-Copernicus
Group, Puyallup, WA, United States of America.

Sequences of the genome that are capable of silencing gene expression are thought
to play a key role in gene regulation. However, very few silencer elements
capable of functioning in mammalian cells have been described, and only a
fraction of these have been tested for the ability to function in an autonomous
fashion. We report here the characterization and functional validation of a
constitutive autonomous silencer element from the human genome called T39, and
the comparison of T39 to three other putative silencer elements previously
described by others. Functional analysis included one assay for enhancer-blocking
insulator activity and two independent assays for silencer activity, all based on
stable transfection and comparison to a neutral spacer control. In erythroid K562
cells, T39 exhibited potent silencer activity, the previously described element
PRE2-S5 exhibited modest silencer activity, and the two other previously
described elements exhibited no silencer activity. T39 was further found to be
capable of silencing three disparate promoters, of silencing gene expression in
three disparate cell lines, and of functioning as a single copy in a
topology-independent manner. Of the four elements analyzed, only T39 exhibits a
constitutive pattern of DNase hypersensitivity and binding by CTCF. In its native
location the T39 element also exhibits a unique interaction profile with a subset
of distal putative regulatory elements. Taken together, these studies validate
T39 as a constitutive autonomous silencer, identify T39 as a defined control for 
future studies of other regulatory elements such as insulators, and provide a
basic chromatin profile for one highly potent silencer element.

PMCID: PMC4409358
PMID: 25910277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Cell Death Differ. 2016 Apr;23(4):565-75. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2015.36. Epub 2015 Apr
24.

Tissue-specific targeting of cell fate regulatory genes by E2f factors.

Julian LM(1), Liu Y(2), Pakenham CA(1), Dugal-Tessier D(1), Ruzhynsky V(1), Bae
S(3), Tsai SY(3), Leone G(3), Slack RS(1), Blais A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience program, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, Canada. (2)Department
of Biochemsitry, Microbiology and Immunology, Ottawa Institute of Systems
Biology, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, Canada.
(3)Solid Tumor Biology Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology, and
Medical Genetics and Department of Molecular Genetics, Comprehensive Cancer
Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Cell cycle proteins are important regulators of diverse cell fate decisions, and 
in this capacity have pivotal roles in neurogenesis and brain development. The
mechanisms by which cell cycle regulation is integrated with cell fate control in
the brain and other tissues are poorly understood, and an outstanding question is
whether the cell cycle machinery regulates fate decisions directly or instead as 
a secondary consequence of proliferative control. Identification of the genes
targeted by E2 promoter binding factor (E2f) transcription factors, effectors of 
the pRb/E2f cell cycle pathway, will provide essential insights into these
mechanisms. We identified the promoter regions bound by three neurogenic E2f
factors in neural precursor cells in a genome-wide manner. Through bioinformatic 
analyses and integration of published genomic data sets we uncovered hundreds of 
transcriptionally active E2f-bound promoters corresponding to genes that control 
cell fate processes, including key transcriptional regulators and members of the 
Notch, fibroblast growth factor, Wnt and Tgf-ß signaling pathways. We also
demonstrate a striking enrichment of the CCCTC binding factor transcription
factor (Ctcf) at E2f3-bound nervous system-related genes, suggesting a potential 
regulatory co-factor for E2f3 in controlling differentiation. Finally, we provide
the first demonstration of extensive tissue specificity among E2f target genes in
mammalian cells, whereby E2f3 promoter binding is well conserved between neural
and muscle precursors at genes associated with cell cycle processes, but is
tissue-specific at differentiation-associated genes. Our findings implicate the
cell cycle pathway as a widespread regulator of cell fate genes, and suggest that
E2f3 proteins control cell type-specific differentiation programs by regulating
unique sets of target genes. This work significantly enhances our understanding
of how the cell cycle machinery impacts cell fate and differentiation, and will
importantly drive further discovery regarding the mechanisms of cell fate control
and transcriptional regulation in the brain, as well as in other tissues.

PMID: 25909886  [PubMed - in process]


148. BMC Med Genomics. 2015 Mar 18;8:13. doi: 10.1186/s12920-015-0087-z.

Systems biology of myasthenia gravis, integration of aberrant lncRNA and mRNA
expression changes.

Luo Z(1), Li Y(2,)(3), Liu X(4), Luo M(5), Xu L(6), Luo Y(7), Xiao B(8), Yang
H(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha,
410008, China. luozhaohui_xy@126.com. (2)Department of Neurology, Xiangya
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 410008, China. 454382507@qq.com.
(3)Department of Neurology, Fujian Medical University Union Hospital, Fuzhou,
350001, China. 454382507@qq.com. (4)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital,
Central South University, Changsha, 410008, China. 294350250@qq.com.
(5)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha,
410008, China. mchuanlow@gmail.com. (6)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital,
Central South University, Changsha, 410008, China. 183752665@qq.com.
(7)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha,
410008, China. yuebei57@gmail.com. (8)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, 
Central South University, Changsha, 410008, China. xiaobo_xy@126.com.
(9)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha,
410008, China. yangh69@126.com.

BACKGROUND: A novel class of transcripts, long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), has
recently emerged as a key player in several biological processes, and important
roles for these molecules have been reported in a number of complex human
diseases, such as autoimmune diseases, neurological disorders, and various
cancers. However, the aberrant lncRNAs implicated in myasthenia gravis (MG)
remain unknown. The aim of the present study was to explore the abnormal
expression of lncRNAs in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and examine
mRNA regulatory relationship networks among MG patients with or without thymoma.
METHODS: Microarray assays were performed, and the outstanding differences
between lncRNAs or mRNA expression were verified through RT-PCR. The lncRNAs
functions were annotated for the target genes using Gene Ontology (GO) and the
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) biological pathway. The potential 
regulatory relationships between the lncRNAs and target genes were analyzed using
the 'cis' and 'trans' model. Outstanding lncRNAs were organized to generate a
TF-lncRNA-gene network using Cytoscape software.
RESULTS: The lncRNA and mRNA expression profile analysis revealed subsets of
differentially expressed genes in MG patients with or without thymoma. A total of
12 outstanding dysregulated expression lncRNAs, such as lncRNA oebiotech_11933,
were verified through real-time PCR. Several GO terms including the cellular
response to interferon-<U+03B3>, platelet degranulation, chemokine receptor binding and 
cytokine interactions were very important in MG pathogenesis. The chromosome
locations of some lncRNAs and associated co-expression genes were demonstrated
using 'cis' analysis. The results of the 'trans' analysis revealed that some TFs 
(i.e., CTCF, TAF1and MYC) regulate lncRNA and gene expression. The outstanding
lncRNAs in each group were implicated in the regulation of the TF-lncRNA-target
gene network.
CONCLUSION: The results of the present study provide a perspective on lncRNA
expression in MG. We identify a subset of aberrant lncRNAs and mRNAs as potential
biomarkers for the diagnosis of MG. The GO and KEGG pathway analysis provides an 
annotation to determine the functions of these lncRNAs. The results of the 'cis' 
and 'trans' analyses provide information concerning the modular regulation of
lncRNAs.

PMCID: PMC4380247
PMID: 25889429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Genome Biol. 2015 Mar 12;16:52. doi: 10.1186/s13059-015-0618-0.

The lncRNA Firre anchors the inactive X chromosome to the nucleolus by binding
CTCF and maintains H3K27me3 methylation.

Yang F(1), Deng X(2), Ma W(3), Berletch JB(4), Rabaia N(5), Wei G(6), Moore
JM(7), Filippova GN(8), Xu J(9), Liu Y(10), Noble WS(11,)(12), Shendure J(13),
Disteche CM(14,)(15).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 98195,
USA. fyang8191@gmail.com. (2)Department of Pathology, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, 98195, USA. dengx2@uw.edu. (3)Department of Genome Sciences,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 98195, USA. wenxiu@uw.edu.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 98195,
USA. joelb07@u.washington.edu. (5)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, 98109, USA. nrabaia@fhcrc.org.
(6)Department of Integrative Physiology and Neuroscience, Washington State
University, Pullman, Washington, 99164, USA. weigengze@vetmed.wsu.edu.
(7)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington, 98109, USA. jmmoore@fhcrc.org. (8)Division of Human Biology, Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, 98109, USA.
gfilippo@fhcrc.org. (9)Department of Integrative Physiology and Neuroscience,
Washington State University, Pullman, Washington, 99164, USA.
junxu@vetmed.wsu.edu. (10)Department of Pathology, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, 98195, USA. yajuan@uw.edu. (11)Department of Genome
Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 98195, USA.
wnoble@uw.edu. (12)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington, 98155, USA. wnoble@uw.edu. (13)Department of
Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 98195, USA.
shendure@uw.edu. (14)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington, 98195, USA. cdistech@u.washington.edu. (15)Department of Medicine,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 98195, USA.
cdistech@u.washington.edu.

BACKGROUND: In mammals, X chromosome genes are present in one copy in males and
two in females. To balance the dosage of X-linked gene expression between the
sexes, one of the X chromosomes in females is silenced. X inactivation is
initiated by upregulation of the lncRNA (long non-coding RNA) Xist and
recruitment of specific chromatin modifiers. The inactivated X chromosome becomes
heterochromatic and visits a specific nuclear compartment adjacent to the
nucleolus.
RESULTS: Here, we show a novel role for the lncRNA Firre in anchoring the
inactive mouse X chromosome and preserving one of its main epigenetic features,
H3K27me3. Similar to Dxz4, Firre is X-linked and expressed from a macrosatellite 
repeat locus associated with a cluster of CTCF and cohesin binding sites, and is 
preferentially located adjacent to the nucleolus. CTCF binding present initially 
in both male and female mouse embryonic stem cells is lost from the active X
during development. Knockdown of Firre disrupts perinucleolar targeting and
H3K27me3 levels in mouse fibroblasts, demonstrating a role in maintenance of an
important epigenetic feature of the inactive X chromosome. No X-linked gene
reactivation is seen after Firre knockdown; however, a compensatory increase in
the expression of chromatin modifier genes implicated in X silencing is observed.
Further experiments in female embryonic stem cells suggest that Firre does not
play a role in X inactivation onset.
CONCLUSIONS: The X-linked lncRNA Firre helps to position the inactive X
chromosome near the nucleolus and to preserve one of its main epigenetic
features.

PMCID: PMC4391730
PMID: 25887447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. BMC Genomics. 2015 Apr 15;16:300. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1485-5.

Different distribution of histone modifications in genes with unidirectional and 
bidirectional transcription and a role of CTCF and cohesin in directing
transcription.

Bornelöv S(1,)(2), Komorowski J(3,)(4), Wadelius C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala
University, Uppsala, SE-751 24, Sweden. susanne.bornelov@imbim.uu.se. (2)Current 
affiliation: Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and 
Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, SE-751 23, Sweden.
susanne.bornelov@imbim.uu.se. (3)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology,
Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, SE-751 24, Sweden.
jan.komorowski@icm.uu.se. (4)Institute of Computer Science, Polish Academy of
Sciences, Warsaw, 01-248, Poland. jan.komorowski@icm.uu.se. (5)Science for Life
Laboratory, Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, SE-751 08, Sweden. claes.wadelius@igp.uu.se.

BACKGROUND: Several post-translational histone modifications are mainly found in 
gene promoters and are associated with the promoter activity. It has been
hypothesized that histone modifications regulate the transcription, as opposed to
the traditional view with transcription factors as the key regulators. Promoters 
of most active genes do not only initiate transcription of the coding sequence,
but also a substantial amount of transcription of the antisense strand upstream
of the transcription start site (TSS). This promoter feature has generally not
been considered in previous studies of histone modifications and transcription
factor binding.
RESULTS: We annotated protein-coding genes as bi- or unidirectional depending on 
their mode of transcription and compared histone modifications and transcription 
factor occurrences between them. We found that H3K4me3, H3K9ac, and H3K27ac were 
significantly more enriched upstream of the TSS in bidirectional genes compared
with the unidirectional ones. In contrast, the downstream histone modification
signals were similar, suggesting that the upstream histone modifications might be
a consequence of transcription rather than a cause. Notably, we found
well-positioned CTCF and RAD21 peaks approximately 60-80 bp upstream of the TSS
in the unidirectional genes. The peak heights were related to the amount of
antisense transcription and we hypothesized that CTCF and cohesin act as a
barrier against antisense transcription.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide insights into the distribution of histone
modifications at promoters and suggest a novel role of CTCF and cohesin as
regulators of transcriptional direction.

PMCID: PMC4446127
PMID: 25881024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Epigenetics. 2015;10(6):484-95. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2015.1040619. Epub 2015 Apr
16.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 epigenomic signature defines age-associated
hypermethylation and gene expression changes.

Dozmorov MG(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biostatistics; Virginia Commonwealth University ; Richmond ,
VA , USA.

Although age-associated gene expression and methylation changes have been
reported throughout the literature, the unifying epigenomic principles of aging
remain poorly understood. Recent explosion in availability and resolution of
functional/regulatory genome annotation data (epigenomic data), such as that
provided by the ENCODE and Roadmap Epigenomics projects, provides an opportunity 
for the identification of epigenomic mechanisms potentially altered by
age-associated differentially methylated regions (aDMRs) and regulatory
signatures in the promoters of age-associated genes (aGENs). In this study we
found that aDMRs and aGENs identified in multiple independent studies share a
common Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 signature marked by EZH2, SUZ12, CTCF
binding sites, repressive H3K27me3, and activating H3K4me1 histone modification
marks, and a "poised promoter" chromatin state. This signature is depleted in RNA
Polymerase II-associated transcription factor binding sites, activating H3K79me2,
H3K36me3, H3K27ac marks, and an "active promoter" chromatin state. The PRC2
signature was shown to be generally stable across cell types. When considering
the directionality of methylation changes, we found the PRC2 signature to be
associated with aDMRs hypermethylated with age, while hypomethylated aDMRs were
associated with enhancers. In contrast, aGENs were associated with the PRC2
signature independently of the directionality of gene expression changes. In this
study we demonstrate that the PRC2 signature is the common epigenomic context of 
genomic regions associated with hypermethylation and gene expression changes in
aging.

PMCID: PMC4623031 [Available on 2016-04-16]
PMID: 25880792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Apr 13;11(4):e1004763. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004763.
eCollection 2015.

Human papillomaviruses activate and recruit SMC1 cohesin proteins for the
differentiation-dependent life cycle through association with CTCF insulators.

Mehta K(1), Gunasekharan V(1), Satsuka A(1), Laimins LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

Human papillomaviruses infect stratified epithelia and link their productive life
cycle to the differentiation state of the host cell. Productive viral replication
or amplification is restricted to highly differentiated suprabasal cells and is
dependent on the activation of the ATM DNA damage pathway. The ATM pathway has
three arms that can act independently of one another. One arm is centered on p53,
another on CHK2 and a third on SMC1/NBS1 proteins. A role for CHK2 in HPV genome 
amplification has been demonstrated but it was unclear what other factors
provided important activities. The cohesin protein, SMC1, is necessary for sister
chromatid association prior to mitosis. In addition the phosphorylated form of
SMC1 plays a critical role together with NBS1 in the ATM DNA damage response. In 
normal cells, SMC1 becomes phosphorylated in response to radiation, however, in
HPV positive cells our studies demonstrate that it is constitutively activated.
Furthermore, pSMC1 is found localized in distinct nuclear foci in complexes with 
<U+03B3>-H2AX, and CHK2 and bound to HPV DNA. Importantly, knockdown of SMC1 blocks
differentiation-dependent genome amplification. pSMC1 forms complexes with the
insulator transcription factor CTCF and our studies show that these factors bind 
to conserved sequence motifs in the L2 late region of HPV 31. Similar motifs are 
found in most HPV types. Knockdown of CTCF with shRNAs blocks genome
amplification and mutation of the CTCF binding motifs in the L2 open reading
frame inhibits stable maintenance of viral episomes in undifferentiated cells as 
well as amplification of genomes upon differentiation. These findings suggest a
model in which SMC1 factors are constitutively activated in HPV positive cells
and recruited to viral genomes through complex formation with CTCF to facilitate 
genome amplification. Our findings identify both SMC1 and CTCF as critical
regulators of the differentiation-dependent life cycle of high-risk human
papillomaviruses.

PMCID: PMC4395367
PMID: 25875106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Cell Adh Migr. 2015;9(3):214-26. doi: 10.1080/19336918.2014.1000069. Epub 2015
Apr 14.

Protocadherins branch out: Multiple roles in dendrite development.

Keeler AB(1), Molumby MJ, Weiner JA.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biology ; Neuroscience Graduate Program; University of Iowa ; 
Iowa City , IA USA.

The proper formation of dendritic arbors is a critical step in neural circuit
formation, and as such defects in arborization are associated with a variety of
neurodevelopmental disorders. Among the best gene candidates are those encoding
cell adhesion molecules, including members of the diverse cadherin superfamily
characterized by distinctive, repeated adhesive domains in their extracellular
regions. Protocadherins (Pcdhs) make up the largest group within this
superfamily, encompassing over 80 genes, including the ~60 genes of the a-, ß-,
and <U+03B3>-Pcdh gene clusters and the non-clustered d-Pcdh genes. An additional group 
includes the atypical cadherin genes encoding the giant Fat and Dachsous proteins
and the 7-transmembrane cadherins. In this review we highlight the many roles
that Pcdhs and atypical cadherins have been demonstrated to play in
dendritogenesis, dendrite arborization, and dendritic spine regulation. Together,
the published studies we discuss implicate these members of the cadherin
superfamily as key regulators of dendrite development and function, and as
potential therapeutic targets for future interventions in neurodevelopmental
disorders.

PMCID: PMC4594470 [Available on 2016-04-14]
PMID: 25869446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. PLoS Genet. 2015 Apr 10;11(4):e1005161. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005161.
eCollection 2015.

Correction: discovery of CTCF-sensitive cis-spliced fusion RNAs between adjacent 
genes in human prostate cells.

Qin F, Song Z, Babiceanu M, Song Y, Facemire L, Singh R, Adli M, Li H.

Erratum for
    PLoS Genet. 2015 Feb;11(2):e1005001.

PMCID: PMC4393099
PMID: 25860022  [PubMed]


155. Nat Commun. 2015 Apr 8;6:6749. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7749.

A cohesin-OCT4 complex mediates Sox enhancers to prime an early embryonic
lineage.

Abboud N(1), Moore-Morris T(2), Hiriart E(3), Yang H(4), Bezerra H(1), Gualazzi
MG(1), Stefanovic S(3), Guénantin AC(1), Evans SM(5), Pucéat M(3).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR 633, Genopole Evry, University Paris Descartes, 91000 Evry, Paris, 
France. (2)INSERM UMR 910, GMGF, Aix-Marseille University, 13885 Marseille,
France. (3)1] INSERM UMR 633, Genopole Evry, University Paris Descartes, 91000
Evry, Paris, France [2] INSERM UMR 910, GMGF, Aix-Marseille University, 13885
Marseille, France. (4)Cancer Science Institute, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 138672, Singapore. (5)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Department of Medecine and Department of Pharmacology, UCSD, La Jolla, 
California 92093, California, USA.

Short- and long-scales intra- and inter-chromosomal interactions are linked to
gene transcription, but the molecular events underlying these structures and how 
they affect cell fate decision during embryonic development are poorly
understood. One of the first embryonic cell fate decisions (that is, mesendoderm 
determination) is driven by the POU factor OCT4, acting in concert with the
high-mobility group genes Sox-2 and Sox-17. Here we report a
chromatin-remodelling mechanism and enhancer function that mediate cell fate
switching. OCT4 alters the higher-order chromatin structure at both Sox-2 and
Sox-17 loci. OCT4 titrates out cohesin and switches the Sox-17 enhancer from a
locked (within an inter-chromosomal Sox-2 enhancer/CCCTC-binding factor
CTCF/cohesin loop) to an active (within an intra-chromosomal Sox-17
promoter/enhancer/cohesin loop) state. SALL4 concomitantly mobilizes the polycomb
complexes at the Soxs loci. Thus, OCT4/SALL4-driven cohesin- and
polycombs-mediated changes in higher-order chromatin structure mediate
instruction of early cell fate in embryonic cells.

PMID: 25851587  [PubMed - in process]


156. Trends Genet. 2015 May;31(5):274-80. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2015.03.002. Epub 2015
Mar 30.

The alternative role of DNA methylation in splicing regulation.

Lev Maor G(1), Yearim A(2), Ast G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Medical
School, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Electronic address:
galitlm@post.tau.ac.il. (2)Department of Human Molecular Genetics and
Biochemistry, Sackler Medical School, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
Electronic address: ahuvyear@post.tau.ac.il. (3)Department of Human Molecular
Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Medical School, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv,
Israel. Electronic address: gilast@post.tau.ac.il.

Although DNA methylation was originally thought to only affect transcription,
emerging evidence shows that it also regulates alternative splicing. Exons, and
especially splice sites, have higher levels of DNA methylation than flanking
introns, and the splicing of about 22% of alternative exons is regulated by DNA
methylation. Two different mechanisms convey DNA methylation information into the
regulation of alternative splicing. The first involves modulation of the
elongation rate of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) by CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) and 
methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2); the second involves the formation of a
protein bridge by heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) that recruits splicing factors 
onto transcribed alternative exons. These two mechanisms, however, regulate only 
a fraction of such events, implying that more underlying mechanisms remain to be 
found.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25837375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Indian J Med Paediatr Oncol. 2015 Jan-Mar;36(1):49-54. doi:
10.4103/0971-5851.151784.

Role of CTCF poly(ADP-Ribosyl)ation in the regulation of apoptosis in breast
cancer cells.

Venkatraman B(1), Klenova E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Australian School of Advanced Medicine, Macquarie University, Sydney,
Australia. (2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, United Kingdom.

INTRODUCTION: CTCF is a candidate tumor suppressor gene encoding a
multifunctional transcription factor. CTCF function is controlled by
posttranslational modification and interaction with other proteins. Research
findings suggested that CTCF function can be regulated by poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation 
(PARlation) and has specific anti-apoptotic function in breast cancer cells. The 
aim of this study is to assess the effect of CTCF-wild type (WT) and CTCF
complete mutant, which is deficient of PARlation in regulating apoptosis in
breast cancer cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The effect of CTCF-WT and CTCF complete mutant was
expressed in breast cancer cell-lines by DNA-mediated transfection technique
monitored by enhanced green fluorescent protein fluorescence. Evaluation of
apoptotic cell death was carried out with immunohistochemical staining using
4'-6'-diamino-2 phenylindole and scoring by fluorescent microscopy.
RESULTS: CTCF-WT supports survival of breast cancer cells and was observed that
CTCF complete mutant interferes with the functions of the CTCF-WT and there was a
considerable apoptotic cell death in the breast cancer cell lines such as
MDA-MB-435, CAMA-1 and MCF-7.
CONCLUSION: The study enlighten CTCF as a Biological Marker for breast cancer and
the role of CTCF PARlation may be involved in breast carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4363851
PMID: 25810575  [PubMed]


158. PLoS Genet. 2015 Mar 18;11(3):e1005079. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005079.
eCollection 2015.

Escape from X inactivation varies in mouse tissues.

Berletch JB(1), Ma W(2), Yang F(1), Shendure J(2), Noble WS(2), Disteche CM(3),
Deng X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United
States of America. (2)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, United States of America. (3)Department of Pathology,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States of America;
Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United
States of America.

X chromosome inactivation (XCI) silences most genes on one X chromosome in female
mammals, but some genes escape XCI. To identify escape genes in vivo and to
explore molecular mechanisms that regulate this process we analyzed the
allele-specific expression and chromatin structure of X-linked genes in mouse
tissues and cells with skewed XCI and distinguishable alleles based on single
nucleotide polymorphisms. Using a binomial model to assess allelic expression, we
demonstrate a continuum between complete silencing and expression from the
inactive X (Xi). The validity of the RNA-seq approach was verified using RT-PCR
with species-specific primers or Sanger sequencing. Both common escape genes and 
genes with significant differences in XCI status between tissues were identified.
Such genes may be candidates for tissue-specific sex differences. Overall, few
genes (3-7%) escape XCI in any of the mouse tissues examined, suggesting
stringent silencing and escape controls. In contrast, an in vitro system
represented by the embryonic-kidney-derived Patski cell line showed a higher
density of escape genes (21%), representing both kidney-specific escape genes and
cell-line specific escape genes. Allele-specific RNA polymerase II occupancy and 
DNase I hypersensitivity at the promoter of genes on the Xi correlated well with 
levels of escape, consistent with an open chromatin structure at escape genes.
Allele-specific CTCF binding on the Xi clustered at escape genes and was denser
in brain compared to the Patski cell line, possibly contributing to a more
compartmentalized structure of the Xi and fewer escape genes in brain compared to
the cell line where larger domains of escape were observed.

PMCID: PMC4364777
PMID: 25785854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 31;112(13):E1632-41. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1423556112. Epub 2015 Mar 16.

Herpes simplex viral-vector design for efficient transduction of nonneuronal
cells without cytotoxicity.

Miyagawa Y(1), Marino P(2), Verlengia G(2), Uchida H(1), Goins WF(1), Yokota
S(3), Geller DA(4), Yoshida O(3), Mester J(5), Cohen JB(1), Glorioso JC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15219; (2)Department of Microbiology and
Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA
15219; Section of Pharmacology, Department of Medical Sciences, University of
Ferrara, 44121 Ferrara, Italy; (3)Thomas E. Starzl Transplantation Institute,
Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh,
PA 15261; (4)Thomas E. Starzl Transplantation Institute, Department of Surgery,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15261; Liver Cancer
Center, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213; and.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Kentucky University, Highland
Heights, KY 41099. (6)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15219;
glorioso@pitt.edu.

The design of highly defective herpes simplex virus (HSV) vectors for transgene
expression in nonneuronal cells in the absence of toxic viral-gene activity has
been elusive. Here, we report that elements of the latency locus protect a
nonviral promoter against silencing in primary human cells in the absence of any 
viral-gene expression. We identified a CTCF motif cluster 5' to the latency
promoter and a known long-term regulatory region as important elements for
vigorous transgene expression from a vector that is functionally deleted for all 
five immediate-early genes and the 15-kb internal repeat region. We inserted a
16.5-kb expression cassette for full-length mouse dystrophin and report robust
and durable expression in dystrophin-deficient muscle cells in vitro. Given the
broad cell tropism of HSV, our design provides a nontoxic vector that can
accommodate large transgene constructs for transduction of a wide variety of
cells without vector integration, thereby filling an important void in the
current arsenal of gene-therapy vectors.

PMCID: PMC4386379
PMID: 25775541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 May;35(10):1825-37. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00011-15. Epub 2015 Mar 
9.

The Human GATA1 Gene Retains a 5' Insulator That Maintains Chromosomal
Architecture and GATA1 Expression Levels in Splenic Erythroblasts.

Moriguchi T(1), Yu L(2), Takai J(2), Hayashi M(2), Satoh H(2), Suzuki M(2),
Ohneda K(3), Yamamoto M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, Japan moriguch@med.tohoku.ac.jp masiyamamoto@med.tohoku.ac.jp. 
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, Japan. (3)Department of Pharmacy, Takasaki University of Health
and Welfare, Takasaki, Japan.

GATA1 is a key transcription factor for erythropoiesis. GATA1 gene expression is 
strictly regulated at the transcriptional level. While the regulatory mechanisms 
governing mouse Gata1 (mGata1) gene expression have been studied extensively, how
expression of the human GATA1 (hGATA1) gene is regulated remains to be
elucidated. To address this issue, we generated hGATA1 bacterial artificial
chromosome (BAC) transgenic mouse lines harboring a 183-kb hGATA1 locus covering 
the hGATA1 exons and distal flanking sequences. Transgenic hGATA1 expression
coincides with endogenous mGata1 expression and fully rescues hematopoietic
deficiency in mGata1 knockdown mice. The transgene exhibited copy
number-dependent and integration position-independent expression of hGATA1,
indicating the presence of chromatin insulator activity within the transgene. We 
found a novel insulator element at 29 kb 5' to the hGATA1 gene and refer to this 
element as the 5' CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) site. Substitution mutation of the 
5' CTCF site in the hGATA1 BAC disrupted the chromatin architecture and led to a 
reduction of hGATA1 expression in splenic erythroblasts under conditions of
stress erythropoiesis. Our results demonstrate that expression of the hGATA1 gene
is regulated through the chromatin architecture organized by 5' CTCF
site-mediated intrachromosomal interactions in the hGATA1 locus.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4405652
PMID: 25755285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Hum Reprod. 2015 May;30(5):1014-28. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dev053. Epub 2015 Mar 9.

Aberrant DNA methylation patterns of spermatozoa in men with unexplained
infertility.

Urdinguio RG(1), Bayón GF(1), Dmitrijeva M(1), Toraño EG(1), Bravo C(1), Fraga
MF(2), Bassas L(3), Larriba S(4), Fernández AF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epigenetics Laboratory, Institute of Oncology of Asturias (IUOPA),
HUCA, Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo 33006, Spain. (2)Cancer Epigenetics
Laboratory, Institute of Oncology of Asturias (IUOPA), HUCA, Universidad de
Oviedo, Oviedo 33006, Spain Department of Immunology and Oncology, National
Center for Biotechnology, CNB-CSIC, Cantoblanco, Madrid 28049, Spain.
(3)Laboratory of Seminology and Embryology, Andrology Service-Fundació Puigvert, 
Barcelona 08025, Spain. (4)Human Molecular Genetics Group-IDIBELL, L'Hospitalet
de Llobregat, Barcelona 08908, Spain affernandez@hca.es slarriba@idibell.cat.
(5)Cancer Epigenetics Laboratory, Institute of Oncology of Asturias (IUOPA),
HUCA, Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo 33006, Spain affernandez@hca.es
slarriba@idibell.cat.

STUDY QUESTION: Are there DNA methylation alterations in sperm that could explain
the reduced biological fertility of male partners from couples with unexplained
infertility?
SUMMARY ANSWER: DNA methylation patterns, not only at specific loci but also at
Alu Yb8 repetitive sequences, are altered in infertile individuals compared with 
fertile controls.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Aberrant DNA methylation of sperm has been associated with
human male infertility in patients demonstrating either deficiencies in the
process of spermatogenesis or low semen quality.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: Case and control prospective study. This study
compares 46 sperm samples obtained from 17 normospermic fertile men and 29
normospermic infertile patients.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Illumina Infinium HD Human Methylation 
450K arrays were used to identify genomic regions showing differences in sperm
DNA methylation patterns between five fertile and seven infertile individuals.
Additionally, global DNA methylation of sperm was measured using the Methylamp
Global DNA Methylation Quantification Ultra kit (Epigentek) in 14 samples, and
DNA methylation at several repetitive sequences (LINE-1, Alu Yb8, NBL2, D4Z4)
measured by bisulfite pyrosequencing in 44 sperm samples. A sperm-specific DNA
methylation pattern was obtained by comparing the sperm methylomes with the DNA
methylomes of differentiated somatic cells using data obtained from methylation
arrays (Illumina 450 K) of blood, neural and glial cells deposited in public
databases.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: In this study we conduct, for the first
time, a genome-wide study to identify alterations of sperm DNA methylation in
individuals with unexplained infertility that may account for the differences in 
their biological fertility compared with fertile individuals. We have identified 
2752 CpGs showing aberrant DNA methylation patterns, and more importantly, these 
differentially methylated CpGs were significantly associated with CpG sites which
are specifically methylated in sperm when compared with somatic cells. We also
found statistically significant (P < 0.001) associations between DNA
hypomethylation and regions corresponding to those which, in somatic cells, are
enriched in the repressive histone mark H3K9me3, and between DNA hypermethylation
and regions enriched in H3K4me1 and CTCF, suggesting that the relationship
between chromatin context and aberrant DNA methylation of sperm in infertile men 
could be locus-dependent. Finally, we also show that DNA methylation patterns,
not only at specific loci but also at several repetitive sequences (LINE-1, Alu
Yb8, NBL2, D4Z4), were lower in sperm than in somatic cells. Interestingly, sperm
samples at Alu Yb8 repetitive sequences of infertile patients showed
significantly lower DNA methylation levels than controls.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Our results are descriptive and further studies
would be needed to elucidate the functional effects of aberrant DNA methylation
on male fertility.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Overall, our data suggest that aberrant sperm
DNA methylation might contribute to fertility impairment in couples with
unexplained infertility and they provide a promising basis for future research.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTERESTS: This work has been financially supported by
Fundación Cientifica de la AECC (to R.G.U.); IUOPA (to G.F.B.); FICYT (to
E.G.T.); the Spanish National Research Council (CSIC; 200820I172 to M.F.F.);
Fundación Ramón Areces (to M.F.F); the Plan Nacional de I+D+I
2008-2011/2013-2016/FEDER (PI11/01728 to AF.F., PI12/01080 to M.F.F. and
PI12/00361 to S.L.); the PN de I+D+I 2008-20011 and the Generalitat de Catalunya 
(2009SGR01490). A.F.F. is sponsored by ISCIII-Subdirección General de Evaluación 
y Fomento de la Investigación (CP11/00131). S.L. is sponsored by the Researchers 
Stabilization Program from the Spanish National Health System (CES09/020). The
IUOPA is supported by the Obra Social Cajastur, Spain.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25753583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Mar 31;43(6):3056-67. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv144. Epub 2015 
Mar 3.

The contribution of cohesin-SA1 to gene expression and chromatin architecture in 
two murine tissues.

Cuadrado A(1), Remeseiro S(1), Graña O(2), Pisano DG(2), Losada A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Chromosome Dynamics Group, Molecular Oncology Programme, Spanish National
Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Melchor Fernández Almagro 3, 28029 Madrid, Spain. 
(2)Bioinformatics Unit, Structural Biology and Biocomputing Programme, Spanish
National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Melchor Fernández Almagro 3, 28029
Madrid, Spain. (3)Chromosome Dynamics Group, Molecular Oncology Programme,
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Melchor Fernández Almagro 3,
28029 Madrid, Spain alosada@cnio.es.

Cohesin, which in somatic vertebrate cells consists of SMC1, SMC3, RAD21 and
either SA1 or SA2, mediates higher-order chromatin organization. To determine how
cohesin contributes to the establishment of tissue-specific transcriptional
programs, we compared genome-wide cohesin distribution, gene expression and
chromatin architecture in cerebral cortex and pancreas from adult mice. More than
one third of cohesin binding sites differ between the two tissues and these show 
reduced overlap with CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) and are enriched at the
regulatory regions of tissue-specific genes. Cohesin/CTCF sites at active
enhancers and promoters contain, at least, cohesin-SA1. Analyses of chromatin
contacts at the Protocadherin (Pcdh) and Regenerating islet-derived (Reg) gene
clusters, mostly expressed in brain and pancreas, respectively, revealed
remarkable differences that correlate with the presence of cohesin. We could not 
detect significant changes in the chromatin contacts at the Pcdh locus when
comparing brains from wild-type and SA1 null embryos. In contrast, reduced dosage
of SA1 altered the architecture of the Reg locus and decreased the expression of 
Reg genes in the pancreas of SA1 heterozygous mice. Given the role of Reg
proteins in inflammation, such reduction may contribute to the increased
incidence of pancreatic cancer observed in these animals.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4381060
PMID: 25735743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Cell Rep. 2015 Mar 3;10(8):1297-309. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.02.004. Epub 2015
Feb 26.

Comparative Hi-C reveals that CTCF underlies evolution of chromosomal domain
architecture.

Vietri Rudan M(1), Barrington C(1), Henderson S(1), Ernst C(2), Odom DT(2), Tanay
A(3), Hadjur S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Research Department of Cancer Biology, Cancer Institute, University College
London, 72 Huntley Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK. (2)Cancer Research UK, Cambridge 
Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK.
(3)Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, Department of
Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute, Rehovot 76100, Israel. (4)Research
Department of Cancer Biology, Cancer Institute, University College London, 72
Huntley Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK. Electronic address: s.hadjur@ucl.ac.uk.

Topological domains are key architectural building blocks of chromosomes, but
their functional importance and evolutionary dynamics are not well defined. We
performed comparative high-throughput chromosome conformation capture (Hi-C) in
four mammals and characterized the conservation and divergence of chromosomal
contact insulation and the resulting domain architectures within distantly
related genomes. We show that the modular organization of chromosomes is robustly
conserved in syntenic regions and that this is compatible with conservation of
the binding landscape of the insulator protein CTCF. Specifically, conserved CTCF
sites are co-localized with cohesin, are enriched at strong topological domain
borders, and bind to DNA motifs with orientations that define the directionality 
of CTCF's long-range interactions. Conversely, divergent CTCF binding between
species is correlated with divergence of internal domain structure, likely driven
by local CTCF binding sequence changes, demonstrating how genome evolution can be
linked to a continuous flux of local conformation changes. We also show that
large-scale domains are reorganized during genome evolution as intact modules.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4542312
PMID: 25732821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Science. 2015 Feb 27;347(6225):1017-21. doi: 10.1126/science.1262088.

CTCF establishes discrete functional chromatin domains at the Hox clusters during
differentiation.

Narendra V(1), Rocha PP(2), An D(3), Raviram R(2), Skok JA(2), Mazzoni EO(4),
Reinberg D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA. Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York University School of Medicine, 
New York, NY 10016, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, New York University School
of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. (3)Department of Biology, New York
University, New York, NY 10003, USA. (4)Department of Biology, New York
University, New York, NY 10003, USA. danny.reinberg@nyumc.org eom204@nyu.edu.
(5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA. Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York University School of Medicine, 
New York, NY 10016, USA. danny.reinberg@nyumc.org eom204@nyu.edu.

Polycomb and Trithorax group proteins encode the epigenetic memory of cellular
positional identity by establishing inheritable domains of repressive and active 
chromatin within the Hox clusters. Here we demonstrate that the CCCTC-binding
factor (CTCF) functions to insulate these adjacent yet antagonistic chromatin
domains during embryonic stem cell differentiation into cervical motor neurons.
Deletion of CTCF binding sites within the Hox clusters results in the expansion
of active chromatin into the repressive domain. CTCF functions as an insulator by
organizing Hox clusters into spatially disjoint domains. Ablation of CTCF binding
disrupts topological boundaries such that caudal Hox genes leave the repressed
domain and become subject to transcriptional activation. Hence, CTCF is required 
to insulate facultative heterochromatin from impinging euchromatin to produce
discrete positional identities.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4428148
PMID: 25722416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Oncogene. 2015 Nov 5;34(45):5677-84. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.17. Epub 2015 Feb 23.

Disruption of CTCF/cohesin-mediated high-order chromatin structures by DNA
methylation downregulates PTGS2 expression.

Kang JY(1,)(2), Song SH(1), Yun J(1,)(2), Jeon MS(1,)(2), Kim HP(1), Han
SW(1,)(3), Kim TY(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Molecular Medicine and
Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of Convergence Science and
Technology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

The CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)/cohesin complex regulates gene transcription via 
high-order chromatin organization of the genome. De novo methylation of CpG
islands in the promoter region is an epigenetic hallmark of gene silencing in
cancer. Although the CTCF/cohesin complex preferentially targets hypomethylated
DNA, it remains unclear whether the CTCF/cohesin-mediated high-order chromatin
structure is affected by DNA methylation during tumorigenesis. We found that DNA 
methylation downregulates the expression of prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2
(PTGS2), which is an inducible, rate-limiting enzyme for prostaglandin synthesis,
by disrupting CTCF/cohesin-mediated chromatin looping. We show that the
CTCF/cohesin complex is enriched near a CpG island associated with PTGS2 and that
the PTGS2 locus forms chromatin loops through methylation-sensitive binding of
the CTCF/cohesin complex. DNA methylation abolishes the association of the
CTCF/cohesin complex with the PTGS2 CpG island. Disruption of chromatin looping
by DNA methylation abrogates the enrichment of transcriptional components, such
as positive elongation factor b, at the transcriptional start site of the PTGS2
locus. These alterations result in the downregulation of PTGS2. Our results
provide evidence that CTCF/cohesin-mediated chromatin looping of the PTGS2 locus 
is dynamically influenced by the DNA methylation status.

PMID: 25703332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2014 Dec 2;7:35. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-7-35. eCollection 
2014.

High-resolution genome-wide DNA methylation maps of mouse primary female dermal
fibroblasts and keratinocytes.

Chatterjee R(1), He X(2), Huang D(3), FitzGerald P(4), Smith A(5), Vinson C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, 37 Convent Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892 USA ; Human Genetics Unit, Indian
Statistical Institute, 203 B. T. Road, Kolkata, 700108 India. (2)Laboratory of
Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 37 Convent 
Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892 USA. (3)NCBI, National Institutes of Health, 8600
Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 USA. (4)Genome Analysis Unit, Genetics Branch,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 37 Convent Drive,
Bethesda, MD 20892 USA. (5)Molecular and Computational Biology, University of
Southern California, 1050 Childs Way, Los Angeles, CA 90089 USA.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide DNA methylation at a single nucleotide resolution in
different primary cells of the mammalian genome helps to determine the
characteristics and functions of tissue-specific hypomethylated regions
(TS-HMRs). We determined genome-wide cytosine methylation maps at 91X and 36X
coverage of newborn female mouse primary dermal fibroblasts and keratinocytes and
compared with mRNA-seq gene expression data.
RESULTS: These high coverage methylation maps were used to identify HMRs in both 
cell types. A total of 2.91% of the genome are in keratinocyte HMRs, and 2.15% of
the genome are in fibroblast HMRs with 1.75% being common. Half of the TS-HMRs
are extensions of common HMRs, and the remaining are unique TS-HMRs. Four levels 
of CG methylation are observed: 1) total unmethylation for CG dinucleotides in
HMRs in CGIs that are active in all tissues; 2) 10% to 40% methylation for
TS-HMRs; 3) 60% methylation for TS-HMRs in cells types where they are not in
HMRs; and 4) 70% methylation for the nonfunctioning part of the genome. SINE
elements are depleted inside the TS-HMRs, while highly enriched in the
surrounding regions. Hypomethylation at the last exon shows gene repression,
while demethylation toward the gene body positively correlates with gene
expression. The overlapping HMRs have a more complex relationship with gene
expression. The common HMRs and TS-HMRs are each enriched for distinct
Transcription Factor Binding Sites (TFBS). C/EBPß binds to methylated regions
outside of HMRs while CTCF prefers to bind in HMRs, highlighting these two parts 
of the genome and their potential interactions.
CONCLUSIONS: Keratinocytes and fibroblasts are of epithelial and mesenchymal
origin. High-resolution methylation maps in these two cell types can be used as
reference methylomes for analyzing epigenetic mechanisms in several diseases
including cancer. Please see related article at the following link:
http://www.epigeneticsandchromatin.com/content/7/1/34.

PMCID: PMC4333159
PMID: 25699092  [PubMed]


167. J Virol. 2015 May;89(9):4770-85. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00097-15. Epub 2015 Feb 18.

CCCTC-binding factor recruitment to the early region of the human papillomavirus 
18 genome regulates viral oncogene expression.

Paris C(1), Pentland I(2), Groves I(3), Roberts DC(1), Powis SJ(1), Coleman N(3),
Roberts S(4), Parish JL(4).

Author information: 
(1)University of St. Andrews, School of Medicine, St. Andrews, Fife, United
Kingdom. (2)University of Birmingham, School of Cancer Sciences, Birmingham,
United Kingdom. (3)University of Cambridge, Department of Pathology, Cambridge,
United Kingdom. (4)University of Birmingham, School of Cancer Sciences,
Birmingham, United Kingdom S.Roberts@bham.ac.uk j.l.parish@bham.ac.uk.

Host cell differentiation-dependent regulation of human papillomavirus (HPV) gene
expression is required for productive infection. The host cell CCCTC-binding
factor (CTCF) functions in genome-wide chromatin organization and gene
regulation. We have identified a conserved CTCF binding site in the E2 open
reading frame of high-risk HPV types. Using organotypic raft cultures of primary 
human keratinocytes containing high-risk HPV18 genomes, we show that CTCF
recruitment to this conserved site regulates viral gene expression in
differentiating epithelia. Mutation of the CTCF binding site increases the
expression of the viral oncoproteins E6 and E7 and promotes host cell
proliferation. Loss of CTCF binding results in a reduction of a specific
alternatively spliced transcript expressed from the early gene region concomitant
with an increase in the abundance of unspliced early transcripts. We conclude
that high-risk HPV types have evolved to recruit CTCF to the early gene region to
control the balance and complexity of splicing events that regulate viral
oncoprotein expression.IMPORTANCE: The establishment and maintenance of HPV
infection in undifferentiated basal cells of the squamous epithelia requires the 
activation of a subset of viral genes, termed early genes. The differentiation of
infected cells initiates the expression of the late viral transcripts, allowing
completion of the virus life cycle. This tightly controlled balance of
differentiation-dependent viral gene expression allows the virus to stimulate
cellular proliferation to support viral genome replication with minimal
activation of the host immune response, promoting virus productivity. Alternative
splicing of viral mRNAs further increases the complexity of viral gene
expression. In this study, we show that the essential host cell protein CTCF,
which functions in genome-wide chromatin organization and gene regulation, is
recruited to the HPV genome and plays an essential role in the regulation of
early viral gene expression and transcript processing. These data highlight a
novel virus-host interaction important for HPV pathogenicity.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4403478
PMID: 25694598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Genome Res. 2015 Apr;25(4):544-57. doi: 10.1101/gr.184341.114. Epub 2015 Feb 12.

Joint annotation of chromatin state and chromatin conformation reveals
relationships among domain types and identifies domains of cell-type-specific
expression.

Libbrecht MW(1), Ay F(2), Hoffman MM(3), Gilbert DM(4), Bilmes JA(5), Noble
WS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington 98195, USA. (2)Department of Genome Sciences, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA. (3)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre,
University of Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada Department of Medical Biophysics,
University of Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada. (4)Department of Biological Science,
The Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida 32304, USA. (5)Department of
Electrical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.
(6)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington 98195, USA Department of Genome Sciences, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

The genomic neighborhood of a gene influences its activity, a behavior that is
attributable in part to domain-scale regulation. Previous genomic studies have
identified many types of regulatory domains. However, due to the difficulty of
integrating genomics data sets, the relationships among these domain types are
poorly understood. Semi-automated genome annotation (SAGA) algorithms facilitate 
human interpretation of heterogeneous collections of genomics data by
simultaneously partitioning the human genome and assigning labels to the
resulting genomic segments. However, existing SAGA methods cannot integrate
inherently pairwise chromatin conformation data. We developed a new computational
method, called graph-based regularization (GBR), for expressing a pairwise prior 
that encourages certain pairs of genomic loci to receive the same label in a
genome annotation. We used GBR to exploit chromatin conformation information
during genome annotation by encouraging positions that are close in 3D to occupy 
the same type of domain. Using this approach, we produced a model of chromatin
domains in eight human cell types, thereby revealing the relationships among
known domain types. Through this model, we identified clusters of tightly
regulated genes expressed in only a small number of cell types, which we term
"specific expression domains." We found that domain boundaries marked by
promoters and CTCF motifs are consistent between cell types even when domain
activity changes. Finally, we showed that GBR can be used to transfer information
from well-studied cell types to less well-characterized cell types during genome 
annotation, making it possible to produce high-quality annotations of the
hundreds of cell types with limited available data.

© 2015 Libbrecht et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4381526
PMID: 25677182  [PubMed - in process]


169. Genome Res. 2015 Apr;25(4):504-13. doi: 10.1101/gr.184986.114. Epub 2015 Feb 12.

Spatial enhancer clustering and regulation of enhancer-proximal genes by cohesin.

Ing-Simmons E(1), Seitan VC(2), Faure AJ(3), Flicek P(4), Carroll T(5), Dekker
J(6), Fisher AG(2), Lenhard B(7), Merkenschlager M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Development Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College
London, London W12 0NN, United Kingdom; Computational Regulatory Genomics Group, 
MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, United
Kingdom; (2)Lymphocyte Development Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial 
College London, London W12 0NN, United Kingdom; (3)European Molecular Biology
Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus,
Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA, United Kingdom; (4)European Molecular Biology
Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus,
Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA, United Kingdom; Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute,
Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA, United Kingdom; (5)Computing and Bioinformatics
Facility, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, 
United Kingdom; (6)Program in Systems Biology, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
Massachusetts 01605, USA. (7)Computational Regulatory Genomics Group, MRC
Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, United
Kingdom; (8)Lymphocyte Development Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial 
College London, London W12 0NN, United Kingdom;
matthias.merkenschlager@csc.mrc.ac.uk.

In addition to mediating sister chromatid cohesion during the cell cycle, the
cohesin complex associates with CTCF and with active gene regulatory elements to 
form long-range interactions between its binding sites. Genome-wide chromosome
conformation capture had shown that cohesin's main role in interphase genome
organization is in mediating interactions within architectural chromosome
compartments, rather than specifying compartments per se. However, it remains
unclear how cohesin-mediated interactions contribute to the regulation of gene
expression. We have found that the binding of CTCF and cohesin is highly enriched
at enhancers and in particular at enhancer arrays or "super-enhancers" in mouse
thymocytes. Using local and global chromosome conformation capture, we
demonstrate that enhancer elements associate not just in linear sequence, but
also in 3D, and that spatial enhancer clustering is facilitated by cohesin. The
conditional deletion of cohesin from noncycling thymocytes preserved enhancer
position, H3K27ac, H4K4me1, and enhancer transcription, but weakened interactions
between enhancers. Interestingly, ~ 50% of deregulated genes reside in the
vicinity of enhancer elements, suggesting that cohesin regulates gene expression 
through spatial clustering of enhancer elements. We propose a model for
cohesin-dependent gene regulation in which spatial clustering of enhancer
elements acts as a unified mechanism for both enhancer-promoter "connections" and
"insulation."

© 2015 Ing-Simmons et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4381522
PMID: 25677180  [PubMed - in process]


170. PLoS Genet. 2015 Feb 6;11(2):e1005001. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005001.
eCollection 2015.

Discovery of CTCF-sensitive Cis-spliced fusion RNAs between adjacent genes in
human prostate cells.

Qin F(1), Song Z(2), Babiceanu M(1), Song Y(1), Facemire L(1), Singh R(3), Adli
M(3), Li H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America. (2)Department of Pathology, 
School of Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, United
States of America; Pharmacy Department of Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, 
United States of America. (4)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America;
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine, University
of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2015 Apr;11(4):e1005161.

Genes or their encoded products are not expected to mingle with each other unless
in some disease situations. In cancer, a frequent mechanism that can produce gene
fusions is chromosomal rearrangement. However, recent discoveries of RNA
trans-splicing and cis-splicing between adjacent genes (cis-SAGe) support for
other mechanisms in generating fusion RNAs. In our transcriptome analyses of 28
prostate normal and cancer samples, 30% fusion RNAs on average are the
transcripts that contain exons belonging to same-strand neighboring genes. These 
fusion RNAs may be the products of cis-SAGe, which was previously thought to be
rare. To validate this finding and to better understand the phenomenon, we used
LNCaP, a prostate cell line as a model, and identified 16 additional cis-SAGe
events by silencing transcription factor CTCF and paired-end RNA sequencing.
About half of the fusions are expressed at a significant level compared to their 
parental genes. Silencing one of the in-frame fusions resulted in reduced cell
motility. Most out-of-frame fusions are likely to function as non-coding RNAs.
The majority of the 16 fusions are also detected in other prostate cell lines, as
well as in the 14 clinical prostate normal and cancer pairs. By studying the
features associated with these fusions, we developed a set of rules: 1) the
parental genes are same-strand-neighboring genes; 2) the distance between the
genes is within 30kb; 3) the 5' genes are actively transcribing; and 4) the
chimeras tend to have the second-to-last exon in the 5' genes joined to the
second exon in the 3' genes. We then randomly selected 20 neighboring genes in
the genome, and detected four fusion events using these rules in prostate cancer 
and non-cancerous cells. These results suggest that splicing between neighboring 
gene transcripts is a rather frequent phenomenon, and it is not a feature unique 
to cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4450057
PMID: 25658338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Feb 17;112(7):E677-86. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1416674112. Epub 2015 Feb 2.

Genome-wide targeting of the epigenetic regulatory protein CTCF to gene promoters
by the transcription factor TFII-I.

Peña-Hernández R(1), Marques M(1), Hilmi K(1), Zhao T(1), Saad A(1),
Alaoui-Jamali MA(1), del Rincon SV(1), Ashworth T(2), Roy AL(3), Emerson BM(4),
Witcher M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Oncology and Experimental Medicine, Lady Davis Institute,
Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3T 1E2, Canada;
(2)Immunoscience Research Unit, Pfizer Inc., Cambridge, MA 02139; (3)Department
of Developmental, Molecular and Chemical Biology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, MA 02111; and. (4)Department of Regulatory Biology, Salk
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037. (5)Departments of Oncology and Experimental
Medicine, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University,
Montreal, QC H3T 1E2, Canada; michael.witcher@mcgill.ca.

CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a key regulator of nuclear chromatin structure and
gene regulation. The impact of CTCF on transcriptional output is highly varied,
ranging from repression to transcriptional pausing and transactivation. The
multifunctional nature of CTCF may be directed solely through remodeling
chromatin architecture. However, another hypothesis is that the multifunctional
nature of CTCF is mediated, in part, through differential association with
protein partners having unique functions. Consistent with this hypothesis, our
mass spectrometry analyses of CTCF interacting partners reveal a previously
undefined association with the transcription factor general transcription factor 
II-I (TFII-I). Biochemical fractionation of CTCF indicates that a distinct CTCF
complex incorporating TFII-I is assembled on DNA. Unexpectedly, we found that the
interaction between CTCF and TFII-I is essential for directing CTCF to the
promoter proximal regulatory regions of target genes across the genome,
particularly at genes involved in metabolism. At genes coregulated by CTCF and
TFII-I, we find knockdown of TFII-I results in diminished CTCF binding, lack of
cyclin-dependent kinase 8 (CDK8) recruitment, and an attenuation of RNA
polymerase II phosphorylation at serine 5. Phenotypically, knockdown of TFII-I
alters the cellular response to metabolic stress. Our data indicate that TFII-I
directs CTCF binding to target genes, and in turn the two proteins cooperate to
recruit CDK8 and enhance transcription initiation.

PMCID: PMC4343169
PMID: 25646466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Cancer Genet. 2015 May;208(5):215-24. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2014.11.001. Epub 
2014 Nov 20.

The role of the histone demethylase KDM4A in cancer.

Guerra-Calderas L(1), González-Barrios R(1), Herrera LA(1), Cantú de León D(1),
Soto-Reyes E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Investigación Biomédica en Cáncer, Instituto Nacional de
Cancerología-Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional
Autónoma de México (UNAM), Mexico City, Mexico. (2)Unidad de Investigación
Biomédica en Cáncer, Instituto Nacional de Cancerología-Instituto de
Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM),
Mexico City, Mexico. Electronic address: ctcf@ciencias.unam.mx.

Histone posttranslational modifications are important components of epigenetic
regulation. One extensively studied modification is the methylation of lysine
residues. These modifications were thought to be irreversible. However, several
proteins with histone lysine demethylase functions have been discovered and
characterized. Among these proteins, KDM4A is the first histone lysine
demethylase shown to demethylate trimethylated residues. This enzyme plays an
important role in gene expression, cellular differentiation, and animal
development. Recently, it has also been shown to be involved in cancer. In this
review, we focus on describing the structure, mechanisms, and function of KDM4A. 
We primarily discuss the role of KDM4A in cancer development and the importance
of KDM4A as a potential therapeutic target.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25633974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 May 15;24(10):2724-32. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv032. Epub 2015 Jan
28.

CHD6 regulates the topological arrangement of the CFTR locus.

Sancho A(1), Li S(2), Paul T(3), Zhang F(4), Aguilo F(1), Vashisht A(5),
Balasubramaniyan N(6), Leleiko NS(7), Suchy FJ(6), Wohlschlegel JA(5), Zhang
W(4), Walsh MJ(8).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Structural and Chemical Biology. (2)Departments of 
Pediatrics. (3)Department of Paediatrics, St. George's Hospital, University of
London, London SW17 0QT, UK. (4)Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Division of
Nephrology, Department of Medicine. (5)Department of Biological Chemistry and the
Institute of Genomics and Proteomics, University of California, Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (6)Children's Hospital Research Institute of Colorado,
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, USA and.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Gastroenterology, Hasbro Children's
Hospital, Brown University School of Medicine, Providence, NY, USA.
(8)Departments of Pediatrics, Structural and Chemical Biology, Department of
Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY 10029, USA, martin.walsh@mssm.edu.

The control of transcription is regulated through the well-coordinated spatial
and temporal interactions between distal genomic regulatory elements required for
specialized cell-type and developmental gene expression programs. With recent
findings CFTR has served as a model to understand the principles that govern
genome-wide and topological organization of distal intra-chromosomal contacts as 
it relates to transcriptional control. This is due to the extensive
characterization of the DNase hypersensitivity sites, modification of chromatin, 
transcription factor binding sites and the arrangement of these sites in CFTR
consistent with the restrictive expression in epithelial cell types. Here, we
identified CHD6 from a screen among several chromatin-remodeling proteins as a
putative epigenetic modulator of CFTR expression. Moreover, our findings of CTCF 
interactions with CHD6 are consistent with the role described previously for CTCF
in CFTR regulation. Our results now reveal that the CHD6 protein lies within the 
infrastructure of multiple transcriptional complexes, such as the FACT, PBAF,
PAF1C, Mediator, SMC/Cohesion and MLL complexes. This model underlies the
fundamental role CHD6 facilitates by tethering cis-acting regulatory elements of 
CFTR in proximity to these multi-subunit transcriptional protein complexes.
Finally, we indicate that CHD6 structurally coordinates a three-dimensional
stricture between intragenic elements of CFTR bound by several cell-type specific
transcription factors, such as CDX2, SOX18, HNF4a and HNF1a. Therefore, our
results reveal new insights into the epigenetic regulation of CFTR expression,
whereas the manipulation of CFTR gene topology could be considered for treating
specific indications of cystic fibrosis and/or pancreatitis.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4406289 [Available on 2016-05-15]
PMID: 25631877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Feb 10;112(6):1815-20. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1424936112. Epub 2015 Jan 26.

CTCF-binding elements 1 and 2 in the Igh intergenic control region cooperatively 
regulate V(D)J recombination.

Lin SG(1), Guo C(2), Su A(2), Zhang Y(1), Alt FW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine and Department of Genetics, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115. (2)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine
and. (3)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine and Department of Genetics,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston 
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115; and alt@enders.tch.harvard.edu.

Ig heavy chain (IgH) variable region exons are assembled from V, D, and J gene
segments during early B-lymphocyte differentiation. A several megabase region at 
the "distal" end of the mouse IgH locus (Igh) contains hundreds of V(H)s,
separated by an intergenic region from Igh Ds, J(H)s, and constant region exons. 
Diverse primary Igh repertoires are generated by joining Vs, Ds, and Js in
different combinations, with a given B cell productively assembling only one
combination. The intergenic control region 1 (IGCR1) in the V(H)-to-D intergenic 
region regulates Igh V(D)J recombination in the contexts of developmental order, 
lineage specificity, and feedback from productive rearrangements. IGCR1 also
diversifies IgH repertoires by balancing proximal and distal V(H) use. IGCR1
functions in all these regulatory contexts by suppressing predominant
rearrangement of D-proximal V(H)s. Such IGCR1 functions were neutralized by
simultaneous mutation of two CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)-binding elements (CBE1
and CBE2) within it. However, it was unknown whether only one CBE mediates IGCR1 
functions or whether both function in this context. To address these questions,
we generated mice in which either IGCR1 CBE1 or CBE2 was replaced with scrambled 
sequences that do not bind CTCF. We found that inactivation of CBE1 or CBE2
individually led to only partial impairment of various IGCR1 functions relative
to the far greater effects of inactivating both binding elements simultaneously, 
demonstrating that they function cooperatively to achieve full IGCR1 regulatory
activity. Based on these and other findings, we propose an orientation-specific
looping model for synergistic CBE1 and CBE2 functions.

PMCID: PMC4330762
PMID: 25624508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Sci Rep. 2015 Jan 16;5:7833. doi: 10.1038/srep07833.

Systematical analyses of variants in CTCF-binding sites identified a novel lung
cancer susceptibility locus among Chinese population.

Dai J(1), Zhu M(2), Wang C(2), Shen W(2), Zhou W(2), Sun J(2), Liu J(2), Jin
G(1), Ma H(1), Hu Z(3), Lin D(4), Shen H(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics and Ministry of Education
(MOE), Key Laboratory for Modern Toxicology, School of Public Health, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China [2] Jiangsu Key Lab of Cancer
Biomarkers, Prevention and Treatment, Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center For
Cancer Personalized Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China. 
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics and Ministry of Education (MOE), 
Key Laboratory for Modern Toxicology, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 211166, China. (3)1] Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics and Ministry of Education (MOE), Key Laboratory for Modern
Toxicology, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, 
China [2] Jiangsu Key Lab of Cancer Biomarkers, Prevention and Treatment, Jiangsu
Collaborative Innovation Center For Cancer Personalized Medicine, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 211166, China [3] State Key Laboratory of Reproductive
Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China. (4)State Key
Laboratory of Molecular Oncology and Department of Etiology and Carcinogenesis,
Cancer Institute and Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking
Union Medical College, Beijing 100021, China.

Genome-wide association studies identified genetic susceptibility variants mostly
lie outside of protein-coding regions. It suggested variants located at
transcriptional regulatory region should play an important role in cancer
carcinogenesis including lung cancer. In the present study, we systematically
investigated the associations between the variants in the binding sites of an
extensive transcription factor CTCF and lung cancer risk in Chinese population. A
two-stage case-control design was conducted to evaluate the variants located at
the uniform CTCF ChIP-seq peaks in a Chinese population (2,331 vs 3,077; 1,115 vs
1,346). The ChIP-seq data for CTCF, specified on lung cancer cell line A549, were
downloaded from ENCODE database. Imputation was performed to increase the genome 
coverage in the CTCF binding regions. Three variants in CTCF binding sites were
found to associate with lung cancer risk in the first stage. Further replication 
revealed a novel single nucleotide polymorphism rs60507107 was significantly
associated with increased risk of lung cancer in two stages (Additive model: OR =
1.19, 95%CI = 1.11-1.27, P = 6.98 × 10(-7)). Our results indicate that rs60507107
in the binding site of CTCF is associated with an increased risk of lung cancer. 
This may further advance our understanding of regulatory DNA sequences in cancer 
development.

PMCID: PMC4296290
PMID: 25592173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Nat Biotechnol. 2015 Feb;33(2):198-203. doi: 10.1038/nbt.3062. Epub 2015 Jan 12.

Genomic discovery of potent chromatin insulators for human gene therapy.

Liu M(1), Maurano MT(2), Wang H(2), Qi H(3), Song CZ(4), Navas PA(1), Emery
DW(4), Stamatoyannopoulos JA(5), Stamatoyannopoulos G(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA. (2)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington, USA. (3)1] Division of Medical Genetics, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, USA. [2] Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China. (4)1] Division of Medical Genetics, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. [2] Institute for Stem Cell and
Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. (5)1] 
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA. [2] Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA. (6)1] Division of Medical Genetics, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington, USA. [2] Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2015 Mar;16(3):130-1.

Insertional mutagenesis and genotoxicity, which usually manifest as hematopoietic
malignancy, represent major barriers to realizing the promise of gene therapy.
Although insulator sequences that block transcriptional enhancers could mitigate 
or eliminate these risks, so far no human insulators with high functional potency
have been identified. Here we describe a genomic approach for the identification 
of compact sequence elements that function as insulators. These elements are
highly occupied by the insulator protein CTCF, are DNase I hypersensitive and
represent only a small minority of the CTCF recognition sequences in the human
genome. We show that the elements identified acted as potent enhancer blockers
and substantially decreased the risk of tumor formation in a cancer-prone animal 
model. The elements are small, can be efficiently accommodated by viral vectors
and have no detrimental effects on viral titers. The insulators we describe here 
are expected to increase the safety of gene therapy for genetic diseases.

PMID: 25580597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Mol Cell. 2015 Jan 22;57(2):361-75. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.12.006. Epub 2015 
Jan 8.

Locus-specific targeting to the X chromosome revealed by the RNA interactome of
CTCF.

Kung JT(1), Kesner B(1), An JY(1), Ahn JY(2), Cifuentes-Rojas C(1), Colognori
D(1), Jeon Y(1), Szanto A(1), del Rosario BC(1), Pinter SF(1), Erwin JA(1), Lee
JT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute; Department of Molecular Biology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114 USA; Department of Genetics,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 USA. (2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute;
Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA
02114 USA; Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 USA; 
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
02138 USA. (3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute; Department of Molecular Biology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114 USA; Department of Genetics,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 USA; Department of Pathology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114 USA. Electronic address:
lee@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu.

CTCF is a master regulator that plays important roles in genome architecture and 
gene expression. How CTCF is recruited in a locus-specific manner is not fully
understood. Evidence from epigenetic processes, such as X chromosome inactivation
(XCI), indicates that CTCF associates functionally with RNA. Using genome-wide
approaches to investigate the relationship between its RNA interactome and
epigenomic landscape, here we report that CTCF binds thousands of transcripts in 
mouse embryonic stem cells, many in close proximity to CTCF's genomic binding
sites. CTCF is a specific and high-affinity RNA-binding protein (Kd < 1 nM).
During XCI, CTCF differentially binds the active and inactive X chromosomes and
interacts directly with Tsix, Xite, and Xist RNAs. Tsix and Xite RNAs target CTCF
to the X inactivation center, thereby inducing homologous X chromosome pairing.
Our work elucidates one mechanism by which CTCF is recruited in a locus-specific 
manner and implicates CTCF-RNA interactions in long-range chromosomal
interactions.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4316200
PMID: 25578877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. PLoS Genet. 2015 Jan 8;11(1):e1004885. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004885.
eCollection 2015.

Interactions of chromatin context, binding site sequence content, and sequence
evolution in stress-induced p53 occupancy and transactivation.

Su D(1), Wang X(1), Campbell MR(1), Song L(2), Safi A(2), Crawford GE(2), Bell
DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Genomics Group, Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health,
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, United States of America. (2)Institute
for Genome Sciences and Policy, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, United
States of America.

Cellular stresses activate the tumor suppressor p53 protein leading to selective 
binding to DNA response elements (REs) and gene transactivation from a large pool
of potential p53 REs (p53REs). To elucidate how p53RE sequences and local
chromatin context interact to affect p53 binding and gene transactivation, we
mapped genome-wide binding localizations of p53 and H3K4me3 in untreated and
doxorubicin (DXR)-treated human lymphoblastoid cells. We examined the
relationships among p53 occupancy, gene expression, H3K4me3, chromatin
accessibility (DNase 1 hypersensitivity, DHS), ENCODE chromatin states, p53RE
sequence, and evolutionary conservation. We observed that the inducible
expression of p53-regulated genes was associated with the steady-state chromatin 
status of the cell. Most highly inducible p53-regulated genes were suppressed at 
baseline and marked by repressive histone modifications or displayed CTCF
binding. Comparison of p53RE sequences residing in different chromatin contexts
demonstrated that weaker p53REs resided in open promoters, while stronger p53REs 
were located within enhancers and repressed chromatin. p53 occupancy was strongly
correlated with similarity of the target DNA sequences to the p53RE consensus,
but surprisingly, inversely correlated with pre-existing nucleosome accessibility
(DHS) and evolutionary conservation at the p53RE. Occupancy by p53 of REs that
overlapped transposable element (TE) repeats was significantly higher (p<10-7)
and correlated with stronger p53RE sequences (p<10-110) relative to
nonTE-associated p53REs, particularly for MLT1H, LTR10B, and Mer61 TEs. However, 
binding at these elements was generally not associated with transactivation of
adjacent genes. Occupied p53REs located in L2-like TEs were unique in displaying 
highly negative PhyloP scores (predicted fast-evolving) and being associated with
altered H3K4me3 and DHS levels. These results underscore the systematic
interaction between chromatin status and p53RE context in the induced
transactivation response. This p53 regulated response appears to have been tuned 
via evolutionary processes that may have led to repression and/or utilization of 
p53REs originating from primate-specific transposon elements.

PMCID: PMC4287438
PMID: 25569532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Nucleus. 2015;6(1):15-8. doi: 10.1080/19491034.2015.1004258.

The ubiquitous transcription factor CTCF promotes lineage-specific epigenomic
remodeling and establishment of transcriptional networks driving cell
differentiation.

Dubois-Chevalier J(1), Staels B, Lefebvre P, Eeckhoute J.

Author information: 
(1)a Inserm UMR U1011 ; Lille , France.

Cell differentiation relies on tissue-specific transcription factors (TFs) that
cooperate to establish unique transcriptomes and phenotypes. However, the role of
ubiquitous TFs in these processes remains poorly defined. Recently, we have shown
that the CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is required for adipocyte differentiation
through epigenomic remodelling of adipose tissue-specific enhancers and
transcriptional activation of Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
(PPARG), the main driver of the adipogenic program (PPARG), and its target genes.
Here, we discuss how these findings, together with the recent literature,
illuminate a functional role for ubiquitous TFs in lineage-determining
transcriptional networks.

PMCID: PMC4615151
PMID: 25565413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Phys Condens Matter. 2015 Feb 18;27(6):064107. doi:
10.1088/0953-8984/27/6/064107. Epub 2015 Jan 7.

The interaction of DNA with multi-Cys2His2 zinc finger proteins.

Liu L(1), Heermann DW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Theoretical Physics, Heidelberg University, 69117 Heidelberg,
Germany.

The multi-Cys2His2 (mC2H2) zinc finger protein, like CTCF, plays a central role
in the three-dimensional organization of chromatin and gene regulation. The
interaction between DNA and mC2H2 zinc finger proteins becomes crucial to better 
understand how CTCF dynamically shapes the chromatin structure. Here, we study a 
coarse-grained model of the mC2H2 zinc finger proteins in complexes with DNA, and
in particular, we study how a mC2H2 zinc finger protein binds to and searches for
its target DNA loci. On the basis of coarse-grained molecular dynamics
simulations, we present several interesting kinetic conformational properties of 
the proteins, such as the rotation-coupled sliding, the asymmetrical roles of
different zinc fingers and the partial binding partial dangling mode. In
addition, two kinds of studied mC2H2 zinc finger proteins, of CG-rich and AT-rich
binding motif each, were able to recognize their target sites and slide away from
their non-target sites, which shows a proper sequence specificity in our model
and the derived force field for mC2H2-DNA interaction. A further application to
CTCF shows that the protein binds to a specific DNA duplex only with its central 
zinc fingers. The zinc finger domains of CTCF asymmetrically bend the DNA, but do
not form a DNA loop alone in our simulations.

PMID: 25563438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jan;43(2):745-59. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1324. Epub 2014 Dec
24.

Enhancers compete with a long non-coding RNA for regulation of the Kcnq1 domain.

Schultz BM(1), Gallicio GA(1), Cesaroni M(1), Lupey LN(1), Engel N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA. (2)Fels Institute for Cancer
Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA noraengel@temple.edu.

The imprinted Kcnq1 domain contains a differentially methylated region (KvDMR) in
intron 11 of Kcnq1. The Kcnq1ot1 non-coding RNA emerges from the unmethylated
paternal KvDMR in antisense direction, resulting in cis-repression of neighboring
genes. The KvDMR encompasses the Kcnq1ot1 promoter, CTCF sites and other DNA
elements, whose individual contribution to regulation of the endogenous domain is
unknown. We find that paternal inheritance of a deletion of the minimal Kcnq1ot1 
promoter derepresses the upstream Cdkn1c gene. Surprisingly, Kcnq1ot1 transcripts
continue to emerge from alternative sites, evidence that silencing depends, not
on the ncRNA, but on the promoter sequence. Detailed analyses of Kcnq1ot during
cardiogenesis show substantial chromatin reorganization coinciding with
discontinuous RNA production in both wild-type and mutant mice, with loss of
imprinting. We show that CTCF binds to both methylated and unmethylated alleles
of the KvDMR. Furthermore, we report a multitude of enhancers within the Kcnq1ot1
region, and present conformational dynamics of a novel heart enhancer engaged in 
Kcnq1 expression. Our results have important implications on tissue-specific
imprinting patterns and how transcriptional mechanisms compete to maximize the
expression of vital genes, in addition to shifting our perception on the role of 
the long ncRNA in regulating this imprinted domain.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4333379
PMID: 25539921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Exp Med. 2015 Jan 12;212(1):107-20. doi: 10.1084/jem.20141479. Epub 2014 Dec
15.

Lineage-specific compaction of Tcrb requires a chromatin barrier to protect the
function of a long-range tethering element.

Majumder K(1), Koues OI(1), Chan EA(2), Kyle KE(1), Horowitz JE(3), Yang-Iott
K(3), Bassing CH(3), Taniuchi I(4), Krangel MS(2), Oltz EM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63110. (2)Department of Immunology, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710. (3)Division of Cancer Pathobiology, 
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Center for Childhood Cancer
Research, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and Abramson Family Cancer
Research Institute, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104. (4)Laboratory for Transcriptional Regulation, RIKEN
Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.
(5)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63110 eoltz@wustl.edu.

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2015 Jan 12;212(1):2.

Gene regulation relies on dynamic changes in three-dimensional chromatin
conformation, which are shaped by composite regulatory and architectural
elements. However, mechanisms that govern such conformational switches within
chromosomal domains remain unknown. We identify a novel mechanism by which
cis-elements promote long-range interactions, inducing conformational changes
critical for diversification of the TCRß antigen receptor locus (Tcrb).
Association between distal Vß gene segments and the highly expressed DßJß
clusters, termed the recombination center (RC), is independent of enhancer
function and recruitment of V(D)J recombinase. Instead, we find that
tissue-specific folding of Tcrb relies on two distinct architectural elements
located upstream of the RC. The first, a CTCF-containing element, directly
tethers distal portions of the Vß array to the RC. The second element is a
chromatin barrier that protects the tether from hyperactive RC chromatin. When
the second element is removed, active RC chromatin spreads upstream, forcing the 
tether to serve as a new barrier. Acquisition of barrier function by the CTCF
element disrupts contacts between distal Vß gene segments and significantly
alters Tcrb repertoires. Our findings reveal a separation of function for
RC-flanking regions, in which anchors for long-range recombination must be
cordoned off from hyperactive RC landscapes by chromatin barriers.

© 2015 Majumder et al.

PMCID: PMC4291525
PMID: 25512470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Neoplasia. 2014 Dec;16(12):1028-35. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2014.09.012.

Harnessing the p53-PUMA axis to overcome DNA damage resistance in renal cell
carcinoma.

Zhou X(1), Tolstov Y(1), Arslan A(1), Roth W(2), Grüllich C(3), Pahernik S(4),
Hohenfellner M(4), Duensing S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Urooncology, Department of Urology, University of Heidelberg School 
of Medicine, Im Neuenheimer Feld 517, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Department 
of Pathology, University of Heidelberg School of Medicine, Im Neuenheimer Feld
224, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (3)National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT),
Medical Oncology, Im Neuenheimer Feld 460, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany; Center
for Kidney Tumors, National Center for Tumor Disease and University of Heidelberg
School of Medicine, Im Neuenheimer Feld 460, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Center for Kidney Tumors, National Center for Tumor Disease and University of 
Heidelberg School of Medicine, Im Neuenheimer Feld 460, D-69120 Heidelberg,
Germany; Department of Urology, University of Heidelberg School of Medicine, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 110, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Molecular Urooncology,
Department of Urology, University of Heidelberg School of Medicine, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 517, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany; Center for Kidney Tumors,
National Center for Tumor Disease and University of Heidelberg School of
Medicine, Im Neuenheimer Feld 460, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany; Department of
Urology, University of Heidelberg School of Medicine, Im Neuenheimer Feld 110,
D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address:
stefan.duensing@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

Resistance to DNA damage-induced apoptosis is a hallmark of cancer and a major
cause of treatment failure and lethal disease outcome. A tumor entity that is
largely resistant to DNA-damaging therapies including chemo- or radiotherapy is
renal cell carcinoma (RCC). This study was designed to explore the underlying
molecular mechanisms of DNA damage resistance in RCC to develop strategies to
resensitize tumor cells to DNA damage-induced apoptosis. Here, we show that
apoptosis-resistant RCC cells have a disconnect between activation of p53 and
upregulation of the downstream proapoptotic protein p53 upregulated modulator of 
apoptosis (PUMA). We demonstrate that this disconnect is not caused by
gene-specific repression through CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) but instead by
aberrant chromatin compaction. Treatment with an HDAC inhibitor was found to
effectively reactivate PUMA expression on the mRNA and protein level and to
revert resistance to DNA damage-induced cell death. Ectopic expression of PUMA
was found to resensitize a panel of RCC cell lines to four different DNA-damaging
agents tested. Remarkably, all RCC cell lines analyzed were wild-type for p53,
and a knockdown was likewise able to sensitize RCC cells to acute genotoxic
stress. Taken together, our results indicate that DNA damage resistance in RCC is
reversible, involves the p53-PUMA axis, and is potentially targetable to improve 
the oncological outcomes of RCC patients.

Copyright © 2014 Neoplasia Press, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4309250
PMID: 25499216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Neoplasia. 2014 Dec;16(12):1018-27. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2014.10.003.

Frequent disruption of chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein 8 (CHD8) and
functionally associated chromatin regulators in prostate cancer.

Damaschke NA(1), Yang B(1), Blute ML Jr(1), Lin CP(2), Huang W(3), Jarrard DF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public
Health, Madison, WI. (2)Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin School of 
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI. (3)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI. (4)Department of
Urology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison,
WI; University of Wisconsin Carbone Comprehensive Cancer Center, Madison, WI;
Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI.
Electronic address: jarrard@urology.wisc.edu.

Abnormal expression and function of chromatin regulators results in the altered
chromatin structure seen in cancer. The chromatin regulator CTCF, its cofactor
CHD8, and antagonistic paralogue BORIS have wide-ranging effects on gene
regulation. Their concurrent expression and regulation was examined in benign,
localized, and metastatic prostate cancer (PCa) arrays with extended follow-up
using an automated quantitative imaging system, VECTRA. Epithelial staining was
quantified and compared against a range of clinicopathologic variables. CHD8
expression was decreased in HGPIN, localized, and metastatic PCa compared to
benign (P < .001). CHD8 promoter hypermethylation, assessed by Quantitative
Pyrosequencing, occurred in over 45% of primary cancers in this population as
well as the TGCA database. Treatment of cell lines with the demethylating agent
5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine reinduced expression. An interesting dichotomy for CHD8
was observed within primary cancers, with higher nuclear protein expression
associated with adverse clinical outcomes including extracapsular extension (P = 
.007), presence of metastases (P = .025) and worse PSA-recurrence free survival
(P = .048). CHD8 outperformed Gleason score and predicted biochemical failure
within intermediate grade prostate cancers. The BORIS/CTCF expression ratio
increased in localized (P = .03) and metastatic PCa (P = .006) and was associated
with higher Gleason score (P = .02), increased tumor volume (P = .02) and
positive margins (P = .04). Per cell heterogeneity of expression revealed all
protein expression to be more heterogeneous in cancerous tissue (both P < .001), 
especially high grade (P < .01). In the first detailed analysis in cancer, a
marked loss of CHD8 expression and increased BORIS/CTCF ratio indicate frequent
disruption of CTCF and its effector genes in PCa.

Copyright © 2014 Neoplasia Press, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4309256
PMID: 25499215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Cell. 2014 Dec 18;159(7):1665-80. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.11.021. Epub 2014 Dec 
11.

A 3D map of the human genome at kilobase resolution reveals principles of
chromatin looping.

Rao SS(1), Huntley MH(2), Durand NC(1), Stamenova EK(1), Bochkov ID(3), Robinson 
JT(4), Sanborn AL(5), Machol I(3), Omer AD(3), Lander ES(6), Aiden EL(7).

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Genome Architecture, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA; Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Computer Science, Department of
Computational and Applied Mathematics, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, USA;
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. (2)The Center for
Genome Architecture, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA;
Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
TX 77030, USA; Department of Computer Science, Department of Computational and
Applied Mathematics, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, USA; Broad Institute of 
MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; School of Engineering and Applied
Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. (3)The Center for Genome 
Architecture, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of
Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA;
Department of Computer Science, Department of Computational and Applied
Mathematics, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, USA. (4)The Center for Genome
Architecture, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Broad Institute
of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. (5)The Center for Genome
Architecture, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of
Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA;
Department of Computer Science, Department of Computational and Applied
Mathematics, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, USA; Department of Computer
Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (6)Broad Institute of MIT 
and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Department of Systems
Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address:
lander@broadinstitute.org. (7)The Center for Genome Architecture, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Computer
Science, Department of Computational and Applied Mathematics, Rice University,
Houston, TX 77005, USA; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139, 
USA; Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice University, Houston, TX
77030, USA. Electronic address: erez@erez.com.

Erratum in
    Cell. 2015 Jul 30;162(3):687-8.

We use in situ Hi-C to probe the 3D architecture of genomes, constructing haploid
and diploid maps of nine cell types. The densest, in human lymphoblastoid cells, 
contains 4.9 billion contacts, achieving 1 kb resolution. We find that genomes
are partitioned into contact domains (median length, 185 kb), which are
associated with distinct patterns of histone marks and segregate into six
subcompartments. We identify ~10,000 loops. These loops frequently link promoters
and enhancers, correlate with gene activation, and show conservation across cell 
types and species. Loop anchors typically occur at domain boundaries and bind
CTCF. CTCF sites at loop anchors occur predominantly (>90%) in a convergent
orientation, with the asymmetric motifs "facing" one another. The inactive X
chromosome splits into two massive domains and contains large loops anchored at
CTCF-binding repeats.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25497547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Mar;1849(3):300-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.12.001. 
Epub 2014 Dec 5.

The transcriptional regulator BCL6 participates in the secondary gene regulatory 
response to vitamin D.

Nurminen V(1), Neme A(1), Ryynänen J(1), Heikkinen S(1), Seuter S(1), Carlberg
C(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland,
FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland. (2)School of Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Eastern Finland, FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland. Electronic address:
carsten.carlberg@uef.fi.

The vitamin D metabolite 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2D3) is the high
affinity ligand of the transcription factor vitamin D receptor (VDR) and
therefore a direct regulator of transcription. Transcriptome-wide analysis of
THP-1 human monocytes had indicated more than 600 genes to be significantly
(p<0.05) stimulated after 4h incubation with 1,25(OH)2D3, but only 67 of them
where more than 1.5-fold up-regulated. These include the genes encoding for the
transcription factors BCL6, NFE2, POU4F2 and ELF4, which are controlled by one or
two VDR binding sites within their chromosomal domains. The latter are defined
via DNA loop formation mediated by the transcription factor CTCF that is highly
conserved in its genome-wide loci. We found BCL6 being most responsive to
1,25(OH)2D3 and selected it for further analysis. An incubation of THP-1 cells
with 1,25(OH)2D3 for 24 h resulted in a significant (p<0.001) change in the mRNA 
expression of more than 1600 genes, of which 132 were at least 2-fold
up-regulated. About half of the latter genes are secondary 1,25(OH)2D3 targets,
since they do not carry any VDR binding site within their chromosomal domain.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing datasets indicated that the majority of 
these domains contain a BCL6 binding site. We followed the secondary
transcriptional response to 1,25(OH)2D3 for eight representative gene examples
and confirmed the binding of CTCF and BCL6 to their respective chromosomal
domains. In conclusion, our study indicated that in monocytes most of the
physiological responses to 1,25(OH)2D3 involve the action of the transcription
factor BCL6.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25482012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Biomed Rep. 2015 Jan;3(1):33-37. Epub 2014 Nov 7.

Absence of DICER1, CTCF, RPL22, DNMT3A, TRRAP, IDH1 and IDH2 hotspot mutations in
patients with various subtypes of ovarian carcinomas.

Zou Y(1), Huang MZ(2), Liu FY(1), Yang BC(3), Wang LQ(3), Wang F(1), Yu XH(4),
Wan L(3), Wan XD(3), Xu XY(2), Li W(2), Huang OP(1), He M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Women's Reproductive Health of Jiangxi Province, P.R. China 
; Central Laboratory, Jiangxi Provincial Maternal and Child Health Hospital,
Nanchang, Jiangxi 330006, P.R. China. (2)Key Laboratory of Women's Reproductive
Health of Jiangxi Province, P.R. China ; Central Laboratory, Jiangxi Provincial
Maternal and Child Health Hospital, Nanchang, Jiangxi 330006, P.R. China ;
Graduate School of Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi 330031, P.R. China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Women's Reproductive Health of Jiangxi Province, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Jiangxi Provincial Maternal and Child Health
Hospital, P.R. China. (5)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Therapeutics,
Nanchang University School of Pharmaceutical Science, Nanchang, Jiangxi 330006,
P.R. China.

Cancer is caused by multiple genetic alterations within cells. Recently,
large-scale sequencing has identified frequent ribonuclease type III (DICER1),
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), ribosomal protein L22 (RPL22), DNA
(cytosine-5-)-methyltransferase 3a (DNMT3A), transformation/transcription
domain-associated protein (TRRAP), isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH)1 and IDH2
hotspot mutations in diverse types of cancer. However, it remains largely unknown
whether these mutations also exist in ovarian carcinomas. In the present study, a
collection of 251 patients with distinct subtypes of ovarian carcinomas were
recruited and sequenced for the presence of these hotspot mutations. However, no 
mutations in the seven genes were detected in the samples. These negative
results, together with certain recent reports, indicate that the hotspot
mutations in the CTCF, RPL22, DNMT3A, TRRAP, IDH1 and IDH2 genes may not be
actively involved in the carcinogenesis of ovarian carcinoma. Of note, the DICER1
mutation frequency in Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor in the present study was
significantly lower compared to prior observation, and therefore, it is
speculated that this discrepancy may be mainly due to the small sample size
analyzed in the study. In addition, among these samples, frequent polymerase (DNA
directed) e, catalytic subunit (POLE1) and ring finger protein 43 (RNF43)
mutations were identified in endometrioid and mucinous ovarian carcinomas,
respectively; thus DICER1, CTCF, RPL22, DNMT3A, TRRAP, IDH1 and IDH2 hotspot
mutations may not play synergistic roles with POLE1 or RNF43 mutations in the
carcinogenesis of endometrioid or mucinous ovarian carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC4251111
PMID: 25469243  [PubMed]


188. FEBS Lett. 2014 Dec 20;588(24):4665-71. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.10.038. Epub 
2014 Nov 11.

DNA methylation dynamics of a maternally methylated DMR in the mouse Dlk1-Dio3
domain.

Zeng TB(1), He HJ(1), Han ZB(1), Zhang FW(1), Huang ZJ(1), Liu Q(1), Cui W(1), Wu
Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, State Key Laboratory of Urban Water
Resources and Environment, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150080,
Heilongjiang, China. (2)School of Life Science and Technology, State Key
Laboratory of Urban Water Resources and Environment, Harbin Institute of
Technology, Harbin 150080, Heilongjiang, China. Electronic address:
kigo@hit.edu.cn.

The mouse delta-like homolog 1 and type III iodothyronine deiodinase (Dlk1-Dio3) 
imprinted domain contains three known paternally methylated differentially
methylated regions (DMRs): intergenic DMR (IG-DMR), maternally expressed 3-DMR
(Gtl2-DMR), and Dlk1-DMR. Here, we report the first maternally methylated DMR,
CpG island 2 (CGI-2), is located approximately 800 bp downstream of miR-1188.
CGI-2 is highly methylated in sperm and oocytes, de-methylated in
pre-implantation embryos, and differentially re-methylated during
post-implantation development. CGI-2, similarly to Gtl2-DMR and Dlk1-DMR,
acquires differential methylation prior to embryonic day 7.5 (E7.5). Both H3K4me3
and H3K9me3 histone modifications are enriched at CGI-2. Furthermore,
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) binds to both alleles of CGI-2 in vivo. These results
contribute to the investigation of imprinting regulation in this domain.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25447521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Nov 11;3(5):699-706. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.09.001.
Epub 2014 Oct 3.

FMR1 epigenetic silencing commonly occurs in undifferentiated fragile X-affected 
embryonic stem cells.

Avitzour M(1), Mor-Shaked H(1), Yanovsky-Dagan S(1), Aharoni S(1), Altarescu
G(2), Renbaum P(2), Eldar-Geva T(3), Schonberger O(3), Levy-Lahad E(2),
Epsztejn-Litman S(1), Eiges R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Research Laboratory, Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek
Medical Center affiliated with the Hebrew University School of Medicine,
Jerusalem 91031, Israel. (2)Zohar PGD Lab, Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare
Zedek Medical Center affiliated with the Hebrew University School of Medicine,
Jerusalem 91031, Israel. (3)IVF Unit, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Shaare Zedek Medical Center affiliated with the Hebrew University School of
Medicine, Jerusalem 91031, Israel. (4)Stem Cell Research Laboratory, Medical
Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center affiliated with the Hebrew
University School of Medicine, Jerusalem 91031, Israel. Electronic address:
rachela@szmc.org.il.

Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common heritable form of cognitive
impairment. It results from epigenetic silencing of the X-linked FMR1 gene by a
CGG expansion in its 5'-untranslated region. Taking advantage of a large set of
FXS-affected human embryonic stem cell (HESC) lines and isogenic subclones
derived from them, we show that FMR1 hypermethylation commonly occurs in the
undifferentiated state (six of nine lines, ranging from 24% to 65%). In addition,
we demonstrate that hypermethylation is tightly linked with FMR1 transcriptional 
inactivation in undifferentiated cells, coincides with loss of H3K4me2 and gain
of H3K9me3, and is unrelated to CTCF binding. Taken together, these results
demonstrate that FMR1 epigenetic gene silencing takes place in FXS HESCs and
clearly highlights the importance of examining multiple cell lines when
investigating FXS and most likely other epigenetically regulated diseases.

PMCID: PMC4235235
PMID: 25418717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. PLoS Genet. 2014 Nov 20;10(11):e1004798. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004798.
eCollection 2014.

Quantitative genetics of CTCF binding reveal local sequence effects and different
modes of X-chromosome association.

Ding Z(1), Ni Y(2), Timmer SW(3), Lee BK(2), Battenhouse A(2), Louzada S(1), Yang
F(1), Dunham I(3), Crawford GE(4), Lieb JD(5), Durbin R(1), Iyer VR(2), Birney
E(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom. (2)Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology,
Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Department of Molecular
Biosciences, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, United States of
America. (3)The European Molecular Biology Laboratory, The European
Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom. (4)Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, and 
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, Duke University, Durham, 
North Carolina, United States of America. (5)Department of Biology and Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2015 Apr;11(4):e1005177.

Associating genetic variation with quantitative measures of gene regulation
offers a way to bridge the gap between genotype and complex phenotypes. In order 
to identify quantitative trait loci (QTLs) that influence the binding of a
transcription factor in humans, we measured binding of the multifunctional
transcription and chromatin factor CTCF in 51 HapMap cell lines. We identified
thousands of QTLs in which genotype differences were associated with differences 
in CTCF binding strength, hundreds of them confirmed by directly observable
allele-specific binding bias. The majority of QTLs were either within 1 kb of the
CTCF binding motif, or in linkage disequilibrium with a variant within 1 kb of
the motif. On the X chromosome we observed three classes of binding sites: a
minority class bound only to the active copy of the X chromosome, the majority
class bound to both the active and inactive X, and a small set of female-specific
CTCF sites associated with two non-coding RNA genes. In sum, our data reveal
extensive genetic effects on CTCF binding, both direct and indirect, and identify
a diversity of patterns of CTCF binding on the X chromosome.

PMCID: PMC4238955
PMID: 25411781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Nat Commun. 2014 Nov 18;5:5490. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6490.

CpG island-mediated global gene regulatory modes in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Beck S(1), Lee BK(1), Rhee C(1), Song J(2), Woo AJ(3), Kim J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, Texas 78712, USA. (2)Texas Advanced Computing Center, The University of
Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78758, USA. (3)School of Medicine and
Pharmacology, Royal Perth Hospital Unit, The University of Western Australia,
Perth, WA 6000, Australia. (4)1] Department of Molecular Biosciences, The
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA [2] Institute for
Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 
78712, USA [3] Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas 
at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA.

Both transcriptional and epigenetic regulations are fundamental for the control
of eukaryotic gene expression. Here we perform a compendium analysis of >200
large sequencing data sets to elucidate the regulatory logic of global gene
expression programs in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells. We define four major
classes of DNA-binding proteins (Core, PRC, MYC and CTCF) based on their target
co-occupancy, and discover reciprocal regulation between the MYC and PRC classes 
for the activity of nearly all genes under the control of the CpG island
(CGI)-containing promoters. This CGI-dependent regulatory mode explains the
functional segregation between CGI-containing and CGI-less genes during early
development. By defining active enhancers based on the co-occupancy of the Core
class, we further demonstrate their additive roles in CGI-containing gene
expression and cell type-specific roles in CGI-less gene expression. Altogether, 
our analyses provide novel insights into previously unknown CGI-dependent global 
gene regulatory modes.

PMCID: PMC4236720
PMID: 25405324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Feb;35(3):529-43. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00235-14. Epub 2014 Nov
17.

Insertion of an imprinted insulator into the IgH locus reveals developmentally
regulated, transcription-dependent control of V(D)J recombination.

Puget N(1), Hirasawa R(2), Hu NS(1), Laviolette-Malirat N(1), Feil R(3),
Khamlichi AA(4).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR5089, Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale (IBPS),
Toulouse, France Université de Toulouse, UPS, Institut de Pharmacologie et de
Biologie Structurale (IPBS), Toulouse, France. (2)Institute of Molecular Genetics
(IGMM), CNRS UMR5535, and University of Montpellier I & II, Montpellier, France. 
(3)Institute of Molecular Genetics (IGMM), CNRS UMR5535, and University of
Montpellier I & II, Montpellier, France robert.feil@igmm.cnrs.fr
ahmed.khamlichi@ipbs.fr. (4)CNRS UMR5089, Institut de Pharmacologie et de
Biologie Structurale (IBPS), Toulouse, France Université de Toulouse, UPS,
Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale (IPBS), Toulouse, France
robert.feil@igmm.cnrs.fr ahmed.khamlichi@ipbs.fr.

The assembly of antigen receptor loci requires a developmentally regulated and
lineage-specific recombination between variable (V), diversity (D), and joining
(J) segments through V(D)J recombination. The process is regulated by
accessibility control elements, including promoters, insulators, and enhancers.
The IgH locus undergoes two recombination steps, D-J(H) and then V(H)-DJ(H), but 
it is unclear how the availability of the DJ(H) substrate could influence the
subsequent V(H)-DJ(H) recombination step. The Eµ enhancer plays a critical role
in V(D)J recombination and controls a set of sense and antisense transcripts. We 
epigenetically perturbed the early events at the IgH locus by inserting the
imprinting control region (ICR) of the Igf2/H19 locus or a transcriptional
insulator devoid of the imprinting function upstream of the Eµ enhancer. The
insertions recapitulated the main epigenetic features of their endogenous
counterparts, including differential DNA methylation and binding of
CTCF/cohesins. Whereas the D-J(H) recombination step was unaffected, both the
insulator insertions led to a severe impairment of V(H)-DJ(H) recombination.
Strikingly, the inhibition of V(H)-DJ(H) recombination correlated consistently
with a strong reduction of DJ(H) transcription and incomplete demethylation.
Thus, developmentally regulated transcription following D-J(H) recombination
emerges as an important mechanism through which the Eµ enhancer controls
V(H)-DJ(H) recombination.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4285425
PMID: 25403489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Med Genet. 2015 Jan;52(1):53-60. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102732. Epub 2014 
Nov 13.

Exhaustive methylation analysis revealed uneven profiles of methylation at
IGF2/ICR1/H19 11p15 loci in Russell Silver syndrome.

Azzi S(1), Steunou V(2), Tost J(3), Rossignol S(4), Thibaud N(5), Das Neves C(5),
Le Jule M(5), Habib WA(4), Blaise A(6), Koudou Y(7), Busato F(8), Le Bouc Y(4),
Netchine I(4).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR_S 938, CDR Saint-Antoine, Paris, France Sorbonne Universités, UPMC
Univ Paris 06, UMR_S 938, CDR Saint-Antoine, Paris, France Department of
Pediatric Endocrinology, APHP, Armand Trousseau Hospital, Paris, France
Epigenetics Programme, The Babraham Institute, Cambridge, UK. (2)INSERM, UMR_S
938, CDR Saint-Antoine, Paris, France. (3)Laboratory for Epigenetics and
Environment (LEE), National Genotyping Center, CEA-Institute of Genomics, Evry,
France. (4)INSERM, UMR_S 938, CDR Saint-Antoine, Paris, France Sorbonne
Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR_S 938, CDR Saint-Antoine, Paris, France
Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, APHP, Armand Trousseau Hospital, Paris,
France. (5)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, APHP, Armand Trousseau
Hospital, Paris, France. (6)INSERM, UMR_S 938, CDR Saint-Antoine, Paris, France
Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR_S 938, CDR Saint-Antoine, Paris,
France. (7)INSERM, Centre for research in Epidemiology and Population Health
(CESP), U1018, Lifelong epidemiology of obesity, diabetes and renal disease team,
Villejuif, France Paris-Sud University, UMRS 1018, Villejuif, France.
(8)Epigenetics Programme, The Babraham Institute, Cambridge, UK.

Erratum in
    J Med Genet. 2015 Feb;52(2):144.

BACKGROUND: The structural organisation of the human IGF2/ICR1/H19 11p15 domain
is very complex, and the mechanisms underlying its regulation are poorly
understood. The Imprinted Center Region 1 (ICR1) contains seven binding sites for
the zinc-finger protein CTCF (CBS: CTCF Binding Sites); three additional
differentially methylated regions (DMR) are located at the H19 promoter (H19DMR) 
and two in the IGF2 gene (DMR0 and DMR2), respectively. Loss of imprinting at the
IGF2/ICR1/H19 domain results in two growth disorders with opposite phenotypes:
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome and Russell Silver syndrome (RSS). Despite the
IGF2/ICR1/H19 locus being widely studied, the extent of hypomethylation across
the domain remains not yet addressed in patients with RSS.
METHODS: We assessed a detailed investigation of the methylation status of the
11p15 ICR1 CBS1-7, IGF2DMR0 and H19DMR (H19 promoter) in a population of controls
(n=50) and RSS carrying (n=104) or not (n=65) carrying a hypomethylation at the
11p15 ICR1 region.
RESULTS: The methylation indexes (MI) were balanced at all regions in the control
population and patients with RSS without any as yet identified molecular anomaly.
Interestingly, patients with RSS with ICR1 hypomethylation showed uneven profiles
of methylation among the CBSs and DMRs. Furthermore, normal MIs at CBS1 and CBS7 
were identified in 9% of patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The hypomethylation does not spread equally throughout the
IGF2/ICR1/H19 locus, and some loci could have normal MI, which may lead to
underdiagnosis of patients with RSS with ICR1 hypomethylation. The uneven pattern
of methylation suggests that some CBSs may play different roles in the
tridimensional chromosomal looping regulation of this locus.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25395389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 6;9(11):e111748. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111748.
eCollection 2014.

Stage-specific binding profiles of cohesin in resting and activated B lymphocytes
suggest a role for cohesin in immunoglobulin class switching and maturation.

Günal-Sadik G(1), Paszkowski-Rogacz M(2), Singaravelu K(3), Beyer A(4), Buchholz 
F(2), Jessberger R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiological Chemistry, Faculty of Medicine Carl Gustav Carus,
Dresden University of Technology, Dresden, Germany. (2)Department of Medical
Systems Biology, University Hospital and Medical Faculty Carl Gustav Carus,
Dresden University of Technology, Dresden, Germany. (3)Cellular Networks and
Systems Biology, Biotechnology Center, Dresden University of Technology, Dresden,
Germany. (4)Cellular Networks and Systems Biology, Biotechnology Center, Dresden 
University of Technology, Dresden, Germany; CECAD, Universität zu Köln, Köln,
Germany.

The immunoglobulin heavy chain locus (Igh) features higher-order chromosomal
interactions to facilitate stage-specific assembly of the Ig molecule. Cohesin, a
ring-like protein complex required for sister chromatid cohesion, shapes
chromosome architecture and chromatin interactions important for transcriptional 
regulation and often acts together with CTCF. Cohesin is likely involved in B
cell activation and Ig class switch recombination. Hence, binding profiles of
cohesin in resting mature murine splenic B lymphocytes and at two stages after
cell activation were elucidated by chromatin immunoprecipitation and deep
sequencing. Comparative genomic analysis revealed cohesin extensively changes its
binding to transcriptional control elements after 48 h of stimulation with
LPS/IL-4. Cohesin was clearly underrepresented at switch regions regardless of
their activation status, suggesting that switch regions need to be cohesin-poor. 
Specific binding changes of cohesin at B-cell specific gene loci Pax5 and Blimp-1
indicate new cohesin-dependent regulatory pathways. Together with conserved
cohesin/CTCF sites at the Igh 3'RR, a prominent cohesin/CTCF binding site was
revealed near the 3' end of Ca where PolII localizes to 3' enhancers. Our study
shows that cohesin likely regulates B cell activation and maturation, including
Ig class switching.

PMCID: PMC4222939
PMID: 25375358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. PLoS Genet. 2014 Nov 6;10(11):e1004697. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004697.
eCollection 2014.

Approximation to the distribution of fitness effects across functional categories
in human segregating polymorphisms.

Racimo F(1), Schraiber JG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, California, United States of America.

Quantifying the proportion of polymorphic mutations that are deleterious or
neutral is of fundamental importance to our understanding of evolution, disease
genetics and the maintenance of variation genome-wide. Here, we develop an
approximation to the distribution of fitness effects (DFE) of segregating
single-nucleotide mutations in humans. Unlike previous methods, we do not assume 
that synonymous mutations are neutral or not strongly selected, and we do not
rely on fitting the DFE of all new nonsynonymous mutations to a single
probability distribution, which is poorly motivated on a biological level. We
rely on a previously developed method that utilizes a variety of published
annotations (including conservation scores, protein deleteriousness estimates and
regulatory data) to score all mutations in the human genome based on how likely
they are to be affected by negative selection, controlling for mutation rate. We 
map this and other conservation scores to a scale of fitness coefficients via
maximum likelihood using diffusion theory and a Poisson random field model on SNP
data. Our method serves to approximate the deleterious DFE of mutations that are 
segregating, regardless of their genomic consequence. We can then compare the
proportion of mutations that are negatively selected or neutral across various
categories, including different types of regulatory sites. We observe that the
distribution of intergenic polymorphisms is highly peaked at neutrality, while
the distribution of nonsynonymous polymorphisms has a second peak at [Formula:
see text]. Other types of polymorphisms have shapes that fall roughly in between 
these two. We find that transcriptional start sites, strong CTCF-enriched
elements and enhancers are the regulatory categories with the largest proportion 
of deleterious polymorphisms.

PMCID: PMC4222666
PMID: 25375159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jan;35(1):318-30. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01061-14. Epub 2014 Nov 3.

A variably occupied CTCF binding site in the ultrabithorax gene in the Drosophila
bithorax complex.

Magbanua JP(1), Runneburger E(1), Russell S(2), White R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (2)Department of Genetics, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (3)Department of Physiology, Development
and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
rw108@cam.ac.uk.

Although the majority of genomic binding sites for the insulator protein
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) are constitutively occupied, a subset show variable
occupancy. Such variable sites provide an opportunity to assess context-specific 
CTCF functions in gene regulation. Here, we have identified a variably occupied
CTCF site in the Drosophila Ultrabithorax (Ubx) gene. This site is occupied in
tissues where Ubx is active (third thoracic leg imaginal disc) but is not bound
in tissues where the Ubx gene is repressed (first thoracic leg imaginal disc).
Using chromatin conformation capture, we show that this site preferentially
interacts with the Ubx promoter region in the active state. The site lies close
to Ubx enhancer elements and is also close to the locations of several gypsy
transposon insertions that disrupt Ubx expression, leading to the bx mutant
phenotype. gypsy insertions carry the Su(Hw)-dependent gypsy insulator and were
found to affect both CTCF binding at the variable site and the chromatin
topology. This suggests that insertion of the gypsy insulator in this region
interferes with CTCF function and supports a model for the normal function of the
variable CTCF site as a chromatin loop facilitator, promoting interaction between
Ubx enhancers and the Ubx transcription start site.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4295388
PMID: 25368383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Genes Cancer. 2014 Sep;5(9-10):365-74.

The apoptosis associated tyrosine kinase gene is frequently hypermethylated in
human cancer and is regulated by epigenetic mechanisms.

Haag T(1), Herkt CE(1), Walesch SK(1), Richter AM(1), Dammann RH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics; Justus-Liebig-University; Universities of Giessen and 
Marburg Lung Center, Member of the German Center for Lung Research; Giessen,
Germany.

Epigenetic gene inactivation through promoter hypermethylation is an important
aberration involved in the silencing of tumor-associated genes in cancer. Here we
identified the apoptosis associated tyrosine kinase (AATK) as an epigenetically
downregulated tumor related gene. We analyzed the epigenetic regulation of AATK
in several human cancer cell lines and normal tissues by methylation and
expression analysis. Hypermethylation of AATK was also analyzed in 25 primary
lung tumors, 30 breast cancers and 24 matching breast tissues. In normal tissues 
the AATK CpG island promoter was unmethylated and AATK was expressed.
Hypermethylation of AATK occurred frequently in 13 out of 14 (93%) human cancer
cell lines. Methylation was reversed by 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment leading 
to re-expression of AATK in cancer cell lines. Aberrant methylation of AATK was
also revealed in primary lung (40%) and breast (53%) cancers, but was found to be
significantly less methylated in matching normal breast tissues (17%; p<0.01). In
addition, we observed that AATK is epigenetically reactivated through the
chromatin regulator CTCF. We further show that overexpression of Aatk
significantly suppresses colony formation in cancer cell lines. Our findings
suggest that the apoptosis associated tyrosine kinase is frequently inactivated
in human cancers and acts as a tumor suppressive gene.

PMCID: PMC4209602
PMID: 25352953  [PubMed]


198. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jan;35(1):224-37. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00553-14. Epub 2014 Oct
27.

Functional interactions between NURF and Ctcf regulate gene expression.

Qiu Z(1), Song C(1), Malakouti N(1), Murray D(1), Hariz A(1), Zimmerman M(1),
Gygax D(1), Alhazmi A(1), Landry JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, VCU Institute of Molecular
Medicine, Massey Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth University School of
Medicine, Richmond, Virginia, USA. (2)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics,
VCU Institute of Molecular Medicine, Massey Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth 
University School of Medicine, Richmond, Virginia, USA jwlandry2@vcu.edu.

Gene expression frequently requires chromatin-remodeling complexes, and it is
assumed that these complexes have common gene targets across cell types. Contrary
to this belief, we show by genome-wide expression profiling that Bptf, an
essential and unique subunit of the nucleosome-remodeling factor (NURF),
predominantly regulates the expression of a unique set of genes between diverse
cell types. Coincident with its functions in gene expression, we observed that
Bptf is also important for regulating nucleosome occupancy at nucleosome-free
regions (NFRs), many of which are located at sites occupied by the multivalent
factors Ctcf and cohesin. NURF function at Ctcf binding sites could be direct,
because Bptf occupies Ctcf binding sites in vivo and has physical interactions
with CTCF and the cohesin subunit SA2. Assays of several Ctcf binding sites using
reporter assays showed that their regulatory activity requires Bptf in two
different cell types. Focused studies at H2-K1 showed that Bptf regulates the
ability of Klf4 to bind near an upstream Ctcf site, possibly influencing gene
expression. In combination, these studies demonstrate that gene expression as
regulated by NURF occurs partly through physical and functional interactions with
the ubiquitous and multivalent factors Ctcf and cohesin.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4295392
PMID: 25348714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Genome Res. 2015 Jan;25(1):89-99. doi: 10.1101/gr.174169.114. Epub 2014 Oct 23.

Two new insulator proteins, Pita and ZIPIC, target CP190 to chromatin.

Maksimenko O(1), Bartkuhn M(2), Stakhov V(1), Herold M(2), Zolotarev N(1), Jox
T(2), Buxa MK(2), Kirsch R(2), Bonchuk A(3), Fedotova A(1), Kyrchanova O(3),
Renkawitz R(4), Georgiev P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Expression Regulation in Development, Institute of Gene
Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow 119334, Russia; (2)Institute for
Genetics, Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Heinrich-Buff-Ring, D-35392 Giessen, 
Germany; (3)Group of Transcriptional Regulation, Institute of Gene Biology,
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow 119334, Russia; (4)Institute for Genetics,
Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Heinrich-Buff-Ring, D-35392 Giessen, Germany;
georgiev_p@mail.ru Rainer.Renkawitz@gen.bio.uni-giessen.de olgina73@yandex.ru.
(5)Department of the Control of Genetic Processes, Institute of Gene Biology,
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow 119334, Russia georgiev_p@mail.ru
Rainer.Renkawitz@gen.bio.uni-giessen.de olgina73@yandex.ru.

Insulators are multiprotein-DNA complexes that regulate the nuclear architecture.
The Drosophila CP190 protein is a cofactor for the DNA-binding insulator proteins
Su(Hw), CTCF, and BEAF-32. The fact that CP190 has been found at genomic sites
devoid of either of the known insulator factors has until now been unexplained.
We have identified two DNA-binding zinc-finger proteins, Pita, and a new factor
named ZIPIC, that interact with CP190 in vivo and in vitro at specific
interaction domains. Genomic binding sites for these proteins are clustered with 
CP190 as well as with CTCF and BEAF-32. Model binding sites for Pita or ZIPIC
demonstrate a partial enhancer-blocking activity and protect gene expression from
PRE-mediated silencing. The function of the CTCF-bound MCP insulator sequence
requires binding of Pita. These results identify two new insulator proteins and
emphasize the unifying function of CP190, which can be recruited by many
DNA-binding insulator proteins.

© 2015 Maksimenko et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4317163
PMID: 25342723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Nature. 2014 Dec 18;516(7531):432-5. doi: 10.1038/nature13833. Epub 2014 Oct 12.

Cohesin-dependent globules and heterochromatin shape 3D genome architecture in S.
pombe.

Mizuguchi T(1), Fudenberg G(2), Mehta S(3), Belton JM(4), Taneja N(3), Folco
HD(3), FitzGerald P(5), Dekker J(4), Mirny L(6), Barrowman J(3), Grewal SI(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA [2].
(2)1] Graduate Program in Biophysics, Harvard University, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA [2] Institute for Medical Engineering and Sciences, Department of
Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139,
USA [3]. (3)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
(4)Program in Systems Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA. (5)Genome Analysis Unit, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. (6)1]
Graduate Program in Biophysics, Harvard University, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, 
USA [2] Institute for Medical Engineering and Sciences, Department of Physics,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2014 Dec;15(12):780.

Eukaryotic genomes are folded into three-dimensional structures, such as
self-associating topological domains, the borders of which are enriched in
cohesin and CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) required for long-range interactions. How
local chromatin interactions govern higher-order folding of chromatin fibres and 
the function of cohesin in this process remain poorly understood. Here we perform
genome-wide chromatin conformation capture (Hi-C) analysis to explore the
high-resolution organization of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe genome, which
despite its small size exhibits fundamental features found in other eukaryotes.
Our analyses of wild-type and mutant strains reveal key elements of chromosome
architecture and genome organization. On chromosome arms, small regions of
chromatin locally interact to form 'globules'. This feature requires a function
of cohesin distinct from its role in sister chromatid cohesion. Cohesin is
enriched at globule boundaries and its loss causes disruption of local globule
structures and global chromosome territories. By contrast, heterochromatin, which
loads cohesin at specific sites including pericentromeric and subtelomeric
domains, is dispensable for globule formation but nevertheless affects genome
organization. We show that heterochromatin mediates chromatin fibre compaction at
centromeres and promotes prominent inter-arm interactions within
centromere-proximal regions, providing structural constraints crucial for proper 
genome organization. Loss of heterochromatin relaxes constraints on chromosomes, 
causing an increase in intra- and inter-chromosomal interactions. Together, our
analyses uncover fundamental genome folding principles that drive higher-order
chromosome organization crucial for coordinating nuclear functions.

PMCID: PMC4465753
PMID: 25307058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Toxicol Sci. 2015 Jan;143(1):97-106. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfu210. Epub 2014 Oct
10.

Prenatal arsenic exposure and the epigenome: identifying sites of
5-methylcytosine alterations that predict functional changes in gene expression
in newborn cord blood and subsequent birth outcomes.

Rojas D(1), Rager JE(1), Smeester L(1), Bailey KA(1), Drobná Z(1), Rubio-Andrade 
M(1), Stýblo M(2), García-Vargas G(1), Fry RC(3).

Author information: 
(1)*Curriculum in Toxicology, Department of Environmental Sciences and
Engineering, Department of Nutrition and Department of Epidemiology, Gillings
School of Global Public Health, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina and Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Juárez del Estado de Durango,
Gómez Palacio, Durango, Mexico. (2)*Curriculum in Toxicology, Department of
Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Department of Nutrition and Department of
Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina and Facultad de Medicina, Universidad
Juárez del Estado de Durango, Gómez Palacio, Durango, Mexico *Curriculum in
Toxicology, Department of Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Department of
Nutrition and Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public
Health, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina and Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad Juárez del Estado de Durango, Gómez Palacio, Durango,
Mexico. (3)*Curriculum in Toxicology, Department of Environmental Sciences and
Engineering, Department of Nutrition and Department of Epidemiology, Gillings
School of Global Public Health, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina and Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Juárez del Estado de Durango,
Gómez Palacio, Durango, Mexico *Curriculum in Toxicology, Department of
Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Department of Nutrition and Department of
Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina and Facultad de Medicina, Universidad
Juárez del Estado de Durango, Gómez Palacio, Durango, Mexico rfry@unc.edu.

Prenatal exposure to inorganic arsenic (iAs) is detrimental to the health of
newborns and increases the risk of disease development later in life. Here we
examined a subset of newborn cord blood leukocyte samples collected from subjects
enrolled in the Biomarkers of Exposure to ARsenic (BEAR) pregnancy cohort in
Gómez Palacio, Mexico, who were exposed to a range of drinking water arsenic
concentrations (0.456-236 µg/l). Changes in iAs-associated DNA 5-methylcytosine
methylation were assessed across 424,935 CpG sites representing 18,761 genes and 
compared with corresponding mRNA expression levels and birth outcomes. In the
context of arsenic exposure, a total of 2919 genes were identified with
iAs-associated differences in DNA methylation. Site-specific analyses identified 
DNA methylation changes that were most predictive of gene expression levels where
CpG methylation within CpG islands positioned within the first exon, the 5'
untranslated region and 200 bp upstream of the transcription start site yielded
the most significant association with gene expression levels. A set of 16 genes
was identified with correlated iAs-associated changes in DNA methylation and mRNA
expression and all were highly enriched for binding sites of the early growth
response (EGR) and CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) transcription factors.
Furthermore, DNA methylation levels of 7 of these genes were associated with
differences in birth outcomes including gestational age and head
circumference.These data highlight the complex interplay between DNA methylation,
functional changes in gene expression and health outcomes and underscore the need
for functional analyses coupled to epigenetic assessments.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4274382
PMID: 25304211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Cell. 2014 Oct 9;159(2):374-87. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.09.030.

Control of cell identity genes occurs in insulated neighborhoods in mammalian
chromosomes.

Dowen JM(1), Fan ZP(2), Hnisz D(1), Ren G(3), Abraham BJ(1), Zhang LN(4),
Weintraub AS(4), Schuijers J(1), Lee TI(1), Zhao K(5), Young RA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA. (2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Computational and Systems Biology Program,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. (3)Systems
Biology Center, NHLBI, National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA; College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F 
University, Yangling, Shaanxi, P.R. China, 712100. (4)Whitehead Institute for
Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Department of 
Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
(5)Systems Biology Center, NHLBI, National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville
Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: zhaok@nhlbi.nih.gov.
(6)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. Electronic address: young@wi.mit.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2014 Dec;15(12):780.

The pluripotent state of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) is produced by active
transcription of genes that control cell identity and repression of genes
encoding lineage-specifying developmental regulators. Here, we use ESC cohesin
ChIA-PET data to identify the local chromosomal structures at both active and
repressed genes across the genome. The results produce a map of enhancer-promoter
interactions and reveal that super-enhancer-driven genes generally occur within
chromosome structures that are formed by the looping of two interacting CTCF
sites co-occupied by cohesin. These looped structures form insulated
neighborhoods whose integrity is important for proper expression of local genes. 
We also find that repressed genes encoding lineage-specifying developmental
regulators occur within insulated neighborhoods. These results provide insights
into the relationship between transcriptional control of cell identity genes and 
control of local chromosome structure.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4197132
PMID: 25303531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014 Oct 9;10(10):e1003877. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003877. 
eCollection 2014.

Depletion of the chromatin looping proteins CTCF and cohesin causes chromatin
compaction: insight into chromatin folding by polymer modelling.

Tark-Dame M(1), Jerabek H(2), Manders EM(3), Heermann DW(2), van Driel R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands. (2)Institute for Theoretical Physics, Heidelberg University,
Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Van Leeuwenhoek Centre for Advanced Microscopy,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department for Molecular
Biotechnology, University of Gent, Gent, Belgium.

Erratum in
    PLoS Comput Biol. 2016 Jan;12(1):e1004716.

Folding of the chromosomal fibre in interphase nuclei is an important element in 
the regulation of gene expression. For instance, physical contacts between
promoters and enhancers are a key element in cell-type-specific transcription. We
know remarkably little about the principles that control chromosome folding. Here
we explore the view that intrachromosomal interactions, forming a complex pattern
of loops, are a key element in chromosome folding. CTCF and cohesin are two
abundant looping proteins of interphase chromosomes of higher eukaryotes. To
investigate the role of looping in large-scale (supra Mb) folding of human
chromosomes, we knocked down the gene that codes for CTCF and the one coding for 
Rad21, an essential subunit of cohesin. We measured the effect on chromosome
folding using systematic 3D fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH). Results
show that chromatin becomes more compact after reducing the concentration of
these two looping proteins. The molecular basis for this counter-intuitive
behaviour is explored by polymer modelling usingy the Dynamic Loop model (Bohn M,
Heermann DW (2010) Diffusion-driven looping provides a consistent framework for
chromatin organization. PLoS ONE 5: e12218.). We show that compaction can be
explained by selectively decreasing the number of short-range loops, leaving
long-range looping unchanged. In support of this model prediction it has recently
been shown by others that CTCF and cohesin indeed are responsible primarily for
short-range looping. Our results suggest that the local and the overall changes
in of chromosome structure are controlled by a delicate balance between
short-range and long-range loops, allowing easy switching between, for instance, 
open and more compact chromatin states.

PMCID: PMC4191888
PMID: 25299688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Biol Reprod. 2014 Nov;91(5):125. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.122945. Epub 2014
Oct 8.

The role of CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) in genomic imprinting, development, and
reproduction.

Franco MM(1), Prickett AR(2), Oakey RJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Embrapa Genetic Resources & Biotechnology, Laboratory of Animal Reproduction, 
Parque Estação Biológica, Brasília, Brazil mauricio.franco@embrapa.br.
(2)Department of Medical & Molecular Genetics, King's College London, Guy's
Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is the major protein involved in insulator activity
in vertebrates, with widespread DNA binding sites in the genome. CTCF
participates in many processes related to global chromatin organization and
remodeling, contributing to the repression or activation of gene transcription.
It is also involved in epigenetic reprogramming and is essential during
gametogenesis and embryo development. Abnormal DNA methylation patterns at CTCF
motifs may impair CTCF binding to DNA, and are related to fertility disorders in 
mammals. Therefore, CTCF and its binding sites are important candidate regions to
be investigated as molecular markers for gamete and embryo quality. This article 
reviews the role of CTCF in genomic imprinting, gametogenesis, and early embryo
development and, moreover, highlights potential opportunities for environmental
influences associated with assisted reproductive techniques (ARTs) to affect
CTCF-mediated processes. We discuss the potential use of CTCF as a molecular
marker for assessing gamete and embryo quality in the context of improving the
efficiency and safety of ARTs.

© 2014 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 25297545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Oct 29;42(19):11941-51. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku937. Epub
2014 Oct 7.

CTCF induces histone variant incorporation, erases the H3K27me3 histone mark and 
opens chromatin.

Weth O(1), Paprotka C(1), Günther K(1), Schulte A(1), Baierl M(1), Leers J(1),
Galjart N(2), Renkawitz R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, Justus-Liebig-University, 35392 Giessen, Germany.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus MC, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. (3)Institute for Genetics, Justus-Liebig-University, 35392 Giessen, 
Germany Rainer.Renkawitz@gen.bio.uni-giessen.de.

Insulators functionally separate active chromatin domains from inactive ones. The
insulator factor, CTCF, has been found to bind to boundaries and to mediate
insulator function. CTCF binding sites are depleted for the histone modification 
H3K27me3 and are enriched for the histone variant H3.3. In order to determine
whether demethylation of H3K27me3 and H3.3 incorporation are a requirement for
CTCF binding at domain boundaries or whether CTCF causes these changes, we made
use of the LacI DNA binding domain to control CTCF binding by the Lac inducer
IPTG. Here we show that, in contrast to the related factor CTCFL, the N-terminus 
plus zinc finger domain of CTCF is sufficient to open compact chromatin rapidly. 
This is preceded by incorporation of the histone variant H3.3, which thereby
removes the H3K27me3 mark. This demonstrates the causal role for CTCF in
generating the chromatin features found at insulators. Thereby, spreading of a
histone modification from one domain through the insulator into the neighbouring 
domain is inhibited.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4231773
PMID: 25294833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Neurobiol Dis. 2015 Jan;73:307-18. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.09.014. Epub 2014 Oct 
2.

Interactive actions of Bdnf methylation and cell metabolism for building neural
resilience under the influence of diet.

Tyagi E(1), Zhuang Y(1), Agrawal R(1), Ying Z(1), Gomez-Pinilla F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology & Physiology, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095,
USA. (2)Department of Integrative Biology & Physiology, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA
90095, USA; Department of Neurosurgery, UCLA Brain Injury Research Center, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Electronic address: fgomezpi@ucla.edu.

Quality nutrition during the period of brain formation is a predictor of brain
functional capacity and plasticity during adulthood; however it is not clear how 
this conferred plasticity imparts long-term neural resilience. Here we report
that early exposure to dietary omega-3 fatty acids orchestrates key interactions 
between metabolic signals and Bdnf methylation creating a reservoir of
neuroplasticity that can protect the brain against the deleterious effects of
switching to a Western diet (WD). We observed that the switch to a WD increased
Bdnf methylation specific to exon IV, in proportion to anxiety-like behavior, in 
Sprague Dawley rats reared in low omega-3 fatty acid diet, and these effects were
abolished by the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. Blocking
methylation also counteracted the reducing action of WD on the transcription
regulator CTCF binding to Bdnf promoter IV. In vitro studies confirmed that CTCF 
binding to Bdnf promoter IV is essential for the action of DHA on BDNF
regulation. Diet is also intrinsically associated to cell metabolism, and here we
show that the switch to WD downregulated cell metabolism (NAD/NADH ratio and
SIRT1). The fact that DNA methyltransferase inhibitor did not alter these
parameters suggests they occur upstream to methylation. In turn, the methylation 
inhibitor counteracted the action of WD on PGC-1a, a mitochondrial transcription 
co-activator and BDNF regulator, suggesting that PGC-1a is an effector of Bdnf
methylation. Results support a model in which diet can build an "epigenetic
memory" during brain formation that confers resilience to metabolic perturbations
occurring in adulthood.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4754354
PMID: 25283985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Aug;7(4):366-82. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mju038. Epub 2014 Oct 3.

Hot spots of DNA double-strand breaks and genomic contacts of human rDNA units
are involved in epigenetic regulation.

Tchurikov NA(1), Fedoseeva DM(2), Sosin DV(2), Snezhkina AV(3), Melnikova NV(3), 
Kudryavtseva AV(3), Kravatsky YV(4), Kretova OV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epigenetic Mechanisms of Gene Expression Regulation, Engelhardt 
Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow 119334, Russia tchurikov@eimb.ru.
(2)Department of Epigenetic Mechanisms of Gene Expression Regulation, Engelhardt 
Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow 119334, Russia. (3)Group of Postgenomic
Studies, Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow 119334, Russia.
(4)Laboratory of DNA-Protein Interactions, Engelhardt Institute of Molecular
Biology, Moscow 119334, Russia.

DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are involved in many cellular mechanisms,
including replication, transcription, and genome rearrangements. The recent
observation that hot spots of DSBs in human chromosomes delimit DNA domains that 
possess coordinately expressed genes suggests a strong relationship between the
organization of transcription patterns and hot spots of DSBs. In this study, we
performed mapping of hot spots of DSBs in a human 43-kb ribosomal DNA (rDNA)
repeated unit. We observed that rDNA units corresponded to the most fragile sites
in human chromosomes and that these units possessed at least nine specific
regions containing clusters of extremely frequently occurring DSBs, which were
located exclusively in non-coding intergenic spacer (IGS) regions. The hot spots 
of DSBs corresponded to only a specific subset of DNase-hypersensitive sites, and
coincided with CTCF, PARP1, and HNRNPA2B1 binding sites, and H3K4me3 marks. Our
rDNA-4C data indicate that the regions of IGS containing the hot spots of DSBs
often form contacts with specific regions in different chromosomes, including the
pericentromeric regions, as well as regions that are characterized by H3K27ac and
H3K4me3 marks, CTCF binding sites, ChIA-PET and RIP signals, and high levels of
DSBs. The data suggest a strong link between chromosome breakage and several
different mechanisms of epigenetic regulation of gene expression.

© The Author (2014). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Journal of
Molecular Cell Biology, IBCB, SIBS, CAS.

PMCID: PMC4524424
PMID: 25280477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Nov 10;42(20):e156. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku846. Epub 2014
Sep 23.

MACE: model based analysis of ChIP-exo.

Wang L(1), Chen J(2), Wang C(3), Uusküla-Reimand L(4), Chen K(5), Medina-Rivera
A(4), Young EJ(4), Zimmermann MT(3), Yan H(3), Sun Z(3), Zhang Y(3), Wu ST(3),
Huang H(6), Wilson MD(7), Kocher JP(8), Li W(9).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA Division of Biostatistics, Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center and Department 
of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030,
USA wl1@bcm.edu. (2)School of Life Science and Technology, Tongji University,
Shanghai 200092, China. (3)Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. (4)Genetics & Genome Biology Program,
SickKids Research Institute, 686 Bay St. Toronto, ON, M5G 0A4, Canada.
(5)Division of Biostatistics, Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center and Department of
Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030,
USA. (6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, MN 55905, 
USA. (7)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario
M5S1A8, Canada. (8)Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA wl1@bcm.edu. (9)Division of Biostatistics, Dan
L. Duncan Cancer Center and Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA wl1@bcm.edu.

Understanding the role of a given transcription factor (TF) in regulating gene
expression requires precise mapping of its binding sites in the genome. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation-exo, an emerging technique using <U+03BB> exonuclease to digest TF
unbound DNA after ChIP, is designed to reveal transcription factor binding site
(TFBS) boundaries with near-single nucleotide resolution. Although ChIP-exo
promises deeper insights into transcription regulation, no dedicated
bioinformatics tool exists to leverage its advantages. Most ChIP-seq and
ChIP-chip analytic methods are not tailored for ChIP-exo, and thus cannot take
full advantage of high-resolution ChIP-exo data. Here we describe a novel
analysis framework, termed MACE (model-based analysis of ChIP-exo) dedicated to
ChIP-exo data analysis. The MACE workflow consists of four steps: (i) sequencing 
data normalization and bias correction; (ii) signal consolidation and noise
reduction; (iii) single-nucleotide resolution border peak detection using the
Chebyshev Inequality and (iv) border matching using the Gale-Shapley stable
matching algorithm. When applied to published human CTCF, yeast Reb1 and our own 
mouse ONECUT1/HNF6 ChIP-exo data, MACE is able to define TFBSs with high
sensitivity, specificity and spatial resolution, as evidenced by multiple
criteria including motif enrichment, sequence conservation, direct sequence
pileup, nucleosome positioning and open chromatin states. In addition, we show
that the fundamental advance of MACE is the identification of two boundaries of a
TFBS with high resolution, whereas other methods only report a single location of
the same event. The two boundaries help elucidate the in vivo binding structure
of a given TF, e.g. whether the TF may bind as dimers or in a complex with other 
co-factors.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4227761
PMID: 25249628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 23;9(9):e107765. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107765.
eCollection 2014.

A functional insulator screen identifies NURF and dREAM components to be required
for enhancer-blocking.

Bohla D(1), Herold M(1), Panzer I(1), Buxa MK(1), Ali T(2), Demmers J(3), Krüger 
M(4), Scharfe M(5), Jarek M(5), Bartkuhn M(1), Renkawitz R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Genetik, Justus-Liebig-Universität, Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(2)Institut für Genetik, Justus-Liebig-Universität, Giessen, Giessen, Germany;
Faculty of Science, Benha University, Benha, Egypt. (3)Proteomics Centre, Erasmus
Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands. (4)Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry, Max
Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany. (5)Helmholtz 
Centre for Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany.

Chromatin insulators of higher eukaryotes functionally divide the genome into
active and inactive domains. Furthermore, insulators regulate enhancer/promoter
communication, which is evident from the Drosophila bithorax locus in which a
multitude of regulatory elements control segment specific gene activity.
Centrosomal protein 190 (CP190) is targeted to insulators by CTCF or other
insulator DNA-binding factors. Chromatin analyses revealed that insulators are
characterized by open and nucleosome depleted regions. Here, we wanted to
identify chromatin modification and remodelling factors required for an enhancer 
blocking function. We used the well-studied Fab-8 insulator of the bithorax locus
to apply a genome-wide RNAi screen for factors that contribute to the enhancer
blocking function of CTCF and CP190. Among 78 genes required for optimal Fab-8
mediated enhancer blocking, all four components of the NURF complex as well as
several subunits of the dREAM complex were most evident. Mass spectrometric
analyses of CTCF or CP190 bound proteins as well as immune precipitation
confirmed NURF and dREAM binding. Both co-localise with most CP190 binding sites 
in the genome and chromatin immune precipitation showed that CP190 recruits NURF 
and dREAM. Nucleosome occupancy and histone H3 binding analyses revealed that
CP190 mediated NURF binding results in nucleosomal depletion at CP190 binding
sites. Thus, we conclude that CP190 binding to CTCF or to other DNA binding
insulator factors mediates recruitment of NURF and dREAM. Furthermore, the
enhancer blocking function of insulators is associated with nucleosomal depletion
and requires NURF and dREAM.

PMCID: PMC4172637
PMID: 25247414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Oct 7;111(40):14631-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1406923111. Epub 2014 Sep 22.

Epigenetic dysregulation by nickel through repressive chromatin domain
disruption.

Jose CC(1), Xu B(2), Jagannathan L(1), Trac C(2), Mallela RK(1), Hattori T(3),
Lai D(3), Koide S(3), Schones DE(4), Cuddapah S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, 
Tuxedo, NY 10987; (2)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research Institute,
City of Hope, Duarte, CA 91010; (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637. (4)Department of Cancer
Biology, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope, Duarte, CA 91010; Irell and
Manella Graduate School of Biological Sciences, City of Hope, Duarte, CA 91010;
and suresh.cuddapah@nyumc.org dschones@coh.org. (5)Department of Environmental
Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, Tuxedo, NY 10987;
suresh.cuddapah@nyumc.org dschones@coh.org.

Investigations into the genomic landscape of histone modifications in
heterochromatic regions have revealed histone H3 lysine 9 dimethylation (H3K9me2)
to be important for differentiation and maintaining cell identity. H3K9me2 is
associated with gene silencing and is organized into large repressive domains
that exist in close proximity to active genes, indicating the importance of
maintenance of proper domain structure. Here we show that nickel, a nonmutagenic 
environmental carcinogen, disrupted H3K9me2 domains, resulting in the spreading
of H3K9me2 into active regions, which was associated with gene silencing. We
found weak CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)-binding sites and reduced CTCF binding at 
the Ni-disrupted H3K9me2 domain boundaries, suggesting a loss of CTCF-mediated
insulation function as a potential reason for domain disruption and spreading. We
furthermore show that euchromatin islands, local regions of active chromatin
within large H3K9me2 domains, can protect genes from H3K9me2-spreading-associated
gene silencing. These results have major implications in understanding H3K9me2
dynamics and the consequences of chromatin domain disruption during pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4210008
PMID: 25246589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Carcinogenesis. 2014 Dec;35(12):2687-97. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgu201. Epub 2014
Sep 19.

Identification of chimeric TSNAX-DISC1 resulting from intergenic splicing in
endometrial carcinoma through high-throughput RNA sequencing.

Li N(1), Zheng J(1), Li H(2), Deng J(1), Hu M(3), Wu H(1), Li W(1), Li F(1), Lan 
X(4), Lu J(5), Zhou Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Medical College of Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, 
China, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Third Hospital, Peking
University, Beijing 100191, China, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The
Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, San Xiang Road No. 1055, Suzhou
215004, China, Department of Genetics, Stanford University, 300 Pasteur Drive,
Stanford, CA 94304, USA and The Institute for Chemical Carcinogenesis, The State 
Key Lab of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510182,
China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Third Hospital, Peking
University, Beijing 100191, China. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, San Xiang Road No. 1055,
Suzhou 215004, China. (4)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, 300 Pasteur
Drive, Stanford, CA 94304, USA and. (5)The Institute for Chemical Carcinogenesis,
The State Key Lab of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou
510182, China. (6)Department of Genetics, Medical College of Soochow University, 
Suzhou 215123, China, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Third Hospital,
Peking University, Beijing 100191, China, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, San Xiang Road 
No. 1055, Suzhou 215004, China, Department of Genetics, Stanford University, 300 
Pasteur Drive, Stanford, CA 94304, USA and The Institute for Chemical
Carcinogenesis, The State Key Lab of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Medical
University, Guangzhou 510182, China zhouyifeng@suda.edu.cn.

Gene fusion is among the primary processes that generate new genes and has been
well characterized as potent pathway of oncogenesis. Here, by high-throughput RNA
sequencing in nine paired human endometrial carcinoma (EC) and matched
non-cancerous tissues, we obtained that chimeric translin-associated factor
X-disrupted-in-schizophrenia 1 (TSNAX-DISC1) occurred significantly upregulated
in multiple EC samples. Experimental investigation showed that TSNAX-DISC1
appears to be formed by splicing without chromosomal rearrangement. The chimera
expression inversely correlated with the binding of CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)
to the insulators. Subsequent investigations indicate that long intergenic
non-coding RNA lincRNA-NR_034037, separating TSNAX from DISC1, regulates TSNAX
-DISC1 production and TSNAX/DISC1 expression levels by extricating CTCF from
insulators. Dysregulation of TSNAX influences steroidogenic factor-1-stimulated
transcription on the StAR promoter, altering progesterone actions, implying the
association with cancer. Together, these results advance our understanding of the
mechanism in which lincRNA-NR_034037 regulates TSNAX-DISC1 formation programs
that tightly regulate EC development.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25239642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2014 Dec;71(23):4519-44. doi: 10.1007/s00018-014-1717-x. Epub 
2014 Sep 20.

Are common fragile sites merely structural domains or highly organized
"functional" units susceptible to oncogenic stress?

Georgakilas AG(1), Tsantoulis P, Kotsinas A, Michalopoulos I, Townsend P,
Gorgoulis VG.

Author information: 
(1)Physics Department, School of Applied Mathematical and Physical Sciences,
National Technical University of Athens (NTUA), Zografou, 15780, Athens, Greece.

Common fragile sites (CFSs) are regions of the genome with a predisposition to
DNA double-strand breaks in response to intrinsic (oncogenic) or extrinsic
replication stress. CFS breakage is a common feature in carcinogenesis from its
earliest stages. Given that a number of oncogenes and tumor suppressors are
located within CFSs, a question that emerges is whether fragility in these
regions is only a structural "passive" incident or an event with a profound
biological effect. Furthermore, there is sparse evidence that other elements,
like non-coding RNAs, are positioned with them. By analyzing data from various
libraries, like miRbase and ENCODE, we show a prevalence of various
cancer-related genes, miRNAs, and regulatory binding sites, such as CTCF within
CFSs. We propose that CFSs are not only susceptible structural domains, but
highly organized "functional" entities that when targeted, severe repercussion
for cell homeostasis occurs.

PMCID: PMC4232749
PMID: 25238782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Genome Res. 2014 Dec;24(12):1905-17. doi: 10.1101/gr.176586.114. Epub 2014 Sep
16.

Genome-wide map of regulatory interactions in the human genome.

Heidari N(1), Phanstiel DH(1), He C(2), Grubert F(1), Jahanbani F(1), Kasowski
M(3), Zhang MQ(4), Snyder MP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California 94305, USA; (2)MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics and Bioinformatics
Division, Center for Synthetic and System Biology, TNLIST/Department of
Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China; (3)Department of
Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305,
USA; Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale
University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA; (4)MOE Key Laboratory of
Bioinformatics and Bioinformatics Division, Center for Synthetic and System
Biology, TNLIST/Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084,
China; Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Center for Systems Biology, The 
University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, Texas 75080-3021, USA. (5)Department
of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, 
USA; mpsnyder@stanford.edu.

Increasing evidence suggests that interactions between regulatory genomic
elements play an important role in regulating gene expression. We generated a
genome-wide interaction map of regulatory elements in human cells (ENCODE tier 1 
cells, K562, GM12878) using Chromatin Interaction Analysis by Paired-End Tag
sequencing (ChIA-PET) experiments targeting six broadly distributed factors.
Bound regions covered 80% of DNase I hypersensitive sites including 99.7% of TSS 
and 98% of enhancers. Correlating this map with ChIP-seq and RNA-seq data sets
revealed cohesin, CTCF, and ZNF143 as key components of three-dimensional
chromatin structure and revealed how the distal chromatin state affects gene
transcription. Comparison of interactions between cell types revealed that
enhancer-promoter interactions were highly cell-type-specific. Construction and
comparison of distal and proximal regulatory networks revealed stark differences 
in structure and biological function. Proximal binding events are enriched at
genes with housekeeping functions, while distal binding events interact with
genes involved in dynamic biological processes including response to stimulus.
This study reveals new mechanistic and functional insights into regulatory region
organization in the nucleus.

© 2014 Heidari et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4248309
PMID: 25228660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Trends Cell Biol. 2014 Nov;24(11):703-11. doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2014.08.003. Epub
2014 Sep 10.

Architectural proteins: regulators of 3D genome organization in cell fate.

Gómez-Díaz E(1), Corces VG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. (2)Department
of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. Electronic address:
vcorces@emory.edu.

The relation between alterations in chromatin structure and changes in gene
expression during cell differentiation has served as a paradigm to understand the
link between genome organization and function. Yet, the factors involved and the 
mechanisms by which the 3D organization of the nucleus is established remain
poorly understood. The use of Chromosome Conformation-Capture (3C)-based
approaches has resulted in a new appreciation of the role of architectural
proteins in the establishment of 3D genome organization. Architectural proteins
orchestrate higher-order chromatin organization through the establishment of
interactions between regulatory elements across multiple spatial scales. The
regulation of these proteins, their interaction with DNA, and their co-occurrence
in the genome, may be responsible for the plasticity of 3D chromatin architecture
that dictates cell and time-specific blueprints of gene expression.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4254322
PMID: 25218583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Nat Commun. 2014 Sep 11;5:4850. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5850.

Ribosomal DNA copy number is coupled with gene expression variation and
mitochondrial abundance in humans.

Gibbons JG(1), Branco AT(1), Yu S(1), Lemos B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular and Integrative Physiological Sciences, Department of
Environmental Health, Harvard School of Public Health, 665 Huntington Avenue,
Building 2, Room 219, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Ribosomes are essential intracellular machines composed of proteins and RNA
molecules. The DNA sequences (rDNA) encoding ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) are tandemly 
repeated and give origin to the nucleolus. Here we develop a computational method
for estimating rDNA dosage (copy number) and mitochondrial DNA abundance using
whole-genome short-read DNA sequencing. We estimate these attributes across
hundreds of human genomes and their association with global gene expression. The 
analyses uncover abundant variation in rDNA dosage that is coupled with the
expression of hundreds of functionally coherent gene sets. These include
associations with genes coding for chromatin components that target the
nucleolus, including CTCF and HP1ß. Finally, the data show an inverse association
between rDNA dosage and mitochondrial DNA abundance that is manifested across
genotypes. Our findings uncover a novel and cryptic source of hypervariable
genomic diversity with global regulatory consequences (ribosomal eQTL) in humans.
The variation provides a mechanism for cellular homeostasis and for rapid and
reversible adaptation.

PMID: 25209200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Cancer Res. 2014 Nov 15;74(22):6463-73. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2922. Epub 
2014 Sep 9.

Histone h1.3 suppresses h19 noncoding RNA expression and cell growth of ovarian
cancer cells.

Medrzycki M(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhang W(2), Cao K(1), Pan C(1), Lailler N(3),
McDonald JF(1), Bouhassira EE(4), Fan Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia. The
Petit Institute for Bioengineering and Bioscience, Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, Georgia. (2)Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine
at Mount Sinai, New York. (3)Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York.
(4)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New
York. (5)School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia.
The Petit Institute for Bioengineering and Bioscience, Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, Georgia. Yuhong.fan@biology.gatech.edu.

Ovarian cancer is a deadly gynecologic malignancy for which novel biomarkers and 
therapeutic targets are imperative for improving survival. Previous studies have 
suggested the expression pattern of linker histone variants as potential
biomarkers for ovarian cancer. To investigate the role of histone H1 in ovarian
cancer cells, we characterize individual H1 variants and overexpress one of the
major somatic H1 variants, H1.3, in the OVCAR-3 epithelial ovarian cancer cell
line. We find that overexpression of H1.3 decreases the growth rate and colony
formation of OVCAR-3 cells. We identify histone H1.3 as a specific repressor for 
the noncoding oncogene H19. Overexpression of H1.3 suppresses H19 expression, and
knockdown of H1.3 increases its expression in multiple ovarian epithelial cancer 
cell lines. Furthermore, we demonstrate that histone H1.3 overexpression leads to
increased occupancy of H1.3 at the H19 regulator region encompassing the
imprinting control region (ICR), concomitant with increased DNA methylation and
reduced occupancy of the insulator protein CTCF at the ICR. Finally, we
demonstrate that H1.3 overexpression and H19 knockdown synergistically decrease
the growth rate of ovarian cancer cells. Our findings suggest that H1.3
dramatically inhibits H19 expression, which contributes to the suppression of
epithelial ovarian carcinogenesis.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4233163
PMID: 25205099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014;42(17):10943-59. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku780. Epub 2014 Sep
2.

A dynamic CTCF chromatin binding landscape promotes DNA hydroxymethylation and
transcriptional induction of adipocyte differentiation.

Dubois-Chevalier J(1), Oger F(1), Dehondt H(1), Firmin FF(1), Gheeraert C(1),
Staels B(1), Lefebvre P(2), Eeckhoute J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm UMR U1011, F-59000 Lille, France Université Lille 2, F-59000 Lille,
France Institut Pasteur de Lille, F-59019 Lille, France European Genomic
Institute for Diabetes (EGID), FR 3508, F-59000 Lille, France. (2)Inserm UMR
U1011, F-59000 Lille, France Université Lille 2, F-59000 Lille, France Institut
Pasteur de Lille, F-59019 Lille, France European Genomic Institute for Diabetes
(EGID), FR 3508, F-59000 Lille, France jerome.eeckhoute@inserm.fr.

CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a ubiquitously expressed multifunctional
transcription factor characterized by chromatin binding patterns often described 
as largely invariant. In this context, how CTCF chromatin recruitment and
functionalities are used to promote cell type-specific gene expression remains
poorly defined. Here, we show that, in addition to constitutively bound CTCF
binding sites (CTS), the CTCF cistrome comprises a large proportion of sites
showing highly dynamic binding patterns during the course of adipogenesis.
Interestingly, dynamic CTCF chromatin binding is positively linked with changes
in expression of genes involved in biological functions defining the different
stages of adipogenesis. Importantly, a subset of these dynamic CTS are gained at 
cell type-specific regulatory regions, in line with a requirement for CTCF in
transcriptional induction of adipocyte differentiation. This relates to, at least
in part, CTCF requirement for transcriptional activation of both the nuclear
receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARG) and its target 
genes. Functionally, we show that CTCF interacts with TET methylcytosine
dioxygenase (TET) enzymes and promotes adipogenic transcriptional enhancer DNA
hydroxymethylation. Our study reveals a dynamic CTCF chromatin binding landscape 
required for epigenomic remodeling of enhancers and transcriptional activation
driving cell differentiation.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4176165
PMID: 25183525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Ann Rheum Dis. 2016 Jan;75(1):242-52. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2014-205584. Epub 
2014 Sep 1.

Preferential association of a functional variant in complement receptor 2 with
antibodies to double-stranded DNA.

Zhao J(1), Giles BM(2), Taylor RL(3), Yette GA(2), Lough KM(2), Ng HL(3), Abraham
LJ(3), Wu H(1), Kelly JA(4), Glenn SB(4), Adler AJ(4), Williams AH(5), Comeau
ME(5), Ziegler JT(5), Marion M(5), Alarcón-Riquelme ME(6); BIOLUPUS and GENLES
Networks, Alarcón GS(7), Anaya JM(8), Bae SC(9), Kim D(9), Lee HS(9), Criswell
LA(10), Freedman BI(11), Gilkeson GS(12), Guthridge JM(4), Jacob CO(13), James
JA(14), Kamen DL(12), Merrill JT(15), Sivils KM(16), Niewold TB(17), Petri
MA(18), Ramsey-Goldman R(19), Reveille JD(20), Scofield RH(21), Stevens AM(22),
Vilá LM(23), Vyse TJ(24), Kaufman KM(25), Harley JB(25), Langefeld CD(5), Gaffney
PM(4), Brown EE(26), Edberg JC(7), Kimberly RP(7), Ulgiati D(3), Tsao BP(1),
Boackle SA(27).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of California at 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA. (2)Division of Rheumatology,
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA. (3)School of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Centre for Genetic Origins of Health and
Disease, The University of Western Australia, Crawley, Western Australia,
Australia. (4)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma
Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA. (5)Department of
Biostatistical Sciences and Center for Public Health Genomics, Wake Forest School
of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA. (6)Arthritis and Clinical
Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma, USA Pfizer-Universidad de Granada-Junta de Andalucía Center for
Genomics and Oncological Research, Granada, Spain. (7)Department of Medicine,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA. (8)Center for
Autoimmune Diseases Research (CREA), Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá, Colombia.
(9)Department of Rheumatology, Hanyang University Hospital for Rheumatic
Diseases, Seoul, South Korea. (10)Rosalind Russell/Ephraim P. Engleman
Rheumatology Research Center, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, USA. (11)Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest
School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA. (12)Division of
Rheumatology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina,
USA. (13)Department of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California, USA. (14)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma
Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA Department of
Pathology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma, USA Department of Medicine, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences
Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA. (15)Department of Clinical Pharmacology,
Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA. (16)Arthritis
and Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA Department of Pathology, University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA. (17)Division of
Rheumatology and Department of Immunology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota,
USA. (18)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (19)Division of Rheumatology, Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA. (20)Department of
Rheumatology and Clinical Immunogenetics, University of Texas Health Science
Center at Houston, Houston, Texas, USA. (21)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology
Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 
USA Department of Medicine, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA US Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA. (22)Division of Rheumatology, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA Center for
Immunity and Immunotherapies, Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle,
Washington, USA. (23)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University
of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus, San Juan, Puerto Rico. (24)Division of
Genetics and Molecular Medicine and Immunology, King's College London, London,
UK. (25)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA US
Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(26)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama, USA Department of Epidemiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, Alabama, USA. (27)Division of Rheumatology, University of Colorado
School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA Denver Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Denver, Colorado, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE; OMIM 152700) is characterised by
the production of antibodies to nuclear antigens. We previously identified
variants in complement receptor 2 (CR2/CD21) that were associated with decreased 
risk of SLE. This study aimed to identify the causal variant for this
association.
METHODS: Genotyped and imputed genetic variants spanning CR2 were assessed for
association with SLE in 15 750 case-control subjects from four ancestral groups. 
Allele-specific functional effects of associated variants were determined using
quantitative real-time PCR, quantitative flow cytometry, electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA) and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-PCR.
RESULTS: The strongest association signal was detected at rs1876453 in intron 1
of CR2 (pmeta=4.2×10(-4), OR 0.85), specifically when subjects were stratified
based on the presence of dsDNA autoantibodies (case-control pmeta=7.6×10(-7), OR 
0.71; case-only pmeta=1.9×10(-4), OR 0.75). Although allele-specific effects on B
cell CR2 mRNA or protein levels were not identified, levels of complement
receptor 1 (CR1/CD35) mRNA and protein were significantly higher on B cells of
subjects harbouring the minor allele (p=0.0248 and p=0.0006, respectively). The
minor allele altered the formation of several DNA protein complexes by EMSA,
including one containing CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), an effect that was
confirmed by ChIP-PCR.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that rs1876453 in CR2 has long-range effects on
gene regulation that decrease susceptibility to lupus. Since the minor allele at 
rs1876453 is preferentially associated with reduced risk of the highly specific
dsDNA autoantibodies that are present in preclinical, active and severe lupus,
understanding its mechanisms will have important therapeutic implications.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMCID: PMC4717392
PMID: 25180293  [PubMed - in process]


219. J Carcinog Mutagen. 2014 May 31;5:177.

Induction of Apoptosis in Pancreatic Cancer Cells by CDDO-Me Involves Repression 
of Telomerase through Epigenetic Pathways.

Deeb D(1), Brigolin C(2), Gao X(1), Liu Y(1), Pindolia KR(2), Gautam SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, USA. (2)Department
of Medical Genetics, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, USA.

Reactivation of telomerase in cancers provides an attractive target for
developing novel agents to selectively destroy tumor cells.
Methyl-2-cyano-3,12-dioxooleana-1,9(11)-dien-28-oate (CDDO-Me), a synthetic
oleanane triterpenoid, inhibited cell proliferation and induced apoptosis in
pancreatic cancer cells at very low concentrations. The antiproliferative and
apoptosis-inducing effects of CDDO-Me were associated with the inhibition of
human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) mRNA, hTERT protein and reduction 
in hTERT telomerase activity. CDDO-Me inhibited multiple transcription factors
that regulate hTERT expression positively (Sp1, c-Myc and NF-<U+03BA>B) and negatively
(CTCF, E2F-1 and MAD1). CDDO-Me inhibited protein levels of DNA methyl
transferases DNMT1 and DNMT3a, which also resulted in hypomethylation of hTERT
promoter. In addition, transcriptionally active chromatin markers, such as
acetylated histone H3 (Lys 9), acetylated histone H4, di-methyl H3 (Lys 4) and
tri-methyl H3 (Lys 9) were all reduced in pancreatic cancer cells treated with
CDDO-Me. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed decreased histone
deacetylation and histone demethylation at hTERT promoter. Collectively, these
results indicate that down-regulation of telomerase through epigenetic mechanisms
plays a critical role in induction of apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells by
CDDO-Me.

PMCID: PMC4139055
PMID: 25152840  [PubMed]


220. Epigenetics. 2014 Sep;9(9):1261-70. doi: 10.4161/epi.32086. Epub 2014 Aug 1.

Highly conserved ENY2/Sus1 protein binds to Drosophila CTCF and is required for
barrier activity.

Maksimenko O(1), Kyrchanova O(2), Bonchuk A(2), Stakhov V(1), Parshikov A(3),
Georgiev P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Expression Regulation in Development; Institute of Gene
Biology; Russian Academy of Sciences; Moscow, Russia. (2)Group of Transcriptional
Regulation; Institute of Gene Biology; Russian Academy of Sciences; Moscow,
Russia. (3)Department of the Control of Genetic Processes; Institute of Gene
Biology; Russian Academy of Sciences; Moscow, Russia.

Chromatin insulators affect interactions between promoters and
enhancers/silencers and function as barriers for the spreading of repressive
chromatin. Drosophila insulator protein dCTCF marks active promoters and
boundaries of many histone H3K27 trimethylation domains associated with repressed
chromatin. In particular, dCTCF binds to such boundaries between the
parasegment-specific regulatory domains of the Bithorax complex. Here we
demonstrate that the evolutionarily conserved protein ENY2 is recruited to the
zinc-finger domain of dCTCF and is required for the barrier activity of
dCTCF-dependent insulators in transgenic lines. Inactivation of ENY2 by RNAi in
BG3 cells leads to the spreading of H3K27 trimethylation and Pc protein at
several dCTCF boundaries. The results suggest that evolutionarily conserved ENY2 
is responsible for barrier activity mediated by the dCTCF protein.

PMCID: PMC4169018
PMID: 25147918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014 Aug 21;10(8):e1003771. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003771. 
eCollection 2014.

Tracing the evolution of lineage-specific transcription factor binding sites in a
birth-death framework.

Yokoyama KD(1), Zhang Y(2), Ma J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, Illinois, United States of America. (2)Department of Bioengineering,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, United States of
America. (3)Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, United States of America; Department of
Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois,
United States of America.

Changes in cis-regulatory element composition that result in novel patterns of
gene expression are thought to be a major contributor to the evolution of
lineage-specific traits. Although transcription factor binding events show
substantial variation across species, most computational approaches to study
regulatory elements focus primarily upon highly conserved sites, and rely heavily
upon multiple sequence alignments. However, sequence conservation based
approaches have limited ability to detect lineage-specific elements that could
contribute to species-specific traits. In this paper, we describe a novel
framework that utilizes a birth-death model to trace the evolution of
lineage-specific binding sites without relying on detailed base-by-base
cross-species alignments. Our model was applied to analyze the evolution of
binding sites based on the ChIP-seq data for six transcription factors (GATA1,
SOX2, CTCF, MYC, MAX, ETS1) along the lineage toward human after human-mouse
common ancestor. We estimate that a substantial fraction of binding sites
(~58-79% for each factor) in humans have origins since the divergence with mouse.
Over 15% of all binding sites are unique to hominids. Such elements are often
enriched near genes associated with specific pathways, and harbor more common
SNPs than older binding sites in the human genome. These results support the
ability of our method to identify lineage-specific regulatory elements and help
understand their roles in shaping variation in gene regulation across species.

PMCID: PMC4140645
PMID: 25144359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Oct;34(20):3867-79. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00567-14. Epub 2014 Aug 
18.

CTCF controls HOXA cluster silencing and mediates PRC2-repressive higher-order
chromatin structure in NT2/D1 cells.

Xu M(1), Zhao GN(1), Lv X(1), Liu G(1), Wang LY(2), Hao DL(1), Wang J(3), Liu
DP(4), Liang CC(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, People's Republic of 
China. (2)Department of Biochemistry, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China Shenzhen Institute of
Research and Innovation, The University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, People's Republic
of China. (3)Department of Biochemistry, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University 
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China Center for Genomic
Sciences, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR,
People's Republic of China Shenzhen Institute of Research and Innovation, The
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, People's Republic of China. (4)State Key
Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, People's Republic of China
iudp@pumc.edu.cn.

HOX cluster genes are activated sequentially in their positional order along the 
chromosome during vertebrate development. This phenomenon, known as temporal
colinearity, depends on transcriptional silencing of 5' HOX genes. Chromatin
looping was recently identified as a conserved feature of silent HOX clusters,
with CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) binding sites located at the loop bases.
However, the potential contribution of CTCF to HOX cluster silencing and the
underlying mechanism have not been established. Here, we demonstrate that the
HOXA locus is organized by CTCF into chromatin loops and that CTCF depletion
causes significantly enhanced activation of HOXA3 to -A7, -A9 to -A11, and -A13
in response to retinoic acid, with the highest effect observed for HOXA9. Our
subsequent analyses revealed that CTCF facilitates the stabilization of Polycomb 
repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and trimethylated lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3K27me3) 
at the human HOXA locus. Our results reveal that CTCF functions as a controller
of HOXA cluster silencing and mediates PRC2-repressive higher-order chromatin
structure.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4187707
PMID: 25135475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014;42(16):10360-72. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku712. Epub 2014 Aug
12.

The bone-specific Runx2-P1 promoter displays conserved three-dimensional
chromatin structure with the syntenic Supt3h promoter.

Barutcu AR(1), Tai PW(2), Wu H(2), Gordon JA(2), Whitfield TW(3), Dobson JR(1),
Imbalzano AN(1), Lian JB(2), van Wijnen AJ(1), Stein JL(2), Stein GS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, 55 Lake Avenue North, Worcester, MA 01655, USA. (2)Department of 
Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 55
Lake Avenue North, Worcester, MA 01655, USA Department of Biochemistry and
Vermont Cancer Center, University of Vermont College of Medicine, 89 Beaumont
Avenue, Burlington, VT 05405, USA. (3)Department of Cell and Developmental
Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 55 Lake Avenue North,
Worcester, MA 01655, USA Program in Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, 55 Lake Avenue North, Worcester, MA
01655, USA. (4)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, 55 Lake Avenue North, Worcester, MA 01655, USA
Department of Biochemistry and Vermont Cancer Center, University of Vermont
College of Medicine, 89 Beaumont Avenue, Burlington, VT 05405, USA
gary.stein@uvm.edu.

Three-dimensional organization of chromatin is fundamental for transcriptional
regulation. Tissue-specific transcriptional programs are orchestrated by
transcription factors and epigenetic regulators. The RUNX2 transcription factor
is required for differentiation of precursor cells into mature osteoblasts.
Although organization and control of the bone-specific Runx2-P1 promoter have
been studied extensively, long-range regulation has not been explored. In this
study, we investigated higher-order organization of the Runx2-P1 promoter during 
osteoblast differentiation. Mining the ENCODE database revealed interactions
between Runx2-P1 and Supt3h promoters in several non-mesenchymal human cell
lines. Supt3h is a ubiquitously expressed gene located within the first intron of
Runx2. These two genes show shared synteny across species from humans to sponges.
Chromosome conformation capture analysis in the murine pre-osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 
cell line revealed increased contact frequency between Runx2-P1 and Supt3h
promoters during differentiation. This increase was accompanied by enhanced
DNaseI hypersensitivity along with RUNX2 and CTCF binding at the Supt3h promoter.
Furthermore, interplasmid-3C and luciferase reporter assays showed that the
Supt3h promoter can modulate Runx2-P1 activity via direct association. Taken
together, our data demonstrate physical proximity between Runx2-P1 and Supt3h
promoters, consistent with their syntenic nature. Importantly, we identify the
Supt3h promoter as a potential regulator of the bone-specific Runx2-P1 promoter.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4176362
PMID: 25120271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Case Rep Dent. 2014;2014:792615. doi: 10.1155/2014/792615. Epub 2014 Jul 10.

CTCFL (BORIS) mRNA Expression in a Peripheral Giant Cell Granuloma of the Oral
Cavity.

Zambrano-Galván G(1), Reyes-Romero M(2), Bologna-Molina R(3), Almeda-Ojeda OE(3),
Lemus-Rojero O(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Stomatology, Faculty of Dentistry, Universidad Juárez 
de Estado de Durango, Predio Canoas Street, 34067 Durango, Mexico. (2)Department 
of Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Nutrition, Universidad Juárez de
Estado del Durango, Universidad Avenue, 34000 Durango, Mexico. (3)Laboratory of
Pathology and Bucal Medicine, Faculty of Dentistry, Universidad Juárez del Estado
de Durango, Predio Canoas Street, 34067 Durango, Mexico. (4)Faculty of Dentistry,
Universidad Autónoma de Zacatecas, Begonias Street, Guadalupe, 98600 Zacatecas,
Mexico.

Peripheral giant cell granuloma (PGCG) is a relatively common benign reactive
lesion of the oral cavity which can occur at any age. CTCFL/BORIS (CTCF
like/Brother of the Regulator of Imprinted Sites) and CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor)
are paralogous genes with an important role in the regulation of gene expression,
genomic imprinting, and nuclear chromatin insulators regulation. BORIS expression
promotes cell immortalization and growth while CTCF has tumor suppressor
activity; the expression pattern may reflect the reverse transcription silencing 
of BORIS. The aim of this work was to describe a histopathological and molecular 
approach of an 8-year-old pediatric male patient with PGCG diagnosis. It was
observed that the PGCG under study expressed CTCF as well as BORIS mRNAs
alongside with the housekeeping gene GAPDH, which may be related to possible
genetic and epigenetic changes in normal cells of oral cavity.

PMCID: PMC4120782
PMID: 25114808  [PubMed]


225. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Oct;34(20):3895-910. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00760-14. Epub 2014 Aug
11.

Regulation of the protocadherin Celsr3 gene and its role in globus pallidus
development and connectivity.

Jia Z(1), Guo Y(1), Tang Y(1), Xu Q(1), Li B(2), Wu Q(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine (Ministry of Education), Center for
Comparative Biomedicine, Institute of Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, 
Shanghai Cancer Institute, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and 
Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Ministry of Education, Bio-X Center, School of Life
Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and Neuropsychiatric
Disorders, Ministry of Education, Bio-X Center, School of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. (3)Key Laboratory 
of Systems Biomedicine (Ministry of Education), Center for Comparative
Biomedicine, Institute of Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai
Cancer Institute, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and 
Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Ministry of Education, Bio-X Center, School of Life
Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
qwu123@gmail.com.

The globus pallidus (GP) is a central component of basal ganglia whose
malfunctions cause a variety of neuropsychiatric disorders as well as cognitive
impairments in neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson's disease. Here we
report that the protocadherin gene Celsr3 is regulated by the insulator
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) and the repressor neuron-restrictive silencer factor 
(NRSF, also known as REST) and is required for the development and connectivity
of GP. Specifically, CTCF/cohesin and NRSF inhibit the expression of Celsr3
through specific binding to its promoter. In addition, we found that the Celsr3
promoter interacts with CTCF/cohesin-occupied neighboring promoters. In Celsr3
knockout mice, we found that the ventral GP is occupied by aberrant
calbindin-positive cholinergic neurons ectopic from the nucleus basalis of
Meynert. Furthermore, the guidepost cells for thalamocortical axonal development 
are missing in the caudal GP. Finally, axonal connections of GP with striatum,
subthalamic nucleus, substantia nigra, and raphe are compromised. These data
reveal the essential role of Celsr3 in GP development in the basal forebrain and 
shed light on the mechanisms of the axonal defects caused by the Celsr3 deletion.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4187713
PMID: 25113559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2014 Aug 5;7:18. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-7-18. eCollection 
2014.

PAT-ChIP coupled with laser microdissection allows the study of chromatin in
selected cell populations from paraffin-embedded patient samples.

Amatori S(1), Ballarini M(2), Faversani A(3), Belloni E(2), Fusar F(2), Bosari
S(4), Pelicci PG(2), Minucci S(5), Fanelli M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, University of Urbino 'Carlo Bo',
Molecular Pathology Lab. 'PaoLa', Via Arco d'Augusto, 2, Fano 61032, Italy ;
Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Via
Adamello, 16, Milan 20139, Italy. (2)Department of Experimental Oncology,
European Institute of Oncology, Via Adamello, 16, Milan 20139, Italy. (3)Division
of Pathology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Via
Francesco Sforza, 33, Milan 20122, Italy. (4)Division of Pathology, Fondazione
IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Via Francesco Sforza, 33, Milan
20122, Italy ; Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of
Milan, Via Francesco Sforza, 35, Milan 20122, Italy. (5)Department of
Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Via Adamello, 16, Milan
20139, Italy ; Department of Biosciences, University of Milan, Via Giovanni
Celoria, 26, Milan 20133, Italy. (6)Department of Biomolecular Sciences,
University of Urbino 'Carlo Bo', Molecular Pathology Lab. 'PaoLa', Via Arco
d'Augusto, 2, Fano 61032, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The recent introduction of pathology tissue-chromatin
immunoprecipitation (PAT-ChIP), a technique allowing chromatin
immunoprecipitation from formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues, has
expanded the application potential of epigenetic studies in tissue samples.
However, FFPE tissue section analysis is strongly limited by tissue
heterogeneity, which hinders linking the observed epigenetic events to the
corresponding cellular population. Thus, ideally, to take full advantage of
PAT-ChIP approaches, procedures able to increase the purity and homogeneity of
cell populations from FFPE tissues are required.
RESULTS: In this study, we tested the use of both core needle biopsies (CNBs) and
laser microdissection (LMD), evaluating the compatibility of these methods with
the PAT-ChIP procedure. Modifications of the original protocols were introduced
in order to increase reproducibility and reduce experimental time. We first
demonstrated that chromatin can be prepared and effectively immunoprecipitated
starting from 0.6-mm-diameter CNBs. Subsequently, in order to assess the
applicability of PAT-ChIP to LMD samples, we tested the effects of hematoxylin or
eosin staining on chromatin extraction and immunoprecipitation, as well as the
reproducibility of our technique when using particularly low quantities of
starting material. Finally, we carried out the PAT-ChIP using chromatin extracted
from either normal tissue or neoplastic lesions, the latter obtained by LMD from 
FFPE lung sections derived from mutant K-ras(v12) transgenic mice or from human
adeno- or squamous lung carcinoma samples. Well characterized histone
post-translational modifications (HPTMs), such as H3K4me3, H3K27me3, H3K27Ac, and
H3K9me3, were specifically immunoselected, as well as the CTCF transcription
factor and RNA polymerase II (Pol II).
CONCLUSIONS: Epigenetic profiling can be performed on enriched cell populations
obtained from FFPE tissue sections. The improved PAT-ChIP protocol will be used
for the discovery and/or validation of novel epigenetic biomarkers in FFPE human 
samples.

PMCID: PMC4124777
PMID: 25104973  [PubMed]


227. Elife. 2014 Jul 31;3:e02833. doi: 10.7554/eLife.02833.

H3K27 modifications define segmental regulatory domains in the Drosophila
bithorax complex.

Bowman SK(1), Deaton AM(1), Domingues H(2), Wang PI(1), Sadreyev RI(3), Kingston 
RE(4), Bender W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
United States Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, United
States. (2)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, United States. (3)Department of Molecular Biology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, United States Department of Pathology,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, United States. (4)Department of Molecular
Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, United States Department of
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, United States
kingston@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu.

The bithorax complex (BX-C) in Drosophila melanogaster is a cluster of homeotic
genes that determine body segment identity. Expression of these genes is governed
by cis-regulatory domains, one for each parasegment. Stable repression of these
domains depends on Polycomb Group (PcG) functions, which include trimethylation
of lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3K27me3). To search for parasegment-specific
signatures that reflect PcG function, chromatin from single parasegments was
isolated and profiled. The H3K27me3 profiles across the BX-C in successive
parasegments showed a 'stairstep' pattern that revealed sharp boundaries of the
BX-C regulatory domains. Acetylated H3K27 was broadly enriched across active
domains, in a pattern complementary to H3K27me3. The CCCTC-binding protein (CTCF)
bound the borders between H3K27 modification domains; it was retained even in
parasegments where adjacent domains lack H3K27me3. These findings provide a
molecular definition of the homeotic domains, and implicate precisely positioned 
H3K27 modifications as a central determinant of segment identity.

Copyright © 2014, Bowman et al.

PMCID: PMC4139060
PMID: 25082344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Sep;42(15):9612-22. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku648. Epub 2014
Jul 31.

Architectural proteins CTCF and cohesin have distinct roles in modulating the
higher order structure and expression of the CFTR locus.

Gosalia N(1), Neems D(2), Kerschner JL(1), Kosak ST(2), Harris A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie Children's Research Center,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA
Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL, 60611, USA. (2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60614, USA.
(3)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie Children's Research Center,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA
Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL, 60611, USA ann-harris@northwestern.edu.

Higher order chromatin structures across the genome are maintained in part by the
architectural proteins CCCTC binding factor (CTCF) and the cohesin complex, which
co-localize at many sites across the genome. Here, we examine the role of these
proteins in mediating chromatin structure at the cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. CFTR encompasses nearly 200 kb flanked by
CTCF-binding enhancer-blocking insulator elements and is regulated by
cell-type-specific intronic enhancers, which loop to the promoter in the active
locus. SiRNA-mediated depletion of CTCF or the cohesin component, RAD21, showed
that these two factors have distinct roles in regulating the higher order
organization of CFTR. CTCF mediates the interactions between CTCF/cohesin binding
sites, some of which have enhancer-blocking insulator activity. Cohesin shares
this tethering role, but in addition stabilizes interactions between the promoter
and cis-acting intronic elements including enhancers, which are also dependent on
the forkhead box A1/A2 (FOXA1/A2) transcription factors (TFs). Disruption of the 
three-dimensional structure of the CFTR gene by depletion of CTCF or RAD21
increases gene expression, which is accompanied by alterations in histone
modifications and TF occupancy across the locus, and causes internalization of
the gene from the nuclear periphery.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4150766
PMID: 25081205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Genome Biol. 2014 Jul 29;15(7):412. doi: 10.1186/s13059-014-0412-4.

Non-targeted transcription factors motifs are a systemic component of ChIP-seq
datasets.

Worsley Hunt R, Wasserman WW.

BACKGROUND: The global effort to annotate the non-coding portion of the human
genome relies heavily on chromatin immunoprecipitation data generated with
high-throughput DNA sequencing (ChIP-seq). ChIP-seq is generally successful in
detailing the segments of the genome bound by the immunoprecipitated
transcription factor (TF), however almost all datasets contain genomic regions
devoid of the canonical motif for the TF. It remains to be determined if these
regions are related to the immunoprecipitated TF or whether, despite the use of
controls, there is a portion of peaks that can be attributed to other causes.
RESULTS: Analyses across hundreds of ChIP-seq datasets generated for
sequence-specific DNA binding TFs reveal a small set of TF binding profiles for
which predicted TF binding site motifs are repeatedly observed to be
significantly enriched. Grouping related binding profiles, the set includes:
CTCF-like, ETS-like, JUN-like, and THAP11 profiles. These frequently enriched
profiles are termed 'zingers' to highlight their unanticipated enrichment in
datasets for which they were not the targeted TF, and their potential impact on
the interpretation and analysis of TF ChIP-seq data. Peaks with zinger motifs and
lacking the ChIPped TF's motif are observed to compose up to 45% of a ChIP-seq
dataset. There is substantial overlap of zinger motif containing regions between 
diverse TF datasets, suggesting a mechanism that is not TF-specific for the
recovery of these regions.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on the zinger regions proximity to cohesin-bound segments, a
loading station model is proposed. Further study of zingers will advance
understanding of gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC4165360
PMID: 25070602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014;42(16):e125. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku600. Epub 2014 Jul 17.

Construction of mate pair full-length cDNAs libraries and characterization of
transcriptional start sites and termination sites.

Matsumoto K(1), Suzuki A(1), Wakaguri H(1), Sugano S(1), Suzuki Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, University of Tokyo, 5-1-5 Kashiwanoha, 
Kashiwa, Chiba 277-8562, Japan. (2)Graduate School of Frontier Sciences,
University of Tokyo, 5-1-5 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-8562, Japan
ysuzuki@hgc.jp.

To identify and characterize transcript structures ranging from transcriptional
start sites (TSSs) to poly(A)-addition sites (PASs), we constructed and analyzed 
human TSS/PAS mate pair full-length cDNA libraries from 14 tissue types and four 
cell lines. The collected information enabled us to define TSS cluster (TSC) and 
PAS cluster (PAC) relationships for a total of 8530/9400 RefSeq genes, as well as
4251/5618 of their putative alternative promoters/terminators and 4619/4605
intervening transcripts, respectively. Analyses of the putative alternative TSCs 
and alternative PACs revealed that their selection appeared to be mostly
independent, with rare exceptions. In those exceptional cases, pairs of
transcript units rarely overlapped one another and were occasionally separated by
Rad21/CTCF. We also identified a total of 172 similar cases in which TSCs and
PACs spanned adjacent but distinct genes. In these cases, different transcripts
may utilize different functional units of a particular gene or of adjacent genes.
This approach was also useful for identifying fusion gene transcripts in
cancerous cells. Furthermore, we could construct cDNA libraries in which 3'-end
mate pairs were distributed randomly over the transcripts. These libraries were
useful for assembling the internal structure of previously uncharacterized
alternative promoter products, as well as intervening transcripts.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4176323
PMID: 25034687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2014 Jun 16;7:10. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-7-10. eCollection
2014.

Targeted Chromatin Capture (T2C): a novel high resolution high throughput method 
to detect genomic interactions and regulatory elements.

Kolovos P(1), van de Werken HJ(1), Kepper N(2), Zuin J(1), Brouwer RW(3), Kockx
CE(3), Wendt KS(1), van IJcken WF(3), Grosveld F(1), Knoch TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Dr. Molewaterplein 50, 3015GE
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum (DKFZ) &
BioQuant, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (3)Center for
Biomics, Erasmus MC, Dr. Molewaterplein 50, 3015GE Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Significant efforts have recently been put into the investigation of 
the spatial organization and the chromatin-interaction networks of genomes.
Chromosome conformation capture (3C) technology and its derivatives are important
tools used in this effort. However, many of these have limitations, such as being
limited to one viewpoint, expensive with moderate to low resolution, and/or
requiring a large sequencing effort. Techniques like Hi-C provide a genome-wide
analysis. However, it requires massive sequencing effort with considerable costs.
Here we describe a new technique termed Targeted Chromatin Capture (T2C), to
interrogate large selected regions of the genome. T2C provides an unbiased view
of the spatial organization of selected loci at superior resolution (single
restriction fragment resolution, from 2 to 6 kbp) at much lower costs than Hi-C
due to the lower sequencing effort.
RESULTS: We applied T2C on well-known model regions, the mouse ß-globin locus and
the human H19/IGF2 locus. In both cases we identified all known chromatin
interactions. Furthermore, we compared the human H19/IGF2 locus data obtained
from different chromatin conformation capturing methods with T2C data. We
observed the same compartmentalization of the locus, but at a much higher
resolution (single restriction fragments vs. the common 40 kbp bins) and higher
coverage. Moreover, we compared the ß-globin locus in two different biological
samples (mouse primary erythroid cells and mouse fetal brain), where it is either
actively transcribed or not, to identify possible transcriptional dependent
interactions. We identified the known interactions in the ß-globin locus and the 
same topological domains in both mouse primary erythroid cells and in mouse fetal
brain with the latter having fewer interactions probably due to the inactivity of
the locus. Furthermore, we show that interactions due to the important chromatin 
proteins, Ldb1 and Ctcf, in both tissues can be analyzed easily to reveal their
role on transcriptional interactions and genome folding.
CONCLUSIONS: T2C is an efficient, easy, and affordable with high (restriction
fragment) resolution tool to address both genome compartmentalization and
chromatin-interaction networks for specific genomic regions at high resolution
for both clinical and non-clinical research.

PMCID: PMC4100494
PMID: 25031611  [PubMed]


232. Genes Dev. 2014 Jul 15;28(14):1562-77. doi: 10.1101/gad.242685.114.

The active enhancer network operated by liganded RXR supports angiogenic activity
in macrophages.

Daniel B(1), Nagy G(1), Hah N(2), Horvath A(1), Czimmerer Z(1), Poliska S(1),
Gyuris T(1), Keirsse J(3), Gysemans C(4), Van Ginderachter JA(3), Balint BL(1),
Evans RM(2), Barta E(5), Nagy L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Debrecen,
Debrecen H-4032, Hungary; (2)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, San
Diego, California 92037, USA; (3)Myeloid Cell Immunology Laboratory, Vlaams
Instituut voor Biotechnologie (VIB), Brussels B-1050, Belgium; Laboratory of
Cellular and Molecular Immunology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels B-1050,
Belgium; (4)Laboratory of Clinical and Experimental Endocrinology, Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven, Leuven B-3000, Belgium; (5)MTA-DE Lendület Immunogenomics
Research Group, University of Debrecen, Debrecen H-4032, Hungary. (6)Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Debrecen, Debrecen H-4032,
Hungary; MTA-DE Lendület Immunogenomics Research Group, University of Debrecen,
Debrecen H-4032, Hungary.

RXR signaling is predicted to have a major impact in macrophages, but neither the
biological consequence nor the genomic basis of its ligand activation is known.
Comprehensive genome-wide studies were carried out to map liganded RXR-mediated
transcriptional changes, active binding sites, and cistromic interactions in the 
context of the macrophage genome architecture. The macrophage RXR cistrome has
5200 genomic binding sites, which are not impacted by ligand. Active enhancers
are characterized by PU.1 binding, an increase of enhancer RNA, and P300
recruitment. Using these features, 387 liganded RXR-bound enhancers were linked
to 226 genes, which predominantly reside in CTCF/cohesin-limited functional
domains. These findings were molecularly validated using chromosome conformation 
capture (3C) and 3C combined with sequencing (3C-seq), and we show that selected 
long-range enhancers communicate with promoters via stable or RXR-induced loops
and that some of the enhancers interact with each other, forming an
interchromosomal network. A set of angiogenic genes, including Vegfa, has
liganded RXR-controlled enhancers and provides the macrophage with a novel
inducible program.

© 2014 Daniel et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4102764
PMID: 25030696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Cell Sci. 2014 Sep 1;127(Pt 17):3757-67. doi: 10.1242/jcs.149427. Epub 2014 Jul
7.

Functional interplay between MyoD and CTCF in regulating long-range chromatin
interactions during differentiation.

Battistelli C(1), Busanello A(1), Maione R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Pasteur Institute-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Department of Cellular
Biotechnologies and Haematology, Sapienza University of Rome, Viale Regina Elena 
324, 00161 Rome, Italy. (2)Pasteur Institute-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti,
Department of Cellular Biotechnologies and Haematology, Sapienza University of
Rome, Viale Regina Elena 324, 00161 Rome, Italy maione@bce.uniroma1.it.

Higher-order chromatin structures appear to be dynamically arranged during
development and differentiation. However, the molecular mechanism underlying
their maintenance or disruption and their functional relevance to gene regulation
are poorly understood. We recently described a dynamic long-range chromatin
interaction between the gene promoter of the cdk inhibitor p57(kip2) (also known 
as Cdkn1c) and the imprinting control region KvDMR1 in muscle cells. Here, we
show that CTCF, the best characterized organizer of long-range chromatin
interactions, binds to both the p57(kip2) promoter and KvDMR1 and is necessary
for the maintenance of their physical contact. Moreover, we show that
CTCF-mediated looping is required to prevent p57(kip2) expression before
differentiation. Finally, we provide evidence that the induction of p57(kip2)
during myogenesis involves the physical interaction of the muscle-regulatory
factor MyoD with CTCF at KvDMR1, the displacement of the cohesin complex subunit 
Rad21 and the destabilization of the chromatin loop. The finding that MyoD
affects chromatin looping at CTCF-binding sites represents the first evidence
that a differentiation factor regulates chromatin-loop dynamics and provides a
useful paradigm for gaining insights into the developmental regulation of
long-range chromatin contacts.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25002401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Dev Cell. 2014 Jul 14;30(1):11-22. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.05.024. Epub 2014
Jul 3.

High-resolution mapping of chromatin packaging in mouse embryonic stem cells and 
sperm.

Carone BR(1), Hung JH(2), Hainer SJ(3), Chou MT(4), Carone DM(5), Weng Z(6),
Fazzio TG(3), Rando OJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. (2)Institute of
Bioinformatics and System Biology, National Chiao Tung University, 75 Bo-Ai
Street, Hsin-Chu, Taiwan 300; Program in Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology, 
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. (3)Program 
in Gene Function and Expression, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605, USA; Program in Molecular Medicine, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. (4)Institute of
Bioinformatics and System Biology, National Chiao Tung University, 75 Bo-Ai
Street, Hsin-Chu, Taiwan 300. (5)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. (6)Program 
in Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. (7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605,
USA. Electronic address: oliver.rando@umassmed.edu.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2014 Jul 14;30(1):6-8.

Mammalian embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and sperm exhibit unusual chromatin
packaging that plays important roles in cellular function. Here, we extend a
recently developed technique, based on deep paired-end sequencing of lightly
digested chromatin, to assess footprints of nucleosomes and other DNA-binding
proteins genome-wide in murine ESCs and sperm. In ESCs, we recover
well-characterized features of chromatin such as promoter nucleosome depletion
and further identify widespread footprints of sequence-specific DNA-binding
proteins such as CTCF, which we validate in knockdown studies. We document global
differences in nuclease accessibility between ESCs and sperm, finding that the
majority of histone retention in sperm preferentially occurs in large gene-poor
genomic regions, with only a small subset of nucleosomes being retained over
promoters of developmental regulators. Finally, we describe evidence that CTCF
remains associated with the genome in mature sperm, where it could play a role in
organizing the sperm genome.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4184102
PMID: 24998598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2014 Aug;27:92-101. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2014.05.002. Epub
2014 Jul 5.

A mechanistic link between gene regulation and genome architecture in mammalian
development.

Bonora G(1), Plath K(2), Denholtz M(3).

Author information: 
(1)David Geffen School of Medicine, Department of Biological Chemistry, Jonsson
Comprehensive Cancer Center, and the Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regenerative 
Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California Los Angeles, CA 90095, 
USA. (2)David Geffen School of Medicine, Department of Biological Chemistry,
Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, and the Eli and Edythe Broad Center of
Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Electronic address: kplath@mednet.ucla.edu. (3)David
Geffen School of Medicine, Department of Biological Chemistry, Jonsson
Comprehensive Cancer Center, and the Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regenerative 
Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California Los Angeles, CA 90095, 
USA. Electronic address: matthew.denholtz@gmail.com.

The organization of chromatin within the nucleus and the regulation of
transcription are tightly linked. Recently, mechanisms underlying this
relationship have been uncovered. By defining the organizational hierarchy of the
genome, determining changes in chromatin organization associated with changes in 
cell identity, and describing chromatin organization within the context of linear
genomic features (such as chromatin modifications and transcription factor
binding) and architectural proteins (including Cohesin, CTCF, and Mediator), a
new paradigm in genome biology was established wherein genomes are organized
around gene regulatory factors that govern cell identity. As such, chromatin
organization plays a central role in establishing and maintaining cell state
during development, with gene regulation and genome organization being mutually
dependent effectors of cell identity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4125518
PMID: 24998386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Med Genet. 2014 Aug;51(8):502-11. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102368. Epub 2014
Jul 4.

Genetic variants within the second intron of the KCNQ1 gene affect CTCF binding
and confer a risk of Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome upon maternal transmission.

Demars J(1), Shmela ME(2), Khan AW(3), Lee KS(4), Azzi S(5), Dehais P(6),
Netchine I(5), Rossignol S(5), Le Bouc Y(5), El-Osta A(7), Gicquel C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics in Human Health and Disease, Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes
Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia INRA, GenPhySE (Génétique, Physiologie 
et Systèmes d'Elevage), Castanet-Tolosan, France. (2)Epigenetics in Human Health 
and Disease, Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia Faculty of Medicine, Nursing and Health Sciences, Monash University,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (3)Epigenetics in Human Health and Disease, Baker
IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Australia. (4)Epigenetics in Human Health and Disease,
Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (5)APHP, 
Armand Trousseau Hôpital, Pediatric Endocrinology, INSERM, UMR_S 938, CDR
Saint-Antoine, F-75012, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR_S 938, CDR 
Saint-Antoine, F-75012, Paris, France. (6)INRA, GenPhySE (Génétique, Physiologie 
et Systèmes d'Elevage), Castanet-Tolosan, France. (7)Epigenetics in Human Health 
and Disease, Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia Faculty of Medicine, Nursing and Health Sciences, Monash University,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Disruption of 11p15 imprinting results in two fetal growth disorders 
with opposite phenotypes: the Beckwith-Wiedemann (BWS; MIM 130650) and the
Silver-Russell (SRS; MIM 180860) syndromes. DNA methylation defects account for
60% of BWS and SRS cases and, in most cases, occur without any identified
mutation in a cis-acting regulatory sequence or a trans-acting factor.
METHODS: We investigated whether 11p15 cis-acting sequence variants account for
primary DNA methylation defects in patients with SRS and BWS with loss of DNA
methylation at ICR1 and ICR2, respectively.
RESULTS: We identified a 4.5 kb haplotype that, upon maternal transmission, is
associated with a risk of ICR2 loss of DNA methylation in patients with BWS. This
novel region is located within the second intron of the KCNQ1 gene, 170 kb
upstream of the ICR2 imprinting centre and encompasses two CTCF binding sites. We
showed that, within the 4.5 kb region, two SNPs (rs11823023 and rs179436) affect 
CTCF occupancy at DNA motifs flanking the CTCF 20 bp core motif.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that genetic variants confer a risk of DNA
methylation defect with a parent-of-origin effect and highlights the crucial role
of CTCF for the regulation of genomic imprinting of the CDKN1C/KCNQ1 domain.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 24996904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jul;42(13):8356-68. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku564. Epub 2014
Jul 2.

Analysis of neonatal brain lacking ATRX or MeCP2 reveals changes in nucleosome
density, CTCF binding and chromatin looping.

Kernohan KD(1), Vernimmen D(2), Gloor GB(3), Bérubé NG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Western Ontario, London N6C 2V5,
Canada Children's Health Research Institute, London, Canada. (2)Medical Research 
Council (MRC) Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular
Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Western Ontario, London N6C 2V5,
Canada. (4)Department of Biochemistry, University of Western Ontario, London N6C 
2V5, Canada Children's Health Research Institute, London, Canada Department of
Paediatrics, University of Western Ontario, London N6C 2V5, Canada
nberube@uwo.ca.

ATRX and MeCP2 belong to an expanding group of chromatin-associated proteins
implicated in human neurodevelopmental disorders, although their gene-regulatory 
activities are not fully resolved. Loss of ATRX prevents full repression of an
imprinted gene network in the postnatal brain and in this study we address the
mechanistic aspects of this regulation. We show that ATRX binds many imprinted
domains individually but that transient co-localization between imprinted domains
in the nuclei of neurons does not require ATRX. We demonstrate that MeCP2 is
required for ATRX recruitment and that deficiency of either ATRX or MeCP2 causes 
decreased frequency of long-range chromatin interactions associated with altered 
nucleosome density at CTCF-binding sites and reduced CTCF occupancy. These
findings indicate that MeCP2 and ATRX regulate gene expression at a subset of
imprinted domains by maintaining a nucleosome configuration conducive to CTCF
binding and to the maintenance of higher order chromatin structure.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4117782
PMID: 24990380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Dec 1;23(23):6246-59. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu344. Epub 2014 Jul 
2.

Tissue-specific insulator function at H19/Igf2 revealed by deletions at the
imprinting control region.

Ideraabdullah FY(1), Thorvaldsen JL(2), Myers JA(2), Bartolomei MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine, 9-123 SCTR, 3400 Civic Center Boulevard,
Philadelphia PA 19104, USA and Department of Genetics, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, 120 Mason Farm Road, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine, 9-123 SCTR, 3400 Civic Center Boulevard,
Philadelphia PA 19104, USA and. (3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, 
University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, 9-123 SCTR, 3400 Civic
Center Boulevard, Philadelphia PA 19104, USA and bartolom@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Parent-of-origin-specific expression at imprinted genes is regulated by
allele-specific DNA methylation at imprinting control regions (ICRs). This
mechanism of gene regulation, where one element controls allelic expression of
multiple genes, is not fully understood. Furthermore, the mechanism of gene
dysregulation through ICR epimutations, such as loss or gain of DNA methylation, 
remains a mystery. We have used genetic mouse models to dissect ICR-mediated
genetic and epigenetic regulation of imprinted gene expression. The
H19/insulin-like growth factor 2 (Igf2) ICR has a multifunctional role including 
insulation, activation and repression. Microdeletions at the human H19/IGF2 ICR
(IC1) are proposed to be responsible for IC1 epimutations associated with
imprinting disorders such as Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS). Here, we have
generated and characterized a mouse model that mimics BWS microdeletions to
define the role of the deleted sequence in establishing and maintaining
epigenetic marks and imprinted expression at the H19/IGF2 locus. These mice carry
a 1.3 kb deletion at the H19/Igf2 ICR [<U+0394>2,3] removing two of four CCCTC-binding
factor (CTCF) sites and the intervening sequence, ~75% of the ICR. Surprisingly, 
the <U+0394>2,3 deletion does not perturb DNA methylation at the ICR; however, it does
disrupt imprinted expression. While repressive functions of the ICR are
compromised by the deletion regardless of tissue type, insulator function is only
disrupted in tissues of mesodermal origin where a significant amount of CTCF is
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ated. These findings suggest that insulator activity of the
H19/Igf2 ICR varies by cell type and may depend on cell-specific enhancers as
well as posttranslational modifications of the insulator protein CTCF.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4222363
PMID: 24990148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Gene. 2014 Sep 1;547(2):239-44. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.06.047. Epub 2014 Jun
24.

An enhancer-blocking element regulates the cell-specific expression of alcohol
dehydrogenase 7.

Jairam S(1), Edenberg HJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, 635 Barnhill Drive, MS4063, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5122, United States.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, 635 Barnhill Drive, MS4063, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5122, United States;
Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of
Medicine, 635 Barnhill Drive, MS4063, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5122, United States.
Electronic address: edenberg@iu.edu.

The class IV alcohol dehydrogenase gene ADH7 encodes an enzyme that is involved
in ethanol and retinol metabolism. ADH7 is expressed mainly in the upper
gastrointestinal tract and not in the liver, the major site of expression of the 
other closely related ADHs. We identified an intergenic sequence (iA1C), located 
between ADH7 and ADH1C, that has enhancer-blocking activity in liver-derived
HepG2 cells that do not express their endogenous ADH7. This enhancer blocking
function was cell- and position-dependent, with no activity seen in CP-A
esophageal cells that express ADH7 endogenously. iA1C function was not specific
to the ADH enhancers; it had a similar cell-specific effect on the SV40 enhancer.
The CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), an insulator binding protein, bound iA1C in
HepG2 cells but not in CP-A cells. Our results suggest that in liver-derived
cells, iA1C blocks the effects of ADH enhancers and thereby contributes to the
cell specificity of ADH7 expression.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4136687
PMID: 24971505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Circ Res. 2014 Aug 1;115(4):432-41. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.303591. Epub 2014
Jun 24.

A large permissive regulatory domain exclusively controls Tbx3 expression in the 
cardiac conduction system.

van Weerd JH(1), Badi I(1), van den Boogaard M(1), Stefanovic S(1), van de Werken
HJ(1), Gomez-Velazquez M(1), Badia-Careaga C(1), Manzanares M(1), de Laat W(1),
Barnett P(1), Christoffels VM(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Anatomy, Embryology, and Physiology, Academic Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands (J.H.v.W., I.B., M.v.d.B., S.S., P.B.,
V.M.C.); Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands (H.J.G.v.d.W., W.d.L.); Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands (H.J.G.v.d.W.); and Cardiovascular
Development and Repair Department, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones
Cardiovasculares, Madrid, Spain (M.G.-V., C.B.-C., M.M.). (2)From the Department 
of Anatomy, Embryology, and Physiology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands (J.H.v.W., I.B., M.v.d.B., S.S., P.B., V.M.C.); Hubrecht
Institute-KNAW and University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands
(H.J.G.v.d.W., W.d.L.); Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands (H.J.G.v.d.W.); and Cardiovascular Development and
Repair Department, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares, Madrid,
Spain (M.G.-V., C.B.-C., M.M.). v.m.christoffels@amc.uva.nl.

RATIONALE: The evolutionary conserved Tbx3/Tbx5 gene cluster encodes T-box
transcription factors that play crucial roles in the development and homeostasis 
of the cardiac conduction system in human and mouse. Both genes are expressed in 
overlapping patterns and function in strictly tissue-specific and dose-dependent 
manners, yet, their regulation is poorly understood.
OBJECTIVE: To analyze the mechanism underlying the complex regulation of the
Tbx3/Tbx5 cluster.
METHODS AND RESULTS: By probing the 3-dimensional architecture of the Tbx3/Tbx5
cluster using high-resolution circular chromosome conformation capture sequencing
in vivo, we found that its regulatory landscape is in a preformed conformation
similar in embryonic heart, limbs, and brain. Tbx3 and its flanking gene desert
form a 1 Mbp loop between CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)-binding sites that is
separated from the neighboring Tbx5 loop. However, Ctcf inactivation did not
result in transcriptional regulatory interaction between Tbx3 and Tbx5. Multiple 
sites within the Tbx3 locus contact the promoter, including sites corresponding
to regions known to contain variations in the human genome influencing
conduction. We identified an atrioventricular-specific enhancer and a pan-cardiac
enhancer that contact the promoter and each other and synergize to activate
transcription in the atrioventricular conduction system.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide a high-resolution model of the 3-dimensional structure
and function of the Tbx3/Tbx5 locus and show that the locus is organized in a
preformed, permissive structure. The Tbx3 locus forms a CTCF-independent
autonomous regulatory domain with multiple combinatorial regulatory elements that
control the precise pattern of Tbx3 in the cardiac conduction system.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 24963028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jun 24;15:519. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-519.

Transcriptional regulation and spatial interactions of head-to-head genes.

Chen Y, Li Y, Wei J(1), Li YY.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Center for Bioinformation Technology, Shanghai, P R China.
Jenny.Wei@astrazeneca.com.

BACKGROUND: In eukaryotic genomes, about 10% of genes are arranged in a
head-to-head (H2H) orientation, and the distance between the transcription start 
sites of each gene pair is closer than 1 kb. Two genes in an H2H pair are prone
to co-express and co-function. There have been many studies on bidirectional
promoters. However, the mechanism by which H2H genes are regulated at the
transcriptional level still needs further clarification, especially with regard
to the co-regulation of H2H pairs. In this study, we first used the Hi-C data of 
chromatin linkages to identify spatially interacting H2H pairs, and then
integrated ChIP-seq data to compare H2H gene pairs with and without evidence of
spatial interactions in terms of their binding transcription factors (TFs). Using
ChIP-seq and DNase-seq data, histones and DNase associated with H2H pairs were
identified. Furthermore, we looked into the connections between H2H genes in a
human co-expression network.
RESULTS: We found that i) Similar to the behaviour of two genes within an H2H
pair (intra-H2H pair), a gene pair involving two distinct H2H pairs (inter-H2H
pair) which interact with each other spatially, share common transcription
factors (TFs); ii) TFs of intra- and inter-H2H pairs are distributed differently.
Factors such as HEY1, GABP, Sin3Ak-20, POL2, E2F6, and c-MYC are essential for
the bidirectional transcription of intra-H2H pairs; while factors like CTCF,
BDP1, GATA2, RAD21, and POL3 play important roles in coherently regulating
inter-H2H pairs; iii) H2H gene blocks are enriched with hypersensitive DNase and 
modified histones, which participate in active transcriptions; and iv) H2H genes 
tend to be highly connected compared with non-H2H genes in the human
co-expression network.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings shed new light on the mechanism of the transcriptional 
regulation of H2H genes through their linear and spatial interactions. For
intra-H2H gene pairs, transcription factors regulate their transcriptions through
bidirectional promoters, whereas for inter-H2H gene pairs, transcription factors 
are likely to regulate their activities depending on the spatial interaction of
H2H gene pairs. In this way, two distinctive groups of transcription factors
mediate intra- and inter-H2H gene transcriptions respectively, resulting in a
highly compact gene regulatory network.

PMCID: PMC4089025
PMID: 24962804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2014 Aug;46(8):647-58. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmu045.

Expression analysis of BORIS during pluripotent, differentiated, cancerous, and
non-cancerous cell states.

Soltanian S, Dehghani H, Matin MM, Bahrami AR.

BORIS/CTCFL is an 11 zinc finger protein, which is the paralog of CTCF, a
ubiquitously expressed protein with diverse roles in gene expression and
chromatin organization. Several studies have shown that the expression of BORIS
is restricted to normal adult testis, pluripotent cells, and diverse cancer cell 
lines. Thus, it is known as a cancer-testis (CT) gene that has been hypothesized 
to exhibit oncogenic properties and to be involved in cancer cell proliferation. 
On the contrary, other reports have shown that its expression is more widespread 
and can be detected in differentiated and normal somatic cells; hence, it might
have roles in general cellular functions. The present study was aimed to analyze 
the expression of BORIS in different cell states of pluripotent, differentiated, 
cancerous and non-cancerous.We found that the two cell states of pluripotency and
differentiation are not accompanied with significant variations of BORIS
expression. Furthermore, Boris transcripts were detected at approximately the
same level in cancer and non-cancer cell lines. These findings suggest that, in
contrast to some previous reports, the expression of mouse BORIS is not limited
to only cancerous cells or pluripotent cell states.

PMID: 24928684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014 Aug;13(8):2114-31. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M113.035808. Epub
2014 Jun 9.

Early targets of miR-34a in neuroblastoma.

De Antonellis P(1), Carotenuto M(1), Vandenbussche J(2), De Vita G(1), Ferrucci
V(1), Medaglia C(1), Boffa I(1), Galiero A(1), Di Somma S(1), Magliulo D(1),
Aiese N(1), Alonzi A(1), Spano D(1), Liguori L(1), Chiarolla C(1), Verrico A(3), 
Schulte JH(4), Mestdagh P(5), Vandesompele J(5), Gevaert K(2), Zollo M(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Centro di Ingegneria Genetica e Biotecnologie Avanzate (CEINGE),
80145 Naples, Italy; §Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie
Mediche, Università Federico II, 80131 Naples, Italy; (2)<U+2016>Department of Medical
Protein Research, VIB, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium; **Department of Biochemistry, Ghent
University, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium; (3)From the Centro di Ingegneria Genetica e
Biotecnologie Avanzate (CEINGE), 80145 Naples, Italy; §Dipartimento di Medicina
Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università Federico II, 80131 Naples, Italy; 
Department of Translational Medical Science, Section of Pediatrics, University 
of Naples Federico II, 80131 Naples, Italy; (4)§§University Children's Hospital
Essen, Essen, Germany; (5)¶¶Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University
Hospital, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium; (6)From the Centro di Ingegneria Genetica e
Biotecnologie Avanzate (CEINGE), 80145 Naples, Italy; §Dipartimento di Medicina
Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università Federico II, 80131 Naples, Italy; 
<U+2016><U+2016>Centro di Medicina Trasfusionale, Azienda Ospedaliera Federico II, 80131
Naples, Italy massimo.zollo@unina.it.

Several genes encoding for proteins involved in proliferation, invasion, and
apoptosis are known to be direct miR-34a targets. Here, we used proteomics to
screen for targets of miR-34a in neuroblastoma (NBL), a childhood cancer that
originates from precursor cells of the sympathetic nervous system. We examined
the effect of miR-34a overexpression using a tetracycline inducible system in two
NBL cell lines (SHEP and SH-SY5Y) at early time points of expression (6, 12, and 
24 h). Proteome analysis using post-metabolic labeling led to the identification 
of 2,082 proteins, and among these 186 were regulated (112 proteins
down-regulated and 74 up-regulated). Prediction of miR-34a targets via
bioinformatics showed that 32 transcripts held miR-34a seed sequences in their
3'-UTR. By combining the proteomics data with Kaplan Meier gene-expression
studies, we identified seven new gene products (ALG13, TIMM13, TGM2, ABCF2, CTCF,
Ki67, and LYAR) that were correlated with worse clinical outcomes. These were
further validated in vitro by 3'-UTR seed sequence regulation. In addition,
Michigan Molecular Interactions searches indicated that together these proteins
affect signaling pathways that regulate cell cycle and proliferation, focal
adhesions, and other cellular properties that overall enhance tumor progression
(including signaling pathways such as TGF-ß, WNT, MAPK, and FAK). In conclusion, 
proteome analysis has here identified early targets of miR-34a with relevance to 
NBL tumorigenesis. Along with the results of previous studies, our data strongly 
suggest miR-34a as a useful tool for improving the chance of therapeutic success 
with NBL.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4125741
PMID: 24912852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. PLoS Genet. 2014 Jun 5;10(6):e1004345. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004345.
eCollection 2014.

Integrated pathway-based approach identifies association between genomic regions 
at CTCF and CACNB2 and schizophrenia.

Juraeva D(1), Haenisch B(2), Zapatka M(3), Frank J(4); GROUP Investigators;
PSYCH-GEMS SCZ Working Group, Witt SH(4), Mühleisen TW(5), Treutlein J(4),
Strohmaier J(4), Meier S(6), Degenhardt F(7), Giegling I(8), Ripke S(9), Leber
M(10), Lange C(11), Schulze TG(12), Mössner R(13), Nenadic I(14), Sauer H(14),
Rujescu D(8), Maier W(13), Børglum A(15), Ophoff R(16), Cichon S(17), Nöthen
MM(7), Rietschel M(4), Mattheisen M(18), Brors B(1).

Collaborators: Kahn RS, Cahn W, Linszen DH, de Haan L, van Os J, Krabbendam L,
Myin-Germeys I, Wiersma D, Bruggeman R, Mors O, Børglum AD, Mortensen PB,
Pedersen CB, Demontis D, Grove J, Mattheisen M, Børglum AD, Mortensen PB,
Pedersen CB, Hougaard DM, Demontis D, Grove J, Mattheisen M, Børglum AD, Grove J,
Mattheisen M, Mattheisen M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 
Heidelberg, Germany. (2)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE),
Bonn, Germany; Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany;
Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices (BfArM), Bonn, Germany;
Department of Psychiatry, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (3)Division of
Molecular Genetics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental 
Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim/Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany.
(5)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany; Department of 
Genomics, Life and Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany; Institute for
Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Centre Juelich, Juelich, Germany.
(6)Department of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental 
Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim/Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany;
National Centre for Integrated Register-based Research (NCRR), Department of
Economics and Business, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark. (7)Institute of Human
Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany; Department of Genomics, Life and
Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (8)Division of Molecular and
Clinical Neurobiology, Department of Psychiatry, Ludwig-Maximilians-University,
Munich, Germany; Department of Psychiatry, University of Halle-Wittenberg, Halle,
Germany. (9)Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Department of Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; 
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of
America. (10)Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics, and Epidemiology,
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (11)German Center for Neurodegenerative
Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany; Department of Genomic Mathematics, University of 
Bonn, Bonn, Germany; Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (12)Department of
Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center Georg-August-Universität,
Göttingen, Germany. (13)Department of Psychiatry, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany. (14)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Jena University
Hospital, Jena, Germany. (15)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus
C, Denmark and Center for Integrated Sequencing, iSEQ, Aarhus, Denmark; Lundbeck 
Foundation Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric Research, iPSYCH, Aarhus and
Copenhagen, Denmark; Centre for Psychiatric Research, Aarhus University Hospital,
Risskov, Denmark. (16)UCLA Center for Neurobehavioral Genetics, Los Angeles,
California, United States of America; Department of Psychiatry, Rudolf Magnus
Institute of Neuroscience, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. (17)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany; 
Department of Genomics, Life and Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany;
Institute for Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Centre Juelich,
Juelich, Germany; Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Basel,
Basel, Switzerland. (18)Department of Genomics, Life and Brain Center, University
of Bonn, Bonn, Germany; Department of Genomic Mathematics, University of Bonn,
Bonn, Germany; Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Department of Biomedicine,
Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark and Center for Integrated Sequencing, iSEQ, 
Aarhus, Denmark; Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric
Research, iPSYCH, Aarhus and Copenhagen, Denmark.

In the present study, an integrated hierarchical approach was applied to: (1)
identify pathways associated with susceptibility to schizophrenia; (2) detect
genes that may be potentially affected in these pathways since they contain an
associated polymorphism; and (3) annotate the functional consequences of such
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the affected genes or their regulatory 
regions. The Global Test was applied to detect schizophrenia-associated pathways 
using discovery and replication datasets comprising 5,040 and 5,082 individuals
of European ancestry, respectively. Information concerning functional gene-sets
was retrieved from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes, Gene Ontology,
and the Molecular Signatures Database. Fourteen of the gene-sets or pathways
identified in the discovery dataset were confirmed in the replication dataset.
These include functional processes involved in transcriptional regulation and
gene expression, synapse organization, cell adhesion, and apoptosis. For two
genes, i.e. CTCF and CACNB2, evidence for association with schizophrenia was
available (at the gene-level) in both the discovery study and published data from
the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium schizophrenia study. Furthermore, these genes
mapped to four of the 14 presently identified pathways. Several of the SNPs
assigned to CTCF and CACNB2 have potential functional consequences, and a gene in
close proximity to CACNB2, i.e. ARL5B, was identified as a potential gene of
interest. Application of the present hierarchical approach thus allowed: (1)
identification of novel biological gene-sets or pathways with potential
involvement in the etiology of schizophrenia, as well as replication of these
findings in an independent cohort; (2) detection of genes of interest for future 
follow-up studies; and (3) the highlighting of novel genes in previously reported
candidate regions for schizophrenia.

PMCID: PMC4046913
PMID: 24901509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jul;42(13):e105. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku463. Epub 2014 May
30.

ChIP-Enrich: gene set enrichment testing for ChIP-seq data.

Welch RP(1), Lee C(2), Imbriano PM(3), Patil S(2), Weymouth TE(4), Smith RA(2),
Scott LJ(5), Sartor MA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA Biostatistics Department, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (2)Department of Computational Medicine and
Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(3)Biostatistics Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(4)Center for Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (5)Biostatistics Department, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA Center for Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA ljst@umich.edu. (6)Department of
Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA Biostatistics Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109,
USA Center for Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA sartorma@umich.edu.

Gene set enrichment testing can enhance the biological interpretation of ChIP-seq
data. Here, we develop a method, ChIP-Enrich, for this analysis which empirically
adjusts for gene locus length (the length of the gene body and its surrounding
non-coding sequence). Adjustment for gene locus length is necessary because it is
often positively associated with the presence of one or more peaks and because
many biologically defined gene sets have an excess of genes with longer or
shorter gene locus lengths. Unlike alternative methods, ChIP-Enrich can account
for the wide range of gene locus length-to-peak presence relationships (observed 
in ENCODE ChIP-seq data sets). We show that ChIP-Enrich has a well-calibrated
type I error rate using permuted ENCODE ChIP-seq data sets; in contrast, two
commonly used gene set enrichment methods, Fisher's exact test and the binomial
test implemented in Genomic Regions Enrichment of Annotations Tool (GREAT), can
have highly inflated type I error rates and biases in ranking. We identify
DNA-binding proteins, including CTCF, JunD and glucocorticoid receptor a (GRa),
that show different enrichment patterns for peaks closer to versus further from
transcription start sites. We also identify known and potential new biological
functions of GRa. ChIP-Enrich is available as a web interface
(http://chip-enrich.med.umich.edu) and Bioconductor package.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4117744
PMID: 24878920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Nat Commun. 2014 May 29;5:3995. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4995.

PADI4 acts as a coactivator of Tal1 by counteracting repressive histone arginine 
methylation.

Kolodziej S(1), Kuvardina ON(1), Oellerich T(2), Herglotz J(3), Backert I(3),
Kohrs N(1), Buscató El(4), Wittmann SK(4), Salinas-Riester G(5), Bonig H(6),
Karas M(4), Serve H(7), Proschak E(8), Lausen J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy,
Paul-Ehrlich-Strasse 42-44, D-60596 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. (2)Department of 
Medicine, Hematology/Oncology, Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe University,
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, D-60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. (3)1] Georg-Speyer-Haus,
Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy, Paul-Ehrlich-Strasse 42-44,
D-60596 Frankfurt am Main, Germany [2]. (4)Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry,
Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe University, Max-von-Laue-Strasse 9, D-60438 Frankfurt am
Main, Germany. (5)Medical-University Goettingen, Transcriptome Analysis
Laboratory, Justus-von-Liebig-Weg 11, D-37077 Goettingen, Germany. (6)German Red 
Cross Blood Service and Institute for Transfusion Medicine and Immunohematology, 
Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe University, Sandhofstrasse 1, D-60528 Frankfurt am Main,
Germany. (7)1] Department of Medicine, Hematology/Oncology,
Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe University, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, D-60590 Frankfurt am
Main, Germany [2] German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany. (8)1]
Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe University,
Max-von-Laue-Strasse 9, D-60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany [2] German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany.

The transcription factor Tal1 is a critical activator or repressor of gene
expression in hematopoiesis and leukaemia. The mechanism by which Tal1
differentially influences transcription of distinct genes is not fully
understood. Here we show that Tal1 interacts with the peptidylarginine deiminase 
IV (PADI4). We demonstrate that PADI4 can act as an epigenetic coactivator
through influencing H3R2me2a. At the Tal1/PADI4 target gene IL6ST the repressive 
H3R2me2a mark triggered by PRMT6 is counteracted by PADI4, which augments the
active H3K4me3 mark and thus increases IL6ST expression. In contrast, at the CTCF
promoter PADI4 acts as a repressor. We propose that the influence of PADI4 on
IL6ST transcription plays a role in the control of IL6ST expression during
lineage differentiation of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. These results
open the possibility to pharmacologically influence Tal1 in leukaemia.

PMCID: PMC4050257
PMID: 24874575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Algorithms Mol Biol. 2014 May 3;9:14. doi: 10.1186/1748-7188-9-14. eCollection
2014.

Identification of alternative topological domains in chromatin.

Filippova D(1), Patro R(2), Duggal G(1), Kingsford C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lane Center for Computational Biology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh 
PA, USA ; Joint Carnegie Mellon University - University of Pittsburgh Ph.D.
Program in Computational Biology, Pittsburgh PA, USA. (2)Lane Center for
Computational Biology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, USA.

Chromosome conformation capture experiments have led to the discovery of dense,
contiguous, megabase-sized topological domains that are similar across cell types
and conserved across species. These domains are strongly correlated with a number
of chromatin markers and have since been included in a number of analyses.
However, functionally-relevant domains may exist at multiple length scales. We
introduce a new and efficient algorithm that is able to capture persistent
domains across various resolutions by adjusting a single scale parameter. The
ensemble of domains we identify allows us to quantify the degree to which the
domain structure is hierarchical as opposed to overlapping, and our analysis
reveals a pronounced hierarchical structure in which larger stable domains tend
to completely contain smaller domains. The identified novel domains are
substantially different from domains reported previously and are highly enriched 
for insulating factor CTCF binding and histone marks at the boundaries.

PMCID: PMC4019371
PMID: 24868242  [PubMed]


248. Elife. 2014 Apr 29;3:e01776. doi: 10.7554/eLife.01776.

p50-associated COX-2 extragenic RNA (PACER) activates COX-2 gene expression by
occluding repressive NF-<U+03BA>B complexes.

Krawczyk M(1), Emerson BM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, United States. (2)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for
Biological Studies, La Jolla, United States emerson@salk.edu.

Deregulated expression of COX-2 has been causally linked to development,
progression, and outcome of several types of human cancer. We describe a novel
fundamental level of transcriptional control of COX-2 expression. Using primary
human mammary epithelial cells and monocyte/macrophage cell lines, we show that
the chromatin boundary/insulator factor CTCF establishes an open chromatin domain
and induces expression of a long non-coding RNA within the upstream promoter
region of COX-2. Upon induction of COX-2 expression, the lncRNA associates with
p50, a repressive subunit of NF-<U+03BA>B, and occludes it from the COX-2 promoter,
potentially facilitating interaction with activation-competent NF-<U+03BA>B p65/p50
dimers. This enables recruitment of the p300 histone acetyltransferase, a
domain-wide increase in histone acetylation and assembly of RNA Polymerase II
initiation complexes. Our findings reveal an unexpected mechanism of gene control
by lncRNA-mediated repressor occlusion and identify the COX-2-lncRNA, PACER, as a
new potential target for COX-2-modulation in inflammation and cancer.DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01776.001.

Copyright © 2014, Krawczyk and Emerson.

PMCID: PMC4017649
PMID: 24843008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. DNA Cell Biol. 2014 Sep;33(9):581-90. doi: 10.1089/dna.2013.2257. Epub 2014 May
19.

The promoter methylation status and mRNA expression levels of CTCF and SIRT6 in
sporadic breast cancer.

Wang D(1), Li C, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Preclinical and
Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University , Chengdu, China .

Promoter hypermethylation causes gene silencing and is thought to be an early
event in carcinogenesis. This study was to detect promoter methylation status and
mRNA expression levels of CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) and sirtuin 6 (SIRT6), and 
to explore the relationship between methylation and mRNA expression in breast
cancer patient samples. Promoter methylation analysis and expression profile
analysis of two genes were performed by methylation-specific PCR, bisulfite
sequencing PCR, and quantitative real-time PCR in cancer lesions and matched
normal tissues. The promoter region of CTCF has not been hypermethylated in all
patient samples. In contrast, methylation of SIRT6 gene was present in invasive
cancers (93.5%) and matched normal tissues (96.8%) from 62 patients. Promoter
hypermethylation of SIRT6 was also observed in ductal carcinoma in situ (three of
three) and matched normal tissues (two of three). mRNA expression of CTCF and
SIRT6 in invasive tumors showed a lower level than that in paired normal tissues 
(p=0.008 and p=0.030, respectively). The fold change values of CTCF expression
were significantly lower in invasive ductal cancer lesions with Ki-67-positive
status (p=0.042). In conclusion, our data showed that the methylation status of
CTCF and SIRT6 promoter regions was not statistically different in cancer lesions
compared with matched normal tissues. No significant association between promoter
methylation status and expression profiles of CTCF and SIRT6 was found in
invasive breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC4144384
PMID: 24842653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Methods Mol Biol. 2014;1165:53-69. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-0856-1_5.

Experimental strategies to manipulate the cellular levels of the multifunctional 
factor CTCF.

González-Buendía E(1), Pérez-Molina R, Ayala-Ortega E, Guerrero G, Recillas-Targa
F.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Apartado Postal 70-242, México, DF,
04510, México.

Cellular homeostasis is the result of an intricate and coordinated combinatorial 
of biochemical and molecular processes. Among them is the control of gene
expression in the context of the chromatin structure which is central for cell
survival. Interdependent action of transcription factors, cofactors, chromatin
remodeling activities, and three-dimensional organization of the genome are
responsible to reach exquisite levels of gene expression. Among such
transcription factors there is a subset of highly specialized nuclear factors
with features resembling master regulators with a large variety of functions.
This is turning to be the case of the multifunctional nuclear factor
CCCTC-binding protein (CTCF) which is involved in gene regulation, chromatin
organization, and three-dimensional conformation of the genome inside the cell
nucleus. Technically its study has turned to be challenging, in particular its
posttranscriptional interference by small interference RNAs. Here we describe
three main strategies to downregulate the overall abundance of CTCF in culture
cell lines.

PMID: 24839018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. PLoS One. 2014 May 16;9(5):e97849. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097849. eCollection
2014.

Formaldehyde-Assisted Isolation of Regulatory Elements (FAIRE) analysis uncovers 
broad changes in chromatin structure resulting from hexavalent chromium exposure.

Ovesen JL(1), Fan Y(1), Zhang X(1), Chen J(1), Medvedovic M(1), Xia Y(1), Puga
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health and Center for Environmental Genetics,
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of 
America.

The ability of chromatin to switch back and forth from open euchromatin to closed
heterochromatin is vital for transcriptional regulation and genomic stability,
but its dynamic structure is subject to disruption by exposure to environmental
agents such as hexavalent chromium. Cr(VI) exposure disrupts chromatin remodeling
mechanisms and causes chromosomal damage through formation of free radicals,
Cr-DNA adducts, and DNA-Cr-protein cross-links. In addition, acute,
high-concentration, and chronic, low-concentration exposures to Cr(VI) lead to
significantly different transcriptional and genomic stability outcomes. We used
mouse hepatoma Hepa-1c1c7 cells to investigate how transcriptional responses to
chromium treatment might correlate with structural chromatin changes. We used
Formaldehyde-Assisted Isolation of Regulatory Elements (FAIRE) analysis coupled
with deep sequencing to identify regions of the genome that may switch between
open and closed chromatin in response to exposure to varying Cr(VI)
concentrations. At either Cr(VI) concentration, chromatin domains surrounding
binding sites for AP-1 transcription factors become significantly open, whereas
BACH2 and CTCF binding sites are open solely at the low and high concentrations, 
respectively. Parallel gene expression profiling using RNA-seq indicates that the
structural chromatin changes caused by Cr(VI) affect gene expression levels in
the target areas that vary depending on Cr(VI) concentration, but show no
correlation between global changes in the overall transcriptional response and
Cr(VI) concentration. Our results suggest that FAIRE may be a useful technique to
map chromatin elements targeted by DNA damaging agents for which there is no
prior knowledge of their specificity, and to identify subsequent transcriptomic
changes induced by those agents.

PMCID: PMC4023961
PMID: 24837440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 May 27;111(21):E2191-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1320308111. Epub 2014 May 12.

Global view of enhancer-promoter interactome in human cells.

He B(1), Chen C(1), Teng L(2), Tan K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Genetics and. (2)Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242. (3)Interdisciplinary Graduate 
Program in Genetics andDepartment of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA 52242 kai-tan@uiowa.edu.

Enhancer mapping has been greatly facilitated by various genomic marks associated
with it. However, little is available in our toolbox to link enhancers with their
target promoters, hampering mechanistic understanding of enhancer-promoter (EP)
interaction. We develop and characterize multiple genomic features for
distinguishing true EP pairs from noninteracting pairs. We integrate these
features into a probabilistic predictor for EP interactions. Multiple validation 
experiments demonstrate a significant improvement over state-of-the-art
approaches. Systematic analyses of EP interactions across 12 cell types reveal
several global features of EP interactions: (i) a larger fraction of EP
interactions are cell type specific than enhancers; (ii) promoters controlled by 
multiple enhancers have higher tissue specificity, but the regulating enhancers
are less conserved; (iii) cohesin plays a role in mediating tissue-specific EP
interactions via chromatin looping in a CTCF-independent manner. Our approach
presents a systematic and effective strategy to decipher the mechanisms
underlying EP communication.

PMCID: PMC4040567
PMID: 24821768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Mol Biol. 2014 Jul 15;426(14):2554-66. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2014.04.025. Epub
2014 May 6.

Stable DNA methylation boundaries and expanded trinucleotide repeats: role of DNA
insertions.

Naumann A(1), Kraus C(2), Hoogeveen A(3), Ramirez CM(4), Doerfler W(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical and Molecular Virology, Erlangen University Medical
School, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany. (2)Institute for Human Genetics, Erlangen
University Medical School, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany. (3)Department of Clinical
Genetics, Erasmus University Medical School, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 
(4)Department of Biostatistics and Statistics, University of California, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (5)Institute for Clinical and Molecular Virology,
Erlangen University Medical School, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany; Institute of
Genetics, University of Cologne, D-50674 Cologne, Germany. Electronic address:
walter.doerfler@viro.med.uni-erlangen.de.

The human genome segment upstream of the FMR1 (fragile X mental retardation 1)
gene (Xq27.3) contains several genetic signals, among them is a DNA methylation
boundary that is located 65-70 CpGs upstream of the CGG repeat. In fragile X
syndrome (FXS), the boundary is lost, and the promoter is inactivated by
methylation spreading. Here we document boundary stability in spite of critical
expansions of the CGG trinucleotide repeat in male or female premutation carriers
and in high functioning males (HFMs). HFMs carry a full CGG repeat expansion but 
exhibit an unmethylated promoter and lack the FXS phenotype. The boundary is also
stable in Turner (45, X) females. A CTCF-binding site is located slightly
upstream of the methylation boundary and carries a unique G-to-A polymorphism
(single nucleotide polymorphism), which occurs 3.6 times more frequently in
genomes with CGG expansions. The increased frequency of this single nucleotide
polymorphism might have functional significance. In CGG expansions, the CTCF
region does not harbor additional mutations. In FXS individuals and often in
cells transgenomic for EBV (Epstein Barr Virus) DNA or for the telomerase gene,
the large number of normally methylated CpGs in the far-upstream region of the
boundary is decreased about 4-fold. A methylation boundary is also present in the
human genome segment upstream of the HTT (huntingtin) promoter (4p16.3) and is
stable both in normal and Huntington disease chromosomes. Hence, the vicinity of 
an expanded repeat does not per se compromise methylation boundaries. Methylation
boundaries exert an important function as promoter safeguards.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24816393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Genome Res. 2014 Aug;24(8):1285-95. doi: 10.1101/gr.164418.113. Epub 2014 May 8.

Nucleosome repositioning links DNA (de)methylation and differential CTCF binding 
during stem cell development.

Teif VB(1), Beshnova DA(1), Vainshtein Y(2), Marth C(1), Mallm JP(1), Höfer T(2),
Rippe K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Genome Organization and Function, Deutsches
Krebsforschungszentrum (DKFZ) and BioQuant, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany;
(2)Division Theoretical Systems Biology, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum (DKFZ) 
and BioQuant, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

During differentiation of embryonic stem cells, chromatin reorganizes to
establish cell type-specific expression programs. Here, we have dissected the
linkages between DNA methylation (5mC), hydroxymethylation (5hmC), nucleosome
repositioning, and binding of the transcription factor CTCF during this process. 
By integrating MNase-seq and ChIP-seq experiments in mouse embryonic stem cells
(ESC) and their differentiated counterparts with biophysical modeling, we found
that the interplay between these factors depends on their genomic context. The
mostly unmethylated CpG islands have reduced nucleosome occupancy and are
enriched in cell type-independent binding sites for CTCF. The few remaining
methylated CpG dinucleotides are preferentially associated with nucleosomes. In
contrast, outside of CpG islands most CpGs are methylated, and the average
methylation density oscillates so that it is highest in the linker region between
nucleosomes. Outside CpG islands, binding of TET1, an enzyme that converts 5mC to
5hmC, is associated with labile, MNase-sensitive nucleosomes. Such nucleosomes
are poised for eviction in ESCs and become stably bound in differentiated cells
where the TET1 and 5hmC levels go down. This process regulates a class of CTCF
binding sites outside CpG islands that are occupied by CTCF in ESCs but lose the 
protein during differentiation. We rationalize this cell type-dependent targeting
of CTCF with a quantitative biophysical model of competitive binding with the
histone octamer, depending on the TET1, 5hmC, and 5mC state.

© 2014 Teif et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4120082
PMID: 24812327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Front Physiol. 2014 Apr 29;5:167. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2014.00167. eCollection
2014.

Genome-wide (over)view on the actions of vitamin D.

Carlberg C(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland
Kuopio, Finland.

For a global understanding of the physiological impact of the nuclear hormone
1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2D3) the analysis of the genome-wide locations
of its high affinity receptor, the transcription factor vitamin D receptor (VDR),
is essential. Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) in GM10855 and 
GM10861 lymphoblastoid cells, undifferentiated and
lipopolysaccharide-differentiated THP-1 monocytes, LS180 colorectal cancer cells 
and LX2 hepatic stellate cells revealed between 1000 and 13,000 VDR-specific
genomic binding sites. The harmonized analysis of these ChIP-seq datasets
indicates that the mechanistic basis for the action of the VDR is independent of 
the cell type. Formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory elements sequencing 
(FAIRE-seq) data highlight accessible chromatin regions, which are under control 
of 1,25(OH)2D3. In addition, public data, such as from the ENCODE project, allow 
to relate the genome-wide actions of VDR and 1,25(OH)2D3 to those of other
proteins within the nucleus. For example, locations of the insulator protein CTCF
suggest a segregation of the human genome into chromatin domains, of which more
than 1000 contain at least one VDR binding site. The integration of all these
genome-wide data facilitates the identification of the most important VDR binding
sites and associated primary 1,25(OH)2D3 target genes. Expression changes of
these key genes can serve as biomarkers for the actions of vitamin D3 and its
metabolites in different tissues and cell types of human individuals. Analysis of
primary tissues obtained from vitamin D3 intervention studies using such markers 
indicated a large inter-individual variation for the efficiency of vitamin D3
supplementation. In conclusion, a genome-wide (over)view on the genomic locations
of VDR provides a broader basis for addressing vitamin D's role in health and
disease.

PMCID: PMC4010781
PMID: 24808867  [PubMed]


256. Horm Metab Res. 2014 Jun;46(6):419-23. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1372593. Epub 2014 May
7.

CTCF-regulating endocrine function of pancreatic islet cells in transgenic mice.

Fang Y(1), Gao J(2), Qi L(3), Li N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Blood Center, Jinan, Shandong Province, P. R. China. (2)Department of
Human Anatomy, School of Basic Medicine, Shandong University of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Jinan, Shandong Province, P. R. China. (3)Emergency Department,
Laiwu People's Hospital, Laiwu, Shandong Province, P. R. China.

Pancreatic islet endocrine cells play crucial roles in regulation of glucose
homeostasis. The differentiation and function of islet cells are regulated by
various transcription factors, including Pax6, a member of the homeobox gene
family. Pax6 plays a key role in the control of gene expression and islet cell
development in the pancreas. Recent studies from our lab demonstrate for the
first time that Pax6 transcription is regulated by CCCTC binding factor (CTCF), a
nuclear protein and transcription regulator. CTCF downregulates Pax6
transcription through interaction with a repressor element located in Pax6 gene
P0 promoter region. To further investigate the effect of CTCF on regulating Pax6 
function in pancreatic islet cells, we measured blood glucose, insulin, and
glucagons levels in newly established transgenic mice overexpressing CTCF. When
compared to wild type mice, CTCF transgenic mice demonstrate an increase in
insulin level and decrease in glucagon level resulting in lower blood glucose
levels (hypoglycemia). In insulin tolerance test, hypoglycemia occurs quickly in 
CTCF transgenic mice and takes a recovery time. In the mean time, glucagon levels
in CTCF mutant mice were significantly lower compared to its wild type
counterpart. Our results indicate that CTCF transgenic mice are disordered in
glucose homeostasis and suggest that CTCF is involved in regulating endocrine
function of pancreatic islet cells by suppression of Pax6 expression.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 24806748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Front Immunol. 2014 Apr 21;5:163. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00163. eCollection
2014.

Epigenetic Regulation of Individual Modules of the immunoglobulin heavy chain
locus 3' Regulatory Region.

Birshtein BK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine , Bronx, NY , 
USA.

The Igh locus undergoes an amazing array of DNA rearrangements and modifications 
during B cell development. During early stages, the variable region gene is
constructed from constituent variable (V), diversity (D), and joining (J)
segments (VDJ joining). B cells that successfully express an antibody can be
activated, leading to somatic hypermutation (SHM) focused on the variable region,
and class switch recombination (CSR), which substitutes downstream constant
region genes for the originally used Cµ constant region gene. Many investigators,
ourselves included, have sought to understand how these processes specifically
target the Igh locus and avoid other loci and potential deleterious consequences 
of malignant transformation. Our laboratory has concentrated on a complex
regulatory region (RR) that is located downstream of Ca, the most 3' of the Igh
constant region genes. The ~40<U+2009>kb 3' RR, which is predicted to serve as a
downstream major regulator of the Igh locus, contains two distinct segments: an
~28<U+2009>kb region comprising four enhancers, and an adjacent ~12<U+2009>kb region containing
multiple CTCF and Pax5 binding sites. Analysis of targeted mutations in mice by a
number of investigators has concluded that the entire 3' RR enhancer region is
essential for SHM and CSR (but not for VDJ joining) and for high levels of
expression of multiple isotypes. The CTCF/Pax5 binding region is a candidate for 
influencing VDJ joining early in B cell development and serving as a potential
insulator of the Igh locus. Components of the 3' RR are subject to a variety of
epigenetic changes during B cell development, i.e., DNAse I hypersensitivity,
histone modifications, and DNA methylation, in association with transcription
factor binding. I propose that these changes provide a foundation by which
regulatory elements in modules of the 3' RR function by interacting with each
other and with target sequences of the Igh locus.

PMCID: PMC4000994
PMID: 24795714  [PubMed]


258. Cell Rep. 2014 May 22;7(4):1020-9. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.04.004. Epub 2014
May 1.

CTCF haploinsufficiency destabilizes DNA methylation and predisposes to cancer.

Kemp CJ(1), Moore JM(2), Moser R(2), Bernard B(3), Teater M(4), Smith LE(2),
Rabaia NA(2), Gurley KE(2), Guinney J(5), Busch SE(2), Shaknovich R(4),
Lobanenkov VV(6), Liggitt D(7), Shmulevich I(3), Melnick A(4), Filippova GN(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA
98109, USA. Electronic address: cjkemp@fhcrc.org. (2)Division of Human Biology,
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA. (3)Institute for 
Systems Biology, Seattle, WA 98106, USA. (4)Division of Hematology/Oncology,
Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10021, USA. (5)Sage Bionetworks, 1100
Fairview Avenue, Seattle, WA 98109, USA. (6)Molecular Pathology Section,
Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, NIH, Rockville, MD 20852, USA. (7)Department of Comparative Medicine,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. (8)Division of Human Biology,
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA. Electronic
address: gfilippo@fhcrc.org.

Epigenetic alterations, particularly in DNA methylation, are ubiquitous in
cancer, yet the molecular origins and the consequences of these alterations are
poorly understood. CTCF, a DNA-binding protein that regulates higher-order
chromatin organization, is frequently altered by hemizygous deletion or mutation 
in human cancer. To date, a causal role for CTCF in cancer has not been
established. Here, we show that Ctcf hemizygous knockout mice are markedly
susceptible to spontaneous, radiation-, and chemically induced cancer in a broad 
range of tissues. Ctcf(+/-) tumors are characterized by increased aggressiveness,
including invasion, metastatic dissemination, and mixed epithelial/mesenchymal
differentiation. Molecular analysis of Ctcf(+/-) tumors indicates that Ctcf is
haploinsufficient for tumor suppression. Tissues with hemizygous loss of CTCF
exhibit increased variability in CpG methylation genome wide. These findings
establish CTCF as a prominent tumor-suppressor gene and point to CTCF-mediated
epigenetic stability as a major barrier to neoplastic progression.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4040130
PMID: 24794443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 24;9(4):e96184. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096184. eCollection
2014.

Characterization of genomic vitamin D receptor binding sites through chromatin
looping and opening.

Seuter S(1), Neme A(1), Carlberg C(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland,
Kuopio, Finland.

The vitamin D receptor (VDR) is a transcription factor that mediates the genomic 
effects of 1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2D3). Genome-wide there are several
thousand binding sites and hundreds of primary 1,25(OH)2D3 target genes, but
their functional relation is largely elusive. In this study, we used ChIA-PET
data of the transcription factor CTCF in combination with VDR ChIP-seq data, in
order to map chromatin domains containing VDR binding sites. In total, we found
1,599 such VDR containing chromatin domains and studied in THP-1 human monocytic 
leukemia cells four representatives of them. Our combined ChIP-seq and FAIRE-seq 
time course data showed that each of these four domains contained a master VDR
binding site, where an increase of VDR binding pairs with 1,25(OH)2D3-promoted
chromatin opening and the presence of a highly significant DR3-type sequence
below the peak summit. These sites differed in their relative VDR binding but not
in their kinetics, while other loci either had a weaker and delayed VDR
association or could not be confirmed at all. All studied chromatin domains
contained at least one primary 1,25(OH)2D3 target gene demonstrating a
characteristic slope of mRNA increase, while neighboring genes responded delayed,
if at all. In conclusion, the observation of ligand-inducible VDR binding and
chromatin opening combined with a DR3-type sequence highlighted genome-wide 160
VDR loci that have within their chromatin domain a more than 4-fold increased
likelihood to identify a primary 1,25(OH)2D3 target gene than in the vicinity of 
other genomic VDR binding sites.

PMCID: PMC3999108
PMID: 24763502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jun;42(10):6421-35. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku280. Epub 2014
Apr 21.

A novel tRNA variable number tandem repeat at human chromosome 1q23.3 is
implicated as a boundary element based on conservation of a CTCF motif in mouse.

Darrow EM(1), Chadwick BP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL
32306-4295, USA. (2)Department of Biological Science, Florida State University,
Tallahassee, FL 32306-4295, USA chadwick@bio.fsu.edu.

The human genome contains numerous large tandem repeats, many of which remain
poorly characterized. Here we report a novel transfer RNA (tRNA) tandem repeat on
human chromosome 1q23.3 that shows extensive copy number variation with 9-43
repeat units per allele and displays evidence of meiotic and mitotic instability.
Each repeat unit consists of a 7.3 kb GC-rich sequence that binds the insulator
protein CTCF and bears the chromatin hallmarks of a bivalent domain in human
embryonic stem cells. A tRNA containing tandem repeat composed of at least three 
7.6-kb GC-rich repeat units reside within a syntenic region of mouse chromosome
1. However, DNA sequence analysis reveals that, with the exception of the tRNA
genes that account for less than 6% of a repeat unit, the remaining 7.2 kb is not
conserved with the notable exception of a 24 base pair sequence corresponding to 
the CTCF binding site, suggesting an important role for this protein at the
locus.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4041453
PMID: 24753417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2014 Mar;45(2):196-201.

[Effects of CTCF on human liver cancer stem cells and cell proliferation].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu QY, Xie XY, Wei L, Liu J, Shen WY, Li R, Yu XQ, Qin Y.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) on human liver
cancer stem cells (HepG2) and cell proliferation of HepG2 and Nasopharyngeal
carcinoma cell line (CNE1).
METHODS: The pEGFP-N1/CTCF, CTCF-shRNA and GFP-shRNA plasmids were constructed
and transfected into HepG2 and CNE1 cells, and RT-PCR or Western blot were
performed to detect the mRNA or protein levels of CTCF. The subpopulation of
CD90+ cancer stem cells in HepG2 cells transfected with CTCF-shRNA plasmid or
GFP-shRNA plasmid (as transfection control) were assayed by flow cytometry with
the wild type HepG2 cells as control. Proliferation of cells transfected with
CTCF-overexpression or CTCF-shRNA plasmid was evaluated by MTT assay.
RESULTS: The levels of both mRNA and protein of CTCF were increased in
pEGFP-N1/CTCF transfected HepG2 and CNE1 cells compared to that in pEGFP-N1
transfected cells (P < 0.05), and decreased in CTCF-shRNA transfected cells
compared to that in cells transfected with GFP-shRNA (P < 0.05). The results of
flow cytometry demonstrated that, detection rate of CD90+ cells in cells
transfected with CTCF-shRNA plasmid [(1.7330 +/- 0.4177)%] was obviously higher
than that of wild-type HepG2 cells [(0.5750 +/- 0.0629)%] and cells transfected
with GFP-shRNA plasmid [(0.3500 +/- 0.0866)%] (P < 0.05). The results of MTT
analysis showed that, alteration of CTCF had no effect on cancer cell
proliferation (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: CTCF inhibits human liver cancer stem cells but no effect on cell
proliferation.

PMID: 24749339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Virol. 2014 Jul;88(13):7389-401. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00845-14. Epub 2014 Apr 16.

CTCF binding to the first intron of the major immediate early (MIE) gene of human
cytomegalovirus (HCMV) negatively regulates MIE gene expression and HCMV
replication.

Martínez FP(1), Cruz R(1), Lu F(2), Plasschaert R(3), Deng Z(2), Rivera-Molina
YA(1), Bartolomei MS(3), Lieberman PM(2), Tang Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/RCMI Program, Ponce School of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Ponce, Puerto Rico, USA. (2)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA. (3)Cell and Molecular Biology Department, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology/RCMI Program, Ponce School of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Ponce, Puerto Rico, USA qtang@psm.edu.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) gene expression during infection is highly
regulated, with sequential expression of immediate-early (IE), early (E), and
late (L) gene transcripts. To explore the potential role of chromatin regulatory 
factors that may regulate HCMV gene expression and DNA replication, we
investigated the interaction of HCMV with the cellular chromatin-organizing
factor CTCF. Here, we show that HCMV-infected cells produce higher levels of CTCF
mRNA and protein at early stages of infection. We also show that CTCF depletion
by short hairpin RNA results in an increase in major IE (MIE) and E gene
expression and an about 50-fold increase in HCMV particle production. We
identified a DNA sequence (TTAACGGTGGAGGGCAGTGT) in the first intron (intron A)
of the MIE gene that interacts directly with CTCF. Deletion of this CTCF-binding 
site led to an increase in MIE gene expression in both transient-transfection and
infection assays. Deletion of the CTCF-binding site in the HCMV bacterial
artificial chromosome plasmid genome resulted in an about 10-fold increase in the
rate of viral replication relative to either wild-type or revertant HCMV. The
CTCF-binding site deletion had no detectable effect on MIE gene-splicing
regulation, nor did CTCF knockdown or overexpression of CTCF alter the ratio of
IE1 to IE2. Therefore, CTCF binds to DNA within the MIE gene at the position of
the first intron to affect RNA polymerase II function during the early stages of 
viral transcription. Finally, the CTCF-binding sequence in CMV is evolutionarily 
conserved, as a similar sequence in murine CMV (MCMV) intron A was found to
interact with CTCF and similarly function in the repression of MCMV MIE gene
expression mediated by CTCF.IMPORTANCE: Our findings that CTCF binds to intron A 
of the cytomegalovirus (CMV) major immediate-early (MIE) gene and functions to
repress MIE gene expression and viral replication are highly significant. For the
first time, a chromatin-organizing factor, CTCF, has been found to facilitate
human CMV gene expression, which affects viral replication. We also identified a 
CTCF-binding motif in the first intron (also called intron A) that directly binds
to CTCF and is required for CTCF to repress MIE gene expression. Finally, we show
that the CTCF-binding motif is conserved in CMV because a similar DNA sequence
was found in murine CMV (MCMV) that is required for CTCF to bind to MCMV MIE gene
to repress MCMV MIE gene expression.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4054410
PMID: 24741094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Epigenetics. 2014 Jul;9(7):951-63. doi: 10.4161/epi.28794. Epub 2014 Apr 15.

The clustering of CpG islands may constitute an important determinant of the 3D
organization of interphase chromosomes.

Gushchanskaya ES(1), Artemov AV(2), Ulyanov SV(3), Logacheva MD(4), Penin AA(4), 
Kotova ES(5), Akopov SB(5), Nikolaev LG(5), Iarovaia OV(6), Sverdlov ED(5),
Gavrilov AA(6), Razin SV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Gene Biology; Russian Academy of Sciences; Moscow, Russia;
Department of Molecular Biology; Lomonosov Moscow State University; Moscow,
Russia; LIA 1066 French-Russian Joint Cancer Research Laboratory; Villejuif,
France and Moscow, Russia. (2)Faculty of Bioengineering and Bioinformatics;
Lomonosov Moscow State University; Moscow, Russia; Institute for Information
Transmission Problems; Russian Academy of Sciences; Moscow, Russia. (3)Institute 
of Gene Biology; Russian Academy of Sciences; Moscow, Russia. (4)Laboratory of
Evolutionary Genomics; Lomonosov Moscow State University; Moscow, Russia.
(5)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry; Russian Academy of
Sciences; Moscow, Russia. (6)Institute of Gene Biology; Russian Academy of
Sciences; Moscow, Russia; LIA 1066 French-Russian Joint Cancer Research
Laboratory; Villejuif, France and Moscow, Russia.

We used the 4C-Seq technique to characterize the genome-wide patterns of spatial 
contacts of several CpG islands located on chromosome 14 in cultured chicken
lymphoid and erythroid cells. We observed a clear tendency for the spatial
clustering of CpG islands present on the same and different chromosomes,
regardless of the presence or absence of promoters within these CpG islands.
Accordingly, we observed preferential spatial contacts between Sp1 binding motifs
and other GC-rich genomic elements, including the DNA sequence motifs capable of 
forming G-quadruplexes. However, an anchor placed in a gene/CpG island-poor area 
formed spatial contacts with other gene/CpG island-poor areas on chromosome 14
and other chromosomes. These results corroborate the two-compartment model of the
spatial organization of interphase chromosomes and suggest that the clustering of
CpG islands constitutes an important determinant of the 3D organization of the
eukaryotic genome in the cell nucleus. Using the ChIP-Seq technique, we mapped
the genome-wide CTCF deposition sites in the chicken lymphoid and erythroid cells
that were used for the 4C analysis. We observed a good correlation between the
density of CTCF deposition sites and the level of 4C signals for the anchors
located in CpG islands but not for an anchor located in a gene desert. It is thus
possible that CTCF contributes to the clustering of CpG islands observed in our
experiments.

PMCID: PMC4143410
PMID: 24736527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. FEBS J. 2014 Jun;281(12):2713-25. doi: 10.1111/febs.12816. Epub 2014 May 12.

Vigilin interacts with CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) and is involved in
CTCF-dependent regulation of the imprinted genes Igf2 and H19.

Liu Q(1), Yang B, Xie X, Wei L, Liu W, Yang W, Ge Y, Zhu Q, Zhang J, Jiang L, Yu 
X, Shen W, Li R, Shi X, Li B, Qin Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, West China School of
Preclinical and Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), a highly conserved zinc finger protein, is a master 
organizer of genome spatial organization and has multiple functions in gene
regulation. Mounting evidence indicates that CTCF regulates the imprinted genes
Igf2 and H19 by organizing chromatin at the Igf2/H19 locus, although the
mechanism by which CTCF carries out this function is not fully understood. By
yeast two-hybrid screening, we identified vigilin, a multi-KH-domain protein, as 
a new partner of CTCF. Subsequent coimmunoprecipitation and glutathione
S-transferase pulldown experiments confirmed that vigilin interacts with CTCF.
Moreover, vigilin is present at several known CTCF target sites, such as the
promoter regions of c-myc and BRCA1, the locus control region of ß-globin, and
several regions within the Igf2/H19 locus. In vivo depletion of vigilin did not
affect CTCF binding; however, knockdown of CTCF reduced vigilin binding to the
H19 imprinting control region. Furthermore, ectopic expression of vigilin
significantly downregulated Igf2 and upregulated H19, whereas depletion of
vigilin upregulated Igf2 and downregulated H19, in HepG2, CNE1 and HeLa cells.
These results reveal the functional relevance of vigilin and CTCF, and show that 
the CTCF-vigilin complex contributes to regulation of Igf2/H19.

© 2014 FEBS.

PMID: 24725430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Immunol. 2014 May 15;192(10):4876-86. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302750. Epub 2014 
Apr 7.

STAT3, STAT4, NFATc1, and CTCF regulate PD-1 through multiple novel regulatory
regions in murine T cells.

Austin JW(1), Lu P, Majumder P, Ahmed R, Boss JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and.

Programmed death-1 (PD-1) is a crucial negative regulator of CD8 T cell
development and function, yet the mechanisms that control its expression are not 
fully understood. Through a nonbiased DNase I hypersensitivity assay, four novel 
regulatory regions within the Pdcd1 locus were identified. Two of these elements 
flanked the locus, bound the transcriptional insulator protein CCCTC-binding
factor, and interacted with each other, creating a potential regulatory
compartmentalization of the locus. In response to T cell activation signaling,
NFATc1 bound to two of the novel regions that function as independent regulatory 
elements. STAT binding sites were identified in these elements as well. In
splenic CD8 T cells, TCR-induced PD-1 expression was augmented by IL-6 and IL-12,
inducers of STAT3 and STAT4 activity, respectively. IL-6 or IL-12 on its own did 
not induce PD-1. Importantly, STAT3/4 and distinct chromatin modifications were
associated with the novel regulatory regions following cytokine stimulation. The 
NFATc1/STAT regulatory regions were found to interact with the promoter region of
the Pdcd1 gene, providing a mechanism for their action. Together these data add
multiple novel distal regulatory regions and pathways to the control of PD-1
expression and provide a molecular mechanism by which proinflammatory cytokines, 
such as IL-6 or IL-12, can augment PD-1 expression.

PMCID: PMC4011967
PMID: 24711622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Genes Dev. 2014 Apr 1;28(7):723-34. doi: 10.1101/gad.236869.113.

CTCF regulates the human p53 gene through direct interaction with its natural
antisense transcript, Wrap53.

Saldaña-Meyer R(1), González-Buendía E, Guerrero G, Narendra V, Bonasio R,
Recillas-Targa F, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Departamento de Genética Molecular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México City 04510, México;

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2014 May;14(5):295.

The multifunctional CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) protein exhibits a broad range of
functions, including that of insulator and higher-order chromatin organizer. We
found that CTCF comprises a previously unrecognized region that is necessary and 
sufficient to bind RNA (RNA-binding region [RBR]) and is distinct from its
DNA-binding domain. Depletion of cellular CTCF led to a decrease in not only
levels of p53 mRNA, as expected, but also those of Wrap53 RNA, an antisense
transcript originated from the p53 locus. PAR-CLIP-seq (photoactivatable
ribonucleoside-enhanced cross-linking and immunoprecipitation [PAR-CLIP] combined
with deep sequencing) analyses indicate that CTCF binds a multitude of
transcripts genome-wide as well as to Wrap53 RNA. Apart from its established role
at the p53 promoter, CTCF regulates p53 expression through its physical
interaction with Wrap53 RNA. Cells harboring a CTCF mutant in its RBR exhibit a
defective p53 response to DNA damage. Moreover, the RBR facilitates CTCF
multimerization in an RNA-dependent manner, which may bear directly on its role
in establishing higher-order chromatin structures in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4015496
PMID: 24696455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Genome Res. 2014 Jun;24(6):1039-50. doi: 10.1101/gr.166983.113. Epub 2014 Mar 27.

Subtelomeric CTCF and cohesin binding site organization using improved
subtelomere assemblies and a novel annotation pipeline.

Stong N(1), Deng Z(2), Gupta R(2), Hu S(2), Paul S(2), Weiner AK(2), Eichler
EE(3), Graves T(4), Fronick CC(4), Courtney L(4), Wilson RK(4), Lieberman PM(2), 
Davuluri RV(2), Riethman H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Group in Genomics and Computational Biology, School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA; The Wistar
Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA; (2)The Wistar Institute,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA; (3)Department of Genome Sciences,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA; (4)The Genome
Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63108,
USA.

Mapping genome-wide data to human subtelomeres has been problematic due to the
incomplete assembly and challenges of low-copy repetitive DNA elements. Here, we 
provide updated human subtelomere sequence assemblies that were extended by
filling telomere-adjacent gaps using clone-based resources. A bioinformatic
pipeline incorporating multiread mapping for annotation of the updated assemblies
using short-read data sets was developed and implemented. Annotation of
subtelomeric sequence features as well as mapping of CTCF and cohesin binding
sites using ChIP-seq data sets from multiple human cell types confirmed that CTCF
and cohesin bind within 3 kb of the start of terminal repeat tracts at many, but 
not all, subtelomeres. CTCF and cohesin co-occupancy were also enriched near
internal telomere-like sequence (ITS) islands and the nonterminal boundaries of
subtelomere repeat elements (SREs) in transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines
(LCLs) and human embryonic stem cell (ES) lines, but were not significantly
enriched in the primary fibroblast IMR90 cell line. Subtelomeric CTCF and cohesin
sites predicted by ChIP-seq using our bioinformatics pipeline (but not predicted 
when only uniquely mapping reads were considered) were consistently validated by 
ChIP-qPCR. The colocalized CTCF and cohesin sites in SRE regions are candidates
for mediating long-range chromatin interactions in the transcript-rich SRE
region. A public browser for the integrated display of short-read sequence-based 
annotations relative to key subtelomere features such as the start of each
terminal repeat tract, SRE identity and organization, and subtelomeric gene
models was established.

© 2014 Stong et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4032850
PMID: 24676094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2014 Mar 25;7(1):5. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-7-5.

The PEG13-DMR and brain-specific enhancers dictate imprinted expression within
the 8q24 intellectual disability risk locus.

Court F, Camprubi C, Garcia CV, Guillaumet-Adkins A, Sparago A, Seruggia D,
Sandoval J, Esteller M, Martin-Trujillo A, Riccio A, Montoliu L, Monk D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Imprinting and Cancer Group, Cancer Epigenetics and Biology Program (PEBC),
Bellvitge Institute for Biomedical Research (IDIBELL), L'Hospitalet de Llobregat,
Barcelona 08907, Spain. dmonk@idibell.cat.

BACKGROUND: Genomic imprinting is the epigenetic marking of genes that results in
parent-of-origin monoallelic expression. Most imprinted domains are associated
with differentially DNA methylated regions (DMRs) that originate in the gametes, 
and are maintained in somatic tissues after fertilization. This allelic
methylation profile is associated with a plethora of histone tail modifications
that orchestrates higher order chromatin interactions. The mouse chromosome 15
imprinted cluster contains multiple brain-specific maternally expressed
transcripts including Ago2, Chrac1, Trappc9 and Kcnk9 and a paternally expressed 
gene, Peg13. The promoter of Peg13 is methylated on the maternal allele and is
the sole DMR within the locus. To determine the extent of imprinting within the
human orthologous region on chromosome 8q24, a region associated with autosomal
recessive intellectual disability, Birk-Barel mental retardation and dysmorphism 
syndrome, we have undertaken a systematic analysis of allelic expression and DNA 
methylation of genes mapping within an approximately 2 Mb region around TRAPPC9.
RESULTS: Utilizing allele-specific RT-PCR, bisulphite sequencing, chromatin
immunoprecipitation and chromosome conformation capture (3C) we show the
reciprocal expression of the novel, paternally expressed, PEG13 non-coding RNA
and maternally expressed KCNK9 genes in brain, and the biallelic expression of
flanking transcripts in a range of tissues. We identify a tandem-repeat region
overlapping the PEG13 transcript that is methylated on the maternal allele, which
binds CTCF-cohesin in chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments and possesses
enhancer-blocker activity. Using 3C, we identify mutually exclusive approximately
58 and 500 kb chromatin loops in adult frontal cortex between a novel
brain-specific enhancer, marked by H3K4me1 and H3K27ac, with the KCNK9 and PEG13 
promoters which we propose regulates brain-specific expression.
CONCLUSIONS: We have characterised the molecular mechanism responsible for
reciprocal allelic expression of the PEG13 and KCNK9 transcripts. Therefore, our 
observations may have important implications for identifying the cause of
intellectual disabilities associated with the 8q24 locus.

PMCID: PMC3986935
PMID: 24667089  [PubMed]


269. Cell Res. 2014 May;24(5):513-31. doi: 10.1038/cr.2014.35. Epub 2014 Mar 25.

Human colorectal cancer-specific CCAT1-L lncRNA regulates long-range chromatin
interactions at the MYC locus.

Xiang JF(1), Yin QF(1), Chen T(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhang XO(2), Wu Z(1), Zhang S(1), 
Wang HB(3), Ge J(3), Lu X(3), Yang L(2), Chen LL(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, 320 Yueyang Road, Shanghai 200031, China. (2)Key Laboratory of
Computational Biology, CAS-MPG Partner Institute for Computational Biology,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320
Yueyang Road, Shanghai 200031, China. (3)Changzheng Hospital, Second Military
Medical University, 415 Fengyang Road, Shanghai 200003, China.

Erratum in
    Cell Res. 2014 Sep;24(9):1150.

Comment in
    Cell Res. 2014 Jun;24(6):643-4.

The human 8q24 gene desert contains multiple enhancers that form tissue-specific 
long-range chromatin loops with the MYC oncogene, but how chromatin looping at
the MYC locus is regulated remains poorly understood. Here we demonstrate that a 
long noncoding RNA (lncRNA), CCAT1-L, is transcribed specifically in human
colorectal cancers from a locus 515 kb upstream of MYC. This lncRNA plays a role 
in MYC transcriptional regulation and promotes long-range chromatin looping.
Importantly, the CCAT1-L locus is located within a strong super-enhancer and is
spatially close to MYC. Knockdown of CCAT1-L reduced long-range interactions
between the MYC promoter and its enhancers. In addition, CCAT1-L interacts with
CTCF and modulates chromatin conformation at these loop regions. These results
reveal an important role of a previously unannotated lncRNA in gene regulation at
the MYC locus.

PMCID: PMC4011346
PMID: 24662484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Biol Chem. 2014 May 2;289(18):12520-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.551762. Epub 2014
Mar 21.

Transcription of angiogenin and ribonuclease 4 is regulated by RNA polymerase III
elements and a CCCTC binding factor (CTCF)-dependent intragenic chromatin loop.

Sheng J(1), Luo C, Jiang Y, Hinds PW, Xu Z, Hu GF.

Author information: 
(1)From the Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02111 and.

Angiogenin (ANG) and ribonuclease 4 (RNASE4), two members of the secreted and
vertebrate-specific ribonuclease superfamily, play important roles in cancers and
neurodegenerative diseases. The ANG and RNASE4 genes share genetic regions with
promoter activities, but the structure and regulation of these putative promotes 
are unknown. We have characterized the promoter regions, defined the
transcription start site, and identified a mechanism of transcription regulation 
that involves both RNA polymerase III (Pol III) elements and CCCTC binding factor
(CTCF) sites. We found that two Pol III elements within the promoter region
influence ANG and RNASE4 expression in a position- and orientation-dependent
manner. We also provide evidence for the presence of an intragenic chromatin loop
between the two CTCF binding sites located in two introns flanking the ANG coding
exon. We found that formation of this intragenic loop preferentially enhances ANG
transcription. These results suggest a multilayer transcriptional regulation of
ANG and RNASE4 gene locus. These data also add more direct evidence to the notion
that Pol III elements are able to directly influence Pol II gene transcription.
Furthermore, our data indicate that a CTCF-dependent chromatin loop is able to
differentially regulate transcription of genes that share the same promoters.

PMCID: PMC4007445
PMID: 24659782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Oncotarget. 2014 Feb 28;5(4):1052-61.

Hypomethylation of the CTCFL/BORIS promoter and aberrant expression during
endometrial cancer progression suggests a role as an Epi-driver gene.

Hoivik EA(1), Kusonmano K, Halle MK, Berg A, Wik E, Werner HM, Petersen K, Oyan
AM, Kalland KH, Krakstad C, Trovik J, Widschwendter M, Salvesen HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Haukeland University Hospital,
Bergen, Norway.

Cancers arise through accumulating genetic and epigenetic alterations, considered
relevant for phenotype and approaches to targeting new therapies. We investigated
a unique collection of endometrial cancer precursor samples and clinically
annotated primary and metastatic lesions for two evolutionary and functionally
related transcription factors, CCCTC-binding factor (zinc finger protein) (CTCF) 
and its paralogue CTCF-like factor, also denoted Brother of the Regulator of
Imprinted Sites (CTCFL/BORIS). CTCF, a chromatin modeling- and transcription
factor, is normally expressed in a ubiquitous fashion, while CTCFL/BORIS is
restricted to the testis. In cancer, CTCF is thought to be a tumor suppressor,
while CTCFL/BORIS has been suggested as an oncogene. CTCF mutations were
identified in 13%, with CTCF hotspot frameshift mutations at p.T204, all observed
solely in the endometrioid subtype, but with no association with outcome.
Interestingly, CTCFL/BORIS was amongst the top ranked genes differentially
expressed between endometrioid and non-endometrioid tumors, and increasing mRNA
level of CTCFL/BORIS was highly significantly associated with poor survival. As
aberrant CTCFL/BORIS expression might relate to loss of methylation, we explored 
methylation status in clinical samples from complex atypical hyperplasia, through
primary tumors to metastatic lesions, demonstrating a pattern of DNA methylation 
loss during disease development and progression in line with the increase in
CTCFL/BORIS mRNA expression observed. Thus, CTCF and CTCFL/BORIS are found to
diverge in the different subtypes of endometrial cancer, with CTCFL/BORIS
activation through demethylation from precursors to metastatic lesions. We thus
propose, CTCFL/BORIS as an Epi-driver gene in endometrial cancer, suggesting a
potential for future vaccine development.

PMCID: PMC4011582
PMID: 24658009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2014 Feb;24:8-15. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2013.10.011. Epub 2013 
Dec 14.

CTCF and BORIS in genome regulation and cancer.

Marshall AD(1), Bailey CG(1), Rasko JE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Gene and Stem Cell Therapy Program, Centenary Institute, Missenden Road,
Camperdown 2050, NSW, Australia; Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney,
Sydney 2006, NSW, Australia. (2)Gene and Stem Cell Therapy Program, Centenary
Institute, Missenden Road, Camperdown 2050, NSW, Australia; Sydney Medical
School, University of Sydney, Sydney 2006, NSW, Australia; Cell and Molecular
Therapies, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown 2050, NSW, Australia.
Electronic address: j.rasko@centenary.org.au.

CTCF plays a vital role in chromatin structure and function. CTCF is ubiquitously
expressed and plays diverse roles in gene regulation, imprinting, insulation,
intra/interchromosomal interactions, nuclear compartmentalisation, and
alternative splicing. CTCF has a single paralogue, the testes-specific CTCF-like 
gene (CTCFL)/BORIS. CTCF and BORIS can be deregulated in cancer. The tumour
suppressor gene CTCF can be mutated or deleted in cancer, or CTCF DNA binding can
be altered by epigenetic changes. BORIS is aberrantly expressed frequently in
cancer, leading some to propose a pro-tumourigenic role for BORIS. However, BORIS
can inhibit cell proliferation, and is mutated in cancer similarly to CTCF
suggesting BORIS activation in cancer may be due to global genetic or epigenetic 
changes typical of malignant transformation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24657531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Biomed Rep. 2014 Jan;2(1):101-104. Epub 2013 Nov 15.

CTCF and CTCFL mRNA expression in 17ß-estradiol-treated MCF7 cells.

Del Campo EP(1), Márquez JJ(2), Reyes-Vargas F(3), Intriago-Ortega MD(4),
Quintanar-Escorza MA(4), Burciaga-Nava JA(4), Sifuentes-Alvarez A(4),
Reyes-Romero M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Nutrition, Juárez
University of the State of Durango, Durango 34000, Mexico. (2)Department of
Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Nutrition, Juárez University of the
State of Durango, Durango 34000, Mexico ; Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of 
Medicine and Nutrition, Juárez University of the State of Durango, Durango 34000,
Mexico. (3)Cancer State Center of the Ministry of Health, Durango, Durango 34000,
Mexico. (4)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine and Nutrition, Juárez 
University of the State of Durango, Durango 34000, Mexico.

Estrogens play a key role in breast cancer, with 60-70% of the cases expressing
estrogen receptors (ERs), which are encoded by the ESR1 gene. CTCFL, a paralogue 
of the chromatin organizer CTCF, is a potential biomarker of breast cancer, but
its expression in this disease is currently controversial. A positive correlation
has been reported between CTCFL and ERs in breast tumors and there also exists a 
coordinated interaction between CTCF and ERs in breast cancer cells. Therefore,
there appears to be an association between CTCF, CTCFL and estrogens in breast
cancer; however, there has been no report on the effects of estrogens on CTCF and
CTCFL expression. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of
17ß-estradiol (E2) on the CTCF and CTCFL mRNA expression in the MCF7 breast
cancer cell line. The promoter methylation status of CTCFL and data mining for
estrogen response elements in promoters of the CTCF and CTCFL genes were also
determined. The transcription of CTCF and CTCFL was performed by quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and the promoter methylation status of CTCFL was
determined by methylation-specific PCR. The MCF7 cells exhibited basal
transcription of CTCF, which was significantly downregulated to 0.68 by 1 µM E2; 
basal or E2-regulated transcription of CTCFL was not detected. Under basal
conditions, the CTCFL promoter was methylated. Through data mining, an estrogen
response element was identified in the CTCF promoter, but no such element was
found in CTCFL. These results suggested that estrogens may modulate CTCF
expression, although there was no apparent association between ERs and CTCFL.

PMCID: PMC3917730
PMID: 24649078  [PubMed]


274. Database (Oxford). 2014 Mar 18;2014:bau020. doi: 10.1093/database/bau020. Print
2014.

Comparison of sequence variants in transcriptomic control regions across 17 mouse
genomes.

Nguyen C(1), Baten A, Morahan G.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Diabetes Research, The Western Australian Institute for Medical
Research, Western Australia, Australia, Centre of Medical Research, University of
Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Australia and Southern Cross Plant
Science, Southern Cross University, Lismore, New South Wales, Australia.

The laboratory mouse is the most widely used mammalian model organism in
biomedical research, so a thorough annotation of functional variation in the
mouse genome would be of significant value. In this study, we compared sequence
variation in a comprehensive list of functional elements (e.g. promoters,
enhancers and CTCF binding sites) across 17 inbred mouse strains. Sequences were 
derived for ~300,000 functional elements experimentally identified by the mouse
ENCODE project as regulating gene expression in 19 different tissue sources. We
aligned sequences for each predicted cis-regulatory element to genomes of 17
mouse strains. This yielded a database comprising ~5 million aligned sequences,
allowing interrogation of sequence variation of functional elements for each of
the 19 tissues/cell types in commonly used mouse strains. We also developed an
online tool to visualize the genome around each predicted cis-regulatory element 
in each tissue context and which allows efficient comparison of variation between
any two sets of strains. This will be particularly useful in the context of the
Collaborative Cross (CC), which was conceived as a powerful new systems genetics 
resource to accelerate gene discovery. Comprising a large number of inbred
strains derived from eight genetically diverse founders, the CC offers rapid
mapping and identification of genes that mediate complex traits. We show that,
among the 17 sequenced strains, the set of CC founder strains captures the most
variability in the ENCODE elements, further emphasizing the value of this
resource. Database URL: www.sysgen.org/ecco.

PMCID: PMC3958616
PMID: 24647628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Immunol. 2014 Apr 15;192(8):3925-35. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1303205. Epub 2014
Mar 14.

B cell differentiation is associated with reprogramming the CCCTC binding
factor-dependent chromatin architecture of the murine MHC class II locus.

Majumder P(1), Scharer CD, Choi NM, Boss JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322.

The transcriptional insulator CCCTC binding factor (CTCF) was shown previously to
be critical for human MHC class II (MHC-II) gene expression. Whether the
mechanisms used by CTCF in humans were similar to that of the mouse and whether
the three-dimensional chromatin architecture created was specific to B cells were
not defined. Genome-wide CTCF occupancy was defined for murine B cells and
LPS-derived plasmablasts by chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing. Fifteen
CTCF sites within the murine MHC-II locus were associated with high CTCF binding 
in B cells. Only one-third of these sites displayed significant CTCF occupancy in
plasmablasts. CTCF was required for maximal MHC-II gene expression in mouse B
cells. In B cells, a subset of the CTCF regions interacted with each other,
creating a three-dimensional architecture for the locus. Additional interactions 
occurred between MHC-II promoters and the CTCF sites. In contrast, a novel
configuration occurred in plasma cells, which do not express MHC-II genes.
Ectopic CIITA expression in plasma cells to induce MHC-II expression resulted in 
high levels of MHC-II proteins, but did not alter the plasma cell architecture
completely. These data suggest that reorganizing the three-dimensional chromatin 
architecture is an epigenetic mechanism that accompanies the silencing of MHC-II 
genes as part of the cell fate commitment of plasma cells.

PMCID: PMC3982198
PMID: 24634495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Nat Rev Genet. 2014 Apr;15(4):234-46. doi: 10.1038/nrg3663. Epub 2014 Mar 11.

CTCF: an architectural protein bridging genome topology and function.

Ong CT(1), Corces VG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, 1510 Clifton Rd NE, Atlanta, Georgia 
30322, USA.

The eukaryotic genome is organized in the three-dimensional nuclear space in a
specific manner that is both a cause and a consequence of its function. This
organization is partly established by a special class of architectural proteins, 
of which CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is the best characterized. Although CTCF has
been assigned various roles that are often contradictory, new results now help to
draw a unifying model to explain the many functions of this protein. CTCF creates
boundaries between topologically associating domains in chromosomes and, within
these domains, facilitates interactions between transcription regulatory
sequences. Thus, CTCF links the architecture of the genome to its function.

PMCID: PMC4610363
PMID: 24614316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Mol Cell. 2014 Apr 10;54(1):56-66. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.02.004. Epub 2014
Mar 6.

Oct-1 regulates IL-17 expression by directing interchromosomal associations in
conjunction with CTCF in T cells.

Kim LK(1), Esplugues E(2), Zorca CE(3), Parisi F(4), Kluger Y(4), Kim TH(5),
Galjart NJ(6), Flavell RA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, CT 06520, USA. (2)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. (3)Department of Immunobiology, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA; Department of Genetics, 
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. (4)Department of
Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(5)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA. (6)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus MC, 3000 CA
Rotterdam, the Netherlands. (7)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. Electronic address:
richard.flavell@yale.edu.

Interchromosomal associations can regulate gene expression, but little is known
about the molecular basis of such associations. In response to antigen
stimulation, naive T cells can differentiate into Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells
expressing IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4, and IL-17, respectively. We previously reported that in
naive T cells, the IFN-<U+03B3> locus is associated with the Th2 cytokine locus. Here we
show that the Th2 locus additionally associates with the IL-17 locus. This
association requires a DNase I hypersensitive region (RHS6) at the Th2 locus.
RHS6 and the IL-17 promoter both bear Oct-1 binding sites. Deletion of either of 
these sites or Oct-1 gene impairs the association. Oct-1 and CTCF bind their
cognate sites cooperatively, and CTCF deficiency similarly impairs the
association. Finally, defects in the association lead to enhanced IL-17
induction. Collectively, our data indicate Th17 lineage differentiation is
restrained by the Th2 locus via interchromosomal associations organized by Oct-1 
and CTCF.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4058095
PMID: 24613343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. PLoS Genet. 2014 Mar 6;10(3):e1004204. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004204.
eCollection 2014.

RBPJ, the major transcriptional effector of Notch signaling, remains associated
with chromatin throughout mitosis, suggesting a role in mitotic bookmarking.

Lake RJ(1), Tsai PF(1), Choi I(2), Won KJ(2), Fan HY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics Program, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (2)Institute 
for Diabetes Obesity and Metabolism, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of Genetics, Perelman School
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United
States of America. (3)Epigenetics Program, Department of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States
of America; Institute for Diabetes Obesity and Metabolism, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of
Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Mechanisms that maintain transcriptional memory through cell division are
important to maintain cell identity, and sequence-specific transcription factors 
that remain associated with mitotic chromatin are emerging as key players in
transcriptional memory propagation. Here, we show that the major transcriptional 
effector of Notch signaling, RBPJ, is retained on mitotic chromatin, and that
this mitotic chromatin association is mediated through the direct association of 
RBPJ with DNA. We further demonstrate that RBPJ binds directly to nucleosomal DNA
in vitro, with a preference for sites close to the entry/exit position of the
nucleosomal DNA. Genome-wide analysis in the murine embryonal-carcinoma cell line
F9 revealed that roughly 60% of the sites occupied by RBPJ in asynchronous cells 
were also occupied in mitotic cells. Among them, we found that a fraction of RBPJ
occupancy sites shifted between interphase and mitosis, suggesting that RBPJ can 
be retained on mitotic chromatin by sliding on DNA rather than disengaging from
chromatin during mitotic chromatin condensation. We propose that RBPJ can
function as a mitotic bookmark, marking genes for efficient transcriptional
activation or repression upon mitotic exit. Strikingly, we found that sites of
RBPJ occupancy were enriched for CTCF-binding motifs in addition to RBPJ-binding 
motifs, and that RBPJ and CTCF interact. Given that CTCF regulates transcription 
and bridges long-range chromatin interactions, our results raise the intriguing
hypothesis that by collaborating with CTCF, RBPJ may participate in establishing 
chromatin domains and/or long-range chromatin interactions that could be
propagated through cell division to maintain gene expression programs.

PMCID: PMC3945225
PMID: 24603501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Genome Med. 2014 Mar 5;6(3):19. doi: 10.1186/gm536. eCollection 2014.

Human-specific epigenetic variation in the immunological Leukotriene B4 Receptor 
(LTB4R/BLT1) implicated in common inflammatory diseases.

Wilson GA(1), Butcher LM(2), Foster HR(3), Feber A(2), Roos C(4), Walter L(4),
Woszczek G(3), Beck S(2), Bell CG(5).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genomics, UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, London, UK 
; Current address: Translational Cancer Therapeutics, CR-UK London Research
Institute, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London, UK. (2)Medical Genomics, UCL Cancer
Institute, University College London, London, UK. (3)MRC & Asthma UK Centre in
Allergic Mechanisms of Asthma, Division of Asthma, Allergy and Lung Biology,
King's College London, London, UK. (4)Genebank of Primates and Primate Genetics
Laboratory, German Primate Centre, Leibniz Institute for Primate Research,
Göttingen, Germany. (5)Medical Genomics, UCL Cancer Institute, University College
London, London, UK ; Current address: Department of Twin Research & Genetic
Epidemiology, St Thomas' Hospital, King's College London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Common human diseases are caused by the complex interplay of genetic 
susceptibility as well as environmental factors. Due to the environment's
influence on the epigenome, and therefore genome function, as well as conversely 
the genome's facilitative effect on the epigenome, analysis of this level of
regulation may increase our knowledge of disease pathogenesis.
METHODS: In order to identify human-specific epigenetic influences, we have
performed a novel genome-wide DNA methylation analysis comparing human,
chimpanzee and rhesus macaque.
RESULTS: We have identified that the immunological Leukotriene B4 receptor
(LTB4R, BLT1 receptor) is the most epigenetically divergent human gene in
peripheral blood in comparison with other primates. This difference is due to the
co-ordinated active state of human-specific hypomethylation in the promoter and
human-specific increased gene body methylation. This gene is significant in
innate immunity and the LTB4/LTB4R pathway is involved in the pathogenesis of the
spectrum of human inflammatory diseases. This finding was confirmed by additional
neutrophil-only DNA methylome and lymphoblastoid H3K4me3 chromatin comparative
data. Additionally we show through functional analysis that this receptor has
increased expression and a higher response to the LTB4 ligand in human versus
rhesus macaque peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Genome-wide we also find human
species-specific differentially methylated regions (human s-DMRs) are more
prevalent in CpG island shores than within the islands themselves, and within the
latter are associated with the CTCF motif.
CONCLUSIONS: This result further emphasises the exclusive nature of the human
immunological system, its divergent adaptation even from very closely related
primates, and the power of comparative epigenomics to identify and understand
human uniqueness.

PMCID: PMC4062055
PMID: 24598577  [PubMed]


280. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2013;78:11-21. doi: 10.1101/sqb.2013.78.019943.
Epub 2014 Feb 28.

Control of antigen receptor diversity through spatial regulation of V(D)J
recombination.

Ebert A(1), Medvedovic J(1), Tagoh H(1), Schwickert TA(1), Busslinger M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna Biocenter, A-1030 Vienna,
Austria. (2)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna Biocenter, A-1030
Vienna, Austria busslinger@imp.ac.at.

Lymphocytes recognize a vast variety of pathogens by expressing a diverse
repertoire of antigen receptor genes that are assembled by V(D)J recombination in
immature B cells (Igh, Igk) and T cells (Tcrb, Tcra/d). V(D)J recombination takes
place in the 3' proximal domain containing the D, J, and C gene segments, whereas
31 (Tcrb) to 200 (Igh) V genes are spread over a large region of 0.67 (Tcrb) to 3
(Igk) Mb pairs. All antigen receptor loci undergo reversible contraction at the
developmental stage, where they engage in V-(D)J recombination. This long-range
looping promotes the participation of all V genes in V-(D)J recombination by
juxtaposing distant V genes next to (D)J segments in the proximal recombination
center. The B-cell-specific Pax5, ubiquitous YY1, and architectural CTCF/cohesin 
proteins promote Igh locus contraction in pro-B cells by binding to multiple
sites in the VH gene cluster. These regulators also control the
pro-B-cell-specific activity of the distally located PAIR elements, which are
likely involved in the regulation of VH-DJH recombination by mediating locus
contraction. Notably, the large VH gene cluster of the Igh locus undergoes
flexible long-range looping that ensures similar participation of all VH genes in
VH-DJH recombination to generate a diverse antibody repertoire.

Copyright © 2013 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

PMID: 24584058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Front Immunol. 2014 Feb 11;5:49. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00049. eCollection 2014.

CTCF and ncRNA Regulate the Three-Dimensional Structure of Antigen Receptor Loci 
to Facilitate V(D)J Recombination.

Choi NM(1), Feeney AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbial Science, The Scripps Research Institute
, La Jolla, CA , USA.

At both the immunoglobulin heavy and kappa light chain loci, there are >100
functional variable (V) genes spread over >2<U+2009>Mb that must move into close
proximity in 3D space to the (D)J genes to create a diverse repertoire of
antibodies. Similar events take place at the T cell receptor (TCR) loci to create
a wide repertoire of TCRs. In this review, we will discuss the role of CTCF in
forming rosette-like structures at the antigen receptor (AgR) loci, and the
varied roles it plays in alternately facilitating and repressing V(D)J
rearrangements. In addition, non-coding RNAs, also known as germline
transcription, can shape the 3D configuration of the Igh locus, and presumably
that of the other AgR loci. At the Igh locus, this could occur by gathering the
regions being transcribed in the VH locus into the same transcription factory
where Iµ is being transcribed. Since the Iµ promoter, Eµ, is adjacent to the DJH 
rearrangement to which one V gene will ultimately rearrange, the process of
germline transcription itself, prominent in the distal half of the VH locus, may 
play an important and direct role in locus compaction. Finally, we will discuss
the impact of the transcriptional and epigenetic landscape of the Igh locus on VH
gene rearrangement frequencies.

PMCID: PMC3920468
PMID: 24575097  [PubMed]


282. Front Immunol. 2014 Feb 10;5:45. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00045. eCollection 2014.

Function of YY1 in Long-Distance DNA Interactions.

Atchison ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania , Philadelphia, PA , USA.

During B cell development, long-distance DNA interactions are needed for V(D)J
somatic rearrangement of the immunoglobulin (Ig) loci to produce functional Ig
genes, and for class switch recombination (CSR) needed for antibody maturation.
The tissue-specificity and developmental timing of these mechanisms is a subject 
of active investigation. A small number of factors are implicated in controlling 
Ig locus long-distance interactions including Pax5, Yin Yang 1 (YY1), EZH2,
IKAROS, CTCF, cohesin, and condensin proteins. Here we will focus on the role
of<U+2009>YY1 in controlling these mechanisms. YY1 is a multifunctional transcription
factor involved in transcriptional activation and repression, X chromosome
inactivation, Polycomb Group (PcG) protein DNA recruitment, and recruitment of
proteins required for epigenetic modifications (acetylation, deacetylation,
methylation, ubiquitination, sumoylation, etc.). YY1 conditional knock-out
indicated that YY1 is required for B cell development, at least in part, by
controlling long-distance DNA interactions at the immunoglobulin heavy chain and 
Ig<U+03BA> loci. Our recent data show that YY1 is also required for CSR. The mechanisms 
implicated in YY1 control of long-distance DNA interactions include controlling
non-coding antisense RNA transcripts, recruitment of PcG proteins to DNA, and
interaction with complexes involved in long-distance DNA interactions including
the cohesin and condensin complexes. Though common rearrangement mechanisms
operate at all Ig loci, their distinct temporal activation along with the
ubiquitous nature of<U+2009>YY1 poses challenges for determining the specific mechanisms
of<U+2009>YY1 function in these processes, and their regulation at the tissue-specific
and B cell stage-specific level. The large numbers of post-translational
modifications that control YY1 functions are possible candidates for regulation.

PMCID: PMC3918653
PMID: 24575094  [PubMed]


283. Nat Commun. 2014 Feb 27;5:3365. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4365.

Characterizing the genetic basis of methylome diversity in histologically normal 
human lung tissue.

Shi J(1), Marconett CN(2), Duan J(3), Hyland PL(1), Li P(1), Wang Z(1), Wheeler
W(4), Zhou B(5), Campan M(2), Lee DS(2), Huang J(6), Zhou W(1), Triche T(7),
Amundadottir L(1), Warner A(8), Hutchinson A(1), Chen PH(2), Chung BS(2),
Pesatori AC(9), Consonni D(9), Bertazzi PA(9), Bergen AW(10), Freedman M(11),
Siegmund KD(7), Berman BP(12), Borok Z(13), Chatterjee N(1), Tucker MA(1),
Caporaso NE(1), Chanock SJ(1), Laird-Offringa IA(2), Landi MT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, NIH, 
DHHS, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. (2)1] Department of Surgery, USC/Norris
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California
90089, USA [2] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, USC/Norris
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California
90089, USA. (3)Center for Psychiatric Genetics, Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, North Shore University Health System Research Institute,
University of Chicago Pritzker School of Medicine, Evanston, Illinois 60201, USA.
(4)Information Management Services Inc., Rockville, Maryland 20852, USA. (5)Will 
Rogers Institute Pulmonary Research Center, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care 
and Sleep Medicine, USC Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90089,
USA. (6)Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, NIH, DHHS, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
(7)Bioinformatics Division, Department of Preventive Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089, USA.
(8)Pathology/Histotechnology Laboratory, Laboratory Animal Sciences Program,
Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick, Maryland 21702,
USA. (9)Unit of Epidemiology, IRCCS Fondazione Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore
Policlinico, Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of 
Milan, Milan 20122, Italy. (10)Molecular Genetics Program, Center for Health
Sciences, SRI, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA. (11)1] Program in Medical and
Population Genetics, The Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA [2]
Department of Medical Oncology, The Center for Functional Cancer Epigenetics,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA. (12)1]
Bioinformatics Division, Department of Preventive Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089, USA [2] USC Epigenome Center 
and USC/Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles, California 90089, USA.
(13)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, USC/Norris Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90089, USA [2]
Will Rogers Institute Pulmonary Research Center, Division of Pulmonary, Critical 
Care and Sleep Medicine, USC Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California
90089, USA.

The genetic regulation of the human epigenome is not fully appreciated. Here we
describe the effects of genetic variants on the DNA methylome in human lung based
on methylation-quantitative trait loci (meQTL) analyses. We report 34,304 cis-
and 585 trans-meQTLs, a genetic-epigenetic interaction of surprising magnitude,
including a regulatory hotspot. These findings are replicated in both breast and 
kidney tissues and show distinct patterns: cis-meQTLs mostly localize to CpG
sites outside of genes, promoters and CpG islands (CGIs), while trans-meQTLs are 
over-represented in promoter CGIs. meQTL SNPs are enriched in CTCF-binding sites,
DNaseI hypersensitivity regions and histone marks. Importantly, four of the five 
established lung cancer risk loci in European ancestry are cis-meQTLs and, in
aggregate, cis-meQTLs are enriched for lung cancer risk in a genome-wide analysis
of 11,587 subjects. Thus, inherited genetic variation may affect lung
carcinogenesis by regulating the human methylome.

PMCID: PMC3982882
PMID: 24572595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. BMC Genomics. 2014;15 Suppl 1:S8. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-S1-S8. Epub 2014 Jan 
24.

Accumulation of CTCF-binding sites drives expression divergence between tandemly 
duplicated genes in humans.

Liao BY, Chang A.

BACKGROUND: During eukaryotic genome evolution, tandem gene duplication is the
most frequent event giving rise to clustered gene families. However, how
expression divergence between tandemly duplicated genes has emerged and
maintained remain unclear. In particular, it is unknown if epigenetic regulators 
have been involved in the process.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), the master epigenetic
regulator and the only known insulator protein in humans, has played a
predominant role in generating divergence in both expression profiles and
expression levels between adjacent paralogs in the human genome. This phenomenon 
was not observed for non-paralogous adjacent genes. After tandem duplication
events, CTCF-binding sites gradually accumulate between paralogs. This trend was 
more prominent for genes involved in particular functions.
CONCLUSIONS: The accumulation of CTCF-binding sites drives expression divergence 
of tandemly duplicated genes. This process is likely targeted by natural
selection. Our study reveals the importance of CTCF to the evolution of animal
diversity and complexity.

PMCID: PMC4046690
PMID: 24564680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Pathol Oncol Res. 2014 Jul;20(3):687-95. doi: 10.1007/s12253-014-9749-y. Epub
2014 Feb 23.

Possible prognostic value of BORIS transcript variants ratio in laryngeal
squamous cell carcinomas - a pilot study.

Novak Kujundic R(1), Grbea I, Ivkic M, Krulin B, Konjevoda P, Gall Troelj K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Epigenomics, Ruder Bokovic Institute, Bijenicka cesta 54,
10002, Zagreb, Croatia, rnovak@irb.hr.

BORIS is a paralog of a highly conserved, multi-functional chromatin factor CTCF.
Unlike CTCF, which has been shown to possess tumor-suppressive properties, BORIS 
belongs to the "cancer/testis antigen" family normally expressed only in germ
cells and aberrantly activated in a variety of tumors. The consequences of BORIS 
expression, relative abundance of its isoforms, and its role in carcinogenesis
have not been completely elucidated. It activates transcription of hTERT and MYC,
genes relevant for laryngeal carcinoma progression. In this study, BORIS
expression has been analyzed at the transcriptional level by RT-PCR and protein
level by semi-quantitative immunohistochemistry in 32 laryngeal squamous cell
carcinomas and adjacent non-tumorous tissue. BORIS was detected in 44 % (14/32)
laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma samples, while it was detected only in one
normal, tumor-adjacent tissue sample. Tree based survival analysis, using the
recursive partitioning algorithm mvpart, extracted the ratio of relative
abundance of BORIS transcript variants containing exon 7 (BORIS 7+) and those
lacking exon 7 (BORIS 7-) as an independent prognostic factor associated with
disease relapse during a 5-year follow-up period. Patients having BORIS 7+/BORIS 
7- ratio =1 had a higher rate of disease relapse than patients with BORIS
7+/BORIS 7- ratio <1. Hazard ratio for that group, based on Cox Proportional
Hazard Regression, was 3.53. This is the first study analyzing expression of
BORIS protein and transcript variants in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma
relative to its possible prognostic value for recurrence and overall survival.

PMID: 24563233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Apr;42(8):4906-21. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku139. Epub 2014 Feb
21.

Tissue specific CTCF occupancy and boundary function at the human growth hormone 
locus.

Tsai YC(1), Cooke NE, Liebhaber SA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Genetics and Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The robust and tissue-specific activation of the human growth hormone (hGH) gene 
cluster in the pituitary and placenta constitutes an informative model for
analysis of gene regulation. The five-gene hGH cluster is regulated by two
partially overlapping sets of DNase I hypersensitive sites (HSs) that constitute 
the pituitary (HSI, II, III and V) and placental (HSIII, IV, and V) locus control
regions (LCRs). The single placenta-specific LCR component, HSIV, is located at
-30 kb to the cluster. Here we generate a series of hGH/BAC transgenes
specifically modified to identify structural features of the hGH locus required
for its appropriate placental expression. We find that placental specificity is
dependent on the overall multigene configuration of the cluster whereas the
distance between the cluster and its LCR impacts the level of placental
expression. We further observe that a major function of the placental hGH LCR is 
to insulate the transgene locus from site-of-integration effects. This insulation
activity is linked to placenta-specific occupancy of the chromatin architectural 
protein, CTCF, at HSIV. These data reveal a remarkable combination of structural 
configurations and regulatory determinants that must work in concert to insure
robust and tightly controlled expression from a complex multigene locus.

PMCID: PMC4005687
PMID: 24561805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. FEBS Lett. 2014 May 2;588(9):1549-55. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.02.013. Epub
2014 Feb 20.

CTCF-mediated reduction of vigilin binding affects the binding of HP1a to the
satellite 2 locus.

Shen WY(1), Liu QY(1), Wei L(1), Yu XQ(1), Li R(1), Yang WL(1), Xie XY(1), Liu
WQ(1), Huang Y(1), Qin Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, West China School of
Preclinical and Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, West China School of
Preclinical and Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China;
Sichuan University "985 project - Science and technology innovation platform for 
novel drug development", Chengdu 610041, China. Electronic address:
qin_1@sina.com.

CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) has been implicated in numerous aspects of chromosome
biology, and vigilin, a multi-KH-domain protein, participates in heterochromatin 
formation and chromosome segregation. We previously showed that CTCF interacts
with vigilin. Here, we show that human vigilin, but not CTCF, colocalizes with
HP1a on heterochromatic satellite 2 and ß-satellite repeats. CTCF up-regulates
the transcription of satellite 2, while vigilin down-regulates it. Vigilin
depletion or CTCF overexpression reduces the binding of HP1a on the satellite 2
locus. Furthermore, overexpression of CTCF resists the loading of vigilin onto
the satellite 2 locus. Thus CTCF may regulate vigilin behavior and thus
indirectly influence the binding of HP1a to the satellite 2 locus.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24561205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 18;9(2):e88052. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088052. eCollection
2014.

A novel pathway links oxidative stress to loss of insulin growth factor-2 (IGF2) 
imprinting through NF-<U+03BA>B activation.

Yang B(1), Wagner J(1), Damaschke N(1), Yao T(1), Wuerzberger-Davis SM(2), Lee
MH(2), Svaren J(3), Miyamoto S(4), Jarrard DF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public
Health, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America. (2)Department of Oncology, 
McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
Wisconsin, United States of America. (3)Comparative Biosciences, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America. (4)Department of
Oncology, McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America ; University of Wisconsin Carbone
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(5)Department of Urology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public
Health, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America ; University of Wisconsin
Carbone Comprehensive Cancer Center, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America
; Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
Wisconsin, United States of America.

Genomic imprinting is the allele-specific expression of a gene based on parental 
origin. Loss of imprinting(LOI) of Insulin-like Growth Factor 2 (IGF2) during
aging is important in tumorigenesis, yet the regulatory mechanisms driving this
event are largely unknown. In this study oxidative stress, measured by increased 
NF-<U+03BA>B activity, induces LOI in both cancerous and noncancerous human prostate
cells. Decreased expression of the enhancer-blocking element CCCTC-binding
factor(CTCF) results in reduced binding of CTCF to the H19-ICR (imprint control
region), a major factor in the allelic silencing of IGF2. This ICR then develops 
increased DNA methylation. Assays identify a recruitment of the canonical pathway
proteins NF-<U+03BA>B p65 and p50 to the CTCF promoter associated with the co-repressor 
HDAC1 explaining gene repression. An I<U+03BA>Ba super-repressor blocks oxidative
stress-induced activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and IGF2 imprinting is maintained. In vivo
experiments using I<U+03BA>Ba mutant mice with continuous NF-<U+03BA>B activation demonstrate
increased IGF2 LOI further confirming a central role for canonical NF-<U+03BA>B
signaling. We conclude CTCF plays a central role in mediating the effects of
NF-<U+03BA>B activation that result in altered imprinting both in vitro and in vivo.
This novel finding connects inflammation found in aging prostate tissues with the
altered epigenetic landscape.

PMCID: PMC3928145
PMID: 24558376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 18;9(2):e81186. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081186. eCollection
2014.

Genome-wide binding patterns of thyroid hormone receptor beta.

Ayers S(1), Switnicki MP(1), Angajala A(1), Lammel J(2), Arumanayagam AS(1), Webb
P(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Genomic Medicine Program, Houston, 
Texas, United States of America. (2)The Methodist Hospital Research Institute,
Genomic Medicine Program, Houston, Texas, United States of America ; Tecnologico 
de Monterrey School of Medicine, Monterrey, NL, Mexico.

Thyroid hormone (TH) receptors (TRs) play central roles in metabolism and are
major targets for pharmaceutical intervention. Presently, however, there is
limited information about genome wide localizations of TR binding sites. Thus,
complexities of TR genomic distribution and links between TRß binding events and 
gene regulation are not fully appreciated. Here, we employ a BioChIP approach to 
capture TR genome-wide binding events in a liver cell line (HepG2). Like other
NRs, TRß appears widely distributed throughout the genome. Nevertheless, there is
striking enrichment of TRß binding sites immediately 5' and 3' of transcribed
genes and TRß can be detected near 50% of T3 induced genes. In contrast, no
significant enrichment of TRß is seen at negatively regulated genes or genes that
respond to unliganded TRs in this system. Canonical TRE half-sites are present in
more than 90% of TRß peaks and classical TREs are also greatly enriched, but
individual TRE organization appears highly variable with diverse half-site
orientation and spacing. There is also significant enrichment of binding sites
for TR associated transcription factors, including AP-1 and CTCF, near TR peaks. 
We conclude that T3-dependent gene induction commonly involves proximal TRß
binding events but that far-distant binding events are needed for T3 induction of
some genes and that distinct, indirect, mechanisms are often at play in negative 
regulation and unliganded TR actions. Better understanding of genomic context of 
TR binding sites will help us determine why TR regulates genes in different ways 
and determine possibilities for selective modulation of TR action.

PMCID: PMC3928038
PMID: 24558356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Neurosci. 2014 Feb 19;34(8):2860-70. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3769-13.2014.

Dual effect of CTCF loss on neuroprogenitor differentiation and survival.

Watson LA(1), Wang X, Elbert A, Kernohan KD, Galjart N, Bérubé NG.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Paediatrics and Biochemistry, The University of Western Ontario
and Children's Health Research Institute, London, Ontario N6C 2V5, Canada and
Medical Genetics Centre Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus
University, 3000 CA, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

An increasing number of proteins involved in genome organization have been
implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders, highlighting the importance of
chromatin architecture in the developing CNS. The CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is 
a zinc finger DNA binding protein involved in higher-order chromatin
organization, and mutations in the human CTCF gene cause an intellectual
disability syndrome associated with microcephaly. However, information on CTCF
function in vivo in the developing brain is lacking. To address this gap, we
conditionally inactivated the Ctcf gene at early stages of mouse brain
development. Cre-mediated Ctcf deletion in the telencephalon and anterior retina 
at embryonic day 8.5 triggered upregulation of the p53 effector PUMA (p53
upregulated modulator of apoptosis), resulting in massive apoptosis and profound 
ablation of telencephalic structures. Inactivation of Ctcf several days later at 
E11 also resulted in PUMA upregulation and increased apoptotic cell death, and
the Ctcf-null forebrain was hypocellular and disorganized at birth. Although
deletion of both Ctcf and Puma in the embryonic brain efficiently rescued
Ctcf-null progenitor cell apoptosis, it failed to improve neonatal
hypocellularity due to decreased proliferative capacity of rescued apical and
outer radial glia progenitor cells. This was exacerbated by an independent effect
of CTCF loss that resulted in depletion of the progenitor pool due to premature
neurogenesis earlier in development. Our findings demonstrate that CTCF
activities are required for two distinct events in early cortex formation: first,
to correctly regulate the balance between neuroprogenitor cell proliferation and 
differentiation, and second, for the survival of neuroprogenitor cells, providing
new clues regarding the contributions of CTCF in microcephaly/intellectual
disability syndrome pathologies.

PMID: 24553927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Oncol Rep. 2014 Apr;31(4):1871-6. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3019. Epub 2014 Feb 11.

Frequent hypermethylation of a CTCF binding site influences Wilms tumor 1
expression in Wilms tumors.

Zitzmann F(1), Mayr D(2), Berger M(1), Stehr M(1), von Schweinitz D(1), Kappler
R(1), Hubertus J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Research Laboratories, Ludwig-Maximilians
University of Munich, D-80337 Munich, Germany. (2)Institute of Pathology,
Ludwig-Maximilians University of Munich, D-80337 Munich, Germany.

The Wilms tumor 1 (WT1) gene plays an essential role in early development and
differentiation of the urinary tract, particularly the kidneys. Aberrant
transcriptional activity of WT1 is a key finding in the genesis of Wilms tumors
(WTs). However, the mechanisms responsible for this alteration remain poorly
understood. In the present study, we examined the methylation pattern of a
putative CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) binding site downstream of the WT1 gene as a
potential cause of WT1 misregulation in 44 native WT specimens. We found that 16 
WT cases exhibited a much higher WT1 expression compared to normal kidney tissue,
and that the high mRNA expression of WT1 is strongly correlated with a high
degree of DNA methylation of the CTCF binding site near the WT1 promoter.
However, there was no correlation between the KTS+/KTS- splicing variants of WT1 
and the methylation status of the CpGs of the CTCF binding site. Our results
demonstrated an aberrant methylation pattern at a CTCF binding site downstream
the WT1 gene, which is associated with an elevated WT1 transcriptional activity. 
Thus, methylation of the CTCF binding site may be partially responsible for the
transcriptional activation of the WT1 locus and hypermethylation of this site may
be an important oncogenic mechanism in the genesis of WT.

PMID: 24534946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Mol Cell. 2014 Feb 20;53(4):631-44. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.01.018. Epub 2014 
Feb 13.

Mislocalization of the centromeric histone variant CenH3/CENP-A in human cells
depends on the chaperone DAXX.

Lacoste N(1), Woolfe A(1), Tachiwana H(1), Garea AV(2), Barth T(2), Cantaloube
S(1), Kurumizaka H(3), Imhof A(2), Almouzni G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Centre de Recherche, Paris75248, France; CNRS, UMR3664,
Paris75248, France; Equipe Labellisée Ligue Contre le Cancer, UMR3664, Paris
75248, France; UPMC, UMR3664, Paris 75248, France. (2)Histone Modifications
Group, Scientific Coordinator ZfP (Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik), Adolf
Butenandt Institut, University of Munich, Schillerstraße 44, 80336 Munich,
Germany. (3)Laboratory of Structural Biology, Graduate School of Advanced Science
and Engineering, Waseda University, 2-2 Wakamatsu-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo
162-8480, Japan. (4)Institut Curie, Centre de Recherche, Paris75248, France;
CNRS, UMR3664, Paris75248, France; Equipe Labellisée Ligue Contre le Cancer,
UMR3664, Paris 75248, France; UPMC, UMR3664, Paris 75248, France. Electronic
address: genevieve.almouzni@curie.fr.

Centromeres are essential for ensuring proper chromosome segregation in
eukaryotes. Their definition relies on the presence of a centromere-specific H3
histone variant CenH3, known as CENP-A in mammals. Its overexpression in
aggressive cancers raises questions concerning its effect on chromatin dynamics
and contribution to tumorigenesis. We find that CenH3 overexpression in human
cells leads to ectopic enrichment at sites of active histone turnover involving a
heterotypic tetramer containing CenH3-H4 with H3.3-H4. Ectopic localization of
this particle depends on the H3.3 chaperone DAXX rather than the dedicated CenH3 
chaperone HJURP. This aberrant nucleosome occludes CTCF binding and has a minor
effect on gene expression. Cells overexpressing CenH3 are more tolerant of DNA
damage. Both the survival advantage and CTCF occlusion in these cells are
dependent on DAXX. Our findings illustrate how changes in histone variant levels 
can disrupt chromatin dynamics and suggests a possible mechanism for cell
resistance to anticancer treatments.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24530302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 3;9(2):e87448. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087448. eCollection 
2014.

Epigenetic control of SPI1 gene by CTCF and ISWI ATPase SMARCA5.

Dluhosova M(1), Curik N(1), Vargova J(1), Jonasova A(2), Zikmund T(1), Stopka
T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University
in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. (2)Department of Pathophysiology, First
Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic ;
Department of Medicine - Hematology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(3):e92635.

CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) can both activate as well as inhibit transcription by
forming chromatin loops between regulatory regions and promoters. In this regard,
Ctcf binding on non-methylated DNA and its interaction with the Cohesin complex
results in differential regulation of the H19/Igf2 locus. Similarly, a role for
CTCF has been established in normal hematopoietic development; however its
involvement in leukemia remains elusive. Here, we show that Ctcf binds to the
imprinting control region of H19/Igf2 in AML blasts. We also demonstrate that
Smarca5, which also associates with the Cohesin complex, facilitates Ctcf binding
to its target sites on DNA. Furthermore, Smarca5 supports Ctcf functionally and
is needed for enhancer-blocking effect at ICR. We next asked whether CTCF and
SMARCA5 control the expression of key hematopoiesis regulators. In normally
differentiating myeloid cells both CTCF and SMARCA5 together with members of the 
Cohesin complex are recruited to the SPI1 gene, a key hematopoiesis regulator and
leukemia suppressor. Due to DNA methylation, CTCF binding to the SPI1 gene is
blocked in AML blasts. Upon AZA-mediated DNA demethylation of human AML blasts,
CTCF and SMARCA5 are recruited to the -14.4 Enhancer of SPI1 gene and block its
expression. Our data provide new insight into complex SPI1 gene regulation now
involving additional key epigenetic factors, CTCF and SMARCA5 that control PU.1
expression at the -14.4 Enhancer.

PMCID: PMC3911986
PMID: 24498324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Blood. 2014 Mar 27;123(13):2066-74. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-12-469833. Epub 2014 
Feb 3.

Loss of imprinting at the 14q32 domain is associated with microRNA overexpression
in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Manodoro F(1), Marzec J, Chaplin T, Miraki-Moud F, Moravcsik E, Jovanovic JV,
Wang J, Iqbal S, Taussig D, Grimwade D, Gribben JG, Young BD, Debernardi S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Haemato-Oncology and.

Distinct patterns of DNA methylation characterize the epigenetic landscape of
promyelocytic leukemia/retinoic acid receptor-a (PML-RARa)-associated acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL). We previously reported that the microRNAs (miRNAs) 
clustered on chromosome 14q32 are overexpressed only in APL. Here, using
high-throughput bisulfite sequencing, we identified an APL-associated
hypermethylation at the upstream differentially methylated region (DMR), which
also included the site motifs for the enhancer blocking protein CCCTC-binding
factor (CTCF). Comparing the profiles of diagnostic/remission paired patient
samples, we show that hypermethylation was acquired in APL in a monoallelic
manner. The cytosine guanine dinucleotide status of the DMR correlated with
expression of the miRNAs following a characteristic position-dependent pattern.
Moreover, a signature of hypermethylation was also detected in leukemic cells
from an established transgenic PML-RARA APL mouse model at the orthologous region
on chromosome 12, including the CTCF binding site located upstream from the mouse
miRNA cluster. These results, together with the demonstration that the region
does not show DNA methylation changes during myeloid differentiation, provide
evidence that 14q32 hypermethylation is implicated in the pathogenesis of APL. We
propose a model in which loss of imprinting at the 14q32 domain leads to
overexpression of the miRNAs in APL.

PMID: 24493669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Mol Cell. 2014 Feb 20;53(4):672-81. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.12.029. Epub 2014 
Jan 30.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation indirect peaks highlight long-range interactions of
insulator proteins and Pol II pausing.

Liang J(1), Lacroix L(1), Gamot A(1), Cuddapah S(2), Queille S(1), Lhoumaud P(1),
Lepetit P(1), Martin PG(3), Vogelmann J(4), Court F(1), Hennion M(1), Micas G(1),
Urbach S(5), Bouchez O(6), Nöllmann M(4), Zhao K(2), Emberly E(7), Cuvier O(8).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire Eucaryote (LBME), CNRS, Université de
Toulouse (UPS), 31000 Toulouse, France. (2)Systems Biology Center, National
Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda,
MD 20824, USA. (3)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire Eucaryote (LBME), CNRS,
Université de Toulouse (UPS), 31000 Toulouse, France; INRA, UMR444- GeT-PlaGe,
Genotoul, 31326 Toulouse, France. (4)Centre de Biochimie Structurale, CNRS, 34090
Montpellier, France. (5)Platform Proteomic Fonctionnelle, IGF, CNRS, 34060
Montpellier, France. (6)INRA, UMR444- GeT-PlaGe, Genotoul, 31326 Toulouse,
France. (7)Physics Department, Simon Fraser University (SFU), Burnaby, BC V5A
1S6, Canada. (8)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire Eucaryote (LBME), CNRS,
Université de Toulouse (UPS), 31000 Toulouse, France. Electronic address:
cuvier@ibcg.biotoul.fr.

Eukaryotic chromosomes are partitioned into topologically associating domains
(TADs) that are demarcated by distinct insulator-binding proteins (IBPs) in
Drosophila. Whether IBPs regulate specific long-range contacts and how this may
impact gene expression remains unclear. Here we identify "indirect peaks" of
multiple IBPs that represent their distant sites of interactions through
long-range contacts. Indirect peaks depend on protein-protein interactions among 
multiple IBPs and their common cofactors, including CP190, as confirmed by
high-resolution analyses of long-range contacts. Mutant IBPs unable to interact
with CP190 impair long-range contacts as well as the expression of hundreds of
distant genes that are specifically flanked by indirect peaks. Regulation of
distant genes strongly correlates with RNAPII pausing, highlighting how this key 
transcriptional stage may trap insulator-based long-range interactions. Our data 
illustrate how indirect peaks may decipher gene regulatory networks through
specific long-range interactions.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4198380
PMID: 24486021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Semin Cancer Biol. 2014 Jun;26:22-9. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2014.01.003. Epub
2014 Jan 24.

Epigenetic regulation of EBV persistence and oncogenesis.

Tempera I(1), Lieberman PM(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Fels Institute, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Temple School
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, United States. Electronic address:
Tempera@temple.edu. (2)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19140, United
States. Electronic address: Lieberman@wistar.org.

Epigenetic mechanisms play a fundamental role in generating diverse and heritable
patterns of viral and cellular gene expression. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) can
adopt a variety of gene expression programs that are necessary for long-term
viral persistence and latency in multiple host-cell types and conditions. The
latent viral genomes assemble into chromatin structures with different histone
and DNA modifications patterns that control viral gene expression. Variations in 
nucleosome organization and chromatin conformations can also influence gene
expression by coordinating physical interactions between different regulatory
elements. The viral-encoded and host-cell factors that control these epigenetic
features are beginning to be understood at the genome-wide level. These
epigenetic regulators can also influence viral pathogenesis by expanding tissue
tropism, evading immune detection, and driving host-cell carcinogenesis. Here, we
review some of the recent findings and perspectives on how the EBV epigenome
plays a central role in viral latency and viral-associated carcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4048758
PMID: 24468737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 22;9(1):e85629. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085629. eCollection
2014.

On the value of intra-motif dependencies of human insulator protein CTCF.

Eggeling R(1), Gohr A(1), Keilwagen J(2), Mohr M(3), Posch S(1), Smith AD(4),
Grosse I(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Computer Science, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg,
Halle/Saale, Germany. (2)Institute for Biosafety in Plant Biotechnology, Julius
Kühn-Institut (JKI) - Federal Research Centre for Cultivated Plants, Quedlinburg,
Germany ; Department of Genebank, Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop
Plant Research (IPK), Seeland OT Gatersleben, Germany. (3)Department of Genebank,
Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research (IPK), Seeland OT
Gatersleben, Germany. (4)Molecular and Computational Biology, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, United States of America. (5)Institute of
Computer Science, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle/Saale, Germany
; Department of Genebank, Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant
Research (IPK), Seeland OT Gatersleben, Germany ; German Center of Integrative
Biodiversity Research (iDiv) Halle-Jena-Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.

The binding affinity of DNA-binding proteins such as transcription factors is
mainly determined by the base composition of the corresponding binding site on
the DNA strand. Most proteins do not bind only a single sequence, but rather a
set of sequences, which may be modeled by a sequence motif. Algorithms for de
novo motif discovery differ in their promoter models, learning approaches, and
other aspects, but typically use the statistically simple position weight matrix 
model for the motif, which assumes statistical independence among all
nucleotides. However, there is no clear justification for that assumption,
leading to an ongoing debate about the importance of modeling dependencies
between nucleotides within binding sites. In the past, modeling statistical
dependencies within binding sites has been hampered by the problem of limited
data. With the rise of high-throughput technologies such as ChIP-seq, this
situation has now changed, making it possible to make use of statistical
dependencies effectively. In this work, we investigate the presence of
statistical dependencies in binding sites of the human enhancer-blocking
insulator protein CTCF by using the recently developed model class of
inhomogeneous parsimonious Markov models, which is capable of modeling complex
dependencies while avoiding overfitting. These findings lead to a more detailed
characterization of the CTCF binding motif, which is only poorly represented by
independent nucleotide frequencies at several positions, predominantly at the 3' 
end.

PMCID: PMC3899044
PMID: 24465627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Nucleic Acids. 2013;2013:567435. doi: 10.1155/2013/567435. Epub 2013 Dec 23.

Transcriptionally Repressive Chromatin Remodelling and CpG Methylation in the
Presence of Expanded CTG-Repeats at the DM1 Locus.

Brouwer JR(1), Huguet A(1), Nicole A(1), Munnich A(1), Gourdon G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U781, Hôpital Broussais, Batiment Leriche, porte 9, 96 rue Didot, 75014
Paris, France ; Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine,
156 rue de Vaugirard, 75015 Paris, France.

An expanded CTG-repeat in the 3' UTR of the DMPK gene is responsible for myotonic
dystrophy type I (DM1). Somatic and intergenerational instability cause the
disease to become more severe during life and in subsequent generations. Evidence
is accumulating that trinucleotide repeat instability and disease progression
involve aberrant chromatin dynamics. We explored the chromatin environment in
relation to expanded CTG-repeat tracts in hearts from transgenic mice carrying
the DM1 locus with different repeat lengths. Using bisulfite sequencing we
detected abundant CpG methylation in the regions flanking the expanded
CTG-repeat. CpG methylation was postulated to affect CTCF binding but we found
that CTCF binding is not affected by CTG-repeat length in our transgenic mice. We
detected significantly decreased DMPK sense and SIX5 transcript expression levels
in mice with expanded CTG-repeats. Expression of the DM1 antisense transcript was
barely affected by CTG-repeat expansion. In line with altered gene expression,
ChIP studies revealed a locally less active chromatin conformation around the
expanded CTG-repeat, namely, decreased enrichment of active histone mark
H3K9/14Ac and increased H3K9Me3 enrichment (repressive chromatin mark). We also
observed binding of PCNA around the repeats, a candidate that could launch
chromatin remodelling cascades at expanded repeats, ultimately affecting gene
transcription and repeat instability.

PMCID: PMC3884603
PMID: 24455202  [PubMed]


299. Mol Reprod Dev. 2014 Apr;81(4):350-62. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22303. Epub 2014 Feb 18.

Differential methylation status of IGF2-H19 locus does not affect the fertility
of crossbred bulls but some of the CTCF binding sites could be potentially
important.

Jena SC(1), Kumar S, Rajput S, Roy B, Verma A, Kumaresan A, Mohanty TK, De S,
Kumar R, Datta TK.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal,
Haryana, India.

Associations between abnormal methylation of spermatozoan DNA with male
infertility have been sought in recent years to identify a molecular explanation 
of differential spermatozoan function. The present work was undertaken to
investigate the methylation profile of differentially methylated regions (DMRs)
in the IGF2-H19 locus of Bos taurus X Bos indicus crossbred bull spermatozoa.
Bulls having more than at least 100 insemination records over a period of 12
years were classified into two groups of five bulls each belonging to low- and
high-fertility groups. The IGF2 and H19 DMR sequences in B. indicus cattle were
observed to be in absolute homology with B. taurus cattle. The DNA of crossbred
bull spermatozoa was isolated, bisulfite treated, and amplified for specific DMR 
regions using methylation-change-specific primers. The overall degree of
methylation at IGF2-H19 DMRs was not found to be significantly different among
two groups of bulls. The sixth CTCF binding site (CCCTC) identified in H19 DMR,
however, had a significant methylation difference between the high- and
low-fertility bulls. It was concluded that alteration of the methylation levels
at IGF2-H19 DMRs might not be responsible for the fertility difference of
crossbred bulls, although the role played by the specific CTCF binding sites at
this locus, which could influence IGF2 expression during spermatogenesis and
early embryonic development, deserves further attention.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24436206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jan 15;15:27. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-27.

T-KDE: a method for genome-wide identification of constitutive protein binding
sites from multiple ChIP-seq data sets.

Li Y, Umbach DM, Li L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biostatistics Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences,
Research Triangle Park, Morrisville, NC 27709, USA. li3@niehs.nih.gov.

BACKGROUND: A protein may bind to its target DNA sites constitutively, i.e.,
regardless of cell type. Intuitively, constitutive binding sites should be
biologically functional. A prerequisite for understanding their functional
relevance is knowing all their locations for a protein of interest. Genome-wide
discovery of constitutive binding sites requires robust and efficient
computational methods to integrate results from numerous binding experiments.
Such methods are lacking, however.
RESULTS: To locate constitutive binding sites for a protein using ChIP-seq data
for that protein from multiple cell lines, we developed a method, T-KDE, which
combines a binary range tree with a kernel density estimator. Using 132 CTCF
(CCCTC-binding factor) ChIP-seq datasets, we showed that the number of
constitutive sites identified by T-KDE is robust to the choice of tuning
parameter and that T-KDE identifies binding site locations more accurately than a
binning approach. Furthermore, T-KDE can identify constitutive sites that are
missed by a motif-based approach either because a bound site failed to reach the 
motif significance cutoff or because the peak sequence scanned was too short. By 
studying sites declared constitutive by T-KDE but not by the motif-based
approach, we discovered two new CTCF motif variants. Using ENCODE data on 22
transcription factors (TF) in 132 cell lines, we identified constitutive binding 
sites for each TF and provide evidence that, for some TFs, they may be
biologically meaningful.
CONCLUSIONS: T-KDE is an efficient and effective method to predict constitutive
protein binding sites using ChIP-seq peaks from multiple cell lines. Besides
constitutive binding sites for a given protein, T-KDE can identify genomic "hot
spots" where several different proteins bind and, conversely, cell-type-specific 
sites bound by a given protein.

PMCID: PMC3903014
PMID: 24428924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Jan;10(1):e1003880. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003880. Epub
2014 Jan 9.

CTCF and Rad21 act as host cell restriction factors for Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) lytic replication by modulating viral gene 
transcription.

Li DJ(1), Verma D(1), Mosbruger T(2), Swaminathan S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.
(2)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, Utah, United States of America. (3)Division of Infectious Diseases,
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, Utah, United States of America ; George E. Wahlen Department of Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is a human herpesvirus that causes
Kaposi's sarcoma and is associated with the development of lymphoproliferative
diseases. KSHV reactivation from latency and virion production is dependent on
efficient transcription of over eighty lytic cycle genes and viral DNA
replication. CTCF and cohesin, cellular proteins that cooperatively regulate gene
expression and mediate long-range DNA interactions, have been shown to bind at
specific sites in herpesvirus genomes. CTCF and cohesin regulate KSHV gene
expression during latency and may also control lytic reactivation, although their
role in lytic gene expression remains incompletely characterized. Here, we
analyze the dynamic changes in CTCF and cohesin binding that occur during the
process of KSHV viral reactivation and virion production by high resolution
chromatin immunoprecipitation and deep sequencing (ChIP-Seq) and show that both
proteins dissociate from viral genomes in kinetically and spatially distinct
patterns. By utilizing siRNAs to specifically deplete CTCF and Rad21, a cohesin
component, we demonstrate that both proteins are potent restriction factors for
KSHV replication, with cohesin knockdown leading to hundred-fold increases in
viral yield. High-throughput RNA sequencing was used to characterize the
transcriptional effects of CTCF and cohesin depletion, and demonstrated that both
proteins have complex and global effects on KSHV lytic transcription.
Specifically, both proteins act as positive factors for viral transcription
initially but subsequently inhibit KSHV lytic transcription, such that their net 
effect is to limit KSHV RNA accumulation. Cohesin is a more potent inhibitor of
KSHV transcription than CTCF but both proteins are also required for efficient
transcription of a subset of KSHV genes. These data reveal novel effects of CTCF 
and cohesin on transcription from a relatively small genome that resemble their
effects on the cellular genome by acting as gene-specific activators of some
promoters, but differ in acting as global negative regulators of transcription.

PMCID: PMC3887114
PMID: 24415941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 21;111(3):889-90. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1321957111. Epub 2014 Jan 7.

CTCF and cohesin cooperate to organize the 3D structure of the mammalian genome.

Baranello L(1), Kouzine F, Levens D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 21;111(3):996-1001.

PMCID: PMC3903212
PMID: 24398527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Genome Res. 2014 Mar;24(3):390-400. doi: 10.1101/gr.163519.113. Epub 2014 Jan 7.

Functional and topological characteristics of mammalian regulatory domains.

Symmons O(1), Uslu VV, Tsujimura T, Ruf S, Nassari S, Schwarzer W, Ettwiller L,
Spitz F.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117
Heidelberg, Germany;

Long-range regulatory interactions play an important role in shaping
gene-expression programs. However, the genomic features that organize these
activities are still poorly characterized. We conducted a large operational
analysis to chart the distribution of gene regulatory activities along the mouse 
genome, using hundreds of insertions of a regulatory sensor. We found that
enhancers distribute their activities along broad regions and not in a
gene-centric manner, defining large regulatory domains. Remarkably, these domains
correlate strongly with the recently described TADs, which partition the genome
into distinct self-interacting blocks. Different features, including specific
repeats and CTCF-binding sites, correlate with the transition zones separating
regulatory domains, and may help to further organize promiscuously distributed
regulatory influences within large domains. These findings support a model of
genomic organization where TADs confine regulatory activities to specific but
large regulatory domains, contributing to the establishment of specific gene
expression profiles.

PMCID: PMC3941104
PMID: 24398455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Mol Cancer. 2014 Jan 7;13:5. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-5.

NF-kappa B mediated up-regulation of CCCTC-binding factor in pediatric acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Zhang H, Zhu L, He H, Zhu S, Zhang W, Liu X, Zhao X, Gao C, Mei M, Bao S(1),
Zheng H.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of Pediatric Hematology Oncology; National Key
Discipline of Pediatrics, Ministry of Education; Key Laboratory of Major Diseases
in Children, Ministry of Education; Hematology Oncology Center, Beijing
Children's Hospital, Capital Medical University, 56 Nanlishi Road, Beijing,
100045, China. slbao@genetics.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most frequently occurring
malignant neoplasm in children. Despite advances in treatment and outcomes for
ALL patients, the pathogenesis of the disease remains unclear. Microarray
analysis of samples from 100 Chinese children with ALL revealed the up-regulation
of CTCF (CCCTC binding factor). CTCF is a highly conserved 11-zinc finger protein
that is involved in many human cancers; however, the biological function of CTCF 
in pediatric ALL is unknown.
METHODS: The expression patterns of CTCF were evaluated in matched newly
diagnosed (ND), complete remission (CR), and relapsed (RE) bone marrow samples
from 28 patients. The potential oncogenic mechanism of CTCF and related pathways 
in leukemogenesis were investigated in leukemia cell lines.
RESULTS: We identified significant up-regulation of CTCF in the ND samples.
Importantly, the expression of CTCF returned to normal levels after CR but
rebounded in the RE samples. In the pre-B ALL cell line Nalm-6, siRNA-mediated
silencing of CTCF expression promoted cell apoptosis and reduced cell
proliferation; accordingly, over-expression of a cDNA encoding full-length CTCF
protected cells from apoptosis and enhanced cell proliferation. Furthermore,
inhibition or activation of the nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) pathway resulted
in marked variations in the levels of CTCF mRNA and protein in leukemic cells,
indicating that CTCF may be involved downstream of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway. Moreover,
inhibition of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway increased cell apoptosis, which was partially
rescued by ectopic over-expression of CTCF, suggesting that CTCF may play a
significant role in the anti-apoptotic pathway mediated by NF-<U+03BA>B.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that CTCF serves as both an anti-apoptotic
factor and a proliferative factor in leukemic cells. It potentially contributes
to leukemogenesis through the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway in pediatric ALL patients.

PMCID: PMC3928924
PMID: 24393203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Genome Biol. 2013 Dec 31;14(12):R148. doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-12-r148.

Co-binding by YY1 identifies the transcriptionally active, highly conserved set
of CTCF-bound regions in primate genomes.

Schwalie PC, Ward MC, Cain CE, Faure AJ, Gilad Y, Odom DT, Flicek P.

BACKGROUND: The genomic binding of CTCF is highly conserved across mammals, but
the mechanisms that underlie its stability are poorly understood. One
transcription factor known to functionally interact with CTCF in the context of
X-chromosome inactivation is the ubiquitously expressed YY1. Because
combinatorial transcription factor binding can contribute to the evolutionary
stabilization of regulatory regions, we tested whether YY1 and CTCF co-binding
could in part account for conservation of CTCF binding.
RESULTS: Combined analysis of CTCF and YY1 binding in lymphoblastoid cell lines
from seven primates, as well as in mouse and human livers, reveals extensive
genome-wide co-localization specifically at evolutionarily stable CTCF-bound
regions. CTCF-YY1 co-bound regions resemble regions bound by YY1 alone, as they
enrich for active histone marks, RNA polymerase II and transcription factor
binding. Although these highly conserved, transcriptionally active CTCF-YY1
co-bound regions are often promoter-proximal, gene-distal regions show similar
molecular features.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results reveal that these two ubiquitously expressed,
multi-functional zinc-finger proteins collaborate in functionally active regions 
to stabilize one another's genome-wide binding across primate evolution.

PMCID: PMC4056453
PMID: 24380390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(12):e1003994. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003994. Epub 2013 Dec
19.

Transcription factor occupancy can mediate active turnover of DNA methylation at 
regulatory regions.

Feldmann A(1), Ivanek R(2), Murr R(1), Gaidatzis D(2), Burger L(2), Schübeler
D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland ;
Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Basel, Switzerland. (3)Friedrich Miescher
Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland ; Faculty of Science,
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Distal regulatory elements, including enhancers, play a critical role in
regulating gene activity. Transcription factor binding to these elements
correlates with Low Methylated Regions (LMRs) in a process that is poorly
understood. Here we ask whether and how actual occupancy of DNA-binding factors
is linked to DNA methylation at the level of individual molecules. Using CTCF as 
an example, we observe that frequency of binding correlates with the likelihood
of a demethylated state and sites of low occupancy display heterogeneous DNA
methylation within the CTCF motif. In line with a dynamic model of binding and
DNA methylation turnover, we find that 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC), formed as 
an intermediate state of active demethylation, is enriched at LMRs in stem and
somatic cells. Moreover, a significant fraction of changes in 5hmC during
differentiation occurs at these regions, suggesting that transcription factor
activity could be a key driver for active demethylation. Since deletion of CTCF
is lethal for embryonic stem cells, we used genetic deletion of REST as another
DNA-binding factor implicated in LMR formation to test this hypothesis. The
absence of REST leads to a decrease of hydroxymethylation and a concomitant
increase of DNA methylation at its binding sites. These data support a model
where DNA-binding factors can mediate turnover of DNA methylation as an integral 
part of maintenance and reprogramming of regulatory regions.

PMCID: PMC3868540
PMID: 24367273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Oncogene. 2015 Jan 8;34(2):246-56. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.535. Epub 2013 Dec 23.

Novel CTCF binding at a site in exon1A of BCL6 is associated with active histone 
marks and a transcriptionally active locus.

Batlle-López A(1), Cortiguera MG(1), Rosa-Garrido M(2), Blanco R(2), del Cerro
E(3), Torrano V(2), Wagner SD(4), Delgado MD(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Instituto de Biomedicina y Biotecnología de Cantabria (IBBTEC) and
Departamento de Biología Molecular, Universidad de Cantabria, CSIC, SODERCAN,
Santander, Spain [2] Servicio de Hematología, Hospital U. Marqués de Valdecilla, 
and IFIMAV-FMV, Santander, Spain. (2)Instituto de Biomedicina y Biotecnología de 
Cantabria (IBBTEC) and Departamento de Biología Molecular, Universidad de
Cantabria, CSIC, SODERCAN, Santander, Spain. (3)Servicio de Hematología, Hospital
U. Marqués de Valdecilla, and IFIMAV-FMV, Santander, Spain. (4)Department of
Cancer Studies and Molecular Medicine and MRC Toxicology Unit, University of
Leicester, Leicester, UK.

BCL6 is a zinc-finger transcriptional repressor, which is highly expressed in
germinal centre B-cells and is essential for germinal centre formation and
T-dependent antibody responses. Constitutive BCL6 expression is sufficient to
produce lymphomas in mice. Deregulated expression of BCL6 due to chromosomal
rearrangements, mutations of a negative autoregulatory site in the BCL6 promoter 
region and aberrant post-translational modifications have been detected in a
number of human lymphomas. Tight lineage and temporal regulation of BCL6 is,
therefore, required for normal immunity, and abnormal regulation occurs in
lymphomas. CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a multi-functional chromatin regulator,
which has recently been shown to bind in a methylation-sensitive manner to sites 
within the BCL6 first intron. We demonstrate a novel CTCF-binding site in BCL6
exon1A within a potential CpG island, which is unmethylated both in cell lines
and in primary lymphoma samples. CTCF binding, which was found in BCL6-expressing
cell lines, correlated with the presence of histone variant H2A.Z and active
histone marks, suggesting that CTCF induces chromatin modification at a
transcriptionally active BCL6 locus. CTCF binding to exon1A was required to
maintain BCL6 expression in germinal centre cells by avoiding BCL6-negative
autoregulation. Silencing of CTCF in BCL6-expressing cells reduced BCL6 mRNA and 
protein expression, which is sufficient to induce B-cell terminal differentiation
toward plasma cells. Moreover, lack of CTCF binding to exon1A shifts the BCL6
local chromatin from an active to a repressive state. This work demonstrates
that, in contexts in which BCL6 is expressed, CTCF binding to BCL6 exon1A
associates with epigenetic modifications indicative of transcriptionally open
chromatin.

PMID: 24362533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Cell Prolif. 2014 Feb;47(1):28-37. doi: 10.1111/cpr.12085. Epub 2013 Dec 20.

CCCTC-binding factor mediates effects of glucose on beta cell survival.

Tsui S(1), Dai W, Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine University of
California Los Angeles, Torrance, CA, 90502, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Pancreatic islet ß-cell survival is paramount for regulation of
insulin activity and for maintaining glucose homeostasis. Recently, Pax6 has been
shown to be essential for many vital functions in ß-cells, although many
molecular mechanisms of its homeostasis in ß-cells remain unclear. The present
study investigates novel effects of glucose- and insulin-induced CCCTC-binding
factor (CTCF) activity on Pax6 gene expression as well as for subsequent effects 
of insulin-activated signalling pathways, on ß-cell proliferation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Pancreatic ß-TC-1-6 cells were cultured in DMEM and
stimulated with high concentrations of glucose (5-125 mm); cell viability was
assessed by MTT assay. Effects of CTCF on Pax6 were evaluated in the high
glucose-induced environment and CTCF/Erk-suppressed cells, by promoter reporter
and western blotting analyses.
RESULTS: Increases in glucose and insulin concentrations upregulated CTCF and
consequently downregulated Pax6 in ß-cell survival and proliferation.
Knocking-down CTCF directly affected Pax6 transcription through CTCF binding and 
blocked the response to glucose. Altered Erk activity mediated effects of CTCF on
controlling Pax6 expression, which partially regulated ß-cell proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: CTCF functioned as a molecular mediator between insulin-induced
upstream Erk signalling and Pax6 expression in these pancreatic ß-cells. This
pathway may contribute to regulation of ß-cell survival and proliferation.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3946918
PMID: 24354619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Gene. 2014 Feb 25;536(2):357-61. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.11.069. Epub 2013 Dec
14.

Expression and genomic imprinting of the porcine Rasgrf1 gene.

Ding YY(1), Liu LY(2), Zhou J(3), Zhang XD(1), Huang L(1), Zhang SJ(2), Yin
ZJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Anhui Provincial Laboratory for Local Livestock and Poultry Genetic Resource
Conservation and Bio-Breeding, Department of Animal Science, College of Animal
Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei City, Anhui 230036, 
PR China. (2)Department of Veterinary, College of Animal Science and Technology, 
Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei City, Anhui 230036, PR China. (3)Department 
of Veterinary, College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural
University, Hefei City, Anhui 230036, PR China. Electronic address:
zhoujie@ahau.edu.cn. (4)Anhui Provincial Laboratory for Local Livestock and
Poultry Genetic Resource Conservation and Bio-Breeding, Department of Animal
Science, College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural University,
Hefei City, Anhui 230036, PR China. Electronic address: yinzongjun@ahau.edu.cn.

Imprinted genes play important roles in mammalian growth, development and
behavior. The Rasgrf1 (Ras protein-specific guanine nucleotide exchange factor 1)
gene has been identified as an imprinted gene in mouse and rat. In the present
study, we detected its sequence, imprinting status and expression pattern in the 
domestic pigs. A 228 bp partial sequence located in exon 14 and a 193 bp partial 
sequence located in exon 1 of the Rasgrf1 gene in domestic pigs were obtained. A 
G/A transition, was identified in Rasgrf1 exon 14, and then, the reciprocal
Berkshire × Wannan black F1 hybrid model and the RT-PCR-RFLP method were used to 
detect the imprinting status of porcine Rasgrf1 gene at the developmental stage
of 1-day-old. The expression profile results indicated that the porcine Rasgrf1
mRNA was highly expressed in brain, pituitary and pancreas, followed by kidney,
stomach, lung, testis, small intestine, ovary, spleen and liver, and at low
levels of expression in longissimus dorsi, heart, and backfat. The expression
levels of Rasgrf1 gene in brain, pituitary and pancreas tissues were
significantly different between the two reciprocal F1 hybrids. Imprinting
analysis showed that porcine Rasgrf1 gene was maternally expressed in the liver, 
small intestine, paternally expressed in the lung, but biallelically expressed in
brain, heart, spleen, kidney, stomach, pancreas, backfat, testis, ovary,
longissimus dorsi and pituitary tissues.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24342659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 21;111(3):996-1001. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1317788111. Epub 2013 Dec 13.

Cohesin and CTCF differentially affect chromatin architecture and gene expression
in human cells.

Zuin J(1), Dixon JR, van der Reijden MI, Ye Z, Kolovos P, Brouwer RW, van de
Corput MP, van de Werken HJ, Knoch TA, van IJcken WF, Grosveld FG, Ren B, Wendt
KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Biophysical Genomics, Department of Cell Biology, 
Center for Biomics, Cancer Genomics Center, Erasmus Medical Center, 3015 GE,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 21;111(3):889-90.

Recent studies of genome-wide chromatin interactions have revealed that the human
genome is partitioned into many self-associating topological domains. The
boundary sequences between domains are enriched for binding sites of CTCC-binding
factor (CTCF) and the cohesin complex, implicating these two factors in the
establishment or maintenance of topological domains. To determine the role of
cohesin and CTCF in higher-order chromatin architecture in human cells, we
depleted the cohesin complex or CTCF and examined the consequences of loss of
these factors on higher-order chromatin organization, as well as the
transcriptome. We observed a general loss of local chromatin interactions upon
disruption of cohesin, but the topological domains remain intact. However, we
found that depletion of CTCF not only reduced intradomain interactions but also
increased interdomain interactions. Furthermore, distinct groups of genes become 
misregulated upon depletion of cohesin and CTCF. Taken together, these
observations suggest that CTCF and cohesin contribute differentially to chromatin
organization and gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC3903193
PMID: 24335803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 6;8(12):e81962. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081962. eCollection
2013.

Oct4/Sox2 binding sites contribute to maintaining hypomethylation of the maternal
igf2/h19 imprinting control region.

Zimmerman DL(1), Boddy CS, Schoenherr CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, United States of America ; Biology
Department, College of the Ozarks, Point Lookout, Missouri, United States of
America.

A central question in genomic imprinting is how parental-specific DNA methylation
of imprinting control regions (ICR) is established during gametogenesis and
maintained after fertilization. At the imprinted Igf2/H19 locus, CTCF binding
maintains the unmethylated state of the maternal ICR after the blastocyst stage. 
In addition, evidence from Beckwith-Wiedemann patients and cultured mouse cells
suggests that two Sox-Oct binding motifs within the Igf2/H19 ICR also participate
in maintaining hypomethylation of the maternal allele. We found that the Sox and 
octamer elements from both Sox-Oct motifs were required to drive hypomethylation 
of integrated transgenes in mouse embryonic carcinoma cells. Oct4 and Sox2 showed
cooperative binding to the Sox-Oct motifs, and both were present at the
endogenous ICR. Using a mouse with mutations in the Oct4 binding sites, we found 
that maternally transmitted mutant ICRs acquired partial methylation in somatic
tissues, but there was little effect on imprinted expression of H19 and Igf2. A
subset of mature oocytes also showed partial methylation of the mutant ICR, which
suggested that the Sox-Oct motifs provide some protection from methylation during
oogenesis. The Sox-Oct motifs, however, were not required for erasure of paternal
methylation in primordial germ cells, which indicated that the oocyte methylation
was acquired post-natally. Maternally inherited mutant ICRs were unmethylated in 
blastocysts, which suggested that at least a portion of the methylation in
somatic tissues occurred after implantation. These findings provide evidence that
Sox-Oct motifs contribute to ICR hypomethylation in post-implantation embryos and
maturing oocytes and link imprinted DNA methylation with key stem cell/germline
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3855764
PMID: 24324735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jan;1839(1):50-61. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2013.11.007. 
Epub 2013 Dec 7.

Cohesin and CTCF differentially regulate spatiotemporal runx1 expression during
zebrafish development.

Marsman J(1), O'Neill AC(1), Kao BR(1), Rhodes JM(1), Meier M(1), Antony J(1),
Mönnich M(1), Horsfield JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dunedin School of Medicine, The University of Otago, 
P.O. Box 913, Dunedin, New Zealand. (2)Department of Pathology, Dunedin School of
Medicine, The University of Otago, P.O. Box 913, Dunedin, New Zealand. Electronic
address: julia.horsfield@otago.ac.nz.

Runx1 is a transcription factor essential for definitive hematopoiesis. In all
vertebrates, the Runx1 gene is transcribed from two promoters: a proximal
promoter (P2), and a distal promoter (P1). We previously found that runx1
expression in a specific hematopoietic cell population in zebrafish embryos
depends on cohesin. Here we show that zebrafish runx1 is directly bound by
cohesin and CCCTC binding factor (CTCF) at the P1 and P2 promoters, and within
the intron between P1 and P2. Cohesin initiates expression of runx1 in the
posterior lateral mesoderm and influences promoter use, while CTCF represses its 
expression in the newly emerging cells of the tail bud. The intronic binding
sites for cohesin and CTCF coincide with histone modifications that confer
enhancer-like properties, and two of the cohesin/CTCF sites behaved as insulators
in an in vivo assay. The identified cohesin and CTCF binding sites are likely to 
be cis-regulatory elements (CREs) for runx1 since they also recruit RNA
polymerase II (RNAPII). CTCF depletion excluded RNAPII from two intronic CREs but
not the promoters of runx1. We propose that cohesin and CTCF have distinct
functions in the regulation of runx1 during zebrafish embryogenesis, and that
these regulatory functions are likely to involve runx1 intronic CREs. Cohesin
(but not CTCF) depletion enhanced RUNX1 expression in a human leukemia cell line,
suggesting conservation of RUNX1 regulation through evolution.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24321385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Genome Res. 2014 Mar;24(3):454-66. doi: 10.1101/gr.163592.113. Epub 2013 Dec 3.

Genome-wide nucleosome map and cytosine methylation levels of an ancient human
genome.

Pedersen JS(1), Valen E, Velazquez AM, Parker BJ, Rasmussen M, Lindgreen S, Lilje
B, Tobin DJ, Kelly TK, Vang S, Andersson R, Jones PA, Hoover CA, Tikhonov A,
Prokhortchouk E, Rubin EM, Sandelin A, Gilbert MT, Krogh A, Willerslev E, Orlando
L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine (MOMA), Aarhus University Hospital, Skejby,
DK-8200 Aarhus N, Denmark;

Epigenetic information is available from contemporary organisms, but is difficult
to track back in evolutionary time. Here, we show that genome-wide epigenetic
information can be gathered directly from next-generation sequence reads of DNA
isolated from ancient remains. Using the genome sequence data generated from hair
shafts of a 4000-yr-old Paleo-Eskimo belonging to the Saqqaq culture, we generate
the first ancient nucleosome map coupled with a genome-wide survey of cytosine
methylation levels. The validity of both nucleosome map and methylation levels
were confirmed by the recovery of the expected signals at promoter regions,
exon/intron boundaries, and CTCF sites. The top-scoring nucleosome calls revealed
distinct DNA positioning biases, attesting to nucleotide-level accuracy. The
ancient methylation levels exhibited high conservation over time, clustering
closely with modern hair tissues. Using ancient methylation information, we
estimated the age at death of the Saqqaq individual and illustrate how epigenetic
information can be used to infer ancient gene expression. Similar epigenetic
signatures were found in other fossil material, such as 110,000- to
130,000-yr-old bones, supporting the contention that ancient epigenomic
information can be reconstructed from a deep past. Our findings lay the
foundation for extracting epigenomic information from ancient samples, allowing
shifts in epialleles to be tracked through evolutionary time, as well as
providing an original window into modern epigenomics.

PMCID: PMC3941110
PMID: 24299735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Clin Genet. 2014 Dec;86(6):539-44. doi: 10.1111/cge.12318. Epub 2013 Dec 4.

A novel de novo point mutation of the OCT-binding site in the IGF2/H19-imprinting
control region in a Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome patient.

Higashimoto K(1), Jozaki K, Kosho T, Matsubara K, Fuke T, Yamada D, Yatsuki H,
Maeda T, Ohtsuka Y, Nishioka K, Joh K, Koseki H, Ogata T, Soejima H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics & Epigenetics, Department of Biomolecular
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Saga University, Saga, Japan.

The IGF2/H19-imprinting control region (ICR1) functions as an insulator to
methylation-sensitive binding of CTCF protein, and regulates imprinted expression
of IGF2 and H19 in a parental origin-specific manner. ICR1 methylation defects
cause abnormal expression of imprinted genes, leading to Beckwith-Wiedemann
syndrome (BWS) or Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS). Not only ICR1 microdeletions
involving the CTCF-binding site, but also point mutations and a small deletion of
the OCT-binding site have been shown to trigger methylation defects in BWS. Here,
mutational analysis of ICR1 in 11 BWS and 12 SRS patients with ICR1 methylation
defects revealed a novel de novo point mutation of the OCT-binding site on the
maternal allele in one BWS patient. In BWS, all reported mutations and the small 
deletion of the OCT-binding site, including our case, have occurred within repeat
A2. These findings indicate that the OCT-binding site is important for
maintaining an unmethylated status of maternal ICR1 in early embryogenesis.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24299031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jan;1839(1):13-24. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2013.11.004. 
Epub 2013 Nov 28.

Regulation of the neuronal transcription factor NPAS4 by REST and microRNAs.

Bersten DC(1), Wright JA(2), McCarthy PJ(2), Whitelaw ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Biomedical Science (Biochemistry) and Australian
Research, Council Special Research Centre for the Molecular Genetics of
Development, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
Electronic address: david.bersten@adelaide.edu.au. (2)School of Molecular and
Biomedical Science (Biochemistry) and Australian Research, Council Special
Research Centre for the Molecular Genetics of Development, The University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

NPAS4 is a brain restricted, activity-induced transcription factor which
regulates the expression of inhibitory synapse genes to control homeostatic
excitatory/inhibitory balance in neurons. NPAS4 is required for normal social
interaction and contextual memory formation in mice. Protein and mRNA expression 
of NPAS4 is tightly coupled to neuronal depolarization and most prevalent in the 
cortical and hippocampal regions in the brain, however the precise mechanisms by 
which the NPAS4 gene is controlled remain unexplored. Here we show that
expression of NPAS4 mRNA is actively repressed by RE-1 silencing transcription
factor/neuron-restrictive silencer factor (REST/NRSF) in embryonic stem cells and
non-neuronal cells by binding multiple sites within the promoter and Intron I of 
NPAS4. Repression by REST also appears to correlate with the binding of the zinc 
finger DNA binding protein CTCF within Intron I of NPAS4. In addition, we show
that the 3' untranslated region (3'UTR) of NPAS4 can be targeted by two
microRNAs, miR-203 and miR-224 to further regulate its expression. miR-224 is a
midbrain/hypothalamus enriched microRNA which is expressed from an intron within 
the GABAA receptor epsilon (GABRE) gene and may further regionalize NPAS4
expression. Our results reveal REST and microRNA dependent mechanisms that
restrict NPAS4 expression to the brain.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24291638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. BMC Cell Biol. 2013 Nov 26;14:52. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-14-52.

BORIS/CTCFL is an RNA-binding protein that associates with polysomes.

Ogunkolade BW, Jones TA, Aarum J, Szary J, Owen N, Ottaviani D, Mumin MA, Patel
S, Pieri CA, Silver AR, Sheer D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Neuroscience and Trauma, Queen Mary University of London, Blizard
Institute, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, E1 2AT,
UK. d.sheer@qmul.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: BORIS (CTCFL), a paralogue of the multifunctional and ubiquitously
expressed transcription factor CTCF, is best known for its role in
transcriptional regulation. In the nucleus, BORIS is particularly enriched in the
nucleolus, a crucial compartment for ribosomal RNA and RNA metabolism. However,
little is known about cytoplasmic BORIS, which represents the major pool of BORIS
protein.
RESULTS: We show, firstly, that BORIS has a putative nuclear export signal in the
C-terminal domain. Furthermore, BORIS associates with mRNA in both neural stem
cells and young neurons. The majority of the BORIS-associated transcripts are
different in the two cell types. Finally, by using polysome profiling we show
that BORIS is associated with actively translating ribosomes.
CONCLUSION: We have demonstrated the RNA binding properties of cellular BORIS and
its association with actively translating ribosomes. We suggest that BORIS is
involved in gene expression at both the transcriptional and post-transcriptional 
levels.

PMCID: PMC4219345
PMID: 24279897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. BMC Genomics. 2013 Nov 24;14:826. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-826.

MMDiff: quantitative testing for shape changes in ChIP-Seq data sets.

Schweikert G(1), Cseke B, Clouaire T, Bird A, Sanguinetti G.

Author information: 
(1)School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, 10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh 
EH89AB, UK. G.Schweikert@ed.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Cell-specific gene expression is controlled by epigenetic
modifications and transcription factor binding. While genome-wide maps for these 
protein-DNA interactions have become widely available, quantitative comparison of
the resulting ChIP-Seq data sets remains challenging. Current approaches to
detect differentially bound or modified regions are mainly borrowed from RNA-Seq 
data analysis, thus focusing on total counts of fragments mapped to a region,
ignoring any information encoded in the shape of the peaks.
RESULTS: Here, we present MMDiff, a robust, broadly applicable method for
detecting differences between sequence count data sets. Based on quantifying
shape changes in signal profiles, it overcomes challenges imposed by the highly
structured nature of the data and the paucity of replicates.We first use a
simulated data set to compare the performance of MMDiff with results obtained by 
four alternative methods. We demonstrate that MMDiff excels when peak profiles
change between samples. We next use MMDiff to re-analyse a recent data set of the
histone modification H3K4me3 elucidating the establishment of this prominent
epigenomic marker. Our empirical analysis shows that the method yields
reproducible results across experiments, and is able to detect functional
important changes in histone modifications. To further explore the broader
applicability of MMDiff, we apply it to two ENCODE data sets: one investigating
the histone modification H3K27ac and one measuring the genome-wide binding of the
transcription factor CTCF. In both cases, MMDiff proves to be complementary to
count-based methods. In addition, we can show that MMDiff is capable of directly 
detecting changes of homotypic binding events at neighbouring binding sites.
MMDiff is readily available as a Bioconductor package.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that higher order features of ChIP-Seq peaks
carry relevant and often complementary information to total counts, and hence are
important in assessing differential histone modifications and transcription
factor binding. We have developed a new computational method, MMDiff, that is
capable of exploring these features and therefore closes an existing gap in the
analysis of ChIP-Seq data sets.

PMCID: PMC4008153
PMID: 24267901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Virol. 2014 Feb;88(3):1703-13. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02209-13. Epub 2013 Nov 20.

Epigenetic deregulation of the LMP1/LMP2 locus of Epstein-Barr virus by mutation 
of a single CTCF-cohesin binding site.

Chen HS(1), Martin KA, Lu F, Lupey LN, Mueller JM, Lieberman PM, Tempera I.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

The chromatin regulatory factors CTCF and cohesin have been implicated in the
coordinated control of multiple gene loci in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latency. We
have found that CTCF and cohesin are highly enriched at the convergent and
partially overlapping transcripts for the LMP1 and LMP2A genes, but it is not yet
known how CTCF and cohesin may coordinately regulate these transcripts. We now
show that genetic disruption of this CTCF binding site (EBV<U+0394>CTCF166) leads to a
deregulation of LMP1, LMP2A, and LMP2B transcription in EBV-immortalized B
lymphocytes. EBV<U+0394>CTCF166 virus-immortalized primary B lymphocytes showed a
decrease in LMP1 and LMP2A mRNA and a corresponding increase in LMP2B mRNA. The
reduction of LMP1 and LMP2A correlated with a loss of euchromatic histone
modification H3K9ac and a corresponding increase in heterochromatic histone
modification H3K9me3 at the LMP2A promoter region in EBV<U+0394>CTCF166. Chromosome
conformation capture (3C) revealed that DNA loop formation with the origin of
plasmid replication (OriP) enhancer was eliminated in EBV<U+0394>CTCF166. We also
observed that the EBV episome copy number was elevated in EBV<U+0394>CTCF166 and that
this was not due to increased lytic cycle activity. These findings suggest that a
single CTCF binding site controls LMP2A and LMP1 promoter selection, chromatin
boundary function, DNA loop formation, and episome copy number control during EBV
latency.

PMCID: PMC3911611
PMID: 24257606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 21;8(10):e78170. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078170.
eCollection 2013.

Primary 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 response of the interleukin 8 gene cluster in
human monocyte- and macrophage-like cells.

Ryynänen J(1), Carlberg C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland,
Kuopio, Finland.

Genome-wide analysis of vitamin D receptor (VDR) binding sites in THP-1 human
monocyte-like cells highlighted the interleukin 8 gene, also known as chemokine
CXC motif ligand 8 (CXCL8). CXCL8 is a chemotactic cytokine with important
functions during acute inflammation as well as in the context of various cancers.
The nine genes of the CXCL cluster and the strong VDR binding site close to the
CXCL8 gene are insulated from neighboring genes by CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)
binding sites. Only CXCL8, CXCL6 and CXCL1 are expressed in THP-1 cells, but all 
three are up-regulated primary 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2D3) target
genes. Formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory elements sequencing analysis
of the whole CXCL cluster demonstrated 1,25(OH)2D3-dependent chromatin opening
exclusively for the VDR binding site. In differentiated THP-1 cells the CXCL8
gene showed a 33-fold higher basal expression, but is together with CXCL6 and
CXCL1 still a primary 1,25(OH)2D3 target under the control of the same genomic
VDR binding site. In summary, both in undifferentiated and differentiated THP-1
cells the genes CXCL8, CXCL6 and CXCL1 are under the primary control of
1,25(OH)2D3 and its receptor VDR. Our observation provides further evidence for
the immune-related functions of vitamin D.

PMCID: PMC3824026
PMID: 24250750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2013 Aug;78(8):879-83. doi: 10.1134/S0006297913080038.

Expression of chicken CTCF gene in COS-1 cells and partial purification of CTCF
protein.

Kotova ES(1), Sorokina IV, Akopov SB, Nikolaev LG, Sverdlov ED.

Author information: 
(1)Shemyakin and Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Russian Academy
of Sciences, Moscow, 117997, Russia. akser@ibch.ru.

The chicken gene for transcription factor CTCF was expressed in COS-1 mammalian
cells. The CTCF protein containing polyhistidine tag was partially purified using
metallo-affinity and ion-exchange chromatography. The expressed protein localized
in the cell nucleus and was shown to be functionally active in the
electrophoretic mobility shift assay and specifically interacted with anti-CTCF
antibodies.

PMID: 24228875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Blood. 2013 Dec 19;122(26):4199-209. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-02-483875. Epub 2013
Nov 7.

Chromatin looping defines expression of TAL1, its flanking genes, and regulation 
in T-ALL.

Zhou Y(1), Kurukuti S, Saffrey P, Vukovic M, Michie AM, Strogantsev R, West AG,
Vetrie D.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics Unit and.

TAL1 is an important regulator of hematopoiesis and its expression is tightly
controlled despite complexities in its genomic organization. It is frequently
misregulated in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), often due to
deletions between TAL1 and the neighboring STIL gene. To better understand the
events that lead to TAL1 expression in hematopoiesis and in T-ALL, we studied
looping interactions at the TAL1 locus. In TAL1-expressing erythroid cells, the
locus adopts a looping "hub" which brings into close physical proximity all known
TAL1 cis-regulatory elements including CTCF-bound insulators. Loss of GATA1
results in disassembly of the hub and loss of CTCF/RAD21 from one of its
insulators. Genes flanking TAL1 are partly dependent on hub integrity for their
transcriptional regulation. We identified looping patterns unique to
TAL1-expressing T-ALL cells, and, intriguingly, loops occurring between the TAL1 
and STIL genes at the common TAL1/STIL breakpoints found in T-ALL. These findings
redefine how TAL1 and neighboring genes communicate within the nucleus, and
indicate that looping facilitates both normal and aberrant TAL1 expression and
may predispose to structural rearrangements in T-ALL. We also propose that
GATA1-dependent looping mechanisms may facilitate the conservation of TAL1
regulation despite cis-regulatory remodeling during vertebrate evolution.

PMID: 24200685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Apr;22(4):568-71. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.244. Epub 2013 Nov
6.

Fine mapping genetic determinants of the highly variably expressed MHC gene
ZFP57.

Plant K(1), Fairfax BP(1), Makino S(1), Vandiedonck C(2), Radhakrishnan J(1),
Knight JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)1] Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 
[2] INSERM UMR-S 958, F-75010 Paris, France [3] Univ Paris Diderot, Sorbonne
Paris Cité, F-75013 Paris, France.

ZFP57 is an important transcriptional regulator involved in DNA methylation and
genomic imprinting during development. Here we demonstrate that gene expression
also occurs at a low level in adult peripheral blood cells and other tissues
including the kidney and thymus, but is critically dependent on underlying local 
genetic variation within the MHC. We resolve a highly significant expression
quantitative trait locus for ZFP57 involving single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in the first intron of the gene co-localizing with a DNase I
hypersensitive site and evidence of CTCF recruitment. These data identify ZFP57
as a candidate gene underlying reported MHC disease associations, notably for
putative regulatory variants associated with cancer and HIV-1. The work
highlights the role that ZFP57 may play in DNA methylation and epigenetic
regulation beyond early development into adult life dependent on genetic
background, with important potential implications for disease.

PMCID: PMC3953924
PMID: 24193346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. EMBO J. 2013 Dec 11;32(24):3119-29. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.237. Epub 2013 Nov 1.

Cohesin-mediated interactions organize chromosomal domain architecture.

Sofueva S(1), Yaffe E, Chan WC, Georgopoulou D, Vietri Rudan M, Mira-Bontenbal H,
Pollard SM, Schroth GP, Tanay A, Hadjur S.

Author information: 
(1)Research Department of Cancer Biology, Cancer Institute, University College
London, London, UK.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2013 Dec 11;32(24):3114-5.

To ensure proper gene regulation within constrained nuclear space, chromosomes
facilitate access to transcribed regions, while compactly packaging all other
information. Recent studies revealed that chromosomes are organized into
megabase-scale domains that demarcate active and inactive genetic elements,
suggesting that compartmentalization is important for genome function. Here, we
show that very specific long-range interactions are anchored by cohesin/CTCF
sites, but not cohesin-only or CTCF-only sites, to form a hierarchy of
chromosomal loops. These loops demarcate topological domains and form intricate
internal structures within them. Post-mitotic nuclei deficient for functional
cohesin exhibit global architectural changes associated with loss of cohesin/CTCF
contacts and relaxation of topological domains. Transcriptional analysis shows
that this cohesin-dependent perturbation of domain organization leads to
widespread gene deregulation of both cohesin-bound and non-bound genes. Our data 
thereby support a role for cohesin in the global organization of domain structure
and suggest that domains function to stabilize the transcriptional programmes
within them.

PMCID: PMC4489921
PMID: 24185899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Mob DNA. 2013 Nov 1;4(1):23. doi: 10.1186/1759-8753-4-23.

PGBD5: a neural-specific intron-containing piggyBac transposase domesticated over
500 million years ago and conserved from cephalochordates to humans.

Pavelitz T, Gray LT, Padilla SL, Bailey AD, Weiner AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195-7350, USA. amweiner@u.washington.edu.

BACKGROUND: piggyBac domain (PGBD) transposons are found in organisms ranging
from fungi to humans. Three domesticated piggyBac elements have been described.
In the ciliates Paramecium tetraurelia and Tetrahymena thermophila, homologs
known as piggyMacs excise internal eliminated sequences from germline
micronuclear DNA during regeneration of the new somatic macronucleus. In
primates, a PGBD3 element inserted into the Cockayne syndrome group B (CSB) gene 
over 43 Mya serves as an alternative 3' terminal exon, enabling the CSB gene to
generate both full length CSB and a conserved CSB-PGBD3 fusion protein that joins
an N-terminal CSB domain to the C-terminal transposase domain.
RESULTS: We describe a fourth domesticated piggyBac element called PGBD5. We show
that i) PGBD5 was first domesticated in the common ancestor of the
cephalochordate Branchiostoma floridae (aka lancelet or amphioxus) and
vertebrates, and is conserved in all vertebrates including lamprey but cannot be 
found in more basal urochordates, hemichordates, or echinoderms; ii) the
lancelet, lamprey, and human PGBD5 genes are syntenic and orthologous; iii) no
potentially mobile ancestral PGBD5 elements can be identified in other more
deeply rooted organisms; iv) although derived from an IS4-related transposase of 
the RNase H clan, PGBD5 protein is unlikely to retain enzymatic activity because 
the catalytic DDD(D) motif is not conserved; v) PGBD5 is preferentially expressed
in certain granule cell lineages of the brain and in the central nervous system
based on available mouse and human in situ hybridization data, and the
tissue-specificity of documented mammalian EST and mRNA clones; vi) the human
PGBD5 promoter and gene region is rich in bound regulatory factors including the 
neuron-restrictive silencer factors NRSF/REST and CoREST, as well as SIN3, KAP1, 
STAT3, and CTCF; and vii) despite preferential localization within the nucleus,
PGBD5 protein is unlikely to bind DNA or chromatin as neither DNase I digestion
nor high salt extraction release PGBD5 from fractionated mouse brain nuclei.
CONCLUSIONS: We speculate that the neural-specific PGBD5 transposase was
domesticated >500 My after cephalochordates and vertebrates split from
urochordates, and that PGBD5 may have played a role in the evolution of a
primitive deuterostome neural network into a centralized nervous system.

PMCID: PMC3902484
PMID: 24180413  [PubMed]


325. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Feb;42(3):1524-40. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt998. Epub 2013 Oct
29.

Hox in motion: tracking HoxA cluster conformation during differentiation.

Rousseau M(1), Crutchley JL, Miura H, Suderman M, Blanchette M, Dostie J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Goodman Cancer Research Center, McGill
University, Montréal, Québec, H3G 1Y6, Canada and School of Computer Science and 
McGill Centre for Bioinformatics, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, H3A 0E9,
Canada.

Three-dimensional genome organization is an important higher order transcription 
regulation mechanism that can be studied with the chromosome conformation capture
techniques. Here, we combined chromatin organization analysis by chromosome
conformation capture-carbon copy, computational modeling and epigenomics to
achieve the first integrated view, through time, of a connection between
chromatin state and its architecture. We used this approach to examine the
chromatin dynamics of the HoxA cluster in a human myeloid leukemia cell line at
various stages of differentiation. We found that cellular differentiation
involves a transient activation of the 5'-end HoxA genes coinciding with a loss
of contacts throughout the cluster, and by specific silencing at the 3'-end with 
H3K27 methylation. The 3D modeling of the data revealed an extensive
reorganization of the cluster between the two previously reported topologically
associated domains in differentiated cells. Our results support a model whereby
silencing by polycomb group proteins and reconfiguration of CTCF interactions at 
a topologically associated domain boundary participate in changing the HoxA
cluster topology, which compartmentalizes the genes following differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3919592
PMID: 24174538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Int J Cancer. 2014 May 15;134(10):2305-13. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28570. Epub 2013 Nov 
14.

CTCF mediates the TERT enhancer-promoter interactions in lung cancer cells:
identification of a novel enhancer region involved in the regulation of TERT
gene.

Eldholm V(1), Haugen A, Zienolddiny S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Work Environment, National Institute of 
Occupational Health, Oslo, Norway.

Telomerase activation is a hallmark of cancer. Although the regulation of the
telomerase reverse transcriptase catalytic subunit (TERT), the rate-limiting
factor for telomerase activity, has been studied intensively it remains
incompletely understood. In cells devoid of telomerase activity, TERT is embedded
in a region of condensed chromatin and the chromatin remodeling protein
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) has been implicated in the inhibition of TERT
expression. The importance of TERT activation for cellular immortalization and
carcinogenesis is attested by the fact that the gene is expressed in more than
90% of immortal cell lines and tumors and that gain of TERT is the most frequent 
amplification event in early stage lung cancer. This study was designed to study 
the mechanisms of regulation of the TERT gene expression by the CTCF
transcription factor in three human lung cancer cell lines, A427, A549 and H838. 
Depletion of CTCF by siRNA resulted in reduced TERT mRNA levels in two (A427 and 
A549) of the three cell lines. A novel enhancer element was identified
approximately 4.5 kb upstream of the TERT transcription start site. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments revealed recruitment of CTCF to this enhancer
element. Chromosome conformation capture experiments demonstrated the presence of
CTCF-dependent chromatin loops between this enhancer element and the TERT
proximal promoter in A427 and A549 cell lines. In summary, the results show that 
CTCF plays an important role in maintaining TERT expression in a subset of human 
lung cancer cell lines. This role may be due to CTCF-dependent enhancer-promoter 
interactions.

© 2013 UICC.

PMID: 24174344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Nov 12;110(46):18537-42. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1317608110. Epub 2013 Oct 28.

Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen leader protein localizes to promoters and
enhancers with cell transcription factors and EBNA2.

Portal D(1), Zhou H, Zhao B, Kharchenko PV, Lowry E, Wong L, Quackenbush J,
Holloway D, Jiang S, Lu Y, Kieff E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and Department of
Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard University, Boston, MA 02115.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) nuclear antigens EBNALP (LP) and EBNA2 (E2) are
coexpressed in EBV-infected B lymphocytes and are critical for lymphoblastoid
cell line outgrowth. LP removes NCOR and RBPJ repressive complexes from
promoters, enhancers, and matrix-associated deacetylase bodies, whereas E2
activates transcription from distal enhancers. LP ChIP-seq analyses identified
19,224 LP sites of which ~50% were ± 2 kb of a transcriptional start site. LP
sites were enriched for B-cell transcription factors (TFs), YY1, SP1, PAX5, BATF,
IRF4, ETS1, RAD21, PU.1, CTCF, RBPJ, ZNF143, SMC3, NF<U+03BA>B, TBLR, and EBF. E2 sites 
were also highly enriched for LP-associated cell TFs and were more highly
occupied by RBPJ and EBF. LP sites were highly marked by H3K4me3, H3K27ac, H2Az, 
H3K9ac, RNAPII, and P300, indicative of activated transcription. LP sites were
29% colocalized with E2 (LP/E2). LP/E2 sites were more similar to LP than to E2
sites in associated cell TFs, RNAPII, P300, and histone H3K4me3, H3K9ac, H3K27ac,
and H2Az occupancy, and were more highly transcribed than LP or E2 sites. Gene
affected by CTCF and LP cooccupancy were more highly expressed than genes
affected by CTCF alone. LP was at myc enhancers and promoters and of MYC
regulated ccnd2, 23 med complex components, and MYC regulated cell survival
genes, igf2r and bcl2. These data implicate LP and associated TFs and DNA looping
factors CTCF, RAD21, SMC3, and YY1/INO80 chromatin-remodeling complexes in
repressor depletion and gene activation necessary for lymphoblastoid cell line
growth and survival.

PMCID: PMC3832032
PMID: 24167291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Gene. 2014 Jan 25;534(2):356-61. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.09.111. Epub 2013 Oct
16.

Intragenic DNA methylation status down-regulates bovine IGF2 gene expression in
different developmental stages.

Huang YZ(1), Zhan ZY(1), Sun YJ(1), Cao XK(1), Li MX(1), Wang J(1), Lan XY(1),
Lei CZ(1), Zhang CL(2), Chen H(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling Shaanxi, China.
(2)Institute of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Jiangsu Normal University, Xuzhou
Jiangsu, China. (3)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F
University, Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling
Shaanxi, China. Electronic address: chenhong1212@263.net.

DNA methylation is a key epigenetic modification in mammals and has an essential 
and important role in muscle development. Insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2) is 
a fetal growth and differentiation factor that plays an important role in muscle 
growth and in myoblast proliferation and differentiation. The aim of this study
was to evaluate the expression of IGF2 and the methylation pattern on the
differentially methylated region (DMR) of the last exon of IGF2 in six tissues
with two different developmental stages. The DNA methylation pattern was compared
using bisulfite sequencing polymerase chain reaction (BSP) and combined bisulfite
restriction analysis (COBRA). The quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) analysis
indicated that IGF2 has a broad tissue distribution and the adult bovine group
showed significant lower mRNA expression levels than that in the fetal bovine
group (P<0.05 or P<0.01). Moreover, the DNA methylation level analysis showed
that the adult bovine group exhibited a significantly higher DNA methylation
levels than that in the fetal bovine group (P<0.05 or P<0.01). These results
indicate that IGF2 expression levels were negatively associated with the
methylation status of the IGF2 DMR during the two developmental stages. Our
results suggest that the methylation pattern in this DMR may be a useful
parameter to investigate as a marker-assisted selection for muscle developmental 
in beef cattle breeding program and as a model for studies in other species.

© 2013.

PMID: 24140490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Science. 2013 Nov 8;342(6159):750-2. doi: 10.1126/science.1242510. Epub 2013 Oct 
17.

Extensive variation in chromatin states across humans.

Kasowski M(1), Kyriazopoulou-Panagiotopoulou S, Grubert F, Zaugg JB, Kundaje A,
Liu Y, Boyle AP, Zhang QC, Zakharia F, Spacek DV, Li J, Xie D, Olarerin-George A,
Steinmetz LM, Hogenesch JB, Kellis M, Batzoglou S, Snyder M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2013 Dec;14(12):824.
    Science. 2013 Nov 8;342(6159):705-6.

The majority of disease-associated variants lie outside protein-coding regions,
suggesting a link between variation in regulatory regions and disease
predisposition. We studied differences in chromatin states using five histone
modifications, cohesin, and CTCF in lymphoblastoid lines from 19 individuals of
diverse ancestry. We found extensive signal variation in regulatory regions,
which often switch between active and repressed states across individuals.
Enhancer activity is particularly diverse among individuals, whereas gene
expression remains relatively stable. Chromatin variability shows genetic
inheritance in trios, correlates with genetic variation and population
divergence, and is associated with disruptions of transcription factor binding
motifs. Overall, our results provide insights into chromatin variation among
humans.

PMCID: PMC4075767
PMID: 24136358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Hum Mutat. 2014 Jan;35(1):63-5.

High frequency strand slippage mutations in CTCF in MSI-positive endometrial
cancers.

Zighelboim I, Mutch DG, Knapp A, Ding L, Xie M, Cohn DE, Goodfellow PJ.

Tumors with defective mismatch repair acquire large numbers of strand slippage
mutations including frameshifts in coding sequence repeats. We identified a
mutational hotspot, p.T204fs, in the insulator-binding protein (CTCF) in
MSI-positive endometrial cancers. Although CTCF was described as a significantly 
mutated gene by the endometrial cancer TCGA, the A7 track variants leading to
T204 frameshifts were not reported. Reanalysis of TCGA data using Pindel revealed
frequent T204fs mutations, confirming CTCF is an MSI target gene and revealed the
same frameshifts in tumors with intact mismatch repair. We show that T204fs
transcripts are subject to nonsense-mediated decay and as such, T204fs mutations 
are unlikely to act as dominant negatives. The spectrum and pattern of mutations 
observed is consistent with CTCF acting as a haploinsufficient tumor suppressor.

© 2013 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMCID: PMC3946358
PMID: 24130125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Prostate. 2014 Feb;74(2):164-76. doi: 10.1002/pros.22738. Epub 2013 Oct 4.

Expression of the cancer-testis antigen BORIS correlates with prostate cancer.

Cheema Z(1), Hari-Gupta Y, Kita GX, Farrar D, Seddon I, Corr J, Klenova E.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Colchester, UK; Department
of Urology, Colchester Hospital University NHS Foundation Trust, Colchester, UK.

BACKGROUND: BORIS, a paralogue of the transcription factor CTCF, is a member of
the cancer-testis antigen (CT) family. BORIS is normally present at high levels
in the testis; however it is aberrantly expressed in various tumors and cancer
cell lines. The main objectives of this study were to investigate BORIS
expression together with sub-cellular localization in both prostate cell lines
and tumor tissues, and assess correlations between BORIS and
clinical/pathological characteristics.
METHODS: We examined BORIS mRNA expression, protein levels and cellular
localization in a panel of human prostate tissues, cancer and benign, together
with a panel prostate cell lines. We also compared BORIS levels and localization 
with clinical/pathological characteristics in prostate tumors.
RESULTS: BORIS was detected in all inspected prostate cancer cell lines and
tumors, but was absent in benign prostatic hyperplasia. Increased levels of BORIS
protein positively correlated with Gleason score, T-stage and androgen receptor
(AR) protein levels in prostate tumors. The relationship between BORIS and AR was
further highlighted in prostate cell lines by the ability of ectopically
expressed BORIS to activate the endogenous AR mRNA and protein. BORIS
localization in the nucleus plus cytoplasm was also associated with higher BORIS 
levels and Gleason score.
CONCLUSIONS: Detection of BORIS in prostate tumors suggests potential
applications of BORIS as a biomarker for prostate cancer diagnosis, as an
immunotherapy target and, potentially, a prognostic marker of more aggressive
prostate cancer. The ability of BORIS to activate the AR gene indicates BORIS
involvement in the growth and development of prostate tumors.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24123052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jan;42(2):774-89. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt910. Epub 2013 Oct 
10.

CTCF binding site sequence differences are associated with unique regulatory and 
functional trends during embryonic stem cell differentiation.

Plasschaert RN(1), Vigneau S, Tempera I, Gupta R, Maksimoska J, Everett L,
Davuluri R, Mamorstein R, Lieberman PM, Schultz D, Hannenhalli S, Bartolomei MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell & Developmental Biology, Perelman School of Medicine at the
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA, Program of Gene
Expression and Regulation, The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA,
Department of Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA and Department of Cell Biology and
Molecular Genetics, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA.

CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor) is a highly conserved multifunctional DNA-binding
protein with thousands of binding sites genome-wide. Our previous work suggested 
that differences in CTCF's binding site sequence may affect the regulation of
CTCF recruitment and its function. To investigate this possibility, we
characterized changes in genome-wide CTCF binding and gene expression during
differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells. After separating CTCF sites into
three classes (LowOc, MedOc and HighOc) based on similarity to the consensus
motif, we found that developmentally regulated CTCF binding occurs preferentially
at LowOc sites, which have lower similarity to the consensus. By measuring the
affinity of CTCF for selected sites, we show that sites lost during
differentiation are enriched in motifs associated with weaker CTCF binding in
vitro. Specifically, enrichment for T at the 18(th) position of the CTCF binding 
site is associated with regulated binding in the LowOc class and can predictably 
reduce CTCF affinity for binding sites. Finally, by comparing changes in CTCF
binding with changes in gene expression during differentiation, we show that
LowOc and HighOc sites are associated with distinct regulatory functions. Our
results suggest that the regulatory control of CTCF is dependent in part on
specific motifs within its binding site.

PMCID: PMC3902912
PMID: 24121688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Cell Cycle. 2013 Nov 15;12(22):3455-6. doi: 10.4161/cc.26697. Epub 2013 Oct 8.

Centromeres in nuclear architecture.

Padeken J(1), Heun P.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute of Immunobiology & Epigenetics; Freiburg, Germany.

Comment on
    Mol Cell. 2013 Apr 25;50(2):236-49.

PMCID: PMC3906326
PMID: 24107624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 3;8(10):e76528. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076528. eCollection
2013.

Identification and characterization of enhancer-blocking insulators to reduce
retroviral vector genotoxicity.

Groth AC(1), Liu M, Wang H, Lovelett E, Emery DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.

The chromatin insulator cHS4 can reduce silencing chromosomal position effects
and genotoxicity associated with integrating viral vectors. However, the fully
active version of this element can also reduce vector titers and is only
partially effective. In order to identify alternatives to cHS4, we developed a
functional lentiviral vector-based reporter screen for enhancer-blocking
insulators. Using this system, we screened candidate sequences that were
initially identified by chromatin profiling for binding by CTCF and for DNase
hypersensitivity. All 12 analyzed candidates blocked enhancer-promoter activity. 
The enhancer-blocking activity of the top two candidates was confirmed in two
complementary plasmid-based assays. Studies in a gammaretroviral reporter vector 
indicated these two candidates have little to no effect on vector titers, and do 
not diminish vector expression in primary mouse bone marrow cultures. Subsequent 
assessment in a mouse in vivo tumor formation model demonstrated that both
candidates reduced the rate of gammaretroviral vector-mediated genotoxicity as
effectively as the cHS4 insulator. In summary, we have developed a novel
lentiviral vector-based method of screening candidate elements for insulator
activity, and have used this method to identify two new insulator elements
capable of improving the safety of retroviral vectors without diminishing vector 
titers or expression. These findings expand the limited arsenal of insulators
functionally validated to reduce the rate of retroviral vector-mediated
genotoxicity.

PMCID: PMC3789682
PMID: 24098520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Biophys J. 2013 Oct 1;105(7):1653-60. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2013.08.033.

Positive and negative design for nonconsensus protein-DNA binding affinity in the
vicinity of functional binding sites.

Afek A(1), Lukatsky DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva,
Israel.

Recent experiments provide an unprecedented view of protein-DNA binding in yeast 
and human genomes at single-nucleotide resolution. These measurements, performed 
over large cell populations, show quite generally that sequence-specific
transcription regulators with well-defined protein-DNA consensus motifs bind only
a fraction among all consensus motifs present in the genome. Alternatively,
proteins in vivo often bind DNA regions lacking known consensus sequences. The
rules determining whether a consensus motif is functional remain incompletely
understood. Here we predict that genomic background surrounding specific
protein-DNA binding motifs statistically modulates the binding of
sequence-specific transcription regulators to these motifs. In particular, we
show that nonconsensus protein-DNA binding in yeast is statistically enhanced, on
average, around functional Reb1 motifs that are bound as compared to
nonfunctional Reb1 motifs that are unbound. The landscape of nonconsensus
protein-DNA binding around functional CTCF motifs in human demonstrates a more
complex behavior. In particular, human genomic regions characterized by the
highest CTCF occupancy, show statistically reduced level of nonconsensus
protein-DNA binding. Our findings suggest that nonconsensus protein-DNA binding
is fine-tuned around functional binding sites using a variety of design
strategies.

Copyright © 2013 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC3822674
PMID: 24094406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Evolution. 2013 Oct;67(10):2945-56. doi: 10.1111/evo.12155. Epub 2013 Jun 4.

Successive gain of insulator proteins in arthropod evolution.

Heger P(1), George R, Wiehe T.

Author information: 
(1)Cologne Biocenter, Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Zülpicher
Straße 47a, 50674 Köln, Germany. peter.heger@uni-koeln.de.

Alteration of regulatory DNA elements or their binding proteins may have drastic 
consequences for morphological evolution. Chromatin insulators are one example of
such proteins and play a fundamental role in organizing gene expression. While a 
single insulator protein, CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor), is known in vertebrates,
Drosophila melanogaster utilizes six additional factors. We studied the evolution
of these proteins and show here that-in contrast to the bilaterian-wide
distribution of CTCF-all other D. melanogaster insulators are restricted to
arthropods. The full set is present exclusively in the genus Drosophila whereas
only two insulators, Su(Hw) and CTCF, existed at the base of the arthropod clade 
and all additional factors have been acquired successively at later stages.
Secondary loss of factors in some lineages further led to the presence of
different insulator subsets in arthropods. Thus, the evolution of insulator
proteins within arthropods is an ongoing and dynamic process that reshapes and
supplements the ancient CTCF-based system common to bilaterians. Expansion of
insulator systems may therefore be a general strategy to increase an organism's
gene regulatory repertoire and its potential for morphological plasticity.

© 2013 The Authors. Evolution published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of
The Society for the Study of Evolution.

PMCID: PMC4208683
PMID: 24094345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 19;8(9):e75146. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075146. eCollection
2013.

NuChart: an R package to study gene spatial neighbourhoods with multi-omics
annotations.

Merelli I(1), Liò P, Milanesi L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biomedical Technologies, National Research Council, Segrate
(Milan), Italy.

Long-range chromosomal associations between genomic regions, and their
repositioning in the 3D space of the nucleus, are now considered to be key
contributors to the regulation of gene expression and important links have been
highlighted with other genomic features involved in DNA rearrangements. Recent
Chromosome Conformation Capture (3C) measurements performed with high throughput 
sequencing (Hi-C) and molecular dynamics studies show that there is a large
correlation between colocalization and coregulation of genes, but these important
researches are hampered by the lack of biologists-friendly analysis and
visualisation software. Here, we describe NuChart, an R package that allows the
user to annotate and statistically analyse a list of input genes with information
relying on Hi-C data, integrating knowledge about genomic features that are
involved in the chromosome spatial organization. NuChart works directly with
sequenced reads to identify the related Hi-C fragments, with the aim of creating 
gene-centric neighbourhood graphs on which multi-omics features can be mapped.
Predictions about CTCF binding sites, isochores and cryptic Recombination Signal 
Sequences are provided directly with the package for mapping, although other
annotation data in bed format can be used (such as methylation profiles and
histone patterns). Gene expression data can be automatically retrieved and
processed from the Gene Expression Omnibus and ArrayExpress repositories to
highlight the expression profile of genes in the identified neighbourhood.
Moreover, statistical inferences about the graph structure and correlations
between its topology and multi-omics features can be performed using
Exponential-family Random Graph Models. The Hi-C fragment visualisation provided 
by NuChart allows the comparisons of cells in different conditions, thus
providing the possibility of novel biomarkers identification. NuChart is
compliant with the Bioconductor standard and it is freely available at
ftp://fileserver.itb.cnr.it/nuchart.

PMCID: PMC3777921
PMID: 24069388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Front Immunol. 2013 Sep 19;4:291. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2013.00291. eCollection
2013.

Bioinformatics analysis of the factors controlling type I IFN gene expression in 
autoimmune disease and virus-induced immunity.

Feng D(1), Barnes BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rutgers Biomedical and
Health Sciences , Newark, NJ , USA ; Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences, New 
Jersey Medical School-Cancer Center, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New 
Jersey , Newark, NJ , USA.

Patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and Sjögren's syndrome (SS)
display increased levels of type I interferon (IFN)-induced genes. Plasmacytoid
dendritic cells (PDCs) are natural interferon producing cells and considered to
be a primary source of IFN-a in these two diseases. Differential expression
patterns of type I IFN-inducible transcripts can be found in different immune
cell subsets and in patients with both active and inactive autoimmune disease. A 
type I IFN gene signature generally consists of three groups of IFN-induced genes
- those regulated in response to virus-induced type I IFN, those regulated by the
IFN-induced mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular-regulated kinase
(MAPK/ERK) pathway, and those by the IFN-induced phosphoinositide-3 kinase
(PI-3K) pathway. These three groups of type I IFN-regulated genes control
important cellular processes such as apoptosis, survival, adhesion, and
chemotaxis, that when dysregulated, contribute to autoimmunity. With the recent
generation of large datasets in the public domain from next-generation sequencing
and DNA microarray experiments, one can perform detailed analyses of cell-type
specific gene signatures as well as identify distinct transcription factors (TFs)
that differentially regulate these gene signatures. We have performed
bioinformatics analysis of data in the public domain and experimental data from
our lab to gain insight into the regulation of type I IFN gene expression. We
have found that the genetic landscape of the IFNA and IFNB genes are occupied by 
TFs, such as insulators CTCF and cohesin, that negatively regulate transcription,
as well as interferon regulatory factor (IRF)5 and IRF7, that positively and
distinctly regulate IFNA subtypes. A detailed understanding of the factors
controlling type I IFN gene transcription will significantly aid in the
identification and development of new therapeutic strategies targeting the IFN
pathway in autoimmune disease.

PMCID: PMC3776951
PMID: 24065968  [PubMed]


339. Epigenomics. 2013;5(5):553-68. doi: 10.2217/epi.13.43.

DNA methylation and differentiation: silencing, upregulation and modulation of
gene expression.

Ehrlich M(1), Lacey M.

Author information: 
(1)Hayward Human Genetics Program, Tulane Cancer Center, and Center for
Bioinformatics & Genomics, Tulane Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, 
USA. ehrlich@tulane.edu.

Differentiation-related DNA methylation is receiving increasing attention, partly
owing to new, whole-genome analyses. These revealed that cell type-specific
differential methylation in gene bodies is more frequent than in promoters. We
review new insights into the functionality of DNA methylation during
differentiation, with emphasis on the methylomes of myoblasts, myotubes and
skeletal muscle versus non-muscle samples. Biostatistical analyses of data from
reduced representation bisulfite sequencing are discussed. Lastly, a model is
presented for how promoter and intragenic DNA hypermethylation affect gene
expression, including increasing the efficiency of polycomb silencing at some
promoters, downmodulating other promoters rather than silencing them,
counteracting enhancers with heterologous specificity, altering chromatin
conformation by inhibiting the binding of CTCF, modulating mRNA transcript levels
by inhibiting overlapping promoters of noncoding RNA genes or by regulating the
use of alternative mRNA promoters, modulating transcription termination,
regulating alternative splicing and acting as barriers to the spread of
activating chromatin.

PMCID: PMC3864898
PMID: 24059801  [PubMed - in process]


340. Nat Genet. 2013 Nov;45(11):1293-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.2759. Epub 2013 Sep 22.

The landscape of somatic mutations in Down syndrome-related myeloid disorders.

Yoshida K(1), Toki T, Okuno Y, Kanezaki R, Shiraishi Y, Sato-Otsubo A, Sanada M, 
Park MJ, Terui K, Suzuki H, Kon A, Nagata Y, Sato Y, Wang R, Shiba N, Chiba K,
Tanaka H, Hama A, Muramatsu H, Hasegawa D, Nakamura K, Kanegane H, Tsukamoto K,
Adachi S, Kawakami K, Kato K, Nishimura R, Izraeli S, Hayashi Y, Miyano S, Kojima
S, Ito E, Ogawa S.

Author information: 
(1)1] Cancer Genomics Project, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. [2] Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology, Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. [3].

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2013 Dec;45(12):1516.

Transient abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM) is a myeloid proliferation resembling acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL), mostly affecting perinatal infants with Down
syndrome. Although self-limiting in a majority of cases, TAM may evolve as
non-self-limiting AMKL after spontaneous remission (DS-AMKL). Pathogenesis of
these Down syndrome-related myeloid disorders is poorly understood, except for
GATA1 mutations found in most cases. Here we report genomic profiling of 41 TAM, 
49 DS-AMKL and 19 non-DS-AMKL samples, including whole-genome and/or whole-exome 
sequencing of 15 TAM and 14 DS-AMKL samples. TAM appears to be caused by a single
GATA1 mutation and constitutive trisomy 21. Subsequent AMKL evolves from a
pre-existing TAM clone through the acquisition of additional mutations, with
major mutational targets including multiple cohesin components (53%), CTCF (20%),
and EZH2, KANSL1 and other epigenetic regulators (45%), as well as common
signaling pathways, such as the JAK family kinases, MPL, SH2B3 (LNK) and multiple
RAS pathway genes (47%).

PMID: 24056718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Nov;33(22):4504-16. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00545-13. Epub 2013 Sep 
16.

Genomic and proteomic analyses of Prdm5 reveal interactions with insulator
binding proteins in embryonic stem cells.

Galli GG(1), Carrara M, Francavilla C, de Lichtenberg KH, Olsen JV, Calogero RA, 
Lund AH.

Author information: 
(1)Biotech Research and Innovation Centre and Centre for Epigenetics, University 
of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

PRDM proteins belong to the SET domain protein family, which is involved in the
regulation of gene expression. Although few PRDM members possess histone
methyltransferase activity, the molecular mechanisms by which the other members
exert transcriptional regulation remain to be delineated. In this study, we find 
that Prdm5 is highly expressed in mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells and exploit
this cellular system to characterize molecular functions of Prdm5. By combining
proteomics and next-generation sequencing technologies, we identify Prdm5
interaction partners and genomic occupancy. We demonstrate that although Prdm5 is
dispensable for mES cell maintenance, it directly targets genomic regions
involved in early embryonic development and affects the expression of a subset of
developmental regulators during cell differentiation. Importantly, Prdm5
interacts with Ctcf, cohesin, and TFIIIC and cooccupies genomic loci. In summary,
our data indicate how Prdm5 modulates transcription by interacting with factors
involved in genome organization in mouse embryonic stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3838183
PMID: 24043305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Mol Oncol. 2013 Dec;7(6):1129-41. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2013.08.008. Epub 2013
Aug 30.

Long range epigenetic silencing is a trans-species mechanism that results in
cancer specific deregulation by overriding the chromatin domains of normal cells.

Forn M(1), Muñoz M, Tauriello DV, Merlos-Suárez A, Rodilla V, Bigas A, Batlle E, 
Jordà M, Peinado MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Predictive and Personalized Medicine of Cancer (IMPPC), 08916
Badalona, Barcelona, Spain.

DNA methylation and chromatin remodeling are frequently implicated in the
silencing of genes involved in carcinogenesis. Long Range Epigenetic Silencing
(LRES) is a mechanism of gene inactivation that affects multiple contiguous CpG
islands and has been described in different human cancer types. However, it is
unknown whether there is a coordinated regulation of the genes embedded in these 
regions in normal cells and in early stages of tumor progression. To better
characterize the molecular events associated with the regulation and remodeling
of these regions we analyzed two regions undergoing LRES in human colon cancer in
the mouse model. We demonstrate that LRES also occurs in murine cancer in vivo
and mimics the molecular features of the human phenomenon, namely, downregulation
of gene expression, acquisition of inactive histone marks, and DNA
hypermethylation of specific CpG islands. The genes embedded in these regions
showed a dynamic and autonomous regulation during mouse intestinal cell
differentiation, indicating that, in the framework considered here, the
coordinated regulation in LRES is restricted to cancer. Unexpectedly, benign
adenomas in Apc(Min/+) mice showed overexpression of most of the genes affected
by LRES in cancer, which suggests that the repressive remodeling of the region is
a late event. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of the transcriptional
insulator CTCF in mouse colon cancer cells revealed disrupted chromatin domain
boundaries as compared with normal cells. Malignant regression of cancer cells by
in vitro differentiation resulted in partial reversion of LRES and gain of CTCF
binding. We conclude that genes in LRES regions are plastically regulated in cell
differentiation and hyperproliferation, but are constrained to a coordinated
repression by abolishing boundaries and the autonomous regulation of chromatin
domains in cancer cells.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24035705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Genome Biol. 2013;14(9):R102.

Differential DNA methylation with age displays both common and dynamic features
across human tissues that are influenced by CpG landscape.

Day K, Waite LL, Thalacker-Mercer A, West A, Bamman MM, Brooks JD, Myers RM,
Absher D.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation is an epigenetic modification that changes with age
in human tissues, although the mechanisms and specificity of this process are
still poorly understood. We compared CpG methylation changes with age across 283 
human blood, brain, kidney, and skeletal muscle samples using methylation arrays 
to identify tissue-specific age effects.
RESULTS: We found age-associated CpGs (ageCGs) that are both tissue-specific and 
common across tissues. Tissue-specific age CGs are frequently located outside CpG
islands with decreased methylation, and common ageCGs show the opposite trend.
AgeCGs are significantly associated with poorly expressed genes, but those with
decreasing methylation are linked with higher tissue-specific expression levels
compared with increasing methylation. Therefore, tissue-specific gene expression 
may protect against common age-dependent methylation. Distinguished from other
tissues, skeletal muscle age CGs are more associated with expression, enriched
near genes related to myofiber contraction, and closer to muscle-specific CTCF
binding sites. Kidney-specific ageCGs are more increasingly methylated compared
to other tissues as measured by affiliation with kidney-specific expressed genes.
Underlying chromatin features also mark common and tissue-specific age effects
reflective of poised and active chromatin states, respectively. In contrast with 
decreasingly methylated ageCGs, increasingly methylated ageCGs are also generally
further from CTCF binding sites and enriched within lamina associated domains.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data identified common and tissue-specific DNA methylation
changes with age that are reflective of CpG landscape and suggests both common
and unique alterations within human tissues. Our findings also indicate that a
simple epigenetic drift model is insufficient to explain all age-related changes 
in DNA methylation.

PMCID: PMC4053985
PMID: 24034465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 4;8(9):e74956. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074956. eCollection 
2013.

Friedreich ataxia patient tissues exhibit increased 5-hydroxymethylcytosine
modification and decreased CTCF binding at the FXN locus.

Al-Mahdawi S(1), Sandi C, Mouro Pinto R, Pook MA.

Author information: 
(1)Ataxia Research Group, Division of Biosciences, School of Health Sciences and 
Social Care, Brunel University, Uxbridge, Middlesex, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) is caused by a homozygous GAA repeat
expansion mutation within intron 1 of the FXN gene, which induces epigenetic
changes and FXN gene silencing. Bisulfite sequencing studies have identified
5-methylcytosine (5 mC) DNA methylation as one of the epigenetic changes that may
be involved in this process. However, analysis of samples by bisulfite sequencing
is a time-consuming procedure. In addition, it has recently been shown that
5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5 hmC) is also present in mammalian DNA, and bisulfite
sequencing cannot distinguish between 5 hmC and 5 mC.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have developed specific MethylScreen
restriction enzyme digestion and qPCR-based protocols to more rapidly quantify
DNA methylation at four CpG sites in the FXN upstream GAA region. Increased DNA
methylation was confirmed at all four CpG sites in both FRDA cerebellum and heart
tissues. We have also analysed the DNA methylation status in FRDA cerebellum and 
heart tissues using an approach that enables distinction between 5 hmC and 5 mC. 
Our analysis reveals that the majority of DNA methylation in both FRDA and
unaffected tissues actually comprises 5 hmC rather than 5 mC. We have also
identified decreased occupancy of the chromatin insulator protein CTCF
(CCCTC-binding factor) at the FXN 5' UTR region in the same FRDA cerebellum
tissues.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Increased DNA methylation at the FXN upstream GAA
region, primarily 5 hmC rather than 5 mC, and decreased CTCF occupancy at the FXN
5' UTR are associated with FRDA disease-relevant human tissues. The role of such 
molecular mechanisms in FRDA pathogenesis has now to be determined.

PMCID: PMC3762780
PMID: 24023969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 28;8(8):e71215. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071215. eCollection
2013.

Altered DNA methylation patterns of the H19 differentially methylated region and 
the DAZL gene promoter are associated with defective human sperm.

Li B(1), Li JB, Xiao XF, Ma YF, Wang J, Liang XX, Zhao HX, Jiang F, Yao YQ, Wang 
XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tangdu Hospital, the Fourth Military 
Medical University, Xi'an, China.

DNA methylation disturbance is associated with defective human sperm. However,
oligozoospermia (OZ) and asthenozoospermia (AZ) usually present together, and the
relationship between the single-phenotype defects in human sperm and DNA
methylation is poorly understood. In this study, 20 infertile OZ patients and 20 
infertile AZ patients were compared with 20 fertile normozoospermic men.
Bisulfate-specific PCR was used to analyze DNA methylation of the H19-DMR and the
DAZL promoter in these subjects. A similar DNA methylation pattern of the H19-DMR
was detected in AZ and NZ(control), with only complete methylation and mild
hypomethylation(<50% unmethylated CpGs) identified, and there was no significant 
difference in the occurrence of these two methylation patterns between AZ and NZ 
(P>0.05). However, the methylation pattern of severe hypomethylation (>50%
unmethylated CpGs ) and complete unmethylation was only detected in 5 OZ
patients, and the occurrence of these two methylation patterns was 8.54±10.86%
and 9±6.06%, respectively. Loss of DNA methylation of the H19-DMR in the OZ
patients was found to mainly occur in CTCF-binding site 6, with occurrence of
18.15±14.71%, which was much higher than that in patients with NZ (0.84±2.05%)
and AZ (0.58±1.77%) (P<0.001).Additional, our data indicated the occurrence of
>20% methylated clones in the DAZL promoter only in infertile patients, there was
no significant difference between the AZ and OZ patients in the proportion of
moderately-to-severely hypermethylated clones (p>0.05). In all cases, global
sperm genome methylation analyses, using LINE1 transposon as the indicator,
showed that dysregulation of DNA methylation is specifically associated with the 
H19-DMR and DAZL promoter. Therefore, abnormal DNA methylation status of H19-DMR,
especially at the CTCF-binding site 6, is closely associated with OZ. Abnormal
DNA methylation of the DAZL promoter might represent an epigenetic marker of male
infertility.

PMCID: PMC3756053
PMID: 24015185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Cell Mol Immunol. 2014 Jan;11(1):58-70. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2013.41. Epub 2013 Sep
9.

The DNA-binding factor Ctcf critically controls gene expression in macrophages.

Nikolic T(1), Movita D(2), Lambers ME(1), Ribeiro de Almeida C(1), Biesta P(2),
Kreefft K(2), de Bruijn MJ(1), Bergen I(1), Galjart N(3), Boonstra A(2), Hendriks
R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. (3)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands.

Macrophages play an important role in immunity and homeostasis. Upon pathogen
recognition via specific receptors, they rapidly induce inflammatory responses.
This process is tightly controlled at the transcriptional level. The DNA binding 
zinc-finger protein CCCTC-binding factor (Ctcf) is a crucial regulator of
long-range chromatin interactions and coordinates specific communication between 
transcription factors and gene expression processes. In this study, the Ctcf gene
was specifically deleted in myeloid cells by making use of the transgenic
Cre-LoxP system. Conditional deletion of the Ctcf gene in myeloid cells induced a
mild phenotype in vivo. Ctcf-deficient mice exhibited significantly reduced
expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II in the liver.
Ctcf-deficient macrophages demonstrated a normal surface phenotype and
phagocytosis capacity. Upon Toll-like receptor (TLR) stimulation, they produced
normal levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-12 and IL-6, but manifested a 
strongly impaired capacity to produce tumor-necrosis factor (TNF) and IL-10, as
well as to express the IL-10 family members IL-19, IL-20 and IL-24. Taken
together, our data demonstrate a role of Ctcf that involves fine-tuning of
macrophage function.

PMCID: PMC4002140
PMID: 24013844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. PLoS Genet. 2013 Aug;9(8):e1003622. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003622. Epub 2013 
Aug 29.

Comparative anatomy of chromosomal domains with imprinted and non-imprinted
allele-specific DNA methylation.

Paliwal A(1), Temkin AM, Kerkel K, Yale A, Yotova I, Drost N, Lax S, Nhan-Chang
CL, Powell C, Borczuk A, Aviv A, Wapner R, Chen X, Nagy PL, Schork N, Do C,
Torkamani A, Tycko B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York,
New York, United States of America.

Allele-specific DNA methylation (ASM) is well studied in imprinted domains, but
this type of epigenetic asymmetry is actually found more commonly at
non-imprinted loci, where the ASM is dictated not by parent-of-origin but instead
by the local haplotype. We identified loci with strong ASM in human tissues from 
methylation-sensitive SNP array data. Two index regions (bisulfite PCR
amplicons), one between the C3orf27 and RPN1 genes in chromosome band 3q21 and
the other near the VTRNA2-1 vault RNA in band 5q31, proved to be new examples of 
imprinted DMRs (maternal alleles methylated) while a third, between STEAP3 and
C2orf76 in chromosome band 2q14, showed non-imprinted haplotype-dependent ASM.
Using long-read bisulfite sequencing (bis-seq) in 8 human tissues we found that
in all 3 domains the ASM is restricted to single differentially methylated
regions (DMRs), each less than 2kb. The ASM in the C3orf27-RPN1 intergenic region
was placenta-specific and associated with allele-specific expression of a long
non-coding RNA. Strikingly, the discrete DMRs in all 3 regions overlap with
binding sites for the insulator protein CTCF, which we found selectively bound to
the unmethylated allele of the STEAP3-C2orf76 DMR. Methylation mapping in two
additional genes with non-imprinted haplotype-dependent ASM, ELK3 and CYP2A7,
showed that the CYP2A7 DMR also overlaps a CTCF site. Thus, two features of
imprinted domains, highly localized DMRs and allele-specific insulator occupancy 
by CTCF, can also be found in chromosomal domains with non-imprinted ASM. Arguing
for biological importance, our analysis of published whole genome bis-seq data
from hES cells revealed multiple genome-wide association study (GWAS) peaks near 
CTCF binding sites with ASM.

PMCID: PMC3757050
PMID: 24009515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Genome Res. 2013 Dec;23(12):2066-77. doi: 10.1101/gr.161620.113. Epub 2013 Sep 3.

Cohesin-based chromatin interactions enable regulated gene expression within
preexisting architectural compartments.

Seitan VC(1), Faure AJ, Zhan Y, McCord RP, Lajoie BR, Ing-Simmons E, Lenhard B,
Giorgetti L, Heard E, Fisher AG, Flicek P, Dekker J, Merkenschlager M.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Development Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College
London, London W12 0NN, United Kingdom;

Chromosome conformation capture approaches have shown that interphase chromatin
is partitioned into spatially segregated Mb-sized compartments and sub-Mb-sized
topological domains. This compartmentalization is thought to facilitate the
matching of genes and regulatory elements, but its precise function and
mechanistic basis remain unknown. Cohesin controls chromosome topology to enable 
DNA repair and chromosome segregation in cycling cells. In addition, cohesin
associates with active enhancers and promoters and with CTCF to form long-range
interactions important for gene regulation. Although these findings suggest an
important role for cohesin in genome organization, this role has not been
assessed on a global scale. Unexpectedly, we find that architectural compartments
are maintained in noncycling mouse thymocytes after genetic depletion of cohesin 
in vivo. Cohesin was, however, required for specific long-range interactions
within compartments where cohesin-regulated genes reside. Cohesin depletion
diminished interactions between cohesin-bound sites, whereas alternative
interactions between chromatin features associated with transcriptional
activation and repression became more prominent, with corresponding changes in
gene expression. Our findings indicate that cohesin-mediated long-range
interactions facilitate discrete gene expression states within preexisting
chromosomal compartments.

PMCID: PMC3847776
PMID: 24002784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2014 Oct;144 Pt A:12-8. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2013.08.014. Epub 2013 Aug 31.

The ASAP2 gene is a primary target of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 in human monocytes
and macrophages.

Seuter S(1), Ryynänen J(1), Carlberg C(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland,
Kuopio, Finland. (2)School of Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, University of
Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland. Electronic address: carsten.carlberg@uef.fi.

A genome-wide data set on vitamin D receptor (VDR) binding sites in human THP-1
cells (monocytes) led us to the genomic region around the ASAP2 (Arf-GAP with SH3
domain, ankyrin repeat and PH domain 2) gene, whose product is involved in the
regulation of vesicular transport, cellular migration and autophagy. Using ENCODE
data, we demonstrated that the ASAP2 gene is flanked by conserved binding sites
of the insulating transcription factor CTCF. These sites define different
chromosomal domains containing the ASAP2 gene, up to six additional genes and
three VDR binding sites. In human monocytes (THP-1 cells) the ASAP2 gene is more 
weakly expressed but more and faster inducible by the biologically active form of
vitamin D, 1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2D3), than in M2-type macrophages
(phorbol ester-differentiated THP-1 cells). Within the investigated genomic
region, the basal mRNA expressions of the neighboring genes are comparably high
in both monocytes and macrophages, but the ASAP2 gene is the only primary
1,25(OH)2D3 target. The three VDR binding sites located 54, 436 and 574kb
downstream of the ASAP2 transcription start site each carry a sequence formed by 
a direct repeat with three intervening nucleotides (DR3). Ligand-inducible VDR
binding was confirmed to all three genomic sites in monocytes and macrophages.
Taken together, the region around the ASAP2 gene is genome-wide highlighted as a 
special attraction point for the VDR, but the presently sole known functional
consequence of the binding of VDR to three sites within this chromosomal region
is that ASAP2 is a primary 1,25(OH)2D3 target gene in monocytes and macrophages. 
This article is part of a Special Issue entitled '16th Vitamin D Workshop'.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 23999061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Virol. 2013 Nov;87(21):11831-42. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01685-13. Epub 2013 Aug 28.

The open chromatin landscape of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus.

Hilton IB(1), Simon JM, Lieb JD, Davis IJ, Damania B, Dittmer DP.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is an oncogenic gammaherpesvirus
which establishes latent infection in endothelial and B cells, as well as in
primary effusion lymphoma (PEL). During latency, the viral genome exists as a
circular DNA minichromosome (episome) and is packaged into chromatin analogous to
human chromosomes. Only a small subset of promoters, those which drive latent
RNAs, are active in latent episomes. In general, nucleosome depletion ("open
chromatin") is a hallmark of eukaryotic regulatory elements such as promoters and
transcriptional enhancers or insulators. We applied formaldehyde-assisted
isolation of regulatory elements (FAIRE) followed by next-generation sequencing
to identify regulatory elements in the KSHV genome and integrated these data with
previously identified locations of histone modifications, RNA polymerase II
occupancy, and CTCF binding sites. We found that (i) regions of open chromatin
were not restricted to the transcriptionally defined latent loci; (ii) open
chromatin was adjacent to regions harboring activating histone modifications,
even at transcriptionally inactive loci; and (iii) CTCF binding sites fell within
regions of open chromatin with few exceptions, including the constitutive LANA
promoter and the vIL6 promoter. FAIRE-identified nucleosome depletion was similar
among B and endothelial cell lineages, suggesting a common viral genome
architecture in all forms of latency.

PMCID: PMC3807352
PMID: 23986576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Immunity. 2013 Aug 22;39(2):229-44. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.08.011.

Flexible long-range loops in the VH gene region of the Igh locus facilitate the
generation of a diverse antibody repertoire.

Medvedovic J(1), Ebert A, Tagoh H, Tamir IM, Schwickert TA, Novatchkova M, Sun Q,
Huis In 't Veld PJ, Guo C, Yoon HS, Denizot Y, Holwerda SJ, de Laat W, Cogné M,
Shi Y, Alt FW, Busslinger M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna Biocenter, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 7,
1030 Vienna, Austria.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2013 Aug 22;39(2):199-201.

The immunoglobulin heavy-chain (Igh) locus undergoes large-scale contraction in
pro-B cells, which facilitates VH-DJH recombination by juxtaposing distal VH
genes next to the DJH-rearranged gene segment in the 3' proximal Igh domain. By
using high-resolution mapping of long-range interactions, we demonstrate that
local interaction domains established the three-dimensional structure of the
extended Igh locus in lymphoid progenitors. In pro-B cells, these local domains
engaged in long-range interactions across the Igh locus, which depend on the
regulators Pax5, YY1, and CTCF. The large VH gene cluster underwent flexible
long-range interactions with the more rigidly structured proximal domain, which
probably ensures similar participation of all VH genes in VH-DJH recombination to
generate a diverse antibody repertoire. These long-range interactions appear to
be an intrinsic feature of the VH gene cluster, because they are still generated 
upon mutation of the Eµ enhancer, IGCR1 insulator, or 3' regulatory region in the
proximal Igh domain.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4810778
PMID: 23973221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Jan 1;23(1):117-28. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt405. Epub 2013 Aug
19.

Promoter histone H3K27 methylation in the control of IGF2 imprinting in human
tumor cell lines.

Li T(1), Chen H, Li W, Cui J, Wang G, Hu X, Hoffman AR, Hu J.

Author information: 
(1)Shenzhen Beike Cell Engineering Research Institute, Shenzhen, China.

Aberrant imprinting of the insulin-like growth factor II (IGF2) gene is a
molecular hallmark of many tumors. Reactivation of the normally suppressed
maternal allele leads to upregulation of the growth factor that promotes tumor
growth. However, the mechanisms underlying the loss of imprinting (LOI) remain
poorly defined. We examined the epigenotypes at the gene promoters that control
IGF2 allelic expression. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation, we found that in
cells characterized by maintenance of IGF2 imprinting, three IGF2 promoters were 
differentially modified, with the suppressed allele heavily methylated at histone
H3K27 while the active allele was unmethylated. In the LOI tumors, however, both 
alleles were unmethylated, and correspondingly there was no binding of SUZ12, the
docking factor of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), and of the zinc
finger-containing transcription factor (CTCF) that recruits the PRC2. Using
chromatin conformation capture, we found that the CTCF-orchestrated
intrachromosomal loop between the IGF2 promoters and the imprinting control
region was abrogated in cells with LOI. SUZ12, which docks the PRC2 to IGF2
promoters for H3K27 methylation, was downregulated in LOI cells. These data
reveal a new epigenetic control pathway related to the loss of IGF2 imprinting in
tumors.

PMCID: PMC3857949
PMID: 23962719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. BMC Genomics. 2013 Aug 14;14:553. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-553.

Characterization of constitutive CTCF/cohesin loci: a possible role in
establishing topological domains in mammalian genomes.

Li Y(1), Huang W, Niu L, Umbach DM, Covo S, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Biostatistics Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences,
Research Triangle Park, Durham, NC 27709, USA. li3@niehs.nih.gov.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies suggested that human/mammalian genomes are divided
into large, discrete domains that are units of chromosome organization. CTCF, a
CCCTC binding factor, has a diverse role in genome regulation including
transcriptional regulation, chromosome-boundary insulation, DNA replication, and 
chromatin packaging. It remains unclear whether a subset of CTCF binding sites
plays a functional role in establishing/maintaining chromatin topological
domains.
RESULTS: We systematically analysed the genomic, transcriptomic and epigenetic
profiles of the CTCF binding sites in 56 human cell lines from ENCODE. We
identified ~24,000 CTCF sites (referred to as constitutive sites) that were bound
in more than 90% of the cell lines. Our analysis revealed: 1) constitutive CTCF
loci were located in constitutive open chromatin and often co-localized with
constitutive cohesin loci; 2) most constitutive CTCF loci were distant from
transcription start sites and lacked CpG islands but were enriched with the
full-spectrum CTCF motifs: a recently reported 33/34-mer and two other
potentially novel (22/26-mer); 3) more importantly, most constitutive CTCF loci
were present in CTCF-mediated chromatin interactions detected by ChIA-PET and
these pair-wise interactions occurred predominantly within, but not between,
topological domains identified by Hi-C.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the constitutive CTCF sites may play a role
in organizing/maintaining the recently identified topological domains that are
common across most human cells.

PMCID: PMC3765723
PMID: 23945083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Hum Mutat. 2013 Nov;34(11):1467-71. doi: 10.1002/humu.22395. Epub 2013 Sep 4.

Novel FOXF1 deep intronic deletion causes lethal lung developmental disorder,
alveolar capillary dysplasia with misalignment of pulmonary veins.

Szafranski P(1), Yang Y, Nelson MU, Bizzarro MJ, Morotti RA, Langston C,
Stankiewicz P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, 77030.

Haploinsufficiency of FOXF1 causes an autosomal dominant neonatally lethal lung
disorder, alveolar capillary dysplasia with misalignment of pulmonary veins
(ACDMPV). We identified novel 0.8-kb deletion within the 1.4-kb intron of FOXF1
in a deceased newborn diagnosed with ACDMPV. The deletion arose de novo on the
maternal copy of the chromosome 16, and did not affect FOXF1 minigene splicing
tested in lung fibroblasts. However, FOXF1 transcript level in the ACDMPV
peripheral lung tissue was reduced by almost 40%. We found that, in an in vitro
reporter assay, the FOXF1 intron exhibited moderate transcriptional enhancer
activity, correlating with the presence of binding sites for expression
regulators CTCF and CEBPB, whereas its truncated copy, which lost major CTCF and 
CEBPB-binding sites, inhibited the FOXF1 promoter. Our data further emphasize the
importance of testing the non-protein coding regions of the genome currently not 
covered by diagnostic chromosomal microarray analyses or whole-exome sequencing.

© 2013 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMCID: PMC4123314
PMID: 23943206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Oct;5(5):308-22. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjt023. Epub 2013 Aug 9.

CTCF depletion alters chromatin structure and transcription of myeloid-specific
factors.

Ouboussad L(1), Kreuz S, Lefevre PF.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Haematology, Leeds Institute of Cancer Studies and
Pathology, University of Leeds, Wellcome Trust Brenner Building, St. James's
University Hospital, Leeds LS9 7TF, UK.

Differentiation is a multistep process tightly regulated and controlled by
complex transcription factor networks. Here, we show that the rate of
differentiation of common myeloid precursor cells increases after depletion of
CTCF, a protein emerging as a potential key factor regulating higher-order
chromatin structure. We identified CTCF binding in the vicinity of important
transcription factors regulating myeloid differentiation and showed that CTCF
depletion impacts on the expression of these genes in concordance with the
observed acceleration of the myeloid commitment. Furthermore, we observed a loss 
of the histone variant H2A.Z within the selected promoter regions and an increase
in non-coding RNA transcription upstream of these genes. Both abnormalities
suggest a global chromatin structure destabilization and an associated increase
of non-productive transcription in response to CTCF depletion but do not drive
the CTCF-mediated transcription alterations of the neighbouring genes. Finally,
we detected a transient eviction of CTCF at the Egr1 locus in correlation with
Egr1 peak of expression in response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) treatment in
macrophages. This eviction is also correlated with the expression of an antisense
non-coding RNA transcribing through the CTCF-binding region indicating that
non-coding RNA transcription could be the cause and the consequence of CTCF
eviction.

PMID: 23933634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Neoplasia. 2013 Aug;15(8):898-912.

A novel mechanism for CTCF in the epigenetic regulation of Bax in breast cancer
cells.

Méndez-Catalá CF(1), Gretton S, Vostrov A, Pugacheva E, Farrar D, Ito Y, Docquier
F, Kita GX, Murrell A, Lobanenkov V, Klenova E.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Colchester, Essex, United 
Kingdom.

We previously reported the association of elevated levels of the multifunctional 
transcription factor, CCCTC binding factor (CTCF), in breast cancer cells with
the specific anti-apoptotic function of CTCF. To understand the molecular
mechanisms of this phenomenon, we investigated regulation of the human Bax gene
by CTCF in breast and non-breast cells. Two CTCF binding sites (CTSs) within the 
Bax promoter were identified. In all cells, breast and non-breast, active histone
modifications were present at these CTSs, DNA harboring this region was
unmethylated, and levels of Bax mRNA and protein were similar. Nevertheless,
up-regulation of Bax mRNA and protein and apoptotic cell death were observed only
in breast cancer cells depleted of CTCF. We proposed that increased CTCF binding 
to the Bax promoter in breast cancer cells, by comparison with non-breast cells, 
may be mechanistically linked to the specific apoptotic phenotype in
CTCF-depleted breast cancer cells. In this study, we show that CTCF binding was
enriched at the Bax CTSs in breast cancer cells and tumors; in contrast, binding 
of other transcription factors (SP1, WT1, EGR1, and c-Myc) was generally
increased in non-breast cells and normal breast tissues. Our findings suggest a
novel mechanism for CTCF in the epigenetic regulation of Bax in breast cancer
cells, whereby elevated levels of CTCF support preferential binding of CTCF to
the Bax CTSs. In this context, CTCF functions as a transcriptional repressor
counteracting influences of positive regulatory factors; depletion of breast
cancer cells from CTCF therefore results in the activation of Bax and apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3730042
PMID: 23908591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Development. 2013 Aug;140(16):3297-302. doi: 10.1242/dev.090621.

Clustered protocadherins.

Chen WV(1), Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The majority of vertebrate protocadherin (Pcdh) genes are clustered in a single
genomic locus, and this remarkable genomic organization is highly conserved from 
teleosts to humans. These clustered Pcdhs are differentially expressed in
individual neurons, they engage in homophilic trans-interactions as multimers and
they are required for diverse neurodevelopmental processes, including neurite
self-avoidance. Here, we provide a concise overview of the molecular and cellular
biology of clustered Pcdhs, highlighting how they generate single cell diversity 
in the vertebrate nervous system and how such diversity may be used in neural
circuit assembly.

PMCID: PMC3737714
PMID: 23900538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Immunol. 2013 Sep 1;191(5):2393-402. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301279. Epub 2013
Jul 29.

Deep sequencing of the murine IgH repertoire reveals complex regulation of
nonrandom V gene rearrangement frequencies.

Choi NM(1), Loguercio S, Verma-Gaur J, Degner SC, Torkamani A, Su AI, Oltz EM,
Artyomov M, Feeney AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbial Science, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

A diverse Ab repertoire is formed through the rearrangement of V, D, and J
segments at the IgH (Igh) loci. The C57BL/6 murine Igh locus has >100 functional 
VH gene segments that can recombine to a rearranged DJH. Although the nonrandom
usage of VH genes is well documented, it is not clear what elements determine
recombination frequency. To answer this question, we conducted deep sequencing of
5'-RACE products of the Igh repertoire in pro-B cells, amplified in an unbiased
manner. Chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing results for several histone
modifications and RNA polymerase II binding, RNA-sequencing for sense and
antisense noncoding germline transcripts, and proximity to CCCTC-binding factor
(CTCF) and Rad21 sites were compared with the usage of individual V genes.
Computational analyses assessed the relative importance of these various
accessibility elements. These elements divide the Igh locus into four
epigenetically and transcriptionally distinct domains, and our computational
analyses reveal different regulatory mechanisms for each region. Proximal V genes
are relatively devoid of active histone marks and noncoding RNA in general, but
having a CTCF site near their recombination signal sequence is critical,
suggesting that being positioned near the base of the chromatin loops is
important for rearrangement. In contrast, distal V genes have higher levels of
histone marks and noncoding RNA, which may compensate for their poorer
recombination signal sequences and for being distant from CTCF sites. Thus, the
Igh locus has evolved a complex system for the regulation of V(D)J rearrangement 
that is different for each of the four domains that comprise this locus.

PMCID: PMC3778908
PMID: 23898036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Oct;41(18):8503-14. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt652. Epub 2013
Jul 24.

Integrative analysis of tissue-specific methylation and alternative splicing
identifies conserved transcription factor binding motifs.

Wan J(1), Oliver VF, Zhu H, Zack DJ, Qian J, Merbs SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Wilmer Institute, Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, 600 North Wolfe Street, 21287 Baltimore, MD, USA, Department of
Pharmacology and Molecular Science, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
600 North Wolfe Street, 21287 Baltimore, MD, USA, Department of Molecular Biology
and Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 600 North Wolfe
Street, 21287 Baltimore, MD, USA, Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, 600 North Wolfe Street, 21287 Baltimore, MD, USA, 
Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 600
North Wolfe Street, 21287 Baltimore, MD, USA and Institut de la Vision, 17 rue
Moreau, 75012 Paris, France.

The exact role of intragenic DNA methylation in regulating tissue-specific gene
regulation is unclear. Recently, the DNA-binding protein CTCF has been shown to
participate in the regulation of alternative splicing in a DNA
methylation-dependent manner. To globally evaluate the relationship between DNA
methylation and tissue-specific alternative splicing, we performed genome-wide
DNA methylation profiling of mouse retina and brain. In protein-coding genes,
tissue-specific differentially methylated regions (T-DMRs) were preferentially
located in exons and introns. Gene ontology and evolutionary conservation
analysis suggest that these T-DMRs are likely to be biologically relevant. More
than 14% of alternatively spliced genes were associated with a T-DMR.
T-DMR-associated genes were enriched for developmental genes, suggesting that a
specific set of alternatively spliced genes may be regulated through DNA
methylation. Novel DNA sequences motifs overrepresented in T-DMRs were identified
as being associated with positive and/or negative regulation of alternative
splicing in a position-dependent context. The majority of these evolutionarily
conserved motifs contain a CpG dinucleotide. Some transcription factors, which
recognize these motifs, are known to be involved in splicing. Our results suggest
that DNA methylation-dependent alternative splicing is widespread and lay the
foundation for further mechanistic studies of the role of DNA methylation in
tissue-specific splicing regulation.

PMCID: PMC3794605
PMID: 23887936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Biol Chem. 2013 Sep 6;288(36):26067-77. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.486175. Epub 2013
Jul 24.

Ribosomal RNA gene transcription mediated by the master genome regulator protein 
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is negatively regulated by the condensin complex.

Huang K(1), Jia J, Wu C, Yao M, Li M, Jin J, Jiang C, Cai Y, Pei D, Pan G, Yao H.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology of the Chinese Academy of Sciences,
South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou 
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou
510530, China.

CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a ubiquitously expressed "master weaver" and plays
multiple functions in the genome, including transcriptional
activation/repression, chromatin insulation, imprinting, X chromosome
inactivation, and high-order chromatin organization. It has been shown that CTCF 
facilitates the recruitment of the upstream binding factor onto ribosomal DNA
(rDNA) and regulates the local epigenetic state of rDNA repeats. However, the
mechanism by which CTCF modulates rRNA gene transcription has not been well
understood. Here we found that wild-type CTCF augments the pre-rRNA level, cell
size, and cell growth in cervical cancer cells. In contrast, RNA
interference-mediated knockdown of CTCF reduced pre-rRNA transcription. CTCF
positively regulates rRNA gene transcription in a RNA polymerase I-dependent
manner. We identified an RRGR motif as a putative nucleolar localization sequence
in the C-terminal region of CTCF that is required for activating rRNA gene
transcription. Using mass spectrometry, we identified SMC2 and SMC4, two subunits
of condensin complexes that interact with CTCF. Condensin negatively regulates
CTCF-mediated rRNA gene transcription. Knockdown of SMC2 expression significantly
facilitates the loading of CTCF and the upstream binding factor onto the rDNA
locus and increases histone acetylation across the rDNA locus. Taken together,
our study suggests that condensin competes with CTCF in binding to a specific
rDNA locus and negatively regulates CTCF-mediated rRNA gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC3764810
PMID: 23884423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Epigenetics. 2013 Aug;8(8):827-38. doi: 10.4161/epi.25472. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

CTCF demarcates chicken embryonic a-globin gene autonomous silencing and
contributes to adult stage-specific gene expression.

Valdes-Quezada C(1), Arriaga-Canon C, Fonseca-Guzmán Y, Guerrero G,
Recillas-Targa F.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Fisiología Celular; Departamento de Genética Molecular;
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México; México D.F., México.

Genomic loci composed of more than one gene are frequently subjected to
differential gene expression, with the chicken a-globin domain being a clear
example. In the present study we aim to understand the globin switching
mechanisms responsible for the epigenetic silencing of the embryonic p gene and
the transcriptional activation of the adult a(D) and a(A) genes at the genomic
domain level. In early stages, we describe a physical contact between the
embryonic p gene and the distal 3' enhancer that is lost later during
development. We show that such a level of regulation is achieved through the
establishment of a DNA hypermethylation sub-domain that includes the embryonic
gene and the adjacent genomic sequences. The multifunctional CCCTCC-binding
factor (CTCF), which is located upstream of the a(D) gene promoter, delimits this
sub-domain and creates a transition between the inactive sub-domain and the
active sub-domain, which includes the adult a(D) gene. In avian-transformed
erythroblast HD3 cells that are induced to differentiate, we found active DNA
demethylation of the adult a(D) promoter, coincident with the incorporation of
5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) and concomitant with adult gene transcriptional
activation. These results suggest that autonomous silencing of the embryonic p
gene is needed to facilitate an optimal topological conformation of the domain.
This model proposes that CTCF is contributing to a specific chromatin
configuration that is necessary for differential a-globin gene expression during 
development.

PMCID: PMC3883786
PMID: 23880533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(7):e1003601. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003601. Epub 2013 Jul 
18.

Role of CTCF protein in regulating FMR1 locus transcription.

Lanni S(1), Goracci M, Borrelli L, Mancano G, Chiurazzi P, Moscato U, Ferrè F,
Helmer-Citterich M, Tabolacci E, Neri G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del S. Cuore, Rome, Italy.

Fragile X syndrome (FXS), the leading cause of inherited intellectual disability,
is caused by epigenetic silencing of the FMR1 gene, through expansion and
methylation of a CGG triplet repeat (methylated full mutation). An antisense
transcript (FMR1-AS1), starting from both promoter and intron 2 of the FMR1 gene,
was demonstrated in transcriptionally active alleles, but not in silent FXS
alleles. Moreover, a DNA methylation boundary, which is lost in FXS, was recently
identified upstream of the FMR1 gene. Several nuclear proteins bind to this
region, like the insulator protein CTCF. Here we demonstrate for the first time
that rare unmethylated full mutation (UFM) alleles present the same boundary
described in wild type (WT) alleles and that CTCF binds to this region, as well
as to the FMR1 gene promoter, exon 1 and intron 2 binding sites. Contrariwise,
DNA methylation prevents CTCF binding to FXS alleles. Drug-induced CpGs
demethylation does not restore this binding. CTCF knock-down experiments clearly 
established that CTCF does not act as insulator at the active FMR1 locus, despite
the presence of a CGG expansion. CTCF depletion induces heterochromatinic histone
configuration of the FMR1 locus and results in reduction of FMR1 transcription,
which however is not accompanied by spreading of DNA methylation towards the FMR1
promoter. CTCF depletion is also associated with FMR1-AS1 mRNA reduction.
Antisense RNA, like sense transcript, is upregulated in UFM and absent in FXS
cells and its splicing is correlated to that of the FMR1-mRNA. We conclude that
CTCF has a complex role in regulating FMR1 expression, probably through the
organization of chromatin loops between sense/antisense transcriptional
regulatory regions, as suggested by bioinformatics analysis.

PMCID: PMC3715420
PMID: 23874213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Aug 8;93(2):224-35. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.06.010. Epub
2013 Jul 18.

Imprinted chromatin around DIRAS3 regulates alternative splicing of GNG12-AS1, a 
long noncoding RNA.

Niemczyk M(1), Ito Y, Huddleston J, Git A, Abu-Amero S, Caldas C, Moore GE,
Stojic L, Murrell A.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK.

Imprinted gene clusters are regulated by long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), CCCTC
binding factor (CTCF)-mediated boundaries, and DNA methylation. DIRAS3 (also
known as ARH1 or NOEY1) is an imprinted gene encoding a protein belonging to the 
RAS superfamily of GTPases and is located within an intron of a lncRNA called
GNG12-AS1. In this study, we investigated whether GNG12-AS1 is imprinted and
coregulated with DIRAS3. We report that GNG12-AS1 is coexpressed with DIRAS3 in
several tissues and coordinately downregulated with DIRAS3 in breast cancers.
GNG12-AS1 has several splice variants, all of which initiate from a single
transcription start site. In placenta tissue and normal cell lines, GNG12-AS1 is 
biallelically expressed but some isoforms are allele-specifically spliced.
Cohesin plays a role in allele-specific splicing of GNG12-AS1. In breast cancer
cell lines with loss of DIRAS3 imprinting, DIRAS3 and GNG12-AS1 are silenced in
cis and the remaining GNG12-AS1 transcripts are predominantly monoallelic. The
GNG12-AS1 locus, which includes DIRAS3, provides an example of imprinted
cotranscriptional splicing and a potential model system for studying the
long-range effects of CTCF-cohesin binding on splicing and transcriptional
interference.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3738830
PMID: 23871723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2013 Jun;19(6):511-7.

[Correlation of DNA methylation status of imprinted gene H19 ICR with
oligozoospermia and asthenozoospermia].

[Article in Chinese]

Li JB(1), Li B, Liang XX, Wang J, Ma YF, Zhang YQ, Liu Z, Min BH, Ma XH, Wang XH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Tangdu Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710038,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the correlation of the DNA methylation status of the
imprinted gene H19 imprinting control region (ICR) with oligozoospermia and
asthenozoospermia.
METHODS: We eliminated chromosomal abnormality as the cause of male infertility
in the subjects by karyotype analysis and detection of Y-chromosome
microdeletions, and identified 18 cases of single factor-induced oligozoospermia 
(sperm concentration < 15 x 10(6)/ml) and 20 cases of single factor-induced
asthenozoospermia (progressively motile sperm <32%) by computer-aided sperm
analysis (CASA). Then we extracted genome-wide sperm DNA, treated it with bisul- 
fite, subjected the target gene fragments to PCR amplification and sequencing.
Lastly, we analyzed the DNA methylation status of the target genes with BIQ
Analyzer and processed the data using SPSS17.0.
RESULTS: The DNA methylation level of the H19 ICR was increased significantly in 
the oligozoospermia patients ([9.19 +/- 2.45]%, P < 0.05), especially in the
severe oligozoospermia males with sperm concentration < 3 x 10(6)/ml (P < 0.01), 
as compared with that of the 20 fertile control men ([0.30 +/- 0.06]%). However, 
no significant differences were found in the level ([0.30 +/- 0.07]%) and pattern
of the DNA methylation of the H19 ICR (P = 0.62). Further analysis of the DNA
methylation status of the CTCF-6 binding sites indicated that the DNA methylation
degree was significant higher in the oligozoospermia men ([2.67 +/- 0.75]%) than 
in the fertile control ([0.05 +/- 0.03]%) or the asthenozoospermia group ([0.03
+/- 0.02]%), with no significant differences between the latter two (P = 0.35).
CONCLUSION: The reduced DNA methylation of the H19 ICR is negatively correlated
with sperm concentration but not associated with sperm motility.

PMID: 23862228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Math Biol. 2014 Aug;69(2):469-500. doi: 10.1007/s00285-013-0705-3. Epub 2013
Jul 17.

Robust k-mer frequency estimation using gapped k-mers.

Ghandi M(1), Mohammad-Noori M, Beer MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering and McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic
Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA, ghandi@jhmi.edu.

Oligomers of fixed length, k, commonly known as k-mers, are often used as
fundamental elements in the description of DNA sequence features of diverse
biological function, or as intermediate elements in the constuction of more
complex descriptors of sequence features such as position weight matrices. k-mers
are very useful as general sequence features because they constitute a complete
and unbiased feature set, and do not require parameterization based on incomplete
knowledge of biological mechanisms. However, a fundamental limitation in the use 
of k-mers as sequence features is that as k is increased, larger spatial
correlations in DNA sequence elements can be described, but the frequency of
observing any specific k-mer becomes very small, and rapidly approaches a sparse 
matrix of binary counts. Thus any statistical learning approach using k-mers will
be susceptible to noisy estimation of k-mer frequencies once k becomes large.
Because all molecular DNA interactions have limited spatial extent, gapped k-mers
often carry the relevant biological signal. Here we use gapped k-mer counts to
more robustly estimate the ungapped k-mer frequencies, by deriving an equation
for the minimum norm estimate of k-mer frequencies given an observed set of
gapped k-mer frequencies. We demonstrate that this approach provides a more
accurate estimate of the k-mer frequencies in real biological sequences using a
sample of CTCF binding sites in the human genome.

PMCID: PMC3895138
PMID: 23861010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Sci Rep. 2013;3:2187. doi: 10.1038/srep02187.

DNA replication-dependent binding of CTCF plays a critical role in adenovirus
genome functions.

Komatsu T(1), Sekiya T, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Biology, Faculty of Medicine and Graduate School of
Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba 305-8575, Japan.

The expression of adenovirus late genes is shown to require viral DNA
replication, but its mechanism remains elusive. Here we found that knockdown of
CTCF suppresses viral DNA replication as well as late, but not early, gene
expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays indicated that CTCF binds to
viral chromatin depending on viral DNA replication. These findings depict CTCF as
a critical regulator for adenovirus genome functions in late phases of infection.

PMCID: PMC3711053
PMID: 23851926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 23;288(34):24363-71. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.458141. Epub
2013 Jul 10.

Epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced corneal epithelial wound healing through
nuclear factor <U+03BA>B subtype-regulated CCCTC binding factor (CTCF) activation.

Wang L(1), Wu X, Shi T, Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California Los Angeles, Torrance, California 90503, USA.

Epidermal growth factor (EGF) plays an important role in corneal epithelial
migration and proliferation to improve the wound healing process. This study
aimed to understand the role of NF<U+03BA>B in EGF-induced corneal epithelial wound
healing through regulation of CTCF activity, which plays important roles in cell 
motility and migration to promote wound healing. The effect of NF<U+03BA>B p50 on
corneal epithelial wound healing was investigated by comparing the eyes of
wild-type and p50 knockout mice. We found that there was a significant
retardation in corneal epithelial wound healing in the corneas of p50 knockout
mice. Wound closure rates were measured in human corneal epithelial cells
transfected with an NF<U+03BA>B activation-sensitive CTCF expression construct to
demonstrate the effect of human CTCF expression under the control of EGF-induced 
NF<U+03BA>B activation on wound healing. EGF stimulation activated NF<U+03BA>B, which directly 
triggered the expression of the exogenous human CTCF in transfected cells and,
subsequently, promoted human corneal epithelial cell motility, migration, and
wound healing. Overexpression of CTCF in corneal epithelial cells and mouse
corneas significantly enhanced the wound healing process. Furthermore, the effect
of overexpressing NF<U+03BA>B p50 in corneal epithelial cells on the promotion of wound 
healing was abolished by knockdown of CTCF with CTCF-specific shRNA. Thus, a
direct regulatory relationship between EGF-induced NF<U+03BA>B p50 and CTCF activation
affecting corneal epithelial wound healing has been established, indicating that 
CTCF is, indeed, a NF<U+03BA>B p50-targeted and effective gene product in the core
transcriptional network downstream from the growth factor-induced NF<U+03BA>B signaling 
pathway.

PMCID: PMC3750138
PMID: 23843455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. FEBS Lett. 2013 Aug 2;587(15):2299-312. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.06.035. Epub 
2013 Jul 4.

Cohesin: functions beyond sister chromatid cohesion.

Mehta GD(1), Kumar R, Srivastava S, Ghosh SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Wadhwani Research Centre for
Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology-Bombay, Mumbai
400076, India.

Faithful segregation of chromosomes during mitosis and meiosis is the cornerstone
process of life. Cohesin, a multi-protein complex conserved from yeast to human, 
plays a crucial role in this process by keeping the sister chromatids together
from S-phase to anaphase onset during mitosis and meiosis. Technological
advancements have discovered myriad functions of cohesin beyond its role in
sister chromatid cohesion (SCC), such as transcription regulation, DNA repair,
chromosome condensation, homolog pairing, monoorientation of sister kinetochore, 
etc. Here, we have focused on such functions of cohesin that are either
independent of or dependent on its canonical role of sister chromatid cohesion.
At the end, human diseases associated with malfunctioning of cohesin, albeit with
mostly unperturbed sister chromatid cohesion, have been discussed.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23831059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 25;8(6):e67605. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067605. Print 2013.

Selective methylation of CpGs at regulatory binding sites controls NNAT
expression in Wilms tumors.

Hubertus J(1), Zitzmann F, Trippel F, Müller-Höcker J, Stehr M, von Schweinitz D,
Kappler R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Research Laboratories,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany. jochen.hubertus@med.lmu.de

Aberrant expression of imprinted genes, such as those coding for the insulin-like
growth factor 2 (IGF2) and neuronatin (NNAT), is a characteristic of a variety of
embryonic neoplasms, including Wilms tumor (WT). In case of IGF2, it is generally
accepted that loss of imprinting in a differentially methylated region of the
IGF2/H19 locus results in biallelic expression and, thus, upregulation of the
gene. In this study we examined methylation pattern at potential regulatory
elements of the paternally expressed NNAT gene in a cohort of WT patients in
order to further characterize the molecular mechanism causing overexpression of
this regulatory gene. We demonstrate that transcriptional upregulation of NNAT in
WT is grossly independent of the bladder cancer-associated protein (BLCAP) gene, 
an imprinted gene within the imprinted domain of the NNAT locus. However,
expression of the BLCAP transcript isoform v2a formerly known to be selectively
expressed from the paternal allele in brain was associated with high expression
of NNAT. This contrasts the situation we found at the IGF2/H19 locus, which shows
high overexpression of IGF2 and inversely correlated expression of the H19 gene
in WT. An analysis of DNA methylation in two potential regulatory regions of the 
NNAT locus by pyrosequencing revealed significant hypomethylation of the tumors
compared to normal kidney tissue. Interestingly, the difference in DNA
methylation was highest at CpGs that were observed within three putative binding 
sites of the CCCTC-binding factor CTCF. Most importantly, hypomethylation of both
NNAT regulatory regions is significantly associated with the upregulation of NNAT
expression and the BLCAP_v2a transcript. Our data indicate that the methylation
status of a not-yet-described regulatory element within the NNAT locus that
contains four potential CTCF binding sites determines the expression level of
NNAT and the nearby located BLCAP_v2a transcript, thereby suggesting a functional
role in the aberrant upregulation of NNAT in WT.

PMCID: PMC3692448
PMID: 23825673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Nov 15;22(22):4627-37. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt311. Epub 2013 Jul
2.

Sox-Oct motifs contribute to maintenance of the unmethylated H19 ICR in YAC
transgenic mice.

Sakaguchi R(1), Okamura E, Matsuzaki H, Fukamizu A, Tanimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences.

Abnormal methylation at the maternally inherited H19 imprinted control region
(H19 ICR) is one of the causative alterations leading to pathogenesis of
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS). Recently, it was shown in human BWS patients, 
as well as mouse cell culture experiments, that Sox-Oct motifs (SOM) in the H19
ICR might play a role in protecting the maternal ICR from de novo DNA
methylation. By grafting a mouse H19 ICR fragment into a human ß-globin yeast
artificial chromosome (YAC) followed by analysis in transgenic mice (TgM), we
showed previously that the fragment carried sufficient information to establish
and maintain differential methylation after fertilization. To examine possible
functions of the SOM in the establishment and/or maintenance of differential
methylation, two kinds of YAC-TgM were generated in this study. In the <U+0394>SOM TgM, 
carrying the mouse H19 ICR bearing an SOM deletion, a maternally inherited
transgenic ICR exhibited increased levels of methylation around the deletion
site, in comparison to the wild-type control, after implantation. In the <U+03BB> + CTCF
+ b (LCb) TgM, carrying a 2.3 kb <U+03BB> DNA fragment supplemented with the fragment b 
including the SOM and four CTCF binding sites, maternally and some of the
paternally inherited LCb fragments were significantly less methylated when
compared with a control <U+03BB> + CTCF fragment that was supplemented only with
additional CTCF sites; the <U+03BB> + CTCF was substantially methylated regardless of
the parent of origin after implantation. These results demonstrated that the SOM 
in the maternal H19 ICR was required for maintaining surrounding sequences in the
unmethylated state in vivo.

PMID: 23821645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Genome Res. 2013 Oct;23(10):1624-35. doi: 10.1101/gr.150136.112. Epub 2013 Jun
26.

Genome-wide and parental allele-specific analysis of CTCF and cohesin DNA binding
in mouse brain reveals a tissue-specific binding pattern and an association with 
imprinted differentially methylated regions.

Prickett AR(1), Barkas N, McCole RB, Hughes S, Amante SM, Schulz R, Oakey RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical & Molecular Genetics, King's College London, Guy's
Hospital, London, SE1 9RT, United Kingdom.

DNA binding factors are essential for regulating gene expression. CTCF and
cohesin are DNA binding factors with central roles in chromatin organization and 
gene expression. We determined the sites of CTCF and cohesin binding to DNA in
mouse brain, genome wide and in an allele-specific manner with high read-depth
ChIP-seq. By comparing our results with existing data for mouse liver and
embryonic stem (ES) cells, we investigated the tissue specificity of CTCF binding
sites. ES cells have fewer unique CTCF binding sites occupied than liver and
brain, consistent with a ground-state pattern of CTCF binding that is elaborated 
during differentiation. CTCF binding sites without the canonical consensus motif 
were highly tissue specific. In brain, a third of CTCF and cohesin binding sites 
coincide, consistent with the potential for many interactions between cohesin and
CTCF but also many instances of independent action. In the context of genomic
imprinting, CTCF and/or cohesin bind to a majority but not all differentially
methylated regions, with preferential binding to the unmethylated parental
allele. Whether the parental allele-specific methylation was established in the
parental germlines or post-fertilization in the embryo is not a determinant in
CTCF or cohesin binding. These findings link CTCF and cohesin with the control
regions of a subset of imprinted genes, supporting the notion that imprinting
control is mechanistically diverse.

PMCID: PMC3787260
PMID: 23804403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. FASEB J. 2013 Oct;27(10):4194-203. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-229070. Epub 2013 Jun 26.

Hypermethylation reduces expression of tumor-suppressor PLZF and regulates
proliferation and apoptosis in non-small-cell lung cancers.

Wang X(1), Wang L, Guo S, Bao Y, Ma Y, Yan F, Xu K, Xu Z, Jin L, Lu D, Xu J, Wang
JC.

Author information: 
(1)2J.-C.W., National Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Contemporary
Anthropology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China. 
jcwang@fudan.edu.cn.

Deregulation of promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger protein (PLZF), a tumor
suppressor gene, was reported in different types of solid tumors. This study for 
the first time explored the reduced expression of PLZF and its effects in
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) carcinogenesis. PLZF was found to be
down-regulated by 62.8% in 87.1% of 154 paired NSCLC samples by quantitative
real-time PCR, and its expression was found to be associated with the sex of the 
patient (P=0.02). Further analysis showed that down-regulation of PLZF in 35.6%
NSCLC samples (31 out of 87) was triggered by hypermethylation in the promoter
region. This was validated by demethylation analysis using the A549 cell line.
Dual-luciferase reporter assay indicated that CTCF binding to the promoter region
could activate PLZF transcription. Overexpression of PLZF in both A549 and LTEP
lung cancer cell lines was found to inhibit proliferation and increase apoptosis.
Therefore, reduced expression of PLZF was found to be common in NSCLC. PLZF
down-regulation was partially correlated with hypermethylation in the promoter
region. Decreased levels of PLZF expression may contribute to the pathogenesis of
NSCLC by promoting cell survival. Therefore, the restoration of PLZF expression
may serve as a new strategy for NSCLC therapy.

PMID: 23804241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Cell. 2013 Jun 20;153(7):1537-51. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.028.

Jpx RNA activates Xist by evicting CTCF.

Sun S(1), Del Rosario BC, Szanto A, Ogawa Y, Jeon Y, Lee JT.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, and Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2013 Aug;14(8):518.

In mammals, dosage compensation between XX and XY individuals occurs through X
chromosome inactivation (XCI). The noncoding Xist RNA is expressed and initiates 
XCI only when more than one X chromosome is present. Current models invoke a
dependency on the X-to-autosome ratio (X:A), but molecular factors remain poorly 
defined. Here, we demonstrate that molecular titration between an X-encoded RNA
and an autosomally encoded protein dictates Xist induction. In pre-XCI cells,
CTCF protein represses Xist transcription. At the onset of XCI, Jpx RNA is
upregulated, binds CTCF, and extricates CTCF from one Xist allele. We demonstrate
that CTCF is an RNA-binding protein and is titrated away from the Xist promoter
by Jpx RNA. Thus, Jpx activates Xist by evicting CTCF. The functional antagonism 
via molecular titration reveals a role for long noncoding RNA in epigenetic
regulation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3777401
PMID: 23791181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2013 Jul;162B(5):474-83. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32178. Epub 2013 Jun 14.

Allele-specific expression of the serotonin transporter and its transcription
factors following lamotrigine treatment in vitro.

D'Souza UM(1), Powell-Smith G, Haddley K, Powell TR, Bubb VJ, Price T, McGuffin
P, Quinn JP, Farmer AE.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry (SGDP) Centre, Institute of
Psychiatry, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.

Lamotrigine, a mood stabilizer used clinically in the treatment of bipolar
disorder, is thought to exert actions on the serotonin system. However
lamotrigine's exact mechanism of action remains unclear. The current study
investigated whether lamotrigine might exert its effects through altering the
expression of the serotonin transporter (5-HTT) gene and its regulatory
transcription factors Y box binding protein 1 (YB-1) and CCCTC-binding factor
(CTCF). We further considered whether functional variable number tandem repeat
(VNTR) polymorphisms in the promoter region of 5-HTT, (5-HTTLPR) and within
intron 2 (Stin2) of the gene, moderated any putative gene expression changes. The
study employed an in vitro design carried out in human lymphoblastoid cell lines 
(LCLs) to investigate the effects of lamotrigine treatment at 0.04, 0.2, and
0.4<U+2009>mM doses for 24<U+2009>hr on the mRNA expression of 5-HTT, YB-1, and CTCF. LCLs were
selected based on combinations of haplotypes of the two VNTRs in the serotonin
transporter gene; creating low-expressing and high-expressing LCL groups.
Ubiquitin C (UBC) and topoisomerase I (TOP1) genes were found to be the most
stably expressed housekeeping genes in drug-treated LCLs. Subsequently,
quantitative PCR revealed that higher doses of lamotrigine significantly lowered 
5-HTT expression and increased CTCF expression. Haplotype-specific differences in
CTCF expression were found in response to lamotrigine, with strongest expression 
changes observed in the high-expressing LCLs. These data provide an
allele-specific in vitro model for examining the molecular targets of
lamotrigine, and support the important role of the serotonin transporter gene in 
its clinical mechanism of action.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23765727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Oct 15;22(20):4180-93. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt265. Epub 2013 Jun
10.

Regional chromatin decompaction in Cornelia de Lange syndrome associated with
NIPBL disruption can be uncoupled from cohesin and CTCF.

Nolen LD, Boyle S, Ansari M, Pritchard E, Bickmore WA.

Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a developmental disorder caused by mutations
in NIPBL, a protein which has functionally been associated with the cohesin
complex. Mutations in core cohesin complex components have also been reported in 
individuals with CdLS-like phenotypes. In addition to its role in sister
chromatid cohesion, cohesin is thought to play a role in regulating gene
expression during development. The mechanism of this gene regulation remains
unclear, but NIPBL and cohesin have been reported to affect long-range
chromosomal interactions, both independently and through interactions with CTCF. 
We used fluorescence in situ hybridization to investigate whether the disruption 
of NIPBL affects chromosome architecture. We show that cells from CdLS patients
exhibit visible chromatin decompaction, that is most pronounced across gene-rich 
regions of the genome. Cells carrying mutations predicted to have a more severe
effect on NIPBL function show more extensive chromatin decompaction than those
carrying milder mutations. This cellular phenotype was reproduced in normal cells
depleted for NIPBL with siRNA, but was not seen following the knockdown of either
the cohesin component SMC3, or CTCF. We conclude that NIPBL has a function in
modulating chromatin architecture, particularly for gene-rich areas of the
chromosome, that is not dependent on SMC3/cohesin or CTCF, raising the
possibility that the aetiology of disorders associated with the mutation of core 
cohesin components is distinct from that associated with the disruption of NIPBL 
itself in classical CdLS.

PMCID: PMC3781641
PMID: 23760082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Jul 11;93(1):124-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.05.007. Epub
2013 Jun 6.

De novo mutations in the genome organizer CTCF cause intellectual disability.

Gregor A(1), Oti M, Kouwenhoven EN, Hoyer J, Sticht H, Ekici AB, Kjaergaard S,
Rauch A, Stunnenberg HG, Uebe S, Vasileiou G, Reis A, Zhou H, Zweier C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

An increasing number of genes involved in chromatin structure and epigenetic
regulation has been implicated in a variety of developmental disorders, often
including intellectual disability. By trio exome sequencing and subsequent
mutational screening we now identified two de novo frameshift mutations and one
de novo missense mutation in CTCF in individuals with intellectual disability,
microcephaly, and growth retardation. Furthermore, an individual with a larger
deletion including CTCF was identified. CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor) is one of the
most important chromatin organizers in vertebrates and is involved in various
chromatin regulation processes such as higher order of chromatin organization,
enhancer function, and maintenance of three-dimensional chromatin structure.
Transcriptome analyses in all three individuals with point mutations revealed
deregulation of genes involved in signal transduction and emphasized the role of 
CTCF in enhancer-driven expression of genes. Our findings indicate that
haploinsufficiency of CTCF affects genomic interaction of enhancers and their
regulated gene promoters that drive developmental processes and cognition.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3710752
PMID: 23746550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Front Oncol. 2013 May 24;3:131. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2013.00131. eCollection 2013.

Increased Intragenic IGF2 Methylation is Associated with Repression of Insulator 
Activity and Elevated Expression in Serous Ovarian Carcinoma.

Huang Z(1), Murphy SK.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics Research Laboratory, Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Department 
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Duke University Medical Center , Durham, NC , USA.

Overexpression of insulin-like growth factor-II (IGF2) is a prominent
characteristic of many epithelial ovarian malignancies. IGF2 imprinting and
transcription are regulated in part through DNA methylation, which in turn
regulates binding of the insulator protein CTCF within the IGF2/H19 imprint
center. We have shown that IGF2 overexpression in ovarian cancer is associated
with hypermethylation of CTCF binding sites within the IGF2/H19 imprint center.
The aim of this study was to investigate the methylation and binding capacity of 
a novel putative CTCF binding motif located intragenic to IGF2 and determine how 
this relates to IGF2 expression. Among 35 primary serous epithelial ovarian
cancer specimens, methylation of two CpGs, including one within the core binding 
motif and another adjacent to this motif, was higher in the 18 cancers with
elevated IGF2 expression versus 10 with low expression (average 68.2 versus
38.5%; p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001). We also found that the CpG site within the CTCF binding motif
is hypermethylated in male gametes (>92%; average 93.2%; N<U+2009>=<U+2009>16). We confirmed
binding of CTCF to this region in ovarian cancer cells, as well as the paralog of
CTCF, Brother Of the Regulator of Imprinted Sites (BORIS), which is frequently
overexpressed in cancers. The unmethylated CTCF binding motif has insulator
activity in cells that express CTCF or BORIS, but not in cells that express both 
CTCF and BORIS. These intragenic CpG dinucleotides therefore comprise a novel
paternal germline imprint mark and are located in a binding motif for the
insulator protein CTCF. Methylation of the CpG dinucleotides is positively
correlated with IGF2 transcription, indicating that increased methylation
represses insulator function. These combined results suggest that methylation and
CTCF binding at this region play important roles in regulating the level of IGF2 
transcription. Our data have revealed a novel epigenetic regulatory element
within the IGF2/H19 imprinted domain that is highly relevant to aberrant IGF2
expression in ovarian malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3662894
PMID: 23745176  [PubMed]


378. J Hum Genet. 2013 Jul;58(7):446-54. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2013.55. Epub 2013 Jun 6.

Regional DNA methylation differences between humans and chimpanzees are
associated with genetic changes, transcriptional divergence and disease genes.

Fukuda K(1), Ichiyanagi K, Yamada Y, Go Y, Udono T, Wada S, Maeda T, Soejima H,
Saitou N, Ito T, Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epigenomics and Development, Medical Institute of Bioregulation,
and Epigenome Network Research Center, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Changes in gene expression have been proposed to have an important role in the
evolutionary changes in phenotypes. Interspecific changes in gene expression can 
result not only from genetic changes in regulatory regions but also from
epigenetic changes in such regions. Here we report the identification of genomic 
regions showing differences in DNA methylation between humans and chimpanzees
(termed S-DMRs for species-specific differentially methylated regions) on
chromosomes 21 and 22. These regional methylation differences are frequently
associated with genes, including those relevant to a disease, such as Alzheimer's
disease, diabetes mellitus or cancer. Methylation differences are often
correlated with changes in promoter activity or alternative splicing. Comparative
studies including other great ape species provide evidence for the contribution
of genetic changes to some of these S-DMRs. Genetic changes responsible for the
S-DMRs include gain or loss of CTCF-binding site and changes in CpG density in
microsatellite repeats. Our results suggest that DNA methylation changes, often
caused by small sequence changes, contribute to transcriptional and phenotypic
diversification in hominid evolution.

PMID: 23739127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Cell Rep. 2013 May 30;3(5):1678-89. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.04.024. Epub 2013 
May 23.

A genome-wide map of CTCF multivalency redefines the CTCF code.

Nakahashi H(1), Kwon KR, Resch W, Vian L, Dose M, Stavreva D, Hakim O, Pruett N, 
Nelson S, Yamane A, Qian J, Dubois W, Welsh S, Phair RD, Pugh BF, Lobanenkov V,
Hager GL, Casellas R.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics and Immunity, NIAMS, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

The "CTCF code" hypothesis posits that CTCF pleiotropic functions are driven by
recognition of diverse sequences through combinatorial use of its 11 zinc fingers
(ZFs). This model, however, is supported by in vitro binding studies of a limited
number of sequences. To study CTCF multivalency in vivo, we define ZF binding
requirements at ~50,000 genomic sites in primary lymphocytes. We find that CTCF
reads sequence diversity through ZF clustering. ZFs 4-7 anchor CTCF to ~80% of
targets containing the core motif. Nonconserved flanking sequences are recognized
by ZFs 1-2 and ZFs 8-11 clusters, which also stabilize CTCF broadly.
Alternatively, ZFs 9-11 associate with a second phylogenetically conserved
upstream motif at ~15% of its sites. Individually, ZFs increase overall binding
and chromatin residence time. Unexpectedly, we also uncovered a conserved
downstream DNA motif that destabilizes CTCF occupancy. Thus, CTCF associates with
a wide array of DNA modules via combinatorial clustering of its 11 ZFs.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3770538
PMID: 23707059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Cell. 2013 Jun 6;153(6):1281-95. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.04.053. Epub 2013 May
23.

Architectural protein subclasses shape 3D organization of genomes during lineage 
commitment.

Phillips-Cremins JE(1), Sauria ME, Sanyal A, Gerasimova TI, Lajoie BR, Bell JS,
Ong CT, Hookway TA, Guo C, Sun Y, Bland MJ, Wagstaff W, Dalton S, McDevitt TC,
Sen R, Dekker J, Taylor J, Corces VG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2013 Jun 6;153(6):1187-9.
    Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Jul 3;13(1):3-4.

Understanding the topological configurations of chromatin may reveal valuable
insights into how the genome and epigenome act in concert to control cell fate
during development. Here, we generate high-resolution architecture maps across
seven genomic loci in embryonic stem cells and neural progenitor cells. We
observe a hierarchy of 3D interactions that undergo marked reorganization at the 
submegabase scale during differentiation. Distinct combinations of CCCTC-binding 
factor (CTCF), Mediator, and cohesin show widespread enrichment in chromatin
interactions at different length scales. CTCF/cohesin anchor long-range
constitutive interactions that might form the topological basis for invariant
subdomains. Conversely, Mediator/cohesin bridge short-range enhancer-promoter
interactions within and between larger subdomains. Knockdown of Smc1 or Med12 in 
embryonic stem cells results in disruption of spatial architecture and
downregulation of genes found in cohesin-mediated interactions. We conclude that 
cell-type-specific chromatin organization occurs at the submegabase scale and
that architectural proteins shape the genome in hierarchical length scales.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3712340
PMID: 23706625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Genome Res. 2013 Aug;23(8):1224-34. doi: 10.1101/gr.156570.113. Epub 2013 May 23.

The genomic landscape of cohesin-associated chromatin interactions.

DeMare LE(1), Leng J, Cotney J, Reilly SK, Yin J, Sarro R, Noonan JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06510, USA.

Cohesin is implicated in establishing tissue-specific DNA loops that target
enhancers to promoters, and also localizes to sites bound by the insulator
protein CTCF, which blocks enhancer-promoter communication. However,
cohesin-associated interactions have not been characterized on a genome-wide
scale. Here we performed chromatin interaction analysis with paired-end tag
sequencing (ChIA-PET) of the cohesin subunit SMC1A in developing mouse limb. We
identified 2264 SMC1A interactions, of which 1491 (65%) involved sites
co-occupied by CTCF. SMC1A participates in tissue-specific enhancer-promoter
interactions and interactions that demarcate regions of correlated regulatory
output. In contrast to previous studies, we also identified interactions between 
promoters and distal sites that are maintained in multiple tissues but are poised
in embryonic stem cells and resolve to tissue-specific activated or repressed
chromatin states in the mouse embryo. Our results reveal the diversity of
cohesin-associated interactions in the genome and highlight their role in
establishing the regulatory architecture of development.

PMCID: PMC3730097
PMID: 23704192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Leukemia. 2014 Feb;28(2):349-61. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.158. Epub 2013 May 23.

Aberrant TAL1 activation is mediated by an interchromosomal interaction in human 
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Patel B(1), Kang Y(2), Cui K(3), Litt M(4), Riberio MS(1), Deng C(1), Salz T(1), 
Casada S(4), Fu X(5), Qiu Y(6), Zhao K(3), Huang S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA. (2)1] Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL,
USA [2] College of Life Science, Jilin University, Changchun, China. (3)Center
for System Biology, NHLBI, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Medical Education Center, Ball State University, Muncie, IN, USA. (5)College
of Life Science, Jilin University, Changchun, China. (6)1] Department of Anatomy 
and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL,
USA [2] Shands Cancer Center, College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA. (7)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA [2] Shands
Cancer Center, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.

Long-range chromatin interactions control metazoan gene transcription. However,
the involvement of intra- and interchromosomal interactions in development and
oncogenesis remains unclear. TAL1/SCL is a critical transcription factor required
for the development of all hematopoietic lineages; yet, aberrant TAL1
transcription often occurs in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Here, 
we report that oncogenic TAL1 expression is regulated by different intra- and
interchromosomal loops in normal hematopoietic and leukemic cells, respectively. 
These intra- and interchromosomal loops alter the cell-type-specific enhancers
that interact with the TAL1 promoter. We show that human SET1 (hSET1)-mediated
H3K4 methylations promote a long-range chromatin loop, which brings the +51
enhancer in close proximity to TAL1 promoter 1 in erythroid cells. The
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) facilitates this long-range enhancer/promoter
interaction of the TAL1 locus in erythroid cells while blocking the same
enhancer/promoter interaction of the TAL1 locus in human T-cell leukemia. In
human T-ALL, a T-cell-specific transcription factor c-Maf-mediated
interchromosomal interaction brings the TAL1 promoter into close proximity with a
T-cell-specific regulatory element located on chromosome 16, activating aberrant 
TAL1 oncogene expression. Thus, our study reveals a novel molecular mechanism
involving changes in three-dimensional chromatin interactions that activate the
TAL1 oncogene in human T-cell leukemia.

PMID: 23698277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2013 May 6;368(1620):20120369. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2012.0369. Print 2013.

CTCF: the protein, the binding partners, the binding sites and their chromatin
loops.

Holwerda SJ(1), de Laat W.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, 
3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

CTCF has it all. The transcription factor binds to tens of thousands of genomic
sites, some tissue-specific, others ultra-conserved. It can act as a
transcriptional activator, repressor and insulator, and it can pause
transcription. CTCF binds at chromatin domain boundaries, at enhancers and gene
promoters, and inside gene bodies. It can attract many other transcription
factors to chromatin, including tissue-specific transcriptional activators,
repressors, cohesin and RNA polymerase II, and it forms chromatin loops. Yet, or 
perhaps therefore, CTCF's exact function at a given genomic site is
unpredictable. It appears to be determined by the associated transcription
factors, by the location of the binding site relative to the transcriptional
start site of a gene, and by the site's engagement in chromatin loops with other 
CTCF-binding sites, enhancers or gene promoters. Here, we will discuss
genome-wide features of CTCF binding events, as well as locus-specific functions 
of this remarkable transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC3682731
PMID: 23650640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Immunol. 2013 May 15;190(10):4915-21. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300218.

Chromatin architecture, CCCTC-binding factor, and V(D)J recombination: managing
long-distance relationships at antigen receptor loci.

Shih HY(1), Krangel MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA.

The rearrangement of T and B lymphocyte Ag receptor loci occurs within a highly
complex chromosomal environment and is orchestrated through complex mechanisms.
During the past decade, a large body of literature has highlighted the
significance of chromatin architecture at Ag receptor loci in supporting the
genomic assembly process: in preparation for recombination, these loci tend to
contract and form multiple loops that shorten the distances between gene segments
and facilitate recombination events. CCCTC-binding factor, CTCF, has received
much attention in this regard since it has emerged as an important regulator of
chromatin organization and transcription. In this review, we summarize recent
work outlining conformational dynamics at Ag receptor loci during lymphocyte
development and we discuss the role of CTCF in Ag receptor locus conformation and
repertoire development.

PMCID: PMC3648861
PMID: 23645930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Epigenetics. 2013 May;8(5):512-21. doi: 10.4161/epi.24450. Epub 2013 Apr 17.

Chromatin remodeling of human subtelomeres and TERRA promoters upon cellular
senescence: commonalities and differences between chromosomes.

Thijssen PE(1), Tobi EW, Balog J, Schouten SG, Kremer D, El Bouazzaoui F,
Henneman P, Putter H, Eline Slagboom P, Heijmans BT, van der Maarel SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Subtelomeres are patchworks of evolutionary conserved sequence blocks and harbor 
the transcriptional start sites for telomere repeat containing RNAs (TERRA).
Recent studies suggest that the interplay between telomeres and subtelomeric
chromatin is required for maintaining telomere function. To further characterize 
chromatin remodeling of subtelomeres in relation to telomere shortening and
cellular senescence, we systematically quantified histone modifications and DNA
methylation at the subtelomeres of chromosomes 7q and 11q in primary human WI-38 
fibroblasts. Upon senescence, both subtelomeres were characterized by a decrease 
in markers of constitutive heterochromatin, suggesting relative chromatin
relaxation. However, we did not find increased levels of markers of euchromatin
or derepression of the 7q VIPR2 gene. The repressed state of the subtelomeres was
maintained upon senescence, which could be attributed to a rise in levels of
facultative heterochromatin markers at both subtelomeres. While
senescence-induced subtelomeric chromatin remodeling was similar for both
chromosomes, chromatin remodeling at TERRA promoters displayed
chromosome-specific patterns. At the 7q TERRA promoter, chromatin structure was
co-regulated with the more proximal subtelomere. In contrast, the 11q TERRA
promoter, which was previously shown to be bound by CCCTC-binding factor CTCF,
displayed lower levels of markers of constitutive heterochromatin that did not
change upon senescence, whereas levels of markers of facultative heterochromatin 
decreased upon senescence. In line with the chromatin state data, transcription
of 11q TERRA but not 7q TERRA was detected. Our study provides a detailed
description of human subtelomeric chromatin dynamics and shows distinct
regulation of the TERRA promoters of 7q and 11q upon cellular senescence.

PMCID: PMC3741221
PMID: 23644601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. PLoS Genet. 2013 Apr;9(4):e1003436. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003436. Epub 2013 
Apr 18.

Insulators target active genes to transcription factories and polycomb-repressed 
genes to polycomb bodies.

Li HB(1), Ohno K, Gui H, Pirrotta V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Rutgers University,
Piscataway, New Jersey, United States of America.

Polycomb bodies are foci of Polycomb proteins in which different Polycomb target 
genes are thought to co-localize in the nucleus, looping out from their
chromosomal context. We have shown previously that insulators, not Polycomb
response elements (PREs), mediate associations among Polycomb Group (PcG) targets
to form Polycomb bodies. Here we use live imaging and 3C interactions to show
that transgenes containing PREs and endogenous PcG-regulated genes are targeted
by insulator proteins to different nuclear structures depending on their state of
activity. When two genes are repressed, they co-localize in Polycomb bodies. When
both are active, they are targeted to transcription factories in a fashion
dependent on Trithorax and enhancer specificity as well as the insulator protein 
CTCF. In the absence of CTCF, assembly of Polycomb bodies is essentially reduced 
to those representing genomic clusters of Polycomb target genes. The critical
role of Trithorax suggests that stable association with a specialized
transcription factory underlies the cellular memory of the active state.

PMCID: PMC3630138
PMID: 23637616  [PubMed - in process]


387. Front Genet. 2013 Apr 25;4:64. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2013.00064. eCollection 2013.

miR-221 affects multiple cancer pathways by modulating the level of hundreds
messenger RNAs.

Lupini L(1), Bassi C, Ferracin M, Bartonicek N, D'Abundo L, Zagatti B, Callegari 
E, Musa G, Moshiri F, Gramantieri L, Corrales FJ, Enright AJ, Sabbioni S, Negrini
M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Morfologia, Chirurgia e Medicina Sperimentale, Università di
Ferrara Ferrara, Italy.

microRNA miR-221 is frequently over-expressed in a variety of human neoplasms.
Aim of this study was to identify new miR-221 gene targets to improve our
understanding on the molecular tumor-promoting mechanisms affected by miR-221.
Gene expression profiling of miR-221-transfected-SNU-398 cells was analyzed by
the Sylamer algorithm to verify the enrichment of miR-221 targets among
down-modulated genes. This analysis revealed that enforced expression of miR-221 
in SNU-398 cells caused the down-regulation of 602 mRNAs carrying sequences
homologous to miR-221 seed sequence within their 3'UTRs. Pathways analysis
performed on these genes revealed their prominent involvement in cell
proliferation and apoptosis. Activation of E2F, MYC, NFkB, and ß-catenin pathways
was experimentally proven. Some of the new miR-221 target genes, including RB1,
WEE1 (cell cycle inhibitors), APAF1 (pro-apoptotic), ANXA1, CTCF (transcriptional
repressor), were individually validated as miR-221 targets in SNU-398, HepG2, and
HEK293 cell lines. By identifying a large set of miR-221 gene targets, this study
improves our knowledge about miR-221 molecular mechanisms involved in
tumorigenesis. The modulation of mRNA level of 602 genes confirms the ability of 
miR-221 to promote cancer by affecting multiple oncogenic pathways.

PMCID: PMC3635019
PMID: 23630541  [PubMed]


388. Mol Cells. 2013 May;35(5):388-95. doi: 10.1007/s10059-013-2283-z. Epub 2013 Apr
24.

CCCTC-binding factor controls its own nuclear transport via regulating the
expression of importin 13.

Wang R(1), Shen J, Huang P, Zhu X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Protein Engineering, Beijing Institute of Biotechnology,
Beijing, China.

CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), a multivalent zinc-finger protein, is involved in
different aspects of regulation including promoter activation or repression, gene
silencing, chromatin insulation, gene imprinting, X-chromosome inactivation, cell
growth or differentiation and tumor genesis. However, the molecular mechanisms of
CTCF nuclear import remains unclear. In this study, we showed that the expression
of CTCF influenced the intracellular distribution of itself, which might go
through transport receptor - import 13 (IPO13). We further confirmed that there
is a CTCF target site in ipo13 -774~-573 bp promoter region and CTCF regulates
the expression of IPO13. Besides, GST pull-down and Co-IP experiments
demonstrated that CTCF interacts with IPO13. Immunofluorescence staining showed
that IPO13 influenced intracellular distribution of CTCF. In all, we conclude
that CTCF regulates the expression of IPO13, which, in turn, mediates the nuclear
import of CTCF.

PMCID: PMC3887860
PMID: 23620300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Sep;1829(9):963-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2013.04.006. 
Epub 2013 Apr 20.

Histone acetylation contributes to chromatin looping between the locus control
region and globin gene by influencing hypersensitive site formation.

Kim YW(1), Kim A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Pusan National University, Busan, South
Korea.

Chromatin loops are formed between enhancers and promoters and between insulators
to regulate gene transcription in the eukaryotic genome. These transcription
regulatory elements forming loops have highly acetylated histones. To understand 
the correlation between histone acetylation and chromatin loop formation, we
inhibited the expression of histone acetyltransferase CBP and p300 in erythroid
K562 cells and analyzed the chromatin structure of the ß-globin locus. The
proximity between the locus control region (LCR) and the active (G)<U+03B3>-globin gene 
was decreased in the ß-globin locus when histones were hypoacetylated by the
double knockdown of CBP and p300. Sensitivity to DNase I and binding of erythroid
specific activators were reduced in the hypoacetylated LCR hypersensitive sites
(HSs) and gene promoter. Interestingly, the chromatin loop between HS5 and 3'HS1 
was formed regardless of the hypoacetylation of the ß-globin locus. CTCF binding 
was maintained at HS5 and 3'HS1 in the hypoacetylated locus. Thus, these results 
indicate that histone acetylation contributes to chromatin looping through the
formation of HSs in the LCR and gene promoter. However, looping between
insulators appears to be independent from histone acetylation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23607989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Genes Dev. 2013 Apr 15;27(8):859-72. doi: 10.1101/gad.210377.112. Epub 2013 Apr
18.

Suv4-20h2 mediates chromatin compaction and is important for cohesin recruitment 
to heterochromatin.

Hahn M(1), Dambacher S, Dulev S, Kuznetsova AY, Eck S, Wörz S, Sadic D, Schulte
M, Mallm JP, Maiser A, Debs P, von Melchner H, Leonhardt H, Schermelleh L, Rohr
K, Rippe K, Storchova Z, Schotta G.

Author information: 
(1)Munich Center for Integrated Protein Science, Ludwig Maximilians University,
Germany.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Sep 15;12(18):2925-6.

Cohesin plays an important role in chromatid cohesion and has additional
functions in higher-order chromatin organization and in transcriptional
regulation. The binding of cohesin to euchromatic regions is largely mediated by 
CTCF or the mediator complex. However, it is currently unknown how cohesin is
recruited to pericentric heterochromatin in mammalian cells. Here we define the
histone methyltransferase Suv4-20h2 as a major structural constituent of
heterochromatin that mediates chromatin compaction and cohesin recruitment.
Suv4-20h2 stably associates with pericentric heterochromatin through synergistic 
interactions with multiple heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) molecules, resulting
in compaction of heterochromatic regions. Suv4-20h mutant cells display an
overall reduced chromatin compaction and an altered chromocenter organization in 
interphase referred to as "chromocenter scattering." We found that
Suv4-20h-deficient cells display chromosome segregation defects during mitosis
that coincide with reduced sister chromatid cohesion. Notably, cohesin subunits
interact with Suv4-20h2 both in vitro and in vivo. This interaction is necessary 
for cohesin binding to heterochromatin, as Suv4-20h mutant cells display
substantially reduced cohesin levels at pericentric heterochromatin. This defect 
is most prominent in G0-phase cells, where cohesin is virtually lost from
heterochromatin, suggesting that Suv4-20h2 is involved in the initial loading or 
maintenance of cohesion subunits. In summary, our data provide the first
compelling evidence that Suv4-20h2 plays essential roles in regulating nuclear
architecture and ensuring proper chromosome segregation.

PMCID: PMC3650224
PMID: 23599346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Anim Sci J. 2013 Apr;84(4):281-8. doi: 10.1111/asj.12011. Epub 2012 Dec 3.

Characterization of the intronic VNTR polymorphisms found in a paralog of chicken
serotonin transporter gene.

Abe H(1), Takeuchi HA, Yamada S, Nakamura A, Nagao K, Nirasawa K, Ito S,
Inoue-Murayama M.

Author information: 
(1)Wildlife Research Center, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8203, Japan.

Polymorphisms in the neurotransmitter-related genes can be a major source of
behavioral variations. We searched for polymorphic sites in chicken
neurotransmitter-related genes and identified two variable number of tandem
repeat (VNTR) loci encompassing the paralog of chicken serotonin transporter gene
(5-HTT). Both intronic VNTR were highly polymorphic across chicken breeds and the
other Galliformes species, even though predominant alleles were considerably
different among breeds. One VNTR locus contained sequences complementary to a
conserved motif of CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) within each repetitive unit,
indicating that transcription of chicken 5-HTT paralog may be regulated by the
CTCF protein. It is of great interest to contrast these results with previous
knowledge on the human 5-HTT that also has CTCF binding sites in the repetitive
units of intronic VNTR. Additionally, we measured the degree of impulsiveness in 
domestic chicks for their preference of immediate/small to large/delayed rewards.
A significant difference in the impulsiveness score was detected between two
chicken breeds (White Leghorn vs. Boris Brown; P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01), as well as between
White Leghorn chicks with different 5-HTT genotypes. These findings imply the
possibility that 5-HTT VNTR genotypes may have some impact on chicks' impulsive
choice by modifying the serotonergic neurotransmission.

© 2012 Japanese Society of Animal Science.

PMID: 23590500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 May 1;41(10):5290-302. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt240. Epub 2013
Apr 12.

Induced DNA demethylation can reshape chromatin topology at the IGF2-H19 locus.

Ito Y(1), Nativio R, Murrell A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, CRUK Cambridge Institute,
Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK.

Choriocarcinomas are embryonal tumours with loss of imprinting and
hypermethylation at the insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2)-H19 locus. The DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor, 5-Aza-2'deoxycytidine (5-AzaCdR) is an approved
epigenetic cancer therapy. However, it is not known to what extent 5-AzaCdR
influences other epigenetic marks. In this study, we set out to determine whether
5-AzaCdR treatment can reprogram the epigenomic organization of the IGF2-H19
locus in a choriocarcinoma cancer cell line (JEG3). We found that localized DNA
demethylation at the H19 imprinting control region (ICR) induced by 5-AzaCdR,
reduced IGF2, increased H19 expression, increased CTCF and cohesin recruitment
and changed histone modifications. Furthermore chromatin accessibility was
increased locus-wide and chromatin looping topography was altered such that a
CTCF site downstream of the H19 enhancers switched its association with the CTCF 
site upstream of the IGF2 promoters to associate with the ICR. We identified a
stable chromatin looping domain, which forms independently of DNA methylation.
This domain contains the IGF2 gene and is marked by a histone H3 lysine 27
trimethylation block between CTCF site upstream of the IGF2 promoters and the
Centrally Conserved Domain upstream of the ICR. Together, these data provide new 
insights into the responsiveness of chromatin topography to DNA methylation
changes.

PMCID: PMC3664821
PMID: 23585276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Adv Protein Chem Struct Biol. 2013;90:67-117. doi:
10.1016/B978-0-12-410523-2.00003-1.

Zinc finger proteins and the 3D organization of chromosomes.

Feinauer CJ(1), Hofmann A, Goldt S, Liu L, Máté G, Heermann DW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Theoretical Physics, Heidelberg University, Philosophenweg,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Zinc finger domains are one of the most common structural motifs in eukaryotic
cells, which employ the motif in some of their most important proteins (including
TFIIIA, CTCF, and ZiF268). These DNA binding proteins contain up to 37 zinc
finger domains connected by flexible linker regions. They have been shown to be
important organizers of the 3D structure of chromosomes and as such are called
the master weaver of the genome. Using NMR and numerical simulations, much
progress has been made during the past few decades in understanding their various
functions and their ways of binding to the DNA, but a large knowledge gap remains
to be filled. One problem of the hitherto existing theoretical models of zinc
finger protein DNA binding in this context is that they are aimed at describing
specific binding. Furthermore, they exclusively focus on the microscopic details 
or approach the problem without considering such details at all. We present the
Flexible Linker Model, which aims explicitly at describing nonspecific binding.
It takes into account the most important effects of flexible linkers and allows a
qualitative investigation of the effects of these linkers on the nonspecific
binding affinity of zinc finger proteins to DNA. Our results indicate that the
binding affinity is increased by the flexible linkers by several orders of
magnitude. Moreover, they show that the binding map for proteins with more than
one domain presents interesting structures, which have been neither observed nor 
described before, and can be interpreted to fit very well with existing theories 
of facilitated target location. The effect of the increased binding affinity is
also in agreement with recent experiments that until now have lacked an
explanation. We further explore the class of proteins with flexible linkers,
which are unstructured until they bind. We have developed a methodology to
characterize these flexible proteins. Employing the concept of barcodes, we
propose a measure to compare such flexible proteins in terms of a similarity
measure. This measure is validated by a comparison between a geometric similarity
measure and the topological similarity measure that takes geometry as well as
topology into account.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23582202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Dis Model Mech. 2013 Jul;6(4):977-92. doi: 10.1242/dmm.010975. Epub 2013 Apr 10.

Long-lasting alterations to DNA methylation and ncRNAs could underlie the effects
of fetal alcohol exposure in mice.

Laufer BI(1), Mantha K, Kleiber ML, Diehl EJ, Addison SM, Singh SM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Unit, Department of Biology, Western University, London,
Ontario, N6A 5B7, Canada.

Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASDs) are characterized by life-long changes
in gene expression, neurodevelopment and behavior. What mechanisms initiate and
maintain these changes are not known, but current research suggests a role for
alcohol-induced epigenetic changes. In this study we assessed alterations to
adult mouse brain tissue by assaying DNA cytosine methylation and small noncoding
RNA (ncRNA) expression, specifically the microRNA (miRNA) and small nucleolar RNA
(snoRNA) subtypes. We found long-lasting alterations in DNA methylation as a
result of fetal alcohol exposure, specifically in the imprinted regions of the
genome harboring ncRNAs and sequences interacting with regulatory proteins. A
large number of major nodes from the identified networks, such as Pten signaling,
contained transcriptional repressor CTCF-binding sites in their promoters,
illustrating the functional consequences of alcohol-induced changes to DNA
methylation. Next, we assessed ncRNA expression using two independent array
platforms and quantitative PCR. The results identified 34 genes that are targeted
by the deregulated miRNAs. Of these, four (Pten, Nmnat1, Slitrk2 and Otx2) were
viewed as being crucial in the context of FASDs given their roles in the brain.
Furthermore,  20% of the altered ncRNAs mapped to three imprinted regions
(Snrpn-Ube3a, Dlk1-Dio3 and Sfmbt2) that showed differential methylation and have
been previously implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders. The findings of this 
study help to expand on the mechanisms behind the long-lasting changes in the
brain transcriptome of FASD individuals. The observed changes could contribute to
the initiation and maintenance of the long-lasting effect of alcohol.

PMCID: PMC3701217
PMID: 23580197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Dec;21(12):1344-8. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.71. Epub 2013 Apr
10.

Evidence for anticipation in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome.

Berland S(1), Appelbäck M, Bruland O, Beygo J, Buiting K, Mackay DJ, Karen Temple
I, Houge G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University
Hospital, Bergen, Norway.

Classical Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) was diagnosed in two sisters and
their male cousin. The children's mothers and a third sister were tall statured
(178, 185 and 187<U+2009>cm) and one had mild BWS features as a child. Their parents had
average heights of 173<U+2009>cm (mother) and 180<U+2009>cm (father). This second generation
tall stature and third generation BWS correlated with increased methylation of
the maternal H19/IGF2-locus. The results were obtained by bisulphite treatment
and subclone Sanger sequencing or next generation sequencing to quantitate the
degree of CpG-methylation on three locations: the H19 promoter region and two
CTCF binding sites in the H19 imprinting control region (ICR1), specifically in
ICR1 repeats B1 and B7. Upon ICR1 copy number analysis and sequencing, the same
maternal point variant NCBI36:11:g.1979595T>C that had been described previously 
as a cause of BWS in three brothers, was found. As expected, this point variant
was on the paternal allele in the non-affected grandmother. This nucleotide
variant has been shown to affect OCTamer-binding transcription factor-4 (OCT4)
binding, which may be necessary for maintaining the unmethylated state of the
maternal allele. Our data extend these findings by showing that the OCT4 binding 
site mutation caused incomplete switching from paternal to maternal ICR1
methylation imprint, and that upon further maternal transmission, methylation of 
the incompletely demethylated variant ICR1 allele was further increased. This
suggests that maternal and paternal ICR1 alleles are treated differentially in
the female germline, and only the paternal allele appears to be capable of
demethylation.

PMCID: PMC3831082
PMID: 23572028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Mol Cell. 2013 Apr 25;50(2):236-49. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.03.002. Epub 2013 
Apr 4.

The nucleoplasmin homolog NLP mediates centromere clustering and anchoring to the
nucleolus.

Padeken J(1), Mendiburo MJ, Chlamydas S, Schwarz HJ, Kremmer E, Heun P.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Stübeweg 51, 79108
Freiburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Nov 15;12(22):3455-6.

Centromere clustering during interphase is a phenomenon known to occur in many
different organisms and cell types, yet neither the factors involved nor their
physiological relevance is well understood. Using Drosophila tissue culture cells
and flies, we identified a network of proteins, including the nucleoplasmin-like 
protein (NLP), the insulator protein CTCF, and the nucleolus protein Modulo, to
be essential for the positioning of centromeres. Artificial targeting further
demonstrated that NLP and CTCF are sufficient for clustering, while Modulo serves
as the anchor to the nucleolus. Centromere clustering was found to depend on
centric chromatin rather than specific DNA sequences. Moreover, unclustering of
centromeres results in the spatial destabilization of pericentric heterochromatin
organization, leading to partial defects in the silencing of repetitive elements,
defects during chromosome segregation, and genome instability.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23562326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. BMC Res Notes. 2013 Apr 4;6:133. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-6-133.

The PinkThing for analysing ChIP profiling data in their genomic context.

Nielsen FG(1), Kooyman M, Kensche P, Marks H, Stunnenberg H, Huynen M.

Author information: 
(1)CMBI-Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Nijmegen Centre for
Molecular Life Sciences, PO Box 9101, 6500HB Nijmegen, Netherlands.
fnielsen@cmbi.ru.nl

BACKGROUND: Current epigenetic research makes frequent use of whole-genome ChIP
profiling for determining the in vivo binding of proteins, e.g. transcription
factors and histones, to DNA. Two important and recurrent questions for these
large scale analyses are: 1) What is the genomic distribution of a set of binding
sites? and 2) Does this genomic distribution differ significantly from another
set of sites?
FINDINGS: We exemplify the functionality of the PinkThing by analysing a ChIP
profiling dataset of cohesin binding sites. We show the subset of cohesin sites
with no CTCF binding have a characteristic genomic distribution different from
the set of all cohesin sites.
CONCLUSIONS: The PinkThing is a web application for fast and easy analysis of the
context of genomic loci, such as peaks from ChIP profiling experiments. The
output of the PinkThing analysis includes: categorisation of position relative to
genes (intronic, exonic, 5' near, 3' near 5' far, 3' far and distant), distance
to the closest annotated 3' and 5' end of genes, direction of transcription of
the nearest gene, and the option to include other genomic elements like ESTs and 
CpG islands. The PinkThing enables easy statistical comparison between
experiments, i.e. experimental versus background sets, reporting over- and
underrepresentation as well as p-values for all comparisons. Access and use of
the PinkThing is free and open (without registration) to all users via the
website: http://pinkthing.cmbi.ru.nl

PMCID: PMC3674928
PMID: 23557140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Int J Cancer. 2013 Oct 1;133(7):1603-13. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28184. Epub 2013 May 2.

The cancer-testis antigen BORIS phenocopies the tumor suppressor CTCF in normal
and neoplastic cells.

Tiffen JC(1), Bailey CG, Marshall AD, Metierre C, Feng Y, Wang Q, Watson SL,
Holst J, Rasko JE.

Author information: 
(1)Gene and Stem Cell Therapy Program, Centenary Institute, University of Sydney,
Camperdown, NSW 2050, Australia.

BORIS and CTCF are paralogous, multivalent 11-zinc finger transcription factors
that play important roles in organizing higher-order chromatin architecture.
BORIS is a cancer-testis antigen with a poorly defined function in cancer,
although it has been hypothesized to exhibit oncogenic properties. CTCF, however,
has been postulated as a candidate tumor suppressor. We collated the genetic
lesions in BORIS and CTCF from multiple cancers identified using high-throughput 
genomics. In BORIS, nonsense and missense mutations are evenly distributed. In
CTCF, recurrent mutations are mostly clustered in the conserved zinc finger
domain and at residues critical for contacting DNA and zinc ion co-ordination.
Three missense mutations are common to both proteins. We used an inducible
lentivector to express wildtype BORIS or CTCF in primary cells and cancer cell
lines in order to define their functional differences. Both BORIS and CTCF caused
a significant decrease in cell proliferation and clonogenic capacity, without
alteration of specific cell cycle phases. Both BORIS and CTCF conferred
protective effects in primary cells and some cancer cells during UV
damage-induced apoptosis. Using a bioluminescent MCF-7 orthotopic breast cancer
model in vivo, we demonstrated that CTCF and BORIS suppressed breast cancer
growth. These findings provide further evidence that CTCF behaves as a tumor
suppressor, and show BORIS has a similar growth inhibitory effect in vitro and in
vivo. Hence, acquired zinc finger mutations may disrupt these functions, thereby 
contributing to tumor growth and development.

© 2013 UICC.

PMID: 23553099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Sci Rep. 2013;3:1588. doi: 10.1038/srep01588.

The interactomes of POU5F1 and SOX2 enhancers in human embryonic stem cells.

Gao F(1), Wei Z, An W, Wang K, Lu W.

Author information: 
(1)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, 
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
California, 1425 San Pablo Street, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

The genes POU5F1 and SOX2 are critical for pluripotency and reprogramming, yet
the chromosomal organization around these genes remains poorly understood. We
assayed long-range chromosomal interactions on putative enhancers of POU5F1 and
SOX2 genes in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) using 4C-Seq technique. We
discovered that their frequent interacting regions mainly overlap with early DNA 
replication domains. The interactomes are associated with active histone marks
and enriched with 5-hydroxymethylcytosine sites. In hESCs, genes within the
interactomes have elevated expression. Additionally, some genes associated with
the POU5F1 enhancer contribute to pluripotency. Binding sites for multiple DNA
binding proteins, including ATF3, CTCF, GABPA, JUND, NANOG, RAD21 and YY1, are
enriched in both interactomes. The RARG locus, frequently interacting with the
POU5F1 locus, has abundant RAD21 binding sites co-localized with other protein
binding sites. Thus the interactomes of these two pluripotency genes could be an 
important part of the regulatory network in hESCs.

PMCID: PMC4070749
PMID: 23549118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59389. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059389. Epub 2013 Mar 22.

A NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent dual promoter-enhancer initiates the
lipopolysaccharide-mediated transcriptional activation of the chicken lysozyme in
macrophages.

Witham J(1), Ouboussad L, Lefevre PF.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Haematology, Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Leeds, Wellcome Trust Brenner Building, St. James's University
Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom.

The transcriptional activation of the chicken lysozyme gene (cLys) by
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in macrophages is dependent on transcription of a
LPS-Inducible Non-Coding RNA (LINoCR) triggering eviction of the CCCTC-binding
factor (CTCF) from a negative regulatory element upstream of the lysozyme
transcription start site. LINoCR is transcribed from a promoter originally
characterized as a hormone response enhancer in the oviduct. Herein, we report
the characterization of this cis-regulatory element (CRE). In activated
macrophages, a 60 bp region bound by NF-<U+03BA>B, AP1 and C/EBPß controls this CRE,
which is strictly dependent on NF-<U+03BA>B binding for its activity in luciferase
assays. Moreover, the serine/threonine kinase IKKa, known to be recruited by
NF-<U+03BA>B to NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent genes is found at the CRE and within the transcribing
regions of both cLys and LINoCR. Such repartition suggests a simultaneous
promoter and enhancer activity of this CRE, initiating cLys transcriptional
activation and driving CTCF eviction. This recruitment was transient despite
persistence of both cLys transcription and NF-<U+03BA>B binding to the CRE. Finally,
comparing cLys with other LPS-inducible genes indicates that IKKa detection
within transcribing regions can be correlated with the presence of the elongating
form of RNA polymerase II or concentrated in the 3' end of the gene.

PMCID: PMC3606415
PMID: 23533622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. BMC Cancer. 2013 Mar 22;13:144. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-144.

Derepression of Cancer/testis antigens in cancer is associated with distinct
patterns of DNA hypomethylation.

Kim R(1), Kulkarni P, Hannenhalli S.

Author information: 
(1)James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute, The Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Cancer/Testis Antigens (CTAs) are a heterogeneous group of
proteins whose expression is typically restricted to the testis. However, they
are aberrantly expressed in most cancers that have been examined to date. Broadly
speaking, the CTAs can be divided into two groups: the CTX antigens that are
encoded by the X-linked genes and the non-X CT antigens that are encoded by the
autosomes. Unlike the non-X CTAs, the CTX antigens form clusters of closely
related gene families and their expression is frequently associated with advanced
disease with poorer prognosis. Regardless however, the mechanism(s) underlying
their selective derepression and stage-specific expression in cancer remain
poorly understood, although promoter DNA demethylation is believed to be the
major driver.
METHODS: Here, we report a systematic analysis of DNA methylation profiling data 
from various tissue types to elucidate the mechanism underlying the derepression 
of the CTAs in cancer. We analyzed the methylation profiles of 501 samples
including sperm, several cancer types, and their corresponding normal somatic
tissue types.
RESULTS: We found strong evidence for specific DNA hypomethylation of CTA
promoters in the testis and cancer cells but not in their normal somatic
counterparts. We also found that hypomethylation was clustered on the genome into
domains that coincided with nuclear lamina-associated domains (LADs) and that
these regions appeared to be insulated by CTCF sites. Interestingly, we did not
observe any significant differences in the hypomethylation pattern between the
CTAs without CpG islands and the CTAs with CpG islands in the proximal promoter.
CONCLUSION: Our results corroborate that widespread DNA hypomethylation appears
to be the driver in the derepression of CTA expression in cancer and furthermore,
demonstrate that these hypomethylated domains are associated with the nuclear
lamina-associated domains (LADS). Taken together, our results suggest that
wide-spread methylation changes in cancer are linked to derepression of
germ-line-specific genes that is orchestrated by the three dimensional
organization of the cancer genome.

PMCID: PMC3618251
PMID: 23522060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Cell. 2013 Mar 14;152(6):1285-97. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.02.029.

CTCF and cohesin: linking gene regulatory elements with their targets.

Merkenschlager M(1), Odom DT.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Development Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College
London, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK. matthias.merkenschlager@csc.mrc.ac.uk

Current epigenomics approaches have facilitated the genome-wide identification of
regulatory elements based on chromatin features and transcriptional regulator
binding and have begun to map long-range interactions between regulatory elements
and their targets. Here, we focus on the emerging roles of CTCF and the cohesin
in coordinating long-range interactions between regulatory elements. We discuss
how species-specific transposable elements may influence such interactions by
remodeling the CTCF binding repertoire and suggest that cohesin's association
with enhancers, promoters, and sites defined by CTCF binding has the potential to
form developmentally regulated networks of long-range interactions that reflect
and promote cell-type-specific transcriptional programs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23498937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Hepatology. 2013 Aug;58(2):739-51. doi: 10.1002/hep.26361. Epub 2013 Jul 1.

Long noncoding RNAs associated with liver regeneration 1 accelerates hepatocyte
proliferation during liver regeneration by activating Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

Xu D(1), Yang F, Yuan JH, Zhang L, Bi HS, Zhou CC, Liu F, Wang F, Sun SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, 
China.

In recent years, long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been investigated as a new
class of regulators of biological function. A recent study reported that lncRNAs 
control cell proliferation in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, the role
of lncRNAs in liver regeneration and the overall mechanisms remain largely
unknown. To address this issue, we carried out a genome-wide lncRNA microarray
analysis during liver regeneration in mice after 2/3 partial hepatectomy (PH) at 
various timepoints. The results revealed differential expression of a subset of
lncRNAs, notably a specific differentially expressed lncRNA associated with
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling during liver regeneration (an lncRNA associated with
liver regeneration, termed lncRNA-LALR1). The functions of lncRNA-LALR1 were
assessed by silencing and overexpressing this lncRNA in vitro and in vivo. We
found that lncRNA-LALR1 enhanced hepatocyte proliferation by promoting
progression of the cell cycle in vitro. Furthermore, we showed that lncRNA-LALR1 
accelerated mouse hepatocyte proliferation and cell cycle progression during
liver regeneration in vivo. Mechanistically, we discovered that lncRNA-LALR1
facilitated cyclin D1 expression through activation of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling by
way of suppression of Axin1. In addition, lncRNA-LALR1 inhibited the expression
of Axin1 mainly by recruiting CTCF to the AXIN1 promoter region. We also
identified a human ortholog RNA of lncRNA-LALR1 (lncRNA-hLALR1) and found that it
was expressed in human liver tissues.CONCLUSION: lncRNA-LALR1 promotes cell cycle
progression and accelerates hepatocyte proliferation during liver regeneration by
activating Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. Pharmacological intervention targeting
lncRNA-LALR1 may be therapeutically beneficial in liver failure and liver
transplantation by inducing liver regeneration.

Copyright © 2013 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 23483581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 May;33(9):1845-58. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01124-12. Epub 2013 Mar
4.

Developmentally programmed 3' CpG island methylation confers tissue- and
cell-type-specific transcriptional activation.

Yu DH(1), Ware C, Waterland RA, Zhang J, Chen MH, Gadkari M, Kunde-Ramamoorthy G,
Nosavanh LM, Shen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, USDA/ARS Children's
Nutrition Research Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

During development, a small but significant number of CpG islands (CGIs) become
methylated. The timing of developmentally programmed CGI methylation and
associated mechanisms of transcriptional regulation during cellular
differentiation, however, remain poorly characterized. Here, we used genome-wide 
DNA methylation microarrays to identify epigenetic changes during human embryonic
stem cell (hESC) differentiation. We discovered a group of CGIs associated with
developmental genes that gain methylation after hESCs differentiate. Conversely, 
erasure of methylation was observed at the identified CGIs during subsequent
reprogramming to induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), further supporting a
functional role for the CGI methylation. Both global gene expression profiling
and quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) validation indicated opposing
effects of CGI methylation in transcriptional regulation during differentiation, 
with promoter CGI methylation repressing and 3' CGI methylation activating
transcription. By studying diverse human tissues and mouse models, we further
confirmed that developmentally programmed 3' CGI methylation confers tissue- and 
cell-type-specific gene activation in vivo. Importantly, luciferase reporter
assays provided evidence that 3' CGI methylation regulates transcriptional
activation via a CTCF-dependent enhancer-blocking mechanism. These findings
expand the classic view of mammalian CGI methylation as a mechanism for
transcriptional silencing and indicate a functional role for 3' CGI methylation
in developmental gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC3624169
PMID: 23459939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Hum Gene Ther Methods. 2013 Apr;24(2):117-24. doi: 10.1089/hgtb.2012.152.

The chicken hypersensitivity site 4 core insulator blocks promoter interference
in lentiviral vectors.

Uchida N(1), Hanawa H, Yamamoto M, Shimada T.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nippon Medical School,
Tokyo, 113-8602 Japan. uchidan@nhlbi.nih.gov

Lentiviral vectors, including double internal promoters, can be used to express
two transgenes in a single vector construct; however, transcriptional activities 
from double internal promoters are often inhibited by promoter interference. To
determine whether the chicken hypersensitivity site 4 insulator (cHS4) could
block promoter interference, lentiviral vectors including an MSCV-U3 promoter
(Mp) and an EF1a promoter (Ep) were generated, and transgene expression was
evaluated among transduced cells. In the Ep-Mp configuration, transcriptional
activity from Mp was much lower, while Mp-Ep had similar transcription levels
from both promoters. The cHS4 core insulator increased expression levels from Mp 
in HeLa cells, hematopoietic cell lines, and mouse peripheral blood cells
following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation transduced with the Mp-Ep
configured vector. This blocking function was mainly mediated by barrier activity
regions in the insulator but not by CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) binding sites.
Cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) methylation did not contribute to this barrier
activity. In summary, combining the cHS4 insulator in double promoter vectors can
improve transgene expression levels in various cell lines and mouse hematopoietic
repopulating cells. These findings are useful for developing hematopoietic stem
cell gene therapy.

PMCID: PMC3732123
PMID: 23448496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Nov;21(11):1253-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.24. Epub 2013 Feb
20.

The intellectual disability of trisomy 21: differences in gene expression in a
case series of patients with lower and higher IQ.

Mégarbané A(1), Noguier F, Stora S, Manchon L, Mircher C, Bruno R, Dorison N,
Pierrat F, Rethoré MO, Trentin B, Ravel A, Morent M, Lefranc G, Piquemal D.

Author information: 
(1)1] Institut Jérôme Lejeune, Paris, France [2] Unité de Génétique Médicale et
Laboratoire Associé INSERM UMR_S910, Beirut, Lebanon.

Trisomy 21 (T21), or Down syndrome (DS), is the most frequent and recognizable
cause of intellectual disabilities. The level of disability, as evaluated by the 
intelligence quotient (IQ) test, varies considerably between patients independent
of other factors. To determine the genetic or molecular basis of this difference,
a high throughput transcriptomic analysis was performed on twenty T21 patients
with high and low IQ, and 10 healthy controls using Digital Gene Expression. More
than 90 millions of tags were sequenced in the three libraries. A total of 80
genes of potential interest were selected for the qPCR experiment validation, and
three housekeeping genes were used for normalizing purposes. HLA DQA1 and HLA
DRB1 were significantly downregulated among the patients with a low IQ, the
values found in the healthy controls being intermediate between those noted in
the IQ+ and IQ- T21 patients. Interestingly, the intergenic region between these 
genes contains a binding sequence for the CCCTC-binding factor, or CTCF, and
cohesin (a multisubunit complex), both of which are essential for expression of
HLA DQA1 and HLA DRB1 and numerous other genes. Our results might lead to the
discovery of genes, or genetic markers, that are directly involved in several
phenotypes of DS and, eventually, to the identification of potential targets for 
therapeutic interventions.

PMCID: PMC3798834
PMID: 23422941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Epigenetics. 2013 Mar;8(3):317-32. doi: 10.4161/epi.23989. Epub 2013 Feb 15.

Early de novo DNA methylation and prolonged demethylation in the muscle lineage.

Tsumagari K(1), Baribault C, Terragni J, Varley KE, Gertz J, Pradhan S, Badoo M, 
Crain CM, Song L, Crawford GE, Myers RM, Lacey M, Ehrlich M.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Human Genetics and Tulane Cancer Center, Tulane Health Sciences
Center, New Orleans, LA, USA.

Myogenic cell cultures derived from muscle biopsies are excellent models for
human cell differentiation. We report the first comprehensive analysis of
myogenesis-specific DNA hyper- and hypo-methylation throughout the genome for
human muscle progenitor cells (both myoblasts and myotubes) and skeletal muscle
tissue vs. 30 non-muscle samples using reduced representation bisulfite
sequencing. We also focused on four genes with extensive hyper- or
hypo-methylation in the muscle lineage (PAX3, TBX1, MYH7B/MIR499 and OBSCN) to
compare DNA methylation, DNaseI hypersensitivity, histone modification, and CTCF 
binding profiles. We found that myogenic hypermethylation was strongly associated
with homeobox or T-box genes and muscle hypomethylation with contractile fiber
genes. Nonetheless, there was no simple relationship between differential gene
expression and myogenic differential methylation, rather only for subsets of
these genes, such as contractile fiber genes. Skeletal muscle retained ~30% of
the hypomethylated sites but only ~3% of hypermethylated sites seen in myogenic
progenitor cells. By enzymatic assays, skeletal muscle was 2-fold enriched
globally in genomic 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC) vs. myoblasts or myotubes and
was the only sample type enriched in 5-hmC at tested myogenic hypermethylated
sites in PAX3/CCDC140 andTBX1. TET1 and TET2 RNAs, which are involved in
generation of 5-hmC and DNA demethylation, were strongly upregulated in myoblasts
and myotubes. Our findings implicate de novo methylation predominantly before the
myoblast stage and demethylation before and after the myotube stage in control of
transcription and co-transcriptional RNA processing. They also suggest that, in
muscle, TET1 or TET2 are involved in active demethylation and in formation of
stable 5-hmC residues.

PMCID: PMC3669123
PMID: 23417056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2013 Mar;20(3):387-95. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2509. Epub 2013 Feb
17.

Transcription forms and remodels supercoiling domains unfolding large-scale
chromatin structures.

Naughton C(1), Avlonitis N, Corless S, Prendergast JG, Mati IK, Eijk PP, Cockroft
SL, Bradley M, Ylstra B, Gilbert N.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and
Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2013 Apr;14(4):238-9.
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2013 Mar;20(3):251-3.

DNA supercoiling is an inherent consequence of twisting DNA and is critical for
regulating gene expression and DNA replication. However, DNA supercoiling at a
genomic scale in human cells is uncharacterized. To map supercoiling, we used
biotinylated trimethylpsoralen as a DNA structure probe to show that the human
genome is organized into supercoiling domains. Domains are formed and remodeled
by RNA polymerase and topoisomerase activities and are flanked by GC-AT
boundaries and CTCF insulator protein-binding sites. Underwound domains are
transcriptionally active and enriched in topoisomerase I, 'open' chromatin fibers
and DNase I sites, but they are depleted of topoisomerase II. Furthermore, DNA
supercoiling affects additional levels of chromatin compaction as underwound
domains are cytologically decondensed, topologically constrained and decompacted 
by transcription of short RNAs. We suggest that supercoiling domains create a
topological environment that facilitates gene activation, providing an
evolutionary purpose for clustering genes along chromosomes.

PMCID: PMC3689368
PMID: 23416946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Br J Haematol. 2013 Apr;161(2):270-8. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12245. Epub 2013 Feb 14.

Genetic determinants of haemolysis in sickle cell anaemia.

Milton JN(1), Rooks H, Drasar E, McCabe EL, Baldwin CT, Melista E, Gordeuk VR,
Nouraie M, Kato GR, Minniti C, Taylor J, Campbell A, Luchtman-Jones L, Rana S,
Castro O, Zhang Y, Thein SL, Sebastiani P, Gladwin MT; Walk-PHAAST Investigators,
Steinberg MH.

Collaborators: Badesch DB, Barst RJ, Castro OL, Gibbs JS, Girgis RE, Gladwin MT, 
Goldsmith JC, Gordeuk VR, Hassell KL, Kato GJ, Krishnamurti L, Lanzkron S, Little
JA, Machado RF, Morris CR, Nouraie M, Onyekwere O, Rosenzweig EB, Sachdev V,
Schraufnagel DE, Waclawiw MA, Woolson R, Yovetich NA.

Author information: 
(1)Biostatistics, Boston University School of Medicine, 72 E. Concord St.,
Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Erratum in
    Br J Haematol. 2014 Aug;166(3):468. Kato, Gregory R [corrected to Kata, Gregory
J].

Haemolytic anaemia is variable among patients with sickle cell anaemia and can be
estimated by reticulocyte count, lactate dehydrogenase, aspartate
aminotransferase and bilirubin levels. Using principal component analysis of
these measurements we computed a haemolytic score that we used as a subphenotype 
in a genome-wide association study. We identified in one cohort and replicated in
two additional cohorts the association of a single nucleotide polymorphism in
NPRL3 (rs7203560; chr16p13·3) (P = 6·04 × 10(-07) ). This association was
validated by targeted genotyping in a fourth independent cohort. The HBA1/HBA2
regulatory elements, hypersensitive sites (HS)-33, HS-40 and HS-48 are located in
introns of NPRL3. Rs7203560 was in perfect linkage disequilibrium (LD) with
rs9926112 (r(2)  = 1) and in strong LD with rs7197554 (r(2)  = 0·75) and
rs13336641 (r(2)  = 0·77); the latter is located between HS-33 and HS-40 sites
and next to a CTCF binding site. The minor allele for rs7203560 was associated
with the -<U+221D>(3·7) thalassaemia gene deletion. When adjusting for HbF and <U+221D>
thalassaemia, the association of NPRL3 with the haemolytic score was significant 
(P = 0·00375) and remained significant when examining only cases without gene
deletion<U+221D> thalassaemia (P = 0·02463). Perhaps by independently down-regulating
expression of the HBA1/HBA2 genes, variants of the HBA1/HBA2 gene regulatory
loci, tagged by rs7203560, reduce haemolysis in sickle cell anaemia.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4129543
PMID: 23406172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Cancer Immun. 2013;13:6. Epub 2013 Jan 22.

BORIS/CTCFL mRNA isoform expression and epigenetic regulation in epithelial
ovarian cancer.

Link PA(1), Zhang W, Odunsi K, Karpf AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, NY, USA.

Cancer germline (CG) genes are normally expressed in germ cells and aberrantly
expressed in a variety of cancers; their immunogenicity has led to the widespread
development of cancer vaccines targeting these antigens. BORIS/CTCFL is an
autosomal CG antigen and promising cancer vaccine target. BORIS is the only known
paralog of CTCF, a gene intimately involved in genomic imprinting, chromatin
insulation, and nuclear regulation. We have previously shown that BORIS is
expressed in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) and that its expression coincides
with promoter and global DNA hypomethylation. Recently, 23 different BORIS mRNA
variants have been described, and have been functionally grouped into six BORIS
isoform families (sf1-sf6). In the present study, we have characterized the
expression of BORIS isoform families in normal ovary (NO) and EOC, the latter of 
which were selected to include two groups with widely varying global DNA
methylation status. We find selective expression of BORIS isoform families in NO,
which becomes altered in EOC, primarily by the activation of BORIS sf1 in EOC.
When comparing EOC samples based on methylation status, we find that BORIS sf1
and sf2 isoform families are selectively activated in globally hypomethylated
tumors. In contrast, CTCF is downregulated in EOC, and the ratio of BORIS sf1,
sf2, and sf6 isoform families as a function of CTCF is elevated in hypomethylated
tumors. Finally, the expression of all BORIS isoform families was induced to
varying extents by epigenetic modulatory drugs in EOC cell lines, particularly
when DNMT and HDAC inhibitors were used in combination.

PMCID: PMC3559194
PMID: 23390377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Mech Ageing Dev. 2013 May-Jun;134(5-6):225-33. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2013.01.001.
Epub 2013 Jan 28.

What role (if any) does the highly conserved CSB-PGBD3 fusion protein play in
Cockayne syndrome?

Weiner AM(1), Gray LT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195-7350, USA. amweiner@uw.edu

The PGBD3 piggyBac transposon inserted into CSB intron 5 early in the primate
lineage. As a result of alternative splicing, the human CSB gene now encodes
three proteins: CSB, a CSB-PGBD3 fusion protein that joins the N-terminal CSB
domain to the C-terminal PGBD3 transposase domain, and PGBD3 transposase. The
fusion protein is as highly conserved as CSB, suggesting that it is advantageous 
in health; however, expression of the fusion protein in CSB-null cells induces a 
constitutive interferon (IFN) response. The fusion protein binds in vivo to
PGBD3-related MER85 elements, but is also tethered to c-Jun, TEAD1, and CTCF
motifs by interactions with the cognate transcription factors. The fusion protein
regulates nearby genes from the c-Jun (and to a lesser extent TEAD1 and CTCF)
motifs, but not from MER85 elements. We speculate that the fusion protein
interferes with CSB-dependent chromatin remodeling, generating double-stranded
RNA (dsRNA) that induces an IFN response through endosomal TLR or cytoplasmic
RIG-I and/or MDA5 RNA sensors. We suggest that the fusion protein was fixed in
primates because an elevated IFN response may help to fight viral infection. We
also speculate that an inappropriate IFN response may contribute to the clinical 
presentation of CS.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3654029
PMID: 23369858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Mar 1;41(5):2963-80. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt037. Epub 2013
Jan 28.

Genome-wide localization of exosome components to active promoters and chromatin 
insulators in Drosophila.

Lim SJ(1), Boyle PJ, Chinen M, Dale RK, Lei EP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 9000
Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Chromatin insulators are functionally conserved DNA-protein complexes situated
throughout the genome that organize independent transcriptional domains. Previous
work implicated RNA as an important cofactor in chromatin insulator activity,
although the precise mechanisms are not yet understood. Here we identify the
exosome, the highly conserved major cellular 3' to 5' RNA degradation machinery, 
as a physical interactor of CP190-dependent chromatin insulator complexes in
Drosophila. Genome-wide profiling of exosome by ChIP-seq in two different
embryonic cell lines reveals extensive and specific overlap with the CP190,
BEAF-32 and CTCF insulator proteins. Colocalization occurs mainly at promoters
but also boundary elements such as Mcp, Fab-8, scs and scs', which overlaps with 
a promoter. Surprisingly, exosome associates primarily with promoters but not
gene bodies of active genes, arguing against simple cotranscriptional recruitment
to RNA substrates. Similar to insulator proteins, exosome is also significantly
enriched at divergently transcribed promoters. Directed ChIP of exosome in cell
lines depleted of insulator proteins shows that CTCF is required specifically for
exosome association at Mcp and Fab-8 but not other sites, suggesting that
alternate mechanisms must also contribute to exosome chromatin recruitment. Taken
together, our results reveal a novel positive relationship between exosome and
chromatin insulators throughout the genome.

PMCID: PMC3597698
PMID: 23358822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Genesis. 2013 May;51(5):311-24. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22375. Epub 2013 Mar 30.

Computational tools and resources for prediction and analysis of gene regulatory 
regions in the chick genome.

Khan MA(1), Soto-Jimenez LM, Howe T, Streit A, Sosinsky A, Stern CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell & Developmental Biology, University College London, London,
United Kingdom.

The discovery of cis-regulatory elements is a challenging problem in
bioinformatics, owing to distal locations and context-specific roles of these
elements in controlling gene regulation. Here we review the current
bioinformatics methodologies and resources available for systematic discovery of 
cis-acting regulatory elements and conserved transcription factor binding sites
in the chick genome. In addition, we propose and make available, a novel workflow
using computational tools that integrate CTCF analysis to predict putative
insulator elements, enhancer prediction, and TFBS analysis. To demonstrate the
usefulness of this computational workflow, we then use it to analyze the locus of
the gene Sox2 whose developmental expression is known to be controlled by a
complex array of cis-acting regulatory elements. The workflow accurately predicts
most of the experimentally verified elements along with some that have not yet
been discovered. A web version of the CTCF tool, together with instructions for
using the workflow can be accessed from
http://toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/view/mkhan1980/ctcf_analysis. For local
installation of the tool, relevant Perl scripts and instructions are provided in 
the directory named "code" in the supplementary materials.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3664090
PMID: 23355428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Cell Rep. 2013 Feb 21;3(2):567-76. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.01.001. Epub 2013
Jan 24.

High-resolution enzymatic mapping of genomic 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in mouse
embryonic stem cells.

Sun Z(1), Terragni J, Borgaro JG, Liu Y, Yu L, Guan S, Wang H, Sun D, Cheng X,
Zhu Z, Pradhan S, Zheng Y.

Author information: 
(1)New England Biolabs Inc., 240 County Road, Ipswich, MA 01938, USA.

Erratum in
    Cell Rep. 2013 Mar 28;3(3):968. Jolyon, Terragni [corrected to Terragni, Jolyon].

We describe the use of a unique DNA-modification-dependent restriction
endonuclease AbaSI coupled with sequencing (Aba-seq) to map high-resolution
hydroxymethylome of mouse E14 embryonic stem cells. The specificity of AbaSI
enables sensitive detection of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) at low-occupancy
regions. Bioinformatic analysis suggests 5hmCs in genic regions closely follow
the 5mC distribution. 5hmC is generally depleted in CpG islands and only enriched
in a small set of repetitive elements. A regularly spaced and oscillating 5hmC
pattern was observed at the binding sites of CTCF. 5hmC is enriched at the poised
enhancers with the monomethylated histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4me1) marks, but not at
the active enhancers with the acetylated histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27Ac) marks.
Non-CG hydroxymethylation appears to be prevalent in the mitochondrial genome. We
propose that some amounts of transiently stable 5hmCs may indicate a poised
epigenetic state or demethylation intermediate, whereas others may suggest a
locally accessible chromosomal environment for the TET enzymatic apparatus.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3743234
PMID: 23352666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Hum Reprod. 2013 Apr;28(4):1117-26. doi: 10.1093/humrep/des459. Epub 2013 Jan 22.

Placentas from pregnancies conceived by IVF/ICSI have a reduced DNA methylation
level at the H19 and MEST differentially methylated regions.

Nelissen EC(1), Dumoulin JC, Daunay A, Evers JL, Tost J, van Montfoort AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, GROW School for Oncology and
Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The
Netherlands.

STUDY QUESTION: Does IVF/ICSI have an effect on the epigenetic regulation of the 
human placenta?
SUMMARY ANSWER: We found a reduced DNA methylation level at the H19 and MEST
differentially methylated regions (DMRs), and an increased RNA expression of H19 
in placentas from pregnancies conceived by IVF/ICSI when compared with placentas 
from spontaneous conception.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Changes in fetal environment are associated with adverse
health outcomes. The placenta is pivotal for intrauterine environment. Animal
studies show that epigenetic regulation plays an important role in these
environment-induced phenotypic effects. Also, the preimplantation embryo
environment affects birthweight as well as the risk of chronic adult diseases.
Epigenetic processes are sensitive to the environment, especially during the
period around conception.
STUDY DESIGN AND PARTICIPANTS: Placental tissue was collected from 35
spontaneously conceived pregnancies and 35 IVF/ICSI (5 IVF, 30 ICSI) derived
pregnancies. We quantitatively analysed the DNA methylation patterns of a number 
of consecutive CpGs in the core regions of DMRs and other regulatory regions of
imprinted genes, since these are involved in placental and fetal growth and
development.
METHODS: By using pyrosequencing, the DNA methylation at seven germline-derived
primary DMRs was analysed quantitatively. Five of these are maternally methylated
(MEST isoform a and ß, PEG3, KCNQ1OT1 and SNRPN) and two are paternally
methylated [H19 DMR and the intergenic region between DLK1 and MEG3 (IG-DMR)].
The post-fertilization-derived secondary DMRs, IGF2 (DMR0 and 2) and IG-DMR (CG7,
also called MEG3 DMR), and the MEG3 promoter region were examined as well. In
case of differential methylation between the two groups, the effect on gene
expression was assessed by quantitative real-time PCR.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Both the promoter region of MEST isoform a
and ß and the 6th CTCF binding site within the H19 DMR were significantly
hypomethylated in the IVF/ICSI group. The phenomenon was consistently observed
over all CpG sites analysed and not restricted to single CpG sites. The other
primary and secondary DMRs were not affected. Expression of H19 was increased in 
the IVF/ICSI group, while that of IGF2 and MEST remained similar.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: In the IVF/ICSI group, mostly ICSI pregnancies 
were investigated. The ICSI technique or male subfertility could be a confounding
factor. Therefore, our results are less generalizable to IVF pregnancies.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: The clinical effects of the observed
placental hypomethylations on the developmental programming of the IVF/ICSI
progeny, if any, are as yet unknown. Whether the hypomethylation is an adaptation
of the placenta to maintain fetal supply and ameliorate the effects of
environmental cues, or whether it is a deregulation leading to deranged
developmental programming with or without increased vulnerability for disease,
consistent with the developmental origins of health and disease hypothesis, needs
further investigation.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTEREST(S): Partly funded by an unrestricted research
grant by Organon BV (now MSD BV) without any role in study design, data
collection and analysis, or preparation of the manuscript. No conflict of
interests to declare.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: Dutch Trial Registry (NTR) number 1298.

PMID: 23343754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Nucleus. 2013 Mar-Apr;4(2):115-22. doi: 10.4161/nucl.23389. Epub 2013 Jan 18.

Functional sub-division of the Drosophila genome via chromatin looping: the
emerging importance of CP190.

Ahanger SH(1), Shouche YS, Mishra RK.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, Pune, India. sajad@ccmb.res.in

Insulators help in organizing the eukaryotic genomes into physically and
functionally autonomous regions through the formation of chromatin loops. Recent 
findings in Drosophila and vertebrates suggest that insulators anchor multiple
loci through long-distance interactions which may be mechanistically linked to
insulator function. Important to such processes in Drosophila is CP190, a common 
co-factor of insulator complexes. CP190 is also known to associate with the
nuclear matrix, components of the RNAi machinery, active promoters and borders of
the repressive chromatin domains. Although CP190 plays a pivotal role in
insulator function in Drosophila, vertebrates lack a probable functional
equivalent of CP190 and employ CTCF as the major factor to carry out insulator
function/chromatin looping. In this review, we discuss the emerging role of CP190
in tethering genome, specifically in the perspective of insulator function in
Drosophila. Future studies aiming genome-wide role of CP190 in chromatin looping 
is likely to give important insights into the mechanism of genome organization.

PMCID: PMC3621743
PMID: 23333867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(1):e1003137. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003137. Epub 2013 Jan 
10.

Aberration in DNA methylation in B-cell lymphomas has a complex origin and
increases with disease severity.

De S(1), Shaknovich R, Riester M, Elemento O, Geng H, Kormaksson M, Jiang Y,
Woolcock B, Johnson N, Polo JM, Cerchietti L, Gascoyne RD, Melnick A, Michor F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
Colorado, United States of America.

Despite mounting evidence that epigenetic abnormalities play a key role in cancer
biology, their contributions to the malignant phenotype remain poorly understood.
Here we studied genome-wide DNA methylation in normal B-cell populations and
subtypes of B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma: follicular lymphoma and diffuse large
B-cell lymphomas. These lymphomas display striking and progressive intra-tumor
heterogeneity and also inter-patient heterogeneity in their cytosine methylation 
patterns. Epigenetic heterogeneity is initiated in normal germinal center
B-cells, increases markedly with disease aggressiveness, and is associated with
unfavorable clinical outcome. Moreover, patterns of abnormal methylation vary
depending upon chromosomal regions, gene density and the status of neighboring
genes. DNA methylation abnormalities arise via two distinct processes: i)
lymphomagenic transcriptional regulators perturb promoter DNA methylation in a
target gene-specific manner, and ii) aberrant epigenetic states tend to spread to
neighboring promoters in the absence of CTCF insulator binding sites.

PMCID: PMC3542081
PMID: 23326238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Bioinformatics. 2013 Mar 1;29(5):533-41. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btt012. Epub
2013 Jan 16.

Sparsely correlated hidden Markov models with application to genome-wide location
studies.

Choi H(1), Fermin D, Nesvizhskii AI, Ghosh D, Qin ZS.

Author information: 
(1)National University of Singapore and National University Health System,
Singapore 117597, Singapore.

MOTIVATION: Multiply correlated datasets have become increasingly common in
genome-wide location analysis of regulatory proteins and epigenetic
modifications. Their correlation can be directly incorporated into a statistical 
model to capture underlying biological interactions, but such modeling quickly
becomes computationally intractable.
RESULTS: We present sparsely correlated hidden Markov models (scHMM), a novel
method for performing simultaneous hidden Markov model (HMM) inference for
multiple genomic datasets. In scHMM, a single HMM is assumed for each series, but
the transition probability in each series depends on not only its own hidden
states but also the hidden states of other related series. For each series, scHMM
uses penalized regression to select a subset of the other data series and
estimate their effects on the odds of each transition in the given series.
Following this, hidden states are inferred using a standard forward-backward
algorithm, with the transition probabilities adjusted by the model at each
position, which helps retain the order of computation close to fitting
independent HMMs (iHMM). Hence, scHMM is a collection of inter-dependent
non-homogeneous HMMs, capable of giving a close approximation to a fully
multivariate HMM fit. A simulation study shows that scHMM achieves comparable
sensitivity to the multivariate HMM fit at a much lower computational cost. The
method was demonstrated in the joint analysis of 39 histone modifications, CTCF
and RNA polymerase II in human CD4+ T cells. scHMM reported fewer high-confidence
regions than iHMM in this dataset, but scHMM could recover previously
characterized histone modifications in relevant genomic regions better than iHMM.
In addition, the resulting combinatorial patterns from scHMM could be better
mapped to the 51 states reported by the multivariate HMM method of Ernst and
Kellis.
AVAILABILITY: The scHMM package can be freely downloaded from
http://sourceforge.net/p/schmm/ and is recommended for use in a linux
environment.

PMCID: PMC3582268
PMID: 23325620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Feb 1;41(4):2095-104. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1449. Epub 2013
Jan 8.

Patterns of methylation heritability in a genome-wide analysis of four brain
regions.

Quon G(1), Lippert C, Heckerman D, Listgarten J.

Author information: 
(1)eScience Group, Microsoft Research, 1100 Glendon Avenue, Suite PH1, Los
Angeles, CA 90024, USA.

DNA methylation has been implicated in a number of diseases and other phenotypes.
It is, therefore, of interest to identify and understand the genetic determinants
of methylation and epigenomic variation. We investigated the extent to which
genetic variation in cis-DNA sequence explains variation in CpG dinucleotide
methylation in publicly available data for four brain regions from unrelated
individuals, finding that 3-4% of CpG loci assayed were heritable, with a mean
estimated narrow-sense heritability of 30% over the heritable loci. Over all
loci, the mean estimated heritability was 3%, as compared with a recent
twin-based study reporting 18%. Heritable loci were enriched for open chromatin
regions and binding sites of CTCF, an influential regulator of transcription and 
chromatin architecture. Additionally, heritable loci were proximal to genes
enriched in several known pathways, suggesting a possible functional role for
these loci. Our estimates of heritability are conservative, and we suspect that
the number of identified heritable loci will increase as the methylome is assayed
across a broader range of cell types and the density of the tested loci is
increased. Finally, we show that the number of heritable loci depends on the
window size parameter commonly used to identify candidate cis-acting
single-nucleotide polymorphism variants.

PMCID: PMC3575819
PMID: 23303775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 1;288(9):6717-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.437400. Epub 2013
Jan 9.

Coordinate regulation of the gel-forming mucin genes at chromosome 11p15.5.

Gosalia N(1), Leir SH, Harris A.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Children's Memorial Research Center and
Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, Illinois 60614, USA.

Four of the genes that encode gel-forming mucins, which are major components of
the mucus layer protecting many epithelial surfaces, are clustered at chromosome 
11p15.5 and show both cell- and tissue-specific expression patterns. We aimed to 
determine whether the individual genes were coordinately regulated by mechanisms 
involving higher order chromatin structure. CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) sites
were predicted in silico and CTCF occupancy then evaluated by chromatin
immunoprecipitation. CTCF was found at many sites across the gene cluster, and
its binding was correlated with mucin gene expression. Next, siRNA-mediated
depletion of CTCF was shown to increase MUC2 expression in A549 lung carcinoma
cells and both MUC6 and MUC5AC expression in LS180 colon carcinoma cells. These
changes correlated with loss of CTCF binding at multiple sites, although others
retained occupancy. In cells actively expressing the mucins, the gene cluster was
shown by chromosome conformation capture to form looped three-dimensional
structures with direct interactions between the MUC2 promoter region, regions 30 
kb 5' to it, close to the MUC6 promoter and others near the 3' end of MUC5AC,
>170 kb away. Finally, to demonstrate the importance of CTCF binding to mucin
gene expression, Calu-3 lung carcinoma cells were exposed to lipopolysaccharide
(LPS). LPS increased the expression of MUC2 and MUC5AC and reduced MUC5B. CTCF
occupancy was concurrently depleted at specific binding sites close to these
genes. These data suggest that CTCF binding and cell type-specific long-range
interactions across the 11p15.5 gene cluster are critical mechanisms for
coordinating gel-forming mucin gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3585109
PMID: 23303185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Feb 1;41(4):2171-9. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1355. Epub 2013
Jan 7.

Imprinting at the PLAGL1 domain is contained within a 70-kb CTCF/cohesin-mediated
non-allelic chromatin loop.

Iglesias-Platas I(1), Court F, Camprubi C, Sparago A, Guillaumet-Adkins A,
Martin-Trujillo A, Riccio A, Moore GE, Monk D.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neonatología, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu (HSJD), Fundació Sant Joan
de Déu, 08950 Barcelona, Spain.

Paternal duplications of chromosome 6q24, a region that contains the imprinted
PLAGL1 and HYMAI transcripts, are associated with transient neonatal diabetes
mellitus. A common feature of imprinted genes is that they tend to cluster
together, presumably as a result of sharing common cis-acting regulatory
elements. To determine the extent of this imprinted cluster in human and mouse,
we have undertaken a systematic analysis of allelic expression and DNA
methylation of the genes mapping within an ~1.4-Mb region flanking PLAGL1/Plagl1.
We confirm that all nine neighbouring genes are biallelically expressed in both
species. In human we identify two novel paternally expressed PLAGL1 coding
transcripts that originate from unique promoter regions. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation for CTCF and the cohesin subunits RAD21 and SMC3 reveals
evolutionarily conserved binding sites within unmethylated regions ~5 kb
downstream of the PLAGL1 differentially methylated region and within the PLAGL1
3' untranslated region (UTR). Higher-order chromatin looping occurs between these
regions in both expressing and non-expressing tissues, forming a non-allelic
chromatin loop around the PLAGL1/Plagl1 gene. In placenta and brain tissues, we
identify an additional interaction between the PLAGL1 P3/P4 promoters and the
unmethylated element downstream of the PLAGL1 differentially methylated region
that we propose facilitates imprinted expression of these alternative isoforms.

PMCID: PMC3575839
PMID: 23295672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52880. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052880. Epub 2012 Dec 21.

Upstream distal regulatory elements contact the Lmo2 promoter in mouse erythroid 
cells.

Bhattacharya A(1), Chen CY, Ho S, Mitchell JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

The Lim domain only 2 (Lmo2) gene encodes a transcriptional cofactor critical for
the development of hematopoietic stem cells. Several distal regulatory elements
have been identified upstream of the Lmo2 gene in the human and mouse genomes
that are capable of enhancing reporter gene expression in erythroid cells and may
be responsible for the high level transcription of Lmo2 in the erythroid lineage.
In this study we investigate how these elements regulate transcription of Lmo2
and whether or not they function cooperatively in the endogenous context.
Chromosome conformation capture (3C) experiments show that chromatin-chromatin
interactions exist between upstream regulatory elements and the Lmo2 promoter in 
erythroid cells but that these interactions are absent from kidney where Lmo2 is 
transcribed at twelve fold lower levels. Specifically, long range
chromatin-chromatin interactions occur between the Lmo2 proximal promoter and two
broad regions, 3-31 and 66-105 kb upstream of Lmo2, which we term the proximal
and distal control regions for Lmo2 (pCR and dCR respectively). Each of these
regions is bound by several transcription factors suggesting that multiple
regulatory elements cooperate in regulating high level transcription of Lmo2 in
erythroid cells. Binding of CTCF and cohesin which support chromatin loops at
other loci were also found within the dCR and at the Lmo2 proximal promoter.
Intergenic transcription occurs throughout the dCR in erythroid cells but not in 
kidney suggesting a role for these intergenic transcripts in regulating Lmo2,
similar to the broad domain of intergenic transcription observed at the human
ß-globin locus control region. Our data supports a model in which the dCR
functions through a chromatin looping mechanism to contact and enhance Lmo2
transcription specifically in erythroid cells. Furthermore, these chromatin loops
are supported by the cohesin complex recruited to both CTCF and transcription
factor bound regions.

PMCID: PMC3528669
PMID: 23285212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Cell Regen (Lond). 2013 Jun 18;2(1):4. doi: 10.1186/2045-9769-2-4. eCollection
2013.

Cohesin complexes with a potential to link mammalian meiosis to cancer.

Strunnikov A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Molecular Epigenetics
Laboratory, 190 Kai Yuan Avenue, Science Park, Guangzhou, 510530 China.

Among multiple genes aberrantly activated in cancers, invariably, there is a
group related to the capacity of cell to self-renewal. Some of these genes are
related to the normal process of development, including the establishment of a
germline. This group, a part of growing family of Cancer/Testis (CT) genes, now
includes the meiosis specific subunits of cohesin complex. The first reports
characterizing the SMC1 and RAD21 genes, encoding subunits of cohesin, were
published 20 years ago; however the exact molecular mechanics of cohesin
molecular machine in vivo remains rather obscure notwithstanding ample elegant
experiments. The matters are complicated by the fact that the evolution of
cohesin function, which is served by just two basic types of protein complexes in
budding yeast, took an explosive turn in Metazoa. The recent characterization of 
a new set of genes encoding cohesin subunits specific for meiosis in vertebrates 
adds several levels of complexity to the task of structure-function analysis of
specific cohesin pathways, even more so in relation to their aberrant
functionality in cancers. These three proteins, SMC1ß, RAD21L and STAG3 are
likely involved in a specific function in the first meiotic prophase, genetic
recombination, and segregation of homologues. However, at present, it is rather
challenging to pinpoint the molecular role of these proteins, particularly in
synaptonemal complex or centromere function, due to the multiplicity of different
cohesins in meiosis. The roles of these proteins in cancer cell physiology, upon 
their aberrant activation in tumors, also remain to be elucidated. Nevertheless, 
as the existence of Cancer/Testis cohesin complexes in tumor cells appears to be 
all but certain, this brings a promise of a new target for cancer therapy and/or 
diagnostics.

PMCID: PMC4230521
PMID: 25408876  [PubMed]


424. Biology (Basel). 2013 Jan 25;2(1):233-83. doi: 10.3390/biology2010233.

Cell-Type Specific Determinants of NRAMP1 Expression in Professional Phagocytes.

Cellier MF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Inrs-Institut Armand-Frappier, 531, Bd des prairies, Laval, QC H7V 1B7,
Canada. mathieu.cellier@iaf.inrs.ca.

The Natural resistance-associated macrophage protein 1 (Nramp1 or Solute carrier 
11 member 1, Slc11a1) transports divalent metals across the membrane of late
endosomes and lysosomes in professional phagocytes. Nramp1 represents an ancient 
eukaryotic cell-autonomous defense whereas the gene duplication that yielded
Nramp1 and Nramp2 predated the origin of Sarcopterygians (lobe-finned fishes and 
tetrapods). SLC11A1 genetic polymorphisms associated with human resistance to
tuberculosis consist of potential regulatory variants. Herein, current knowledge 
of the regulation of SLC11A1 gene expression is reviewed and comprehensive
analysis of ENCODE data available for hematopoietic cell-types suggests a
hypothesis for the regulation of SLC11A1 expression during myeloid development
and phagocyte functional polarization. SLC11A1 is part of a 34.6 kb
CTCF-insulated locus scattered with predicted regulatory elements: a 3' enhancer,
a large 5' enhancer domain and four elements spread around the transcription
start site (TSS), including several C/EBP and PU.1 sites. SLC11A1 locus ends
appear mobilized by ETS-related factors early during myelopoiesis; activation of 
both 5' and 3' enhancers in myelo-monocytic cells correlate with transcription
factor binding at the TSS. Characterizing the corresponding cis/trans
determinants functionally will establish the mechanisms involved and possibly
reveal genetic variation that impacts susceptibility to infectious or immune
diseases.

PMCID: PMC4009858
PMID: 24832660  [PubMed]


425. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Feb;33(4):858-71. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01003-12. Epub 2012 Dec
10.

The H19 imprinting control region mediates preimplantation imprinted methylation 
of nearby sequences in yeast artificial chromosome transgenic mice.

Okamura E(1), Matsuzaki H, Sakaguchi R, Takahashi T, Fukamizu A, Tanimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

In the mouse Igf2/H19 imprinted locus, differential methylation of the imprinting
control region (H19 ICR) is established during spermatogenesis and is maintained 
in offspring throughout development. Previously, however, we observed that the
paternal H19 ICR, when analyzed in yeast artificial chromosome transgenic mice
(YAC-TgM), was preferentially methylated only after fertilization. To identify
the DNA sequences that confer methylation imprinting, we divided the H19 ICR into
two fragments (1.7 and 1.2 kb), ligated them to both ends of a <U+03BB> DNA fragment
into which CTCF binding sites had been inserted, and analyzed this in YAC-TgM.
The maternally inherited <U+03BB> sequence, normally methylated after implantation in
the absence of H19 ICR sequences, became hypomethylated, demonstrating protective
activity against methylation within the ICR. Meanwhile, the paternally inherited 
<U+03BB> sequence was hypermethylated before implantation only when a 1.7-kb fragment
was ligated. Consistently, when two subfragments of the H19 ICR were individually
investigated for their activities in YAC-TgM, only the 1.7-kb fragment was
capable of introducing paternal allele-specific DNA methylation. These results
show that postfertilization methylation imprinting is conferred by a paternal
allele-specific methylation activity present in a 1.7-kb DNA fragment of the H19 
ICR, while maternal allele-specific activities protect the allele from de novo
DNA methylation.

PMCID: PMC3571351
PMID: 23230275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2013 Jan;20(1):119-26. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2448. Epub 2012 Dec
9.

Multilayered chromatin analysis reveals E2f, Smad and Zfx as transcriptional
regulators of histones.

Gokhman D(1), Livyatan I, Sailaja BS, Melcer S, Meshorer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Sciences,
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

Histones, the building blocks of eukaryotic chromatin, are essential for genome
packaging, function and regulation. However, little is known about their
transcriptional regulation. Here we conducted a comprehensive computational
analysis, based on chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing and -microarray
analysis (ChIP-seq and ChIP-chip) data of over 50 transcription factors and
histone modifications in mouse embryonic stem cells. Enrichment scores supported 
by gene expression data from gene knockout studies identified E2f1 and E2f4 as
master regulators of histone genes, CTCF and Zfx as repressors of core and linker
histones, respectively, and Smad1, Smad2, YY1 and Ep300 as restricted or cell
type-specific regulators. We propose that histone gene regulation is
substantially more complex than previously thought, and that a combination of
factors orchestrate histone gene regulation, from strict synchronization with S
phase to targeted regulation of specific histone subtypes.

PMID: 23222641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Mol Brain. 2012 Dec 6;5:42. doi: 10.1186/1756-6606-5-42.

DNA methylation at the Igf2/H19 imprinting control region is associated with
cerebellum mass in outbred mice.

Pidsley R(1), Fernandes C, Viana J, Paya-Cano JL, Liu L, Smith RG, Schalkwyk LC, 
Mill J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, De Crespigny Park, Denmark
Hill, London SE5 8AF, UK.

BACKGROUND: Insulin-like growth factor 2 (Igf2) is a paternally expressed
imprinted gene regulating fetal growth, playing an integral role in the
development of many tissues including the brain. The parent-of-origin specific
expression of Igf2 is largely controlled by allele-specific DNA methylation at
CTCF-binding sites in the imprinting control region (ICR), located immediately
upstream of the neighboring H19 gene. Previously we reported evidence of a
negative correlation between DNA methylation in this region and cerebellum weight
in humans.
RESULTS: We quantified cerebellar DNA methylation across all four CTCF binding
sites spanning the murine Igf2/H19 ICR in an outbred population of Heterogeneous 
Stock (HS) mice (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>48). We observe that DNA methylation at the second and third
CTCF binding sites in the Igf2/H19 ICR shows a negative relationship with
cerebellar mass, reflecting the association observed in human post-mortem
cerebellum tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: Given the important role of the cerebellum in motor control and
cognition, and the link between structural cerebellar abnormalities and
neuropsychiatric phenotypes, the identification of epigenetic factors associated 
with cerebellum growth and development may provide important insights about the
etiology of psychiatric disorders.

PMCID: PMC3541153
PMID: 23216893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 18;109(51):21081-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1219280110. Epub 2012 Nov 30.

CTCF/cohesin-mediated DNA looping is required for protocadherin a promoter
choice.

Guo Y(1), Monahan K, Wu H, Gertz J, Varley KE, Li W, Myers RM, Maniatis T, Wu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine, Ministry of Education, Center for
Comparative Biomedicine, Institute of Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200240, China.

The closely linked human protocadherin (Pcdh) a, ß, and <U+03B3> gene clusters encode 53
distinct protein isoforms, which are expressed in a combinatorial manner to
generate enormous diversity on the surface of individual neurons. This diversity 
is a consequence of stochastic promoter choice and alternative pre-mRNA
processing. Here, we show that Pcdha promoter choice is achieved by DNA looping
between two downstream transcriptional enhancers and individual promoters driving
the expression of alternate Pcdha isoforms. In addition, we show that this DNA
looping requires specific binding of the CTCF/cohesin complex to two
symmetrically aligned binding sites in both the transcriptionally active
promoters and in one of the enhancers. These findings have important implications
regarding enhancer/promoter interactions in the generation of complex Pcdh cell
surface codes for the establishment of neuronal identity and self-avoidance in
individual neurons.

PMCID: PMC3529044
PMID: 23204437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Jan;41(Database issue):D188-94. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1165.
Epub 2012 Nov 27.

CTCFBSDB 2.0: a database for CTCF-binding sites and genome organization.

Ziebarth JD(1), Bhattacharya A, Cui Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Memphis, TN 38163, USA.

CTCF is a highly conserved transcriptional regulator protein that performs
diverse functions such as regulating gene expression and organizing the 3D
structure of the genome. Here, we describe recent updates to a database of
CTCF-binding sites, CTCFBSDB (http://insulatordb.uthsc.edu/), which now contains 
almost 15 million CTCF-binding sequences in 10 species. Since the original
publication of the database, studies of the 3D structure of the genome, such as
those provided by Hi-C experiments, have suggested that CTCF plays an important
role in mediating intra- and inter-chromosomal interactions. To reflect this
important progress, we have integrated CTCF-binding sites with genomic
topological domains defined using Hi-C data. Additionally, the updated database
includes new features enabled by new CTCF-binding site data, including binding
site occupancy and the ability to visualize overlapping CTCF-binding sites
determined in separate experiments.

PMCID: PMC3531215
PMID: 23193294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Virol. 2013 Feb;87(3):1789-99. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02283-12. Epub 2012 Nov 28.

CTCF regulates Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus latency transcription by
nucleosome displacement and RNA polymerase programming.

Kang H(1), Cho H, Sung GH, Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Republic of Korea.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2013 Apr;87(7):4127.

CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) has been implicated in various aspects of viral and
host chromatin organization and transcriptional control. We showed previously
that CTCF binds to a cluster of three sites in the first intron of the Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) multicistronic latency-associated
transcript that encodes latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA), viral cyclin
(vCyclin), vFLIP, viral microRNAs, and kaposin. We show here that these CTCF
binding sites regulate mRNA production, RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) programming,
and nucleosome organization of the KSHV latency transcript control region. We
also show that KSHV bacmids lacking these CTCF binding sites have elevated and
altered ratios of spliced latency transcripts. CTCF binding site mutations
altered RNAPII and RNAPII-accessory factor interactions with the latency control 
region. CTCF binding sites were required for the in vitro recruitment of RNAPII
to the latency control region, suggesting that direct interactions between CTCF
and RNAPII contribute to transcription regulation. Histone modifications in the
latency control region were also altered by mutations in the CTCF binding sites. 
Finally, we show that CTCF binding alters the regular phasing of nucleosomes in
the latency gene transcript and intron, suggesting that nucleosome positioning
can be an underlying biochemical mechanism of CTCF function. We propose that
RNAPII interactions and nucleosome displacement serve as a biochemical basis for 
programming RNAPII in the KSHV transcriptional control region.

PMCID: PMC3554185
PMID: 23192870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Genome Biol. 2012 Nov 27;13(11):R110. doi: 10.1186/gb-2012-13-11-r110.

Human genes with CpG island promoters have a distinct transcription-associated
chromatin organization.

Vavouri T, Lehner B.

BACKGROUND: More than 50% of human genes initiate transcription from CpG
dinucleotide-rich regions referred to as CpG islands. These genes show
differences in their patterns of transcription initiation, and have been reported
to have higher levels of some activation-associated chromatin modifications.
RESULTS: Here we report that genes with CpG island promoters have a
characteristic transcription-associated chromatin organization. This signature
includes high levels of the transcription elongation-associated histone
modifications H4K20me1, H2BK5me1 and H3K79me1/2/3 in the 5' end of the gene,
depletion of the activation marks H2AK5ac, H3K14ac and H3K23ac immediately
downstream of the transcription start site (TSS), and characteristic epigenetic
asymmetries around the TSS. The chromosome organization factor CTCF may be bound 
upstream of RNA polymerase in most active CpG island promoters, and an unstable
nucleosome at the TSS may be specifically marked by H4K20me3, the first example
of such a modification. H3K36 monomethylation is only detected as enriched in the
bodies of active genes that have CpG island promoters. Finally, as expression
levels increase, peak modification levels of the histone methylations H3K9me1,
H3K4me1, H3K4me2 and H3K27me1 shift further away from the TSS into the gene body.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that active genes with CpG island promoters
have a distinct step-like series of modified nucleosomes after the TSS. The
identity, positioning, shape and relative ordering of transcription-associated
histone modifications differ between genes with and without CpG island promoters.
This supports a model where chromatin organization reflects not only
transcription activity but also the type of promoter in which transcription
initiates.

PMCID: PMC3580500
PMID: 23186133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Nat Rev Genet. 2013 Jan;14(1):6. doi: 10.1038/nrg3392. Epub 2012 Nov 27.

Evolution: Positively selecting CTCF binding.

Stower H.

Comment on
    PLoS Biol. 2012;10(11):e1001420.

PMID: 23183708  [PubMed]


433. Cell. 2012 Nov 21;151(5):951-63. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.10.037.

Site-specific silencing of regulatory elements as a mechanism of X inactivation.

Calabrese JM(1), Sun W, Song L, Mugford JW, Williams L, Yee D, Starmer J,
Mieczkowski P, Crawford GE, Magnuson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, the Carolina Center for Genome Sciences, and the
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599, USA.

The inactive X chromosome's (Xi) physical territory is microscopically devoid of 
transcriptional hallmarks and enriched in silencing-associated modifications. How
these microscopic signatures relate to specific Xi sequences is unknown.
Therefore, we profiled Xi gene expression and chromatin states at high resolution
via allele-specific sequencing in mouse trophoblast stem cells. Most notably,
X-inactivated transcription start sites harbored distinct epigenetic signatures
relative to surrounding Xi DNA. These sites displayed H3-lysine27-trimethylation 
enrichment and DNaseI hypersensitivity, similar to autosomal Polycomb targets,
yet excluded Pol II and other transcriptional hallmarks, similar to
nontranscribed genes. CTCF bound X-inactivated and escaping genes, irrespective
of measured chromatin boundaries. Escape from X inactivation occurred within, and
X inactivation was maintained exterior to, the area encompassed by Xist in cells 
subject to imprinted and random X inactivation. The data support a model whereby 
inactivation of specific regulatory elements, rather than a simple
chromosome-wide separation from transcription machinery, governs gene silencing
over the Xi.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3511858
PMID: 23178118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 11;109(50):E3493-502. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1214131109. Epub 2012 Nov 19.

Tcra gene recombination is supported by a Tcra enhancer- and CTCF-dependent
chromatin hub.

Shih HY(1), Verma-Gaur J, Torkamani A, Feeney AJ, Galjart N, Krangel MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA.

Antigen receptor locus V(D)J recombination requires interactions between widely
separated variable (V), diversity (D), and joining (J) gene segments, but the
mechanisms that generate these interactions are not well understood. Here we
assessed mechanisms that direct developmental stage-specific long-distance
interactions at the Tcra/Tcrd locus. The Tcra/Tcrd locus recombines Tcrd gene
segments in CD4(-)CD8(-) double-negative thymocytes and Tcra gene segments in
CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive thymocytes. Initial V(a)-to-J(a) recombination
occurs within a chromosomal domain that displays a contracted conformation in
both thymocyte subsets. We used chromosome conformation capture to demonstrate
that the Tcra enhancer (E(a)) interacts directly with V(a) and J(a) gene segments
distributed across this domain, specifically in double-positive thymocytes.
Moreover, E(a) promotes interactions between these V(a) and J(a) segments that
should facilitate their synapsis. We found that the CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)
binds to E(a) and to many locus promoters, biases E(a) to interact with these
promoters, and is required for efficient V(a)-J(a) recombination. Our data
indicate that E(a) and CTCF cooperate to create a developmentally regulated
chromatin hub that supports V(a)-J(a) synapsis and recombination.

PMCID: PMC3528579
PMID: 23169622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. BMC Genomics. 2012;13 Suppl 6:S3. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-S6-S3. Epub 2012 Oct 
26.

Integrative genome-wide chromatin signature analysis using finite mixture models.

Taslim C(1), Lin S, Huang K, Huang TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210,
USA. taslim.2@osu.edu

Regulation of gene expression has been shown to involve not only the binding of
transcription factor at target gene promoters but also the characterization of
histone around which DNA is wrapped around. Some histone modification, for
example di-methylated histone H3 at lysine 4 (H3K4me2), has been shown to bind to
promoters and activate target genes. However, no clear pattern has been shown to 
predict human promoters. This paper proposed a novel quantitative approach to
characterize patterns of promoter regions and predict novel and alternative
promoters. We utilized high-throughput data generated using chromatin
immunoprecipitation methods followed by massively parallel sequencing (ChIP-seq) 
technology on RNA Polymerase II (Pol-II) and H3K4me2. Common patterns of promoter
regions are modeled using a mixture model involving double-exponential and
uniform distributions. The fitted model obtained were then used to search for
regions displaying similar patterns over the entire genome to find novel and
alternative promoters. Regions with high correlations with the common patterns
are identified as putative novel promoters. We used this proposed algorithm,
RNA-seq data and several transcripts databases to find alternative promoters in
MCF7 (normal breast cancer) cell line. We found 7,235 high-confidence regions
that display the identified promoter patterns. Of these, 4,167 regions (58%) can 
be mapped to RefSeq regions. 2,444 regions are in a gene body or overlap with
transcripts (non-coding RNAs, ESTs, and transcripts that are predicted by RNA-seq
data). Some of these maybe potential alternative promoters. We also found 193
regions that map to enhancer regions (represented by androgen and estrogen
receptor binding sites) and other regulatory regions such as CTCF (CCCTC binding 
factor) and CpG island. Around 5% (431 regions) of these correlated regions do
not overlap with any transcripts or regulatory regions suggesting that these
might be potential new promoters or markers for other annotation which are
currently undiscovered.

PMCID: PMC3481451
PMID: 23134707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Front Genet. 2012 Nov 16;3:251. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2012.00251. eCollection 2012.

The role of CTCF binding sites in the 3' immunoglobulin heavy chain regulatory
region.

Birshtein BK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine Bronx, NY,
USA.

The immunoglobulin heavy chain locus undergoes a series of DNA rearrangements and
modifications to achieve the construction and expression of individual antibody
heavy chain genes in B cells. These events affect variable regions, through VDJ
joining and subsequent somatic hypermutation, and constant regions through class 
switch recombination (CSR). Levels of IgH expression are also regulated during B 
cell development, resulting in high levels of secreted antibodies from fully
differentiated plasma cells. Regulation of these events has been attributed
primarily to two cis-elements that work from long distances on their target
sequences, i.e., an ~1 kb intronic enhancer, Eµ, located between the V region
segments and the most 5' constant region gene, Cµ; and an ~40 kb 3' regulatory
region (3' RR) that is located downstream of the most 3' C(H) gene, Ca. The 3' RR
is a candidate for an "end" of B cell-specific regulation of the Igh locus. The
3' RR contains several B cell-specific enhancers associated with DNase I
hypersensitive sites (hs1-4), which are essential for CSR and for high levels of 
IgH expression in plasma cells. Downstream of this enhancer-containing region is 
a region of high-density CTCF binding sites, which extends through hs5, 6, and 7 
and further downstream. CTCF, with its enhancer-blocking activities, has been
associated with all mammalian insulators and implicated in multiple chromosomal
interactions. Here we address the 3' RR CTCF-binding region as a potential
insulator of the Igh locus, an independent regulatory element and a predicted
modulator of the activity of 3' RR enhancers. Using chromosome conformation
capture technology, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and genetic approaches, we
have found that the 3' RR with its CTCF-binding region interacts with target
sequences in the V(H), Eµ, and C(H) regions through DNA looping as regulated by
protein binding. This region impacts on B cell-specific Igh processes at
different stages of B cell development.

PMCID: PMC3499808
PMID: 23162572  [PubMed]


437. Subcell Biochem. 2013;61:261-87. doi: 10.1007/978-94-007-4525-4_12.

RNA polymerase III transcription - regulated by chromatin structure and regulator
of nuclear chromatin organization.

Pascali C(1), Teichmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Européen de Chimie et Biologie (IECB), Université Bordeaux Segalen / 
INSERM U869, 2, rue Robert Escarpit, 33607, Pessac, France.

RNA polymerase III (Pol III) transcription is regulated by modifications of the
chromatin. DNA methylation and post-translational modifications of histones, such
as acetylation, phosphorylation and methylation have been linked to Pol III
transcriptional activity. In addition to being regulated by modifications of DNA 
and histones, Pol III genes and its transcription factors have been implicated in
the organization of nuclear chromatin in several organisms. In yeast, the ability
of the Pol III transcription system to contribute to nuclear organization seems
to be dependent on direct interactions of Pol III genes and/or its transcription 
factors TFIIIC and TFIIIB with the structural maintenance of chromatin (SMC)
protein-containing complexes cohesin and condensin. In human cells, Pol III genes
and transcription factors have also been shown to colocalize with cohesin and the
transcription regulator and genome organizer CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF).
Furthermore, chromosomal sites have been identified in yeast and humans that are 
bound by partial Pol III machineries (extra TFIIIC sites - ETC; chromosome
organizing clamps - COC). These ETCs/COC as well as Pol III genes possess the
ability to act as boundary elements that restrict spreading of heterochromatin.

PMID: 23150255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. PLoS Biol. 2012;10(11):e1001420. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001420. Epub 2012 Nov
6.

Adaptive evolution and the birth of CTCF binding sites in the Drosophila genome.

Ni X(1), Zhang YE, Nègre N, Chen S, Long M, White KP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genomics and Systems Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago,
IL, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2013 Jan;14(1):6.
    PLoS Biol. 2012;10(11):e1001421.

Changes in the physical interaction between cis-regulatory DNA sequences and
proteins drive the evolution of gene expression. However, it has proven difficult
to accurately quantify evolutionary rates of such binding change or to estimate
the relative effects of selection and drift in shaping the binding evolution.
Here we examine the genome-wide binding of CTCF in four species of Drosophila
separated by between ~2.5 and 25 million years. CTCF is a highly conserved
protein known to be associated with insulator sequences in the genomes of human
and Drosophila. Although the binding preference for CTCF is highly conserved, we 
find that CTCF binding itself is highly evolutionarily dynamic and has adaptively
evolved. Between species, binding divergence increased linearly with evolutionary
distance, and CTCF binding profiles are diverging rapidly at the rate of 2.22%
per million years (Myr). At least 89 new CTCF binding sites have originated in
the Drosophila melanogaster genome since the most recent common ancestor with
Drosophila simulans. Comparing these data to genome sequence data from 37
different strains of Drosophila melanogaster, we detected signatures of selection
in both newly gained and evolutionarily conserved binding sites. Newly evolved
CTCF binding sites show a significantly stronger signature for positive selection
than older sites. Comparative gene expression profiling revealed that expression 
divergence of genes adjacent to CTCF binding site is significantly associated
with the gain and loss of CTCF binding. Further, the birth of new genes is
associated with the birth of new CTCF binding sites. Our data indicate that
binding of Drosophila CTCF protein has evolved under natural selection, and CTCF 
binding evolution has shaped both the evolution of gene expression and genome
evolution during the birth of new genes.

PMCID: PMC3491045
PMID: 23139640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Feb 1;22(3):544-57. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds465. Epub 2012 Oct
30.

The molecular function and clinical phenotype of partial deletions of the
IGF2/H19 imprinting control region depends on the spatial arrangement of the
remaining CTCF-binding sites.

Beygo J(1), Citro V, Sparago A, De Crescenzo A, Cerrato F, Heitmann M, Rademacher
K, Guala A, Enklaar T, Anichini C, Cirillo Silengo M, Graf N, Prawitt D, Cubellis
MV, Horsthemke B, Buiting K, Riccio A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany.

At chromosome 11p15.5, the imprinting centre 1 (IC1) controls the parent of
origin-specific expression of the IGF2 and H19 genes. The 5 kb IC1 region
contains multiple target sites (CTS) for the zinc-finger protein CTCF, whose
binding on the maternal chromosome prevents the activation of IGF2 and allows
that of H19 by common enhancers. CTCF binding helps maintaining the maternal IC1 
methylation-free, whereas on the paternal chromosome gamete-inherited DNA
methylation inhibits CTCF interaction and enhancer-blocking activity resulting in
IGF2 activation and H19 silencing. Maternally inherited 1.4-2.2 kb deletions are 
associated with methylation of the residual CTSs and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome,
although with different penetrance and expressivity. We explored the relationship
between IC1 microdeletions and phenotype by analysing a number of previously
described and novel mutant alleles. We used a highly quantitative assay based on 
next generation sequencing to measure DNA methylation in affected families and
analysed enhancer-blocking activity and CTCF binding in cultured cells. We
demonstrate that the microdeletions mostly affect IC1 function and CTCF binding
by changing CTS spacing. Thus, the extent of IC1 inactivation and the clinical
phenotype are influenced by the arrangement of the residual CTSs. A CTS spacing
similar to the wild-type allele results in moderate IC1 inactivation and is
associated with stochastic DNA methylation of the maternal IC1 and incomplete
penetrance. Microdeletions with different CTS spacing display severe IC1
inactivation and are associated with IC1 hypermethylation and complete
penetrance. Careful characterization of the IC1 microdeletions is therefore
needed to predict recurrence risks and phenotypical outcomes.

PMCID: PMC3542864
PMID: 23118352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Biochem J. 2013 Feb 1;449(3):623-30. doi: 10.1042/BJ20121429.

ADP-ribose polymer depletion leads to nuclear Ctcf re-localization and chromatin 
rearrangement(1).

Guastafierro T(1), Catizone A, Calabrese R, Zampieri M, Martella O, Bacalini MG, 
Reale A, Di Girolamo M, Miccheli M, Farrar D, Klenova E, Ciccarone F, Caiafa P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Histology, Forensic Medicine and Orthopedics, Section 
of Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Pharmacy and Medicine, "Sapienza"
University Rome, V.le Regina Elena 324, 00161 Rome, Italy.

Ctcf (CCCTC-binding factor) directly induces Parp [poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase] 1
activity and its PARylation [poly(ADPribosyl)ation] in the absence of DNA damage.
Ctcf, in turn, is a substrate for this post-synthetic modification and as such it
is covalently and non-covalently modified by PARs (ADP-ribose polymers).
Moreover, PARylation is able to protect certain DNA regions bound by Ctcf from
DNA methylation. We recently reported that de novo methylation of Ctcf target
sequences due to overexpression of Parg [poly(ADP-ribose)glycohydrolase] induces 
loss of Ctcf binding. Considering this, we investigate to what extent PARP
activity is able to affect nuclear distribution of Ctcf in the present study.
Notably, Ctcf lost its diffuse nuclear localization following PAR (ADP-ribose
polymer) depletion and accumulated at the periphery of the nucleus where it was
linked with nuclear pore complex proteins remaining external to the perinuclear
Lamin B1 ring. We demonstrated that PAR depletion-dependent perinuclear
localization of Ctcf was due to its blockage from entering the nucleus. Besides
Ctcf nuclear delocalization, the outcome of PAR depletion led to changes in
chromatin architecture. Immunofluorescence analyses indicated DNA redistribution,
a generalized genomic hypermethylation and an increase of inactive compared with 
active chromatin marks in Parg-overexpressing or Ctcf-silenced cells. Together
these results underline the importance of the cross-talk between Parp1 and Ctcf
in the maintenance of nuclear organization.

PMID: 23116180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. BMC Genomics. 2012 Oct 26;13:566. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-566.

Euchromatin islands in large heterochromatin domains are enriched for CTCF
binding and differentially DNA-methylated regions.

Wen B(1), Wu H, Loh YH, Briem E, Daley GQ, Feinberg AP.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Epigenetics and Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: The organization of higher order chromatin is an emerging epigenetic 
mechanism for understanding development and disease. We and others have
previously observed dynamic changes during differentiation and oncogenesis in
large heterochromatin domains such as Large Organized Chromatin K (lysine)
modifications (LOCKs), of histone H3 lysine-9 dimethylation (H3K9me2) or other
repressive histone posttranslational modifications. The microstructure of these
regions has not previously been explored.
RESULTS: We analyzed the genome-wide distribution of H3K9me2 in two human
pluripotent stem cell lines and three differentiated cells lines. We identified >
2,500 small regions with very low H3K9me2 signals in the body of LOCKs, which
were termed as euchromatin islands (EIs). EIs are 6.5-fold enriched for DNase I
Hypersensitive Sites and 8-fold enriched for the binding of CTCF, the major
organizer of higher-order chromatin. Furthermore, EIs are 2-6 fold enriched for
differentially DNA-methylated regions associated with tissue types (T-DMRs),
reprogramming (R-DMRs) and cancer (C-DMRs). Gene ontology (GO) analysis suggests 
that EI-associated genes are functionally related to organ system development,
cell adhesion and cell differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: We identify the existence of EIs as a finer layer of epigenomic
architecture within large heterochromatin domains. Their enrichment for CTCF
sites and DNAse hypersensitive sites, as well as association with DMRs, suggest
that EIs play an important role in normal epigenomic architecture and its
disruption in disease.

PMCID: PMC3507770
PMID: 23102236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Front Genet. 2012 Oct 17;3:217. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2012.00217. eCollection 2012.

Chromatin loops, gene positioning, and gene expression.

Holwerda S(1), de Laat W.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, University
Medical Center Utrecht Utrecht, Netherlands.

Technological developments and intense research over the last years have led to a
better understanding of the 3D structure of the genome and its influence on
genome function inside the cell nucleus. We will summarize topological studies
performed on four model gene loci: the a- and ß-globin gene loci, the antigen
receptor loci, the imprinted H19-Igf2 locus and the Hox gene clusters.
Collectively, these studies show that regulatory DNA sequences physically contact
genes to control their transcription. Proteins set up the 3D configuration of the
genome and we will discuss the roles of the key structural organizers CTCF and
cohesin, the nuclear lamina and the transcription machinery. Finally, genes adopt
non-random positions in the nuclear interior. We will review studies on gene
positioning and propose that cell-specific genome conformations can juxtapose a
regulatory sequence on one chromosome to a responsive gene on another chromosome 
to cause altered gene expression in subpopulations of cells.

PMCID: PMC3473233
PMID: 23087710  [PubMed]


443. Front Genet. 2012 Oct 15;3:214. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2012.00214. eCollection 2012.

More than insulator: multiple roles of CTCF at the H19-Igf2 imprinted domain.

Singh P(1), Lee DH, Szabó PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Beckman Research Institute
Duarte, CA, USA.

CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor)-mediated insulation at the H19-Insulin-like growth
factor 2 (Igf2) imprinted domain is a classic example for imprinted gene
regulation. DNA methylation difference in the imprinting control region (ICR) is 
inherited from the gametes and subsequently determines parental allele-specific
enhancer blocking and imprinted expression in the soma. Recent genetic studies
showed that proper monoallelic enhancer blocking at the H19-Igf2 ICR is critical 
for development. Strict biallelic insulation at this locus causes perinatal
lethality, whereas leaky biallelic insulation results in smaller size but no
lethality. Apart from enhancer blocking, CTCF is also the master organizer of
chromatin composition in the maternal allele along this imprinted domain,
affecting not only histone tail covalent modifications but also those in the
histone core. Additionally, CTCF binding in the soma protects the maternal allele
from de novo DNA methylation. CTCF binding is not involved in the establishment
of the gametic marks at the ICR, but it slightly delays de novo methylation in
the maternally inherited ICR allele in prospermatogonia. This review focuses on
the developmental and epigenetic consequences of CTCF binding at the H19-Igf2
ICR.

PMCID: PMC3471092
PMID: 23087708  [PubMed]


444. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2012 Nov;19(11):1185-92. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2419. Epub 2012
Oct 21.

Genome-wide nucleosome positioning during embryonic stem cell development.

Teif VB(1), Vainshtein Y, Caudron-Herger M, Mallm JP, Marth C, Höfer T, Rippe K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Genome Organization and Function, Deutsches
Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany. v.teif@dkfz.de

We determined genome-wide nucleosome occupancies in mouse embryonic stem cells
and their neural progenitor and embryonic fibroblast counterparts to assess
features associated with nucleosome positioning during lineage commitment.
Cell-type- and protein-specific binding preferences of transcription factors to
sites with either low (Myc, Klf4 and Zfx) or high (Nanog, Oct4 and Sox2)
nucleosome occupancy as well as complex patterns for CTCF were identified.
Nucleosome-depleted regions around transcription start and transcription
termination sites were broad and more pronounced for active genes, with distinct 
patterns for promoters classified according to CpG content or histone methylation
marks. Throughout the genome, nucleosome occupancy was correlated with certain
histone methylation or acetylation modifications. In addition, the average
nucleosome repeat length increased during differentiation by 5-7 base pairs, with
local variations for specific regions. Our results reveal regulatory mechanisms
of cell differentiation that involve nucleosome repositioning.

PMID: 23085715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Nat Immunol. 2012 Dec;13(12):1196-204. doi: 10.1038/ni.2432. Epub 2012 Oct 14.

Global changes in the nuclear positioning of genes and intra- and interdomain
genomic interactions that orchestrate B cell fate.

Lin YC(1), Benner C, Mansson R, Heinz S, Miyazaki K, Miyazaki M, Chandra V,
Bossen C, Glass CK, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
California, USA.

The genome is folded into domains located in compartments that are either
transcriptionally inert or transcriptionally permissive. Here we used genome-wide
strategies to characterize domains during B cell development. Structured
interaction matrix analysis showed that occupancy by the architectural protein
CTCF was associated mainly with intradomain interactions, whereas sites bound by 
the histone acetyltransferase p300 or the transcription factors E2A or PU.1 were 
associated with intra- and interdomain interactions that are developmentally
regulated. We identified a spectrum of genes that switched nuclear location
during early B cell development. In progenitor cells, the transcriptionally
inactive locus encoding early B cell factor (Ebf1) was sequestered at the nuclear
lamina, which thereby preserved their multipotency. After development into the
pro-B cell stage, Ebf1 and other genes switched compartments to establish new
intra- and interdomain interactions associated with a B lineage-specific
transcription signature.

PMCID: PMC3501570
PMID: 23064439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Nat Genet. 2012 Nov;44(11):1207-14. doi: 10.1038/ng.2442. Epub 2012 Oct 14.

Epigenetic polymorphism and the stochastic formation of differentially methylated
regions in normal and cancerous tissues.

Landan G(1), Cohen NM, Mukamel Z, Bar A, Molchadsky A, Brosh R, Horn-Saban S,
Zalcenstein DA, Goldfinger N, Zundelevich A, Gal-Yam EN, Rotter V, Tanay A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, Weizmann Institute of 
Science, Rehovot, Israel.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2012 Nov;44(11):1173-4.

DNA methylation has been comprehensively profiled in normal and cancer cells, but
the dynamics that form, maintain and reprogram differentially methylated regions 
remain enigmatic. Here, we show that methylation patterns within populations of
cells from individual somatic tissues are heterogeneous and polymorphic. Using in
vitro evolution of immortalized fibroblasts for over 300 generations, we track
the dynamics of polymorphic methylation at regions developing significant
differential methylation on average. The data indicate that changes in
population-averaged methylation occur through a stochastic process that generates
a stream of local and uncorrelated methylation aberrations. Despite the
stochastic nature of the process, nearly deterministic epigenetic remodeling
emerges on average at loci that lose or gain resistance to methylation
accumulation. Changes in the susceptibility to methylation accumulation are
correlated with changes in histone modification and CTCF occupancy.
Characterizing epigenomic polymorphism within cell populations is therefore
critical to understanding methylation dynamics in normal and cancer cells.

PMID: 23064413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Front Genet. 2012 Sep 25;3:186. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2012.00186. eCollection 2012.

Role of CTCF in the regulation of microRNA expression.

Saito Y(1), Saito H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacotherapeutics, Faculty of Pharmacy, Keio University Tokyo, 
Japan.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that regulate expression of various 
target genes. miRNAs are expressed in a tissue-specific manner and play important
roles in cell proliferation, apoptosis, and differentiation. Epigenetic
alterations such as DNA methylation and histone modification are essential for
chromatin remodeling and regulation of gene expression including miRNAs. The
CCCTC-binding factor, CTCF, is known to bind insulators and exhibits an
enhancer-blocking and barrier function, and more recently, it also contributes to
the three-dimensional organization of the genome. CTCF can also serve as a
barrier against the spread of DNA methylation and histone repressive marks over
promoter regions of tumor suppressor genes. Recent studies have shown that CTCF
is also involved in the regulation of miRNAs such as miR-125b1, miR-375, and the 
miR-290 cluster in cancer cells and stem cells. miR-125b1 is a candidate of tumor
suppressor and is silenced in breast cancer cells. On the other hand, miR-375 may
have oncogenic function and is overexpressed in breast cancer cells. CTCF is
involved in the regulation of both miR-125b1 and miR-375, indicating that there
are various patterns of CTCF-associated epigenetic regulation of miRNAs. CTCF may
also play a key role in the pluripotency of cells through the regulation of
miR-290 cluster. These observations suggest that CTCF-mediated regulation of
miRNAs could be a novel approach for cancer therapy and regenerative medicine.

PMCID: PMC3457075
PMID: 23056006  [PubMed]


448. Vet Res Commun. 2013 Mar;37(1):29-35. doi: 10.1007/s11259-012-9543-9. Epub 2012
Oct 11.

H19 gene methylation study in Indian buffalo (Bubalus bubalis).

Tripathi AK(1), Solanki JV, Joshi CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biotechnology, College of Veterinary Science & Animal
Husbandry, Anand Agricultural University, Anand, 388 001, Gujarat, India.
drajais@gmail.com

The methylation of DNA at cytosine residues within CpG dinucleotides is
associated with transcriptional repression and is implicated in maintaining
genomic stability and also the silencing of repetitive elements. These imprinted 
genes are unique as they are expressed exclusively from one parental allele. The 
present study was carried out to detect methylation status in H19 gene promoter
CTCF III region in three Indian buffalo breeds (Jaffarabadi, Surti and Mehsani)
by bisulfite sequencing. Methylation percent in Jaffarabadi, Surti and Mehsani
buffaloes were found to be 50.19, 70.85 and 52.24, respectively, with mean
incidence of methylation percent in H19 in all three breeds as 57.36. Apart from 
CpG methylation, unexpected nucleotide conversion (T>C, A>G, G>A) and deletion (A
and G) after bisulfite sequencing were also observed. We observed no significant 
relationships in milk yield and milk fat per cent with methylation pattern in H19
gene in any of the three breeds.

PMID: 23054415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Bioinformatics. 2013 Jun 15;29(12):1485-7. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts596.
Epub 2012 Oct 9.

Promoter-proximal CCCTC-factor binding is associated with an increase in the
transcriptional pausing index.

Paredes SH(1), Melgar MF, Sethupathy P.

Author information: 
(1)Curriculum in Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, Carolina Center for
Genome Sciences, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC
27599, USA.

MOTIVATION: It has been known for more than 2 decades that after RNA polymerase
II (RNAPII) initiates transcription, it can enter into a paused or stalled state 
immediately downstream of the transcription start site before productive
elongation. Recent advances in high-throughput genomic technologies facilitated
the discovery that RNAPII pausing at promoters is a widespread physiologically
regulated phenomenon. The molecular underpinnings of pausing are incompletely
understood. The CCCTC-factor (CTCF) is a ubiquitous nuclear factor that has
diverse regulatory functions, including a recently discovered role in promoting
RNAPII pausing at splice sites.
RESULTS: In this study, we analyzed CTCF binding sites and nascent transcriptomic
data from three different cell types, and found that promoter-proximal CTCF
binding is significantly associated with RNAPII pausing.

PMCID: PMC3673211
PMID: 23047559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Oct 23;109(43):17507-12. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1111941109. Epub 2012 Oct 8.

The chromatin insulator CTCF and the emergence of metazoan diversity.

Heger P(1), Marin B, Bartkuhn M, Schierenberg E, Wiehe T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, Cologne Biocenter, University of Cologne, 50674
Cologne, Germany. peter.heger@uni-koeln.de

The great majority of metazoans belong to bilaterian phyla. They diversified
during a short interval in Earth's history known as the Cambrian explosion, ~540 
million years ago. However, the genetic basis of these events is poorly
understood. Here we argue that the vertebrate genome organizer CTCF
(CCCTC-binding factor) played an important role for the evolution of bilaterian
animals. We provide evidence that the CTCF protein and a genome-wide abundance of
CTCF-specific binding motifs are unique to bilaterian phyla, but absent in other 
eukaryotes. We demonstrate that CTCF-binding sites within vertebrate and
Drosophila Hox gene clusters have been maintained for several hundred million
years, suggesting an ancient origin of the previously known interaction between
Hox gene regulation and CTCF. In addition, a close correlation between the
presence of CTCF and Hox gene clusters throughout the animal kingdom suggests
conservation of the Hox-CTCF link across the Bilateria. On the basis of these
findings, we propose the existence of a Hox-CTCF kernel as principal organizer of
bilaterian body plans. Such a kernel could explain (i) the formation of Hox
clusters in Bilateria, (ii) the diversity of bilaterian body plans, and (iii) the
uniqueness and time of onset of the Cambrian explosion.

PMCID: PMC3491479
PMID: 23045651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Genome Biol. 2012 Oct 3;13(10):R89. doi: 10.1186/gb-2012-13-10-r89.

Epigenetic interplay between mouse endogenous retroviruses and host genes.

Rebollo R, Miceli-Royer K, Zhang Y, Farivar S, Gagnier L, Mager DL.

BACKGROUND: Transposable elements are often the targets of repressive epigenetic 
modifications such as DNA methylation that, in theory, have the potential to
spread toward nearby genes and induce epigenetic silencing. To better understand 
the role of DNA methylation in the relationship between transposable elements and
genes, we assessed the methylation state of mouse endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) 
located near genes.
RESULTS: We found that ERVs of the ETn/MusD family show decreased DNA methylation
when near transcription start sites in tissues where the nearby gene is
expressed. ERVs belonging to the IAP family, however, are generally heavily
methylated, regardless of the genomic environment and the tissue studied.
Furthermore, we found full-length ETn and IAP copies that display differential
DNA methylation between their two long terminal repeats (LTRs), suggesting that
the environment surrounding gene promoters can prevent methylation of the nearby 
LTR. Spreading from methylated ERV copies to nearby genes was rarely observed,
with the regions between the ERVs and genes apparently acting as a boundary,
enriched in H3K4me3 and CTCF, which possibly protects the unmethylated gene
promoter. Furthermore, the flanking regions of unmethylated ERV copies harbor
H3K4me3, consistent with spreading of euchromatin from the host gene toward ERV
insertions.
CONCLUSIONS: We have shown that spreading of DNA methylation from ERV copies
toward active gene promoters is rare. We provide evidence that genes can be
protected from ERV-induced heterochromatin spreading by either blocking the
invasion of repressive marks or by spreading euchromatin toward the ERV copy.

PMCID: PMC3491417
PMID: 23034137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. PLoS Genet. 2012 Sep;8(9):e1002972. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002972. Epub 2012 
Sep 27.

Tethering of the conserved piggyBac transposase fusion protein CSB-PGBD3 to
chromosomal AP-1 proteins regulates expression of nearby genes in humans.

Gray LT(1), Fong KK, Pavelitz T, Weiner AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, United States of America.

The CSB-PGBD3 fusion protein arose more than 43 million years ago when a 2.5-kb
piggyBac 3 (PGBD3) transposon inserted into intron 5 of the Cockayne syndrome
Group B (CSB) gene in the common ancestor of all higher primates. As a result,
full-length CSB is now coexpressed with an abundant CSB-PGBD3 fusion protein by
alternative splicing of CSB exons 1-5 to the PGBD3 transposase. An internal
deletion of the piggyBac transposase ORF also gave rise to 889 dispersed, 140-bp 
MER85 elements that were mobilized in trans by PGBD3 transposase. The CSB-PGBD3
fusion protein binds MER85s in vitro and induces a strong interferon-like innate 
antiviral immune response when expressed in CSB-null UVSS1KO cells. To explore
the connection between DNA binding and gene expression changes induced by
CSB-PGBD3, we investigated the genome-wide DNA binding profile of the fusion
protein. CSB-PGBD3 binds to 363 MER85 elements in vivo, but these sites do not
correlate with gene expression changes induced by the fusion protein. Instead,
CSB-PGBD3 is enriched at AP-1, TEAD1, and CTCF motifs, presumably through
protein-protein interactions with the cognate transcription factors; moreover,
recruitment of CSB-PGBD3 to AP-1 and TEAD1 motifs correlates with nearby genes
regulated by CSB-PGBD3 expression in UVSS1KO cells and downregulated by CSB
rescue of mutant CS1AN cells. Consistent with these data, the N-terminal CSB
domain of the CSB-PGBD3 fusion protein interacts with the AP-1 transcription
factor c-Jun and with RNA polymerase II, and a chimeric CSB-LacI construct
containing only the N-terminus of CSB upregulates many of the genes induced by
CSB-PGBD3. We conclude that the CSB-PGBD3 fusion protein substantially reshapes
the transcriptome in CS patient CS1AN and that continued expression of the
CSB-PGBD3 fusion protein in the absence of functional CSB may affect the clinical
presentation of CS patients by directly altering the transcriptional program.

PMCID: PMC3459987
PMID: 23028371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Immunol. 2012 Nov 1;189(9):4459-69. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201915. Epub 2012
Sep 28.

The inducible tissue-specific expression of the human IL-3/GM-CSF locus is
controlled by a complex array of developmentally regulated enhancers.

Baxter EW(1), Mirabella F, Bowers SR, James SR, Bonavita AM, Bertrand E,
Strogantsev R, Hawwari A, Bert AG, Gonzalez de Arce A, West AG, Bonifer C,
Cockerill PN.

Author information: 
(1)Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Leeds, St. James's
University Hospital, Leeds LS9 7TF, United Kingdom.

The closely linked human IL-3 and GM-CSF genes are tightly regulated and are
expressed in activated T cells and mast cells. In this study, we used transgenic 
mice to study the developmental regulation of this locus and to identify DNA
elements required for its correct activity in vivo. Because these two genes are
separated by a CTCF-dependent insulator, and the GM-CSF gene is regulated
primarily by its own upstream enhancer, the main objective in this study was to
identify regions of the locus required for correct IL-3 gene expression. We
initially found that the previously identified proximal upstream IL-3 enhancers
were insufficient to account for the in vivo activity of the IL-3 gene. However, 
an extended analysis of DNase I-hypersensitive sites (DHSs) spanning the entire
upstream IL-3 intergenic region revealed the existence of a complex cluster of
both constitutive and inducible DHSs spanning the -34- to -40-kb region. The
tissue specificity of these DHSs mirrored the activity of the IL-3 gene, and
included a highly inducible cyclosporin A-sensitive enhancer at -37 kb that
increased IL-3 promoter activity 40-fold. Significantly, inclusion of this region
enabled correct in vivo regulation of IL-3 gene expression in T cells, mast
cells, and myeloid progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC3480713
PMID: 23024272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Int J Oncol. 2012 Dec;41(6):1959-66. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1641. Epub 2012 Sep
26.

Cell type and context-specific function of PLAG1 for IGF2 P3 promoter activity.

Akhtar M(1), Holmgren C, Göndör A, Vesterlund M, Kanduri C, Larsson C, Ekström
TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska
University Hospital, SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.

The fetal transcription factor PLAG1 is found to be overexpressed in cancers, and
has been suggested to bind the insulin like growth factor 2 (IGF2) P3 promoter,
and to activate the IGF2 gene. The expression of IGF2 has partly been linked to
loss of CTCF-dependent chromatin insulator function at the H19 imprinting control
region (ICR). We investigated the role of PLAG1 for IGF2 regulation in Hep3B and 
JEG-3 cell lines. Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed cell type-specific
binding of PLAG1 to the IGF2 P3 promoter, which was substantially insensitive to 
recombinant PLAG1 overexpression in the endogenous context. We hypothesized that 
the H19 chromatin insulator may be involved in the cell type-specific PLAG1
response. By using a GFP reporter gene/insulator assay plasmid construct with and
without the H19 ICR and/or an SV40 enhancer, we confirm that the effect of the
insulator is specifically associated with the activity of the IGF2 P3 promoter in
the GFP reporter system, and furthermore, that the reporter insulator is
functional in JEG-3 but not in Hep3B cells. FACS analysis was used to assess the 
function of PLAG1 in low endogenously expressing, but Zn-inducible stable PLAG1
expressing JEG-3 cell clones. Considerable increase in IGF2 expression upon PLAG1
induction with a partial insulator overriding activity was found using the
reporter constructs. This is in contrast to the effect of the endogenous IGF2
gene which was insensitive to PLAG1 expression in JEG-3, while modestly induced
the already highly expressed IGF2 gene in Hep3B cells. We suggest that the PLAG1 
binding to the IGF2 P3 promoter and IGF2 expression is cell type-specific, and
that the PLAG1 transcription factor acts as a transcriptional facilitator that
partially overrides the insulation by the H19 ICR.

PMCID: PMC3583874
PMID: 23023303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Neoplasia. 2012 Sep;14(9):855-67.

Apicidin and docetaxel combination treatment drives CTCFL expression and HMGB1
release acting as potential antitumor immune response inducers in metastatic
breast cancer cells.

Buoncervello M(1), Borghi P, Romagnoli G, Spadaro F, Belardelli F, Toschi E,
Gabriele L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore 
di Sanita, 00161 Rome, Italy.

Currently approved combination regimens available for the treatment of metastatic
tumors, such as breast cancer, have been shown to increase response rates, often 
at the cost of a substantial increase in toxicity. An ideal combination strategy 
may consist of agents with different mechanisms of action leading to
complementary antitumor activities and safety profiles. In the present study, we 
investigated the effects of the epigenetic modulator apicidin in combination with
the cytotoxic agent docetaxel in tumor breast cell lines characterized by
different grades of invasiveness. We report that combined treatment of apicidin
and docetaxel, at low toxicity doses, stimulates in metastatic breast cancer
cells the expression of CTCF-like protein and other cancer antigens, thus
potentially favoring an antitumor immune response. In addition, apicidin and
docetaxel co-treatment specifically stimulates apoptosis, characterized by an
increased Bax/Bcl-2 ratio and caspase-8 activation. Importantly, following
combined exposure to these agents, metastatic cells were also found to induce
signals of immunogenic apoptosis such as cell surface expression of calreticulin 
and release of considerable amounts of high-mobility group box 1 protein, thus
potentially promoting the translation of induced cell death into antitumor immune
response. Altogether, our results indicate that the combined use of apicidin and 
docetaxel, at a low toxicity profile, may represent a potential innovative
strategy able to activate complementary antitumor pathways in metastatic breast
cancer cells, associated with a potential control of metastatic growth and
possible induction of antitumor immunity.

PMCID: PMC3459281
PMID: 23019417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Genes Brain Behav. 2013 Mar;12(2):282-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2012.00857.x.
Epub 2012 Nov 7.

Allele-specific transcriptional activity of the variable number of tandem repeats
in 5' region of the DRD4 gene is stimulus specific in human neuronal cells.

Paredes UM(1), Quinn JP, D'Souza UM.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry (SGDP), Institute 
of Psychiatry, King's College, University of London, London.
ursula.paredes@zoo.ox.ac.uk

The dopamine receptor D4 (DRD4) gene includes several variable number of tandem
repeat loci that have been suggested to modulate DRD4 gene expression patterns.
Previous studies showed differential basal activity of the two most common
variants of a tandem repeat (120 bp per repeat unit) located in the 5' region
adjacent to the DRD4 promoter in human cell lines. In this communication, we
further characterized the ability of this polymorphic repeat to elicit tissue-,
allele- and stimuli-specific transcriptional activity in vitro. The short and
long variants of the DRD4 5' tandem repeat were cloned into a luciferase reporter
gene construct containing the SV40 promoter. The luciferase constructs were
cotransfected with expression vectors of two ubiquitously expressed human
transcription factors (TFs), CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) and upstream stimulatory
factor 2 (USF2), into human cell lines and primary cultures of neonate rat cortex
and luciferase activity measured. Overexpression with these TFs resulted in
differential cell- and allele-specific transcriptional activities of the
luciferase constructs. The results of our experiments show that variants of this 
tandem repeat in the 5' promoter of the DRD4 gene will direct differential
reporter gene transcriptional activity in a cell-type-specific manner dependent
on the signal pathways activated.

© 2012 The Authors. Genes, Brain and Behavior © 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd and
International Behavioural and Neural Genetics Society.

PMID: 23013251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. EMBO J. 2012 Nov 5;31(21):4165-78. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.266. Epub 2012 Sep 25.

A role for CTCF and cohesin in subtelomere chromatin organization, TERRA
transcription, and telomere end protection.

Deng Z(1), Wang Z, Stong N, Plasschaert R, Moczan A, Chen HS, Hu S, Wikramasinghe
P, Davuluri RV, Bartolomei MS, Riethman H, Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

The contribution of human subtelomeric DNA and chromatin organization to telomere
integrity and chromosome end protection is not yet understood in molecular
detail. Here, we show by ChIP-Seq that most human subtelomeres contain a CTCF-
and cohesin-binding site within ~1-2<U+2009>kb of the TTAGGG repeat tract and adjacent
to a CpG-islands implicated in TERRA transcription control. ChIP-Seq also
revealed that RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) was enriched at sites adjacent to the
CTCF sites and extending towards the telomere repeat tracts. Mutation of
CTCF-binding sites in plasmid-borne promoters reduced transcriptional activity in
an orientation-dependent manner. Depletion of CTCF by shRNA led to a decrease in 
TERRA transcription, and a loss of cohesin and RNAPII binding to the
subtelomeres. Depletion of either CTCF or cohesin subunit Rad21 caused
telomere-induced DNA damage foci (TIF) formation, and destabilized TRF1 and TRF2 
binding to the TTAGGG proximal subtelomere DNA. These findings indicate that CTCF
and cohesin are integral components of most human subtelomeres, and important for
the regulation of TERRA transcription and telomere end protection.

PMCID: PMC3492729
PMID: 23010778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Oncol Rep. 2012 Dec;28(6):2156-62. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.2050. Epub 2012 Sep 20.

Covariation of copy number located at 16q22.1: new evidence in mammary ductal
carcinoma.

Sun Q(1), Yang YM, Yu SH, Zhang YX, He XG, Sun SS, Liang XS, Pang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical 
University, Harbin 150081, PR China.

Copy number variation (CNV) is crucial for gene regulation in humans. A number of
studies have revealed that CNV contributes to the initiation and progression of
cancer. In this study, we analysed four breast cancer cell lines and six fresh
frozen tissues from patients to evaluate the CNV present in the genome using
microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH). Six genes located at
16q22.1 were analysed by real-time PCR. The real-time PCR analysis revealed that 
the loss of CDH1/E2F4 may be associated with worse clinical and pathological
findings. Interestingly, covariation of CDH1, CDH3, CTCF and E2F4 was found to be
associated with triple negative breast cancer and HER-2 receptor status. In
conclusion, our study supports the idea that CNV at 16q22.1 in breast cancer is a
frequent event; furthermore, it reveals the covariation of CDH1, CDH3, CTCF and
E2F4. The role of the covariation is more complex than a simple additive effect
of these four separate genes, which may provide a novel target for breast cancer.

PMID: 23007606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys. 2012 Aug;86(2 Pt 1):021918. Epub 2012
Aug 21.

Path-preference cellular-automaton model for traffic flow through transit points 
and its application to the transcription process in human cells.

Ohta Y(1), Nishiyama A, Wada Y, Ruan Y, Kodama T, Tsuboi T, Tokihiro T, Ihara S.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, 
4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8904, Japan.

We all use path routing everyday as we take shortcuts to avoid traffic jams, or
by using faster traffic means. Previous models of traffic flow of RNA polymerase 
II (RNAPII) during transcription, however, were restricted to one dimension along
the DNA template. Here we report the modeling and application of traffic flow in 
transcription that allows preferential paths of different dimensions only
restricted to visit some transit points, as previously introduced between the 5' 
and 3' end of the gene. According to its position, an RNAPII protein molecule
prefers paths obeying two types of time-evolution rules. One is an asymmetric
simple exclusion process (ASEP) along DNA, and the other is a three-dimensional
jump between transit points in DNA where RNAPIIs are staying. Simulations based
on our model, and comparison experimental results, reveal how RNAPII molecules
are distributed at the DNA-loop-formation-related protein binding sites as well
as CTCF insulator proteins (or exons). As time passes after the stimulation, the 
RNAPII density at these sites becomes higher. Apparent far-distance jumps in one 
dimension are realized by short-range three-dimensional jumps between DNA loops. 
We confirm the above conjecture by applying our model calculation to the SAMD4A
gene by comparing the experimental results. Our probabilistic model provides
possible scenarios for assembling RNAPII molecules into transcription factories, 
where RNAPII and related proteins cooperatively transcribe DNA.

PMID: 23005796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e44800. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044800. Epub 2012 Sep 11.

Mining gene expression signature for the detection of pre-malignant melanocytes
and early melanomas with risk for metastasis.

de Souza CF(1), Xander P, Monteiro AC, Silva AG, da Silva DC, Mai S, Bernardo V, 
Lopes JD, Jasiulionis MG.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Farmacologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo,
São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Metastatic melanoma is a highly aggressive skin cancer and currently 
resistant to systemic therapy. Melanomas may involve genetic, epigenetic and
metabolic abnormalities. Evidence is emerging that epigenetic changes might play 
a significant role in tumor cell plasticity and metastatic phenotype of melanoma 
cells.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, we developed a systematic approach to identify
genes implicated in melanoma progression. To do this, we used the Affymetrix
GeneChip Arrays to screen 34,000 mouse transcripts in melan-a melanocytes, 4C
pre-malignant melanocytes, 4C11- non-metastatic and 4C11+ metastatic melanoma
cell lines. The genome-wide association studies revealed pathways commonly
over-represented in the transition from immortalized to pre-malignant stage, and 
under-represented in the transition from non-metastatic to metastatic stage.
Additionally, the treatment of cells with 10 µM 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5AzaCdR) 
for 48 hours allowed us to identify genes differentially re-expressed at specific
stages of melan-a malignant transformation. Treatment of human primary
melanocytes with the demethylating agent 5AzaCdR in combination to the histone
deacetylase inhibitor Trichostatin A (TSA) revealed changes on melanocyte
morphology and gene expression which could be an indicator of epigenetic
flexibility in normal melanocytes. Moreover, changes on gene expression
recognized by affecting the melanocyte biology (NDRG2 and VDR), phenotype of
metastatic melanoma cells (HSPB1 and SERPINE1) and response to cancer therapy
(CTCF, NSD1 and SRC) were found when Mel-2 and/or Mel-3-derived patient
metastases were exposed to 5AzaCdR plus TSA treatment. Hierarchical clustering
and network analyses in a panel of five patient-derived metastatic melanoma cells
showed gene interactions that have never been described in melanomas.
SIGNIFICANCE: Despite the heterogeneity observed in melanomas, this study
demonstrates the utility of our murine melanoma progression model to identify
molecular markers commonly perturbed in metastasis. Additionally, the novel gene 
expression signature identified here may be useful in the future into a model
more closely related to translational research.

PMCID: PMC3439384
PMID: 22984562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Blood. 2012 Nov 1;120(18):e83-92. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-12-401471. Epub 2012
Sep 13.

Commonly altered genomic regions in acute myeloid leukemia are enriched for
somatic mutations involved in chromatin remodeling and splicing.

Dolnik A(1), Engelmann JC, Scharfenberger-Schmeer M, Mauch J, Kelkenberg-Schade
S, Haldemann B, Fries T, Krönke J, Kühn MW, Paschka P, Kayser S, Wolf S, Gaidzik 
VI, Schlenk RF, Rücker FG, Döhner H, Lottaz C, Döhner K, Bullinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, University Hospital of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is characterized by molecular heterogeneity. As
commonly altered genomic regions point to candidate genes involved in
leukemogenesis, we used microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization and
single nucleotide polymorphism profiling data of 391 AML cases to further narrow 
down genomic regions of interest. Targeted resequencing of 1000 genes located in 
the critical regions was performed in a representative cohort of 50 AML samples
comprising all major cytogenetic subgroups. We identified 120 missense/nonsense
mutations as well as 60 insertions/deletions affecting 73 different genes (~ 3.6 
tumor-specific aberrations/AML). While most of the newly identified alterations
were nonrecurrent, we observed an enrichment of mutations affecting genes
involved in epigenetic regulation including known candidates like TET2, TET1,
DNMT3A, and DNMT1, as well as mutations in the histone methyltransferases NSD1,
EZH2, and MLL3. Furthermore, we found mutations in the splicing factor SFPQ and
in the nonclassic regulators of mRNA processing CTCF and RAD21. These
splicing-related mutations affected 10% of AML patients in a mutually exclusive
manner. In conclusion, we could identify a large number of alterations in genes
involved in aberrant splicing and epigenetic regulation in genomic regions
commonly altered in AML, highlighting their important role in the molecular
pathogenesis of AML.

PMID: 22976956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Virol. 2012 Dec;86(23):12741-59. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01655-12. Epub 2012 Sep 12.

CTCF occupation of the herpes simplex virus 1 genome is disrupted at early times 
postreactivation in a transcription-dependent manner.

Ertel MK(1), Cammarata AL, Hron RJ, Neumann DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Louisiana State
University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.

In herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1), binding clusters enriched in CTCF during
latency have been previously identified. We hypothesized that CTCF binding to
CTCF clusters in HSV-1 would be disrupted in a reactivation event. To
investigate, CTCF occupation of three CTCF binding clusters in HSV-1 was analyzed
following sodium butyrate (NaB)- and explant-induced reactivation in the mouse.
Our data show that the CTCF domains positioned within the HSV-1 genome,
specifically around the latency-associated transcript (LAT) and ICP0 and ICP4
regions of the genome, lose CTCF occupancy following the application of
reactivation stimuli in wild-type virus. We also found that CTCF binding clusters
upstream of the ICP0 and ICP4 promoters both function as classical insulators
capable of acting as enhancer blockers of the LAT enhancer. Finally, our results 
suggest that CTCF occupation of domains in HSV-1 may be differentially regulated 
both during latency and at early times following reactivation by the presence of 
lytic transcripts and further implicate epigenetic regulation of HSV-1 as a
critical component of the latency-reactivation transition.

PMCID: PMC3497617
PMID: 22973047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Front Genet. 2012 Sep 3;3:169. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2012.00169. eCollection 2012.

Regulation of chromatin structure by poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation.

Beneke S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland.

The interaction of DNA with proteins in the context of chromatin has to be
tightly regulated to achieve so different tasks as packaging, transcription,
replication and repair. The very rapid and transient post-translational
modification of proteins by poly(ADP-ribose) has been shown to take part in all
four. Originally identified as immediate cellular answer to a variety of
genotoxic stresses, already early data indicated the ability of this highly
charged nucleic acid-like polymer to modulate nucleosome structure, the basic
unit of chromatin. At the same time the enzyme responsible for synthesizing
poly(ADP-ribose), the zinc-finger protein poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP1), 
was shown to control transcription initiation as basic factor TFIIC within the
RNA-polymerase II machinery. Later research focused more on PARP-mediated
regulation of DNA repair and cell death, but in the last few years, transcription
as well as chromatin modulation has re-appeared on the scene. This review will
discuss the impact of PARP1 on transcription and transcription factors, its
implication in chromatin remodeling for DNA repair and probably also replication,
and its role in controlling epigenetic events such as DNA methylation and the
functionality of the insulator protein CCCTC-binding factor.

PMCID: PMC3432497
PMID: 22969794  [PubMed]


464. Genome Res. 2012 Dec;22(12):2497-506. doi: 10.1101/gr.143008.112. Epub 2012 Sep
7.

Genome-wide mapping of nucleosome positioning and DNA methylation within
individual DNA molecules.

Kelly TK(1), Liu Y, Lay FD, Liang G, Berman BP, Jones PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90033, USA.

DNA methylation and nucleosome positioning work together to generate chromatin
structures that regulate gene expression. Nucleosomes are typically mapped using 
nuclease digestion requiring significant amounts of material and varying enzyme
concentrations. We have developed a method (NOMe-seq) that uses a GpC
methyltransferase (M.CviPI) and next generation sequencing to generate a high
resolution footprint of nucleosome positioning genome-wide using less than 1
million cells while retaining endogenous DNA methylation information from the
same DNA strand. Using a novel bioinformatics pipeline, we show a striking
anti-correlation between nucleosome occupancy and DNA methylation at CTCF regions
that is not present at promoters. We further show that the extent of nucleosome
depletion at promoters is directly correlated to expression level and can
accommodate multiple nucleosomes and provide genome-wide evidence that expressed 
non-CpG island promoters are nucleosome-depleted. Importantly, NOMe-seq obtains
DNA methylation and nucleosome positioning information from the same DNA
molecule, giving the first genome-wide DNA methylation and nucleosome positioning
correlation at the single molecule, and thus, single cell level, that can be used
to monitor disease progression and response to therapy.

PMCID: PMC3514679
PMID: 22960375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Genome Res. 2012 Sep;22(9):1735-47. doi: 10.1101/gr.136366.111.

Ubiquitous heterogeneity and asymmetry of the chromatin environment at regulatory
elements.

Kundaje A(1), Kyriazopoulou-Panagiotopoulou S, Libbrecht M, Smith CL, Raha D,
Winters EE, Johnson SM, Snyder M, Batzoglou S, Sidow A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, California
94305, USA. akundaje@stanford.edu

Gene regulation at functional elements (e.g., enhancers, promoters, insulators)
is governed by an interplay of nucleosome remodeling, histone modifications, and 
transcription factor binding. To enhance our understanding of gene regulation,
the ENCODE Consortium has generated a wealth of ChIP-seq data on DNA-binding
proteins and histone modifications. We additionally generated nucleosome
positioning data on two cell lines, K562 and GM12878, by MNase digestion and
high-depth sequencing. Here we relate 14 chromatin signals (12 histone marks,
DNase, and nucleosome positioning) to the binding sites of 119 DNA-binding
proteins across a large number of cell lines. We developed a new method for
unsupervised pattern discovery, the Clustered AGgregation Tool (CAGT), which
accounts for the inherent heterogeneity in signal magnitude, shape, and implicit 
strand orientation of chromatin marks. We applied CAGT on a total of 5084 data
set pairs to obtain an exhaustive catalog of high-resolution patterns of histone 
modifications and nucleosome positioning signals around bound transcription
factors. Our analyses reveal extensive heterogeneity in how histone modifications
are deposited, and how nucleosomes are positioned around binding sites. With the 
exception of the CTCF/cohesin complex, asymmetry of nucleosome positioning is
predominant. Asymmetry of histone modifications is also widespread, for all types
of chromatin marks examined, including promoter, enhancer, elongation, and
repressive marks. The fine-resolution signal shapes discovered by CAGT unveiled
novel correlation patterns between chromatin marks, nucleosome positioning, and
sequence content. Meta-analyses of the signal profiles revealed a common
vocabulary of chromatin signals shared across multiple cell lines and binding
proteins.

PMCID: PMC3431490
PMID: 22955985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Genome Res. 2012 Sep;22(9):1680-8. doi: 10.1101/gr.136101.111.

Widespread plasticity in CTCF occupancy linked to DNA methylation.

Wang H(1), Maurano MT, Qu H, Varley KE, Gertz J, Pauli F, Lee K, Canfield T,
Weaver M, Sandstrom R, Thurman RE, Kaul R, Myers RM, Stamatoyannopoulos JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195, USA.

CTCF is a ubiquitously expressed regulator of fundamental genomic processes
including transcription, intra- and interchromosomal interactions, and chromatin 
structure. Because of its critical role in genome function, CTCF binding patterns
have long been assumed to be largely invariant across different cellular
environments. Here we analyze genome-wide occupancy patterns of CTCF by ChIP-seq 
in 19 diverse human cell types, including normal primary cells and immortal
lines. We observed highly reproducible yet surprisingly plastic genomic binding
landscapes, indicative of strong cell-selective regulation of CTCF occupancy.
Comparison with massively parallel bisulfite sequencing data indicates that 41%
of variable CTCF binding is linked to differential DNA methylation, concentrated 
at two critical positions within the CTCF recognition sequence. Unexpectedly,
CTCF binding patterns were markedly different in normal versus immortal cells,
with the latter showing widespread disruption of CTCF binding associated with
increased methylation. Strikingly, this disruption is accompanied by
up-regulation of CTCF expression, with the result that both normal and immortal
cells maintain the same average number of CTCF occupancy sites genome-wide. These
results reveal a tight linkage between DNA methylation and the global occupancy
patterns of a major sequence-specific regulatory factor.

PMCID: PMC3431485
PMID: 22955980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Nature. 2012 Sep 6;489(7414):109-13. doi: 10.1038/nature11279.

The long-range interaction landscape of gene promoters.

Sanyal A(1), Lajoie BR, Jain G, Dekker J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605-0103, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2012 Oct;13(10):678.

The vast non-coding portion of the human genome is full of functional elements
and disease-causing regulatory variants. The principles defining the
relationships between these elements and distal target genes remain unknown.
Promoters and distal elements can engage in looping interactions that have been
implicated in gene regulation. Here we have applied chromosome conformation
capture carbon copy (5C) to interrogate comprehensively interactions between
transcription start sites (TSSs) and distal elements in 1% of the human genome
representing the ENCODE pilot project regions. 5C maps were generated for
GM12878, K562 and HeLa-S3 cells and results were integrated with data from the
ENCODE consortium. In each cell line we discovered >1,000 long-range interactions
between promoters and distal sites that include elements resembling enhancers,
promoters and CTCF-bound sites. We observed significant correlations between gene
expression, promoter-enhancer interactions and the presence of enhancer RNAs.
Long-range interactions show marked asymmetry with a bias for interactions with
elements located ~120 kilobases upstream of the TSS. Long-range interactions are 
often not blocked by sites bound by CTCF and cohesin, indicating that many of
these sites do not demarcate physically insulated gene domains. Furthermore, only
~7% of looping interactions are with the nearest gene, indicating that genomic
proximity is not a simple predictor for long-range interactions. Finally,
promoters and distal elements are engaged in multiple long-range interactions to 
form complex networks. Our results start to place genes and regulatory elements
in three-dimensional context, revealing their functional relationships.

PMCID: PMC3555147
PMID: 22955621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 7;287(37):30906-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.R111.324962. Epub 2012
Sep 5.

Genome-wide studies of CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) and cohesin provide insight
into chromatin structure and regulation.

Lee BK(1), Iyer VR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biology, Section of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Texas,
Austin, Texas 78712, USA.

Eukaryotic genomes are organized into higher order chromatin architectures by
protein-mediated long-range interactions in the nucleus. CCCTC-binding factor
(CTCF), a sequence-specific transcription factor, serves as a chromatin organizer
in building this complex chromatin structure by linking chromosomal domains.
Recent genome-wide studies mapping the binding sites of CTCF and its interacting 
partner, cohesin, using chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with deep
sequencing (ChIP-seq) revealded that CTCF globally co-localizes with cohesin.
This partnership between CTCF and cohesin is emerging as a novel and perhaps
pivotal aspect of gene regulatory mechanisms, in addition to playing a role in
the organization of higher order chromatin architecture.

PMCID: PMC3438923
PMID: 22952237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Mol Cancer Res. 2012 Oct;10(10):1332-42. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0351. Epub
2012 Sep 4.

SINE retrotransposons cause epigenetic reprogramming of adjacent gene promoters.

Estécio MR(1), Gallegos J, Dekmezian M, Lu Y, Liang S, Issa JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. mestecio@mdanderson.org

Almost half of the human genome and as much as 40% of the mouse genome is
composed of repetitive DNA sequences. The majority of these repeats are
retrotransposons of the SINE and LINE families, and such repeats are generally
repressed by epigenetic mechanisms. It has been proposed that these elements can 
act as methylation centers from which DNA methylation spreads into gene promoters
in cancer. Contradictory to a methylation center function, we have found that
retrotransposons are enriched near promoter CpG islands that stay
methylation-free in cancer. Clearly, it is important to determine which
influence, if any, these repetitive elements have on nearby gene promoters. Using
an in vitro system, we confirm here that SINE B1 elements can influence the
activity of downstream gene promoters, with acquisition of DNA methylation and
loss of activating histone marks, thus resulting in a repressed state. SINE
sequences themselves did not immediately acquire DNA methylation but were marked 
by H3K9me2 and H3K27me3. Moreover, our bisulfite sequencing data did not support 
that gain of DNA methylation in gene promoters occurred by methylation spreading 
from SINE B1 repeats. Genome-wide analysis of SINE repeats distribution showed
that their enrichment is directly correlated with the presence of USF1, USF2, and
CTCF binding, proteins with insulator function. In summary, our work supports the
concept that SINE repeats interfere negatively with gene expression and that
their presence near gene promoters is counter-selected, except when the promoter 
is protected by an insulator element.

PMCID: PMC3475755
PMID: 22952045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Genome Biol. 2012 Sep 26;13(9):R50. doi: 10.1186/gb-2012-13-9-r50.

Functional analysis of transcription factor binding sites in human promoters.

Whitfield TW(1), Wang J, Collins PJ, Partridge EC, Aldred SF, Trinklein ND, Myers
RM, Weng Z.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology and Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

BACKGROUND: The binding of transcription factors to specific locations in the
genome is integral to the orchestration of transcriptional regulation in cells.
To characterize transcription factor binding site function on a large scale, we
predicted and mutagenized 455 binding sites in human promoters. We carried out
functional tests on these sites in four different immortalized human cell lines
using transient transfections with a luciferase reporter assay, primarily for the
transcription factors CTCF, GABP, GATA2, E2F, STAT, and YY1.
RESULTS: In each cell line, between 36% and 49% of binding sites made a
functional contribution to the promoter activity; the overall rate for observing 
function in any of the cell lines was 70%. Transcription factor binding resulted 
in transcriptional repression in more than a third of functional sites. When
compared with predicted binding sites whose function was not experimentally
verified, the functional binding sites had higher conservation and were located
closer to transcriptional start sites (TSSs). Among functional sites, repressive 
sites tended to be located further from TSSs than were activating sites. Our data
provide significant insight into the functional characteristics of YY1 binding
sites, most notably the detection of distinct activating and repressing classes
of YY1 binding sites. Repressing sites were located closer to, and often
overlapped with, translational start sites and presented a distinctive variation 
on the canonical YY1 binding motif.
CONCLUSIONS: The genomic properties that we found to associate with functional TF
binding sites on promoters -- conservation, TSS proximity, motifs and their
variations -- point the way to improved accuracy in future TFBS predictions.

PMCID: PMC3491394
PMID: 22951020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Development. 2012 Oct;139(19):3613-22. doi: 10.1242/dev.081828.

ISWI contributes to ArsI insulator function in development of the sea urchin.

Yajima M(1), Fairbrother WG, Wessel GM.

Author information: 
(1)MCB Department, Brown University, 185 Meeting Street, BOX-GL173, Providence,
RI 02912, USA. mamiko_yajima@brown.edu

Insulators are genomic elements that regulate transcriptional activity by forming
chromatin boundaries. Various DNA insulators have been identified or are
postulated in many organisms, and the paradigmatic CTCF-dependent insulators are 
perhaps the best understood and most widespread in function. The diversity of DNA
insulators is, however, understudied, especially in the context of embryonic
development, when many new gene territories undergo transitions in functionality.
Here we report the functional analysis of the arylsulfatase insulator (ArsI)
derived from the sea urchin, which has conserved insulator activity throughout
the many metazoans tested, but for which the molecular mechanism of function is
unknown. Using a rapid in vivo assay system and a high-throughput mega-shift
assay, we identified a minimal region in ArsI that is responsible for its
insulator function. We discovered a small set of proteins specifically bound to
the minimal ArsI region, including ISWI, a known chromatin-remodeling protein.
During embryogenesis, ISWI was found to interact with select ArsI sites
throughout the genome, and when inactivated led to misregulation of select gene
expression, loss of insulator activity and aberrant morphogenesis. These studies 
reveal a mechanistic basis for ArsI function in the gene regulatory network of
early development.

PMCID: PMC3436113
PMID: 22949616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. BMC Genomics. 2012 Aug 30;13:436. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-436.

Normalization of a chromosomal contact map.

Cournac A(1), Marie-Nelly H, Marbouty M, Koszul R, Mozziconacci J.

Author information: 
(1)LPTMC, UMR 7600, Tour 12-13/13-23, Boîte 121, 4, Place Jussieu, 75252 Paris
Cedex 05, France.

BACKGROUND: Chromatin organization has been increasingly studied in relation with
its important influence on DNA-related metabolic processes such as replication or
regulation of gene expression. Since its original design ten years ago, capture
of chromosome conformation (3C) has become an essential tool to investigate the
overall conformation of chromosomes. It relies on the capture of long-range trans
and cis interactions of chromosomal segments whose relative proportions in the
final bank reflect their frequencies of interactions, hence their spatial
proximity in a population of cells. The recent coupling of 3C with deep
sequencing approaches now allows the generation of high resolution genome-wide
chromosomal contact maps. Different protocols have been used to generate such
maps in various organisms. This includes mammals, drosophila and yeast. The
massive amount of raw data generated by the genomic 3C has to be carefully
processed to alleviate the various biases and byproducts generated by the
experiments. Our study aims at proposing a simple normalization procedure to
minimize the influence of these unwanted but inevitable events on the final
results.
RESULTS: Careful analysis of the raw data generated previously for budding yeast 
S. cerevisiae led to the identification of three main biases affecting the final 
datasets, including a previously unknown bias resulting from the circularization 
of DNA molecules. We then developed a simple normalization procedure to process
the data and allow the generation of a normalized, highly contrasted, chromosomal
contact map for S. cerevisiae. The same method was then extended to the first
human genome contact map. Using the normalized data, we revisited the
preferential interactions originally described between subsets of discrete
chromosomal features. Notably, the detection of preferential interactions between
tRNA in yeast and CTCF, PolII binding sites in human can vary with the
normalization procedure used.
CONCLUSIONS: We quantitatively reanalyzed the genomic 3C data obtained for S.
cerevisiae, identified some of the biases inherent to the technique and proposed 
a simple normalization procedure to analyse them. Such an approach can be easily 
generalized for genomic 3C experiments in other organisms. More experiments and
analysis will be necessary to reach optimal resolution and accuracies of the maps
generated through these approaches. Working with cell population presenting
highest levels of homogeneity will prove useful in this regards.

PMCID: PMC3534615
PMID: 22935139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. BMC Genomics. 2012 Aug 28;13:429. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-429.

Identification and analysis of pig chimeric mRNAs using RNA sequencing data.

Ma L(1), Yang S, Zhao W, Tang Z, Zhang T, Li K.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory for Domestic Animal Genetic Resources and Breeding of
Ministry of Agriculture of China, Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, 100193, P R China.

BACKGROUND: Gene fusion is ubiquitous over the course of evolution. It is
expected to increase the diversity and complexity of transcriptomes and proteomes
through chimeric sequence segments or altered regulation. However, chimeric mRNAs
in pigs remain unclear. Here we identified some chimeric mRNAs in pigs and
analyzed the expression of them across individuals and breeds using
RNA-sequencing data.
RESULTS: The present study identified 669 putative chimeric mRNAs in pigs, of
which 251 chimeric candidates were detected in a set of RNA-sequencing data. The 
618 candidates had clear trans-splicing sites, 537 of which obeyed the canonical 
GU-AG splice rule. Only two putative pig chimera variants whose fusion junction
was overlapped with that of a known human chimeric mRNA were found. A set of
unique chimeric events were considered middle variances in the expression across 
individuals and breeds, and revealed non-significant variance between sexes.
Furthermore, the genomic region of the 5' partner gene shares a similar DNA
sequence with that of the 3' partner gene for 458 putative chimeric mRNAs. The 81
of those shared DNA sequences significantly matched the known DNA-binding motifs 
in the JASPAR CORE database. Four DNA motifs shared in parental genomic regions
had significant similarity with known human CTCF binding sites.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study provided detailed information on some pig chimeric
mRNAs. We proposed a model that trans-acting factors, such as CTCF, induced the
spatial organisation of parental genes to the same transcriptional factory so
that parental genes were coordinatively transcribed to give birth to chimeric
mRNAs.

PMCID: PMC3531304
PMID: 22925561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. PLoS Comput Biol. 2012;8(8):e1002638. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002638. Epub
2012 Aug 9.

High resolution genome wide binding event finding and motif discovery reveals
transcription factor spatial binding constraints.

Guo Y(1), Mahony S, Gifford DK.

Author information: 
(1)Computational and Systems Biology Program, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.

An essential component of genome function is the syntax of genomic regulatory
elements that determine how diverse transcription factors interact to orchestrate
a program of regulatory control. A precise characterization of in vivo spacing
constraints between key transcription factors would reveal key aspects of this
genomic regulatory language. To discover novel transcription factor spatial
binding constraints in vivo, we developed a new integrative computational method,
genome wide event finding and motif discovery (GEM). GEM resolves ChIP data into 
explanatory motifs and binding events at high spatial resolution by linking
binding event discovery and motif discovery with positional priors in the context
of a generative probabilistic model of ChIP data and genome sequence. GEM
analysis of 63 transcription factors in 214 ENCODE human ChIP-Seq experiments
recovers more known factor motifs than other contemporary methods, and discovers 
six new motifs for factors with unknown binding specificity. GEM's adaptive
learning of binding-event read distributions allows it to further improve upon
previous methods for processing ChIP-Seq and ChIP-exo data to yield unsurpassed
spatial resolution and discovery of closely spaced binding events of the same
factor. In a systematic analysis of in vivo sequence-specific transcription
factor binding using GEM, we have found hundreds of spatial binding constraints
between factors. GEM found 37 examples of factor binding constraints in mouse ES 
cells, including strong distance-specific constraints between Klf4 and other key 
regulatory factors. In human ENCODE data, GEM found 390 examples of spatially
constrained pair-wise binding, including such novel pairs as c-Fos:c-Jun/USF1,
CTCF/Egr1, and HNF4A/FOXA1. The discovery of new factor-factor spatial
constraints in ChIP data is significant because it proposes testable models for
regulatory factor interactions that will help elucidate genome function and the
implementation of combinatorial control.

PMCID: PMC3415389
PMID: 22912568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Genome Biol. 2012 Aug 20;13(8):R70. doi: 10.1186/gb-2012-13-8-r70.

The mouse DXZ4 homolog retains Ctcf binding and proximity to Pls3 despite
substantial organizational differences compared to the primate macrosatellite.

Horakova AH, Calabrese JM, McLaughlin CR, Tremblay DC, Magnuson T, Chadwick BP.

BACKGROUND: The X-linked macrosatellite DXZ4 is a large homogenous tandem repeat 
that in females adopts an alternative chromatin organization on the primate X
chromosome in response to X-chromosome inactivation. It is packaged into
heterochromatin on the active X chromosome but into euchromatin and bound by the 
epigenetic organizer protein CTCF on the inactive X chromosome. Because its DNA
sequence diverges rapidly beyond the New World monkeys, the existence of DXZ4
outside the primate lineage is unknown.
RESULTS: Here we extend our comparative genome analysis and report the
identification and characterization of the mouse homolog of the macrosatellite.
Furthermore, we provide evidence of DXZ4 in a conserved location downstream of
the PLS3 gene in a diverse group of mammals, and reveal that DNA sequence
conservation is restricted to the CTCF binding motif, supporting a central role
for this protein at this locus. However, many features that characterize primate 
DXZ4 differ in mouse, including the overall size of the array, the mode of
transcription, the chromatin organization and conservation between adjacent
repeat units of DNA sequence and length. Ctcf binds Dxz4 but is not exclusive to 
the inactive X chromosome, as evidenced by association in some males and equal
binding to both X chromosomes in trophoblast stem cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Characterization of Dxz4 reveals substantial differences in the
organization of DNA sequence, chromatin packaging, and the mode of transcription,
so the potential roles performed by this sequence in mouse have probably diverged
from those on the primate X chromosome.

PMCID: PMC3491370
PMID: 22906166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Epigenetics. 2012 Sep;7(9):1057-70. Epub 2012 Aug 16.

Genome wide identification of promoter binding sites for H4K12ac in human sperm
and its relevance for early embryonic development.

Paradowska AS(1), Miller D, Spiess AN, Vieweg M, Cerna M, Dvorakova-Hortova K,
Bartkuhn M, Schuppe HC, Weidner W, Steger K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Pediatric Urology and Andrology, Justus Liebig
University of Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
Agnieszka.Paradowska@chiru.med.uni-giessen.de

Comment in
    Epigenomics. 2013 Feb;5(1):21-2.

Sperm chromatin reveals two characteristic features in that protamines are the
predominant nuclear proteins and remaining histones are highly acetylated.
Histone H4 acetylated at lysine 12 (H4K12ac) is localized in the post-acrosomal
region, while protamine-1 is present within the whole nucleus. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation in combination with promoter array analysis allowed
genome-wide identification of H4K12ac binding sites. Previously, we reported
enrichment of H4K12ac at CTCF binding sites and promoters of genes involved in
developmental processes. Here, we demonstrate that H4K12ac is enriched
predominantly between ± 2 kb from the transcription start site. In addition, we
identified developmentally relevant H4K12ac-associated promoters with high
expression levels of their transcripts stored in mature sperm. The highest
expressed mRNA codes for testis-specific PHD finger protein-7 (PHF7), suggesting 
an activating role of H4K12ac in the regulatory elements of this gene.
H4K12ac-associated genes revealed a weak correlation with genes expressed at
4-cell stage human embryos, while 23 H4K12ac-associated genes were activated in
8-cell embryo and 39 in the blastocyst. Genes activated in 4-cell embryos are
involved in gene expression, histone fold and DNA-dependent transcription, while 
genes expressed in the blastocyst were classified as involved in developmental
processes. Immunofluorescence staining detected H4K12ac from the murine male
pronucleus to early stages of embryogenesis. Aberrant histone acetylation within 
developmentally important gene promoters in infertile men may reflect
insufficient sperm chromatin compaction, which may result in inappropriate
transfer of epigenetic information to the oocyte.

PMCID: PMC3466190
PMID: 22894908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2012;138(1):11-8. doi: 10.1159/000341503. Epub 2012 Aug 10.

Direct evidence of allele-specific binding of CTCF and MeCP2 to Tsix in a
HPRT-deficient female F1 hybrid mouse cell line.

Son J(1), Min NY, Choi JH, Ko YJ, Liang W, Rhee S, Lee KH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, College of Natural Science, Chung-Ang University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Mammalian dosage compensation requires silencing of one of the two X chromosomes 
in females and is controlled by the X inactivation center (Xic). Xic contains
many of the regulatory elements for the mutual interplay of X-inactive specific
transcript (Xist) and Tsix, the antisense counterpart of Xist. The regulatory
elements control X chromosome inactivation (XCI) via the formation of DNA-DNA and
DNA-protein complexes with cis- and trans-acting factors. However, the
process-dependent regulation of Xist/Tsix by these elements in each XCI process
remains largely unknown. In this study, a 6-thioguanine-resistant female F(1)
hybrid mouse cell line (designated HOBMSKI2) was constructed from a cross between
a female HPRT-deficient transgenic mouse (designated BM3) and a male wild type
Mus spretus mouse (designated MS), which enabled the direct discrimination of
both allele-specific expression of X-linked genes and allele-specific binding of 
proteins associated with XCI due to DNA polymorphisms between BM3 and MS. Using
this cell line, we found that Tsix on the active X chromosome (Xa) was not
expressed in somatic cells despite the fact that CTCF, which ensures Tsix
expression in embryonic stem cells, was still bound to the 5' end of Tsix on Xa, 
implying that CTCF may function differently during each XCI process and its
trans-activating activity for Tsix expression may be lost in the maintenance
process. In addition, the monoallelic expression of Tsix on Xa was inhibited by
epigenetic modification of the chromatin in the maintenance process, which was
mediated by protein complexes recruited by MeCP2. The results indicate the value 
of HOBMSKI2 in directly detecting the allele-specific binding of CTCF and MeCP2
to the 5' end of Tsix. The HOBMSKI2 mouse line is a versatile and useful resource
for studying the molecular mechanism of the XCI process.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22889989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Transcription. 2012 Nov-Dec;3(6):277-84. doi: 10.4161/trns.21579. Epub 2012 Aug
14.

tDNA insulators and the emerging role of TFIIIC in genome organization.

Van Bortle K(1), Corces VG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Recent findings provide evidence that tDNAs function as chromatin insulators from
yeast to humans. TFIIIC, a transcription factor that interacts with the B-box in 
tDNAs as well as thousands of ETC sites in the genome, is responsible for
insulator function. Though tDNAs are capable of enhancer-blocking and barrier
activities for which insulators are defined, new insights into the relationship
between insulators and chromatin structure suggest that TFIIIC serves a complex
role in genome organization. We review the role of tRNA genes and TFIIIC as
chromatin insulators, and highlight recent findings that have broadened our
understanding of insulators in genome biology.

PMCID: PMC3630181
PMID: 22889843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42424. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042424. Epub 2012 Aug 3.

Functional and molecular characterization of the role of CTCF in human embryonic 
stem cell biology.

Balakrishnan SK(1), Witcher M, Berggren TW, Emerson BM.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California, United States of America.

The CCCTC-binding factor CTCF is the only known vertebrate insulator protein and 
has been shown to regulate important developmental processes such as imprinting, 
X-chromosome inactivation and genomic architecture. In this study, we examined
the role of CTCF in human embryonic stem cell (hESC) biology. We demonstrate that
CTCF associates with several important pluripotency genes, including NANOG, SOX2,
cMYC and LIN28 and is critical for hESC proliferation. CTCF depletion impacts
expression of pluripotency genes and accelerates loss of pluripotency upon BMP4
induced differentiation, but does not result in spontaneous differentiation. We
find that CTCF associates with the distal ends and internal sites of the
co-regulated 160 kb NANOG-DPPA3-GDF3 locus. Each of these sites can function as a
CTCF-dependent enhancer-blocking insulator in heterologous assays. In hESCs, CTCF
exists in multisubunit protein complexes and can be poly(ADP)ribosylated. Known
CTCF cofactors, such as Cohesin, differentially co-localize in the vicinity of
specific CTCF binding sites within the NANOG locus. Importantly, the association 
of some cofactors and protein PARlation selectively changes upon differentiation 
although CTCF binding remains constant. Understanding how unique cofactors may
impart specialized functions to CTCF at specific genomic locations will further
illuminate its role in stem cell biology.

PMCID: PMC3411781
PMID: 22879976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Cell Rep. 2012 Aug 30;2(2):345-57. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.06.014. Epub 2012
Jul 26.

CTCF is required for neural development and stochastic expression of clustered
Pcdh genes in neurons.

Hirayama T(1), Tarusawa E, Yoshimura Y, Galjart N, Yagi T.

Author information: 
(1)KOKORO-Biology Group, Laboratories for Integrated Biology, Graduate School of 
Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.

The CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a key molecule for chromatin conformational
changes that promote cellular diversity, but nothing is known about its role in
neurons. Here, we produced mice with a conditional knockout (cKO) of CTCF in
postmitotic projection neurons, mostly in the dorsal telencephalon. The CTCF-cKO 
mice exhibited postnatal growth retardation and abnormal behavior and had defects
in functional somatosensory mapping in the brain. In terms of gene expression,
390 transcripts were expressed at significantly different levels between
CTCF-deficient and control cortex and hippocampus. In particular, the levels of
53 isoforms of the clustered protocadherin (Pcdh) genes, which are stochastically
expressed in each neuron, declined markedly. Each CTCF-deficient neuron showed
defects in dendritic arborization and spine density during brain development.
Their excitatory postsynaptic currents showed normal amplitude but occurred with 
low frequency. Our results indicate that CTCF regulates functional neural
development and neuronal diversity by controlling clustered Pcdh expression.

Copyright © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22854024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. EMBO Rep. 2012 Sep;13(9):819-26. doi: 10.1038/embor.2012.112. Epub 2012 Jul 27.

Long-range genomic interactions epigenetically regulate the expression of a
cytokine receptor.

Deligianni C(1), Spilianakis CG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology-Hellas, Heraklion 70013, Crete, Greece.

Current research on the cytokine-mediated signalling towards the polarization and
differentiation of a T-helper cell lineage lacks mechanistic insights on the
transcriptional regulation of cytokine receptor genes. Here, we propose a new
mechanism for the transcriptional regulation of the interferon gamma receptor 1
gene via long-range intrachromosomal interactions with the Ifn<U+03B3> locus mediated by
the protein CTCF. These interactions sustain the monoallelic expression of the
differentially methylated Ifn<U+03B3>R1 gene and are persistent on blockade of active
transcription. Our findings suggest that regulatory elements for a cytokine gene 
locus can also positively regulate the transcription of its receptor.

PMCID: PMC3432804
PMID: 22836578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e41374. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041374. Epub 2012 Jul 19.

Comprehensive identification and annotation of cell type-specific and ubiquitous 
CTCF-binding sites in the human genome.

Chen H(1), Tian Y, Shu W, Bo X, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing,
China.

Chromatin insulators are DNA elements that regulate the level of gene expression 
either by preventing gene silencing through the maintenance of heterochromatin
boundaries or by preventing gene activation by blocking interactions between
enhancers and promoters. CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), a ubiquitously expressed
11-zinc-finger DNA-binding protein, is the only protein implicated in the
establishment of insulators in vertebrates. While CTCF has been implicated in
diverse regulatory functions, CTCF has only been studied in a limited number of
cell types across human genome. Thus, it is not clear whether the identified cell
type-specific differences in CTCF-binding sites are functionally significant.
Here, we identify and characterize cell type-specific and ubiquitous CTCF-binding
sites in the human genome across 38 cell types designated by the Encyclopedia of 
DNA Elements (ENCODE) consortium. These cell type-specific and ubiquitous
CTCF-binding sites show uniquely versatile transcriptional functions and
characteristic chromatin features. In addition, we confirm the insulator barrier 
function of CTCF-binding and explore the novel function of CTCF in DNA
replication. These results represent a critical step toward the comprehensive and
systematic understanding of CTCF-dependent insulators and their versatile roles
in the human genome.

PMCID: PMC3400636
PMID: 22829947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40389. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040389. Epub 2012 Jul 5.

Dose-dependent activation of putative oncogene SBSN by BORIS.

Gaykalova D(1), Vatapalli R, Glazer CA, Bhan S, Shao C, Sidransky D, Ha PK,
Califano JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Testis-specific transcription factor BORIS (Brother of the Regulator of Imprinted
Sites), a paralog and proposed functional antagonist of the widely expressed
CTCF, is abnormally expressed in multiple tumor types and has been implicated in 
the epigenetic activation of cancer-testis antigens (CTAs). We have reported
previously that suprabasin (SBSN), whose expression is restricted to the
epidermis, is epigenetically derepressed in lung cancer. In this work, we
establish that SBSN is a novel non-CTA target of BORIS epigenetic regulation.
With the use of a doxycycline-inducible BORIS expressing vector, we demonstrate
that relative BORIS dosage is critical for SBSN activation. At lower
concentrations, BORIS induces demethylation of the SBSN CpG island and disruption
and activation of chromatin around the SBSN transcription start site (TSS),
resulting in a 35-fold increase in SBSN expression in the H358 human lung cancer 
cell line. Interestingly, increasing BORIS concentrations leads to a subsequent
reduction in SBSN expression via chromatin repression. In a similar manner,
increase in BORIS concentrations leads to eventual decrease of cell growth and
colony formation. This is the first report demonstrating that different amount of
BORIS defines its varied effects on the expression of a target gene via chromatin
structure reorganization.

PMCID: PMC3390376
PMID: 22792300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Oct 15;21(20):4367-77. Epub 2012 Jul 12.

The macrosatellite DXZ4 mediates CTCF-dependent long-range intrachromosomal
interactions on the human inactive X chromosome.

Horakova AH(1), Moseley SC, McLaughlin CR, Tremblay DC, Chadwick BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL
32306-4295, USA.

The human X-linked macrosatellite DXZ4 is a large tandem repeat located at Xq23
that is packaged into heterochromatin on the male X chromosome and female active 
X chromosome and, in response to X chromosome, inactivation is organized into
euchromatin bound by the insulator protein CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) on the
inactive X chromosome (Xi). The purpose served by this unusual epigenetic
regulation is unclear, but suggests a Xi-specific gain of function for DXZ4.
Other less extensive bands of euchromatin can be observed on the Xi, but the
identity of the underlying DNA sequences is unknown. Here, we report the
identification of two novel human X-linked tandem repeats, located 58 Mb proximal
and 16 Mb distal to the macrosatellite DXZ4. Both tandem repeats are entirely
contained within the transcriptional unit of novel spliced transcripts. Like
DXZ4, the tandem repeats are packaged into Xi-specific CTCF-bound euchromatin.
These sequences undergo frequent CTCF-dependent interactions with DXZ4 on the Xi,
implicating DXZ4 as an epigenetically regulated Xi-specific structural element
and providing the first putative functional attribute of a macrosatellite in the 
human genome.

PMCID: PMC3459461
PMID: 22791747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Genome Res. 2012 Nov;22(11):2163-75. doi: 10.1101/gr.136507.111. Epub 2012 Jul
10.

Cohesin regulates tissue-specific expression by stabilizing highly occupied
cis-regulatory modules.

Faure AJ(1), Schmidt D, Watt S, Schwalie PC, Wilson MD, Xu H, Ramsay RG, Odom DT,
Flicek P.

Author information: 
(1)European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridge CB10 1SD, United Kingdom.

The cohesin protein complex contributes to transcriptional regulation in a
CTCF-independent manner by colocalizing with master regulators at tissue-specific
loci. The regulation of transcription involves the concerted action of multiple
transcription factors (TFs) and cohesin's role in this context of combinatorial
TF binding remains unexplored. To investigate cohesin-non-CTCF (CNC) binding
events in vivo we mapped cohesin and CTCF, as well as a collection of
tissue-specific and ubiquitous transcriptional regulators using ChIP-seq in
primary mouse liver. We observe a positive correlation between the number of
distinct TFs bound and the presence of CNC sites. In contrast to regions of the
genome where cohesin and CTCF colocalize, CNC sites coincide with the binding of 
master regulators and enhancer-markers and are significantly associated with
liver-specific expressed genes. We also show that cohesin presence partially
explains the commonly observed discrepancy between TF motif score and ChIP
signal. Evidence from these statistical analyses in wild-type cells, and
comparisons to maps of TF binding in Rad21-cohesin haploinsufficient mouse liver,
suggests that cohesin helps to stabilize large protein-DNA complexes. Finally, we
observe that the presence of mirrored CTCF binding events at promoters and their 
nearby cohesin-bound enhancers is associated with elevated expression levels.

PMCID: PMC3483546
PMID: 22780989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Mol Cell. 2012 Aug 24;47(4):622-32. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.050. Epub 2012 
Jul 5.

XPG and XPF endonucleases trigger chromatin looping and DNA demethylation for
accurate expression of activated genes.

Le May N(1), Fradin D, Iltis I, Bougnères P, Egly JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/Inserm/ULP, BP163, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, C.U. Strasbourg, France.

Nucleotide excision repair factors, initially characterized as part of DNA
repair, have been shown to participate in the transcriptional process in the
absence of genotoxic attack. However, their molecular function when recruited at 
the promoters of activated genes together with the transcription machinery
remained obscure. Here we show that the NER factors XPG and XPF are essential for
establishing CTCF-dependent chromatin looping between the promoter and terminator
of the activated RARß2 gene. Silencing XPG and/or XPF endonucleases, or mutations
in their catalytic sites, prevents CTCF recruitment, chromatin loop formation,
and optimal transcription of RARß2. We demonstrated that XPG endonuclease
promotes DNA breaks and DNA demethylation at promoters allowing the recruitment
of CTCF and gene looping, which is further stabilized by XPF. Our results
highlight a timely orchestrated activity of the NER factors XPG and XPF in the
formation of the active chromatin hub that controls gene expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22771116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Theor Biol Med Model. 2012 Jul 3;9:27. doi: 10.1186/1742-4682-9-27.

Electric oscillation and coupling of chromatin regulate chromosome packaging and 
transcription in eukaryotic cells.

Zhao Y(1), Zhan Q.

Author information: 
(1)State key laboratory of molecular oncology, Cancer Institute & Hospital of
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing,
100021, China. alexanderyz@gmail.com

Transcription in eukaryotic cells is efficiently spatially and temporally
regulated, but how this genome-wide regulation is achieved at the physical level 
remains unclear, given the limited transcriptional resources within the nucleus
and the sporadic linear arrangements of genes within chromosomes. In this
article, we provide a physical model for chromatin cluster formation, based on
oscillation synchronization and clustering of different chromatin regions,
enabling efficient systemic genome-wide regulation of transcription. We also
propose that the electromagnetic field generated by oscillation of chromatin is
the driving force for chromosome packing during M phase. We further explore the
physical mechanisms for chromatin oscillation cluster (COC) formation, and
long-distance chromatin kissing. The COC model, which connects the dots between
chromatin epigenetic modification and higher-order nuclear organization, answers 
many important questions, such as how the CCCTC-binding factor CTCF contributes
to higher-order chromatin organization, and the mechanism of sequential
transcriptional activation of HOX clusters. In the COC model, long non-coding
RNAs function as oscillation clustering adaptors to recruit chromatin
modification factors to specific sub-nuclear regions, fine-tuning transcriptional
events in the chromatin oscillation clusters. Introns of eukaryotic genes have
evolved to promote the clustering of transcriptionally co-regulated genes in
these sub-nuclear regions.

PMCID: PMC3472328
PMID: 22759343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Int J Mol Sci. 2012;13(5):6204-19. doi: 10.3390/ijms13056204. Epub 2012 May 21.

Characterization of ARF-BP1/HUWE1 interactions with CTCF, MYC, ARF and p53 in
MYC-driven B cell neoplasms.

Qi CF(1), Kim YS, Xiang S, Abdullaev Z, Torrey TA, Janz S, Kovalchuk AL, Sun J,
Chen D, Cho WC, Gu W, Morse HC 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20852, USA; E-Mails:
kimyongs@mail.nih.gov (Y.-S.K.); xiangshao@gmail.com (S.X.); zabdul@mail.nih.gov 
(Z.A.); kovalcha@niaid.nih.gov (A.L.K.); sunj7@mail.nih.gov (J.S.).

Transcriptional activation of MYC is a hallmark of many B cell lineage neoplasms.
MYC provides a constitutive proliferative signal but can also initiate
ARF-dependent activation of p53 and apoptosis. The E3 ubiquitin ligase, ARF-BP1, 
encoded by HUWE1, modulates the activity of both the MYC and the ARF-p53
signaling pathways, prompting us to determine if it is involved in the
pathogenesis of MYC-driven B cell lymphomas. ARF-BP1 was expressed at high levels
in cell lines from lymphomas with either wild type or mutated p53 but not in
ARF-deficient cells. Downregulation of ARF-BP1 resulted in elevated steady state 
levels of p53, growth arrest and apoptosis. Co-immunoprecipitation studies
identified a multiprotein complex comprised of ARF-BP1, ARF, p53, MYC and the
multifunctional DNA-binding factor, CTCF, which is involved in the
transcriptional regulation of MYC, p53 and ARF. ARF-BP1 bound and ubiquitylated
CTCF leading to its proteasomal degradation. ARF-BP1 and CTCF thus appear to be
key cofactors linking the MYC proliferative and p53-ARF apoptotic pathways. In
addition, ARF-BP1 could be a therapeutic target for MYC-driven B lineage
neoplasms, even if p53 is inactive, with inhibition reducing the transcriptional 
activity of MYC for its target genes and stabilizing the apoptosis-promoting
activities of p53.

PMCID: PMC3382761
PMID: 22754359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Virol. 2012 Sep;86(17):9454-64. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00787-12. Epub 2012 Jun 27.

Cohesins repress Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus immediate early gene
transcription during latency.

Chen HS(1), Wikramasinghe P, Showe L, Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Chromatin-organizing factors such as CTCF and cohesins have been implicated in
the control of complex viral regulatory programs. We investigated the role of
CTCF and cohesins in the control of the switch from latency to the lytic cycle
for Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV). We found that cohesin
subunits but not CTCF are required for the repression of KSHV immediate early
gene transcription. Depletion of the cohesin subunits Rad21, SMC1, and SMC3
resulted in lytic cycle gene transcription and viral DNA replication. In
contrast, depletion of CTCF failed to induce lytic transcription or DNA
replication. Chromatin immunoprecipitation with high-throughput sequencing
(ChIP-Seq) revealed that cohesins and CTCF bound to several sites within the
immediate early control region for ORF50 and to more distal 5' sites that also
regulate the divergently transcribed ORF45-ORF46-ORF47 gene cluster. Rad21
depletion led to a robust increase in ORF45, ORF46, ORF47, and ORF50 transcripts,
with similar kinetics to that observed with chemical induction by sodium
butyrate. During latency, the chromatin between the ORF45 and ORF50 transcription
start sites was enriched in histone H3K4me3, with elevated H3K9ac at the ORF45
promoter and elevated H3K27me3 at the ORF50 promoter. A paused form of RNA
polymerase II (Pol II) was loosely associated with the ORF45 promoter region
during latency but was converted to an active elongating form upon reactivation
induced by Rad21 depletion. Butyrate treatment caused a rapid dissociation of
cohesins and loss of CTCF binding at the immediate early gene locus, suggesting
that cohesins may be a direct target of butyrate-mediated lytic induction. Our
findings implicate cohesins as a major repressor of KSHV lytic gene activation
and show that they function coordinately with CTCF to regulate the switch between
latent and lytic gene activity.

PMCID: PMC3416178
PMID: 22740398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39371. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039371. Epub 2012 Jun 19.

A cell cycle role for the epigenetic factor CTCF-L/BORIS.

Rosa-Garrido M(1), Ceballos L, Alonso-Lecue P, Abraira C, Delgado MD, Gandarillas
A.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Cycle, Stem Cell Fate and Cancer Laboratory, Fundación Marqués de
Valdecilla-Instituto de Formación e Investigación Marqués de Valdecilla,
Santander, Spain.

CTCF is a ubiquitous epigenetic regulator that has been proposed as a master
keeper of chromatin organisation. CTCF-like, or BORIS, is thought to antagonise
CTCF and has been found in normal testis, ovary and a large variety of tumour
cells. The cellular function of BORIS remains intriguing although it might be
involved in developmental reprogramming of gene expression patterns. We here
unravel the expression of CTCF and BORIS proteins throughout human epidermis.
While CTCF is widely distributed within the nucleus, BORIS is confined to the
nucleolus and other euchromatin domains. Nascent RNA experiments in primary
keratinocytes revealed that endogenous BORIS is present in active transcription
sites. Interestingly, BORIS also localises to interphase centrosomes suggesting a
role in the cell cycle. Blocking the cell cycle at S phase or mitosis, or causing
DNA damage, produced a striking accumulation of BORIS. Consistently, ectopic
expression of wild type or GFP- BORIS provoked a higher rate of S phase cells as 
well as genomic instability by mitosis failure. Furthermore, down-regulation of
endogenous BORIS by specific shRNAs inhibited both RNA transcription and cell
cycle progression. The results altogether suggest a role for BORIS in
coordinating S phase events with mitosis.

PMCID: PMC3378572
PMID: 22724006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Genome Res. 2012 Nov;22(11):2176-87. doi: 10.1101/gr.136788.111. Epub 2012 Jun
21.

Drosophila CTCF tandemly aligns with other insulator proteins at the borders of
H3K27me3 domains.

Van Bortle K(1), Ramos E, Takenaka N, Yang J, Wahi JE, Corces VG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Several multiprotein DNA complexes capable of insulator activity have been
identified in Drosophila melanogaster, yet only CTCF, a highly conserved zinc
finger protein, and the transcription factor TFIIIC have been shown to function
in mammals. CTCF is involved in diverse nuclear activities, and recent studies
suggest that the proteins with which it associates and the DNA sequences that it 
targets may underlie these various roles. Here we show that the Drosophila
homolog of CTCF (dCTCF) aligns in the genome with other Drosophila insulator
proteins such as Suppressor of Hairy wing [SU(HW)] and Boundary Element
Associated Factor of 32 kDa (BEAF-32) at the borders of H3K27me3 domains, which
are also enriched for associated insulator proteins and additional cofactors.
RNAi depletion of dCTCF and combinatorial knockdown of gene expression for other 
Drosophila insulator proteins leads to a reduction in H3K27me3 levels within
repressed domains, suggesting that insulators are important for the maintenance
of appropriate repressive chromatin structure in Polycomb (Pc) domains. These
results shed new insights into the roles of insulators in chromatin domain
organization and support recent models suggesting that insulators underlie
interactions important for Pc-mediated repression. We reveal an important
relationship between dCTCF and other Drosophila insulator proteins and speculate 
that vertebrate CTCF may also align with other nuclear proteins to accomplish
similar functions.

PMCID: PMC3483547
PMID: 22722341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Cancer Discov. 2012 Jul;2(7):598-607. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-12-0042. Epub
2012 Jun 19.

Chimeric transcript generated by cis-splicing of adjacent genes regulates
prostate cancer cell proliferation.

Zhang Y(1), Gong M, Yuan H, Park HG, Frierson HF, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia
22908, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2012 Jul;2(7):582-5.

Gene fusion is a common event in cancer. The fusion RNA and protein products
often play causal roles in tumorigenesis and therefore represent ideal diagnostic
and therapeutic targets. Formerly, fusion chimeric products in cancer were
thought to be produced solely by chromosomal translocation. Here, we show that a 
chimeric SLC45A3-ELK4 RNA is generated in the absence of chromosomal
rearrangement. We showed that it is not a product of RNA trans-splicing, but
formed by cis-splicing of adjacent genes/read-through. The binding of
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) to the insulator sequences inversely correlates with 
the expression of the chimera transcript. The SLC45A3-ELK4 fusion, but not
wild-type, ELK4 plays important roles in regulating cell growth in both
androgen-dependent and -independent prostate cancer cells. The level of the
chimeric transcript correlates with disease progression, with the highest levels 
in prostate cancer metastases. Our results suggest that gene fusions can arise
from cis-splicing of adjacent genes without corresponding DNA
changes.SIGNIFICANCE: With the absence of corresponding DNA rearrangement,
chimeric fusion SLC45A3-ELK4 transcript in prostate cancer cells is generated by 
cis-splicing of adjacent genes/gene read-through instead of trans-splicing.
SLC45A3-ELK4 controls prostate cancer cell proliferation, and the chimera level
correlates with prostate cancer disease progression.

PMID: 22719019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Sep;40(16):7753-65. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks556. Epub 2012
Jun 20.

An ectopic CTCF-dependent transcriptional insulator influences the choice of Vß
gene segments for VDJ recombination at TCRß locus.

Shrimali S(1), Srivastava S, Varma G, Grinberg A, Pfeifer K, Srivastava M.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Immunology, Aruna Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi 110067,
India.

Insulators regulate transcription as they modulate the interactions between
enhancers and promoters by organizing the chromatin into distinct domains. To
gain better understanding of the nature of chromatin domains defined by
insulators, we analyzed the ability of an insulator to interfere in VDJ
recombination, a process that is critically dependent on long-range interactions 
between diverse types of cis-acting DNA elements. A well-established
CTCF-dependent transcriptional insulator, H19 imprint control region (H19-ICR),
was inserted in the mouse TCRß locus by genetic manipulation. Analysis of the
mutant mice demonstrated that the insulator retains its CTCF and
position-dependent enhancer-blocking potential in this heterologous context in
vivo. Remarkably, the inserted H19-ICR appears to have the ability to modulate
cis-DNA interactions between recombination signal sequence elements of the TCRß
locus leading to a dramatically altered usage of Vß segments for Vß-to-DßJß
recombination in the mutant mice. This reveals a novel ability of CTCF to govern 
long range cis-DNA interactions other than enhancer-promoter interactions and
suggests that CTCF-dependent insulators may play a diverse and complex role in
genome organization beyond transcriptional control. Our functional analysis of
mutated TCRß locus supports the emerging role of CTCF in governing VDJ
recombination.

PMCID: PMC3439925
PMID: 22718969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2012 Jun 18;5(1):8. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-5-8.

The male germ cell gene regulator CTCFL is functionally different from CTCF and
binds CTCF-like consensus sites in a nucleosome composition-dependent manner.

Sleutels F(1), Soochit W, Bartkuhn M, Heath H, Dienstbach S, Bergmaier P, Franke 
V, Rosa-Garrido M, van de Nobelen S, Caesar L, van der Reijden M, Bryne JC, van
Ijcken W, Grootegoed JA, Delgado MD, Lenhard B, Renkawitz R, Grosveld F, Galjart 
N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
f.sleutels@erasmusmc.nl.

BACKGROUND: CTCF is a highly conserved and essential zinc finger protein
expressed in virtually all cell types. In conjunction with cohesin, it organizes 
chromatin into loops, thereby regulating gene expression and epigenetic events.
The function of CTCFL or BORIS, the testis-specific paralog of CTCF, is less
clear.
RESULTS: Using immunohistochemistry on testis sections and fluorescence-based
microscopy on intact live seminiferous tubules, we show that CTCFL is only
transiently present during spermatogenesis, prior to the onset of meiosis, when
the protein co-localizes in nuclei with ubiquitously expressed CTCF. CTCFL
distribution overlaps completely with that of Stra8, a retinoic acid-inducible
protein essential for the propagation of meiosis. We find that absence of CTCFL
in mice causes sub-fertility because of a partially penetrant testicular atrophy.
CTCFL deficiency affects the expression of a number of testis-specific genes,
including Gal3st1 and Prss50. Combined, these data indicate that CTCFL has a
unique role in spermatogenesis. Genome-wide RNA expression studies in ES cells
expressing a V5- and GFP-tagged form of CTCFL show that genes that are
downregulated in CTCFL-deficient testis are upregulated in ES cells. These data
indicate that CTCFL is a male germ cell gene regulator. Furthermore, genome-wide 
DNA-binding analysis shows that CTCFL binds a consensus sequence that is very
similar to that of CTCF. However, only ~3,700 out of the ~5,700 CTCFL- and
~31,000 CTCF-binding sites overlap. CTCFL binds promoters with loosely assembled 
nucleosomes, whereas CTCF favors consensus sites surrounded by phased
nucleosomes. Finally, an ES cell-based rescue assay shows that CTCFL is
functionally different from CTCF.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that nucleosome composition specifies the
genome-wide binding of CTCFL and CTCF. We propose that the transient expression
of CTCFL in spermatogonia and preleptotene spermatocytes serves to occupy a
subset of promoters and maintain the expression of male germ cell genes.

PMCID: PMC3418201
PMID: 22709888  [PubMed]


495. Virus Genes. 2012 Oct;45(2):265-73. Epub 2012 Jun 16.

CTCF and Sp1 interact with the Murine gammaherpesvirus 68 internal repeat
elements.

Stevens HC(1), Cham KS, Hughes DJ, Sun R, Sample JT, Bubb VJ, Stewart JP, Quinn
JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, Institute of Translational 
Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 3GE, UK.

Herpesviruses maintain a dynamic balance between latency and productive
infection. This is a complex process regulated by viral and cellular factors. We 
have developed a Murine gammaherpesvirus 68 (MHV-68) model system in which to
study mechanisms underlying balance between latency and lytic infection. We have 
generated an epithelial cell line that carries MHV-68 in a tightly latent form by
using a bacterial artificial chromosome clone of the virus genome with a mutation
in the MHV-68 major lytic R transactivator gene. Complementation of this defect
in trans by transfection with a plasmid encoding R transactivator initiated and
restored the productive cycle. This cell line model was used to investigate
transcription factor occupancy (CCCTC binding factor [CTCF] and Sp1) of the two
internal repeat elements in the viral genome during latency and reactivation
using chromatin immunoprecipitation. Our results show that CTCF can bind to the
40-bp and the 100-bp repeat sequences during latency, whereas binding is reduced 
upon reactivation. In contrast, Sp1 only bound to the 100-bp repeat after
reactivation. Our results indicate that the large internal repeat sequences in
MHV-68 have different functions. We hypothesise that the 40-bp repeat may be
involved in regulation of gene expression during the maintenance of latency,
while the 100-bp repeat domain may be involved in regulation of the lytic cycle.

PMID: 22706977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Sep;40(16):7718-27. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks536. Epub 2012
Jun 16.

CTCF-mediated transcriptional regulation through cell type-specific chromosome
organization in the ß-globin locus.

Junier I(1), Dale RK, Hou C, Képès F, Dean A.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenomics Project and institute of Systems and Synthetic Biology, Genopole®,
CNRS, University of Evry, 5 rue Henri Desbrueres, Evry F-91030, Institute of
Complex Systems, Paris, France. i.junier@gmail.com

The principles underlying the architectural landscape of chromatin beyond the
nucleosome level in living cells remains largely unknown despite its potential to
play a role in mammalian gene regulation. We investigated the three-dimensional
folding of a 1 Mbp region of human chromosome 11 containing the ß-globin genes by
integrating looping interactions of the CCCTC-binding insulator protein CTCF
determined comprehensively by chromosome conformation capture (3C) into a polymer
model of chromatin. We find that CTCF-mediated cell type-specific interactions in
erythroid cells are organized to favor contacts known to occur in vivo between
the ß-globin locus control region (LCR) and genes. In these cells, the modeled
ß-globin domain folds into a globule with the LCR and the active globin genes on 
the periphery. In contrast, in non-erythroid cells, the globule is less compact
with few but dominant CTCF interactions driving the genes away from the LCR. This
leads to a decrease in contact frequencies that can exceed 1000-fold depending on
the stiffness of the chromatin and the exact position of the genes. Our findings 
show that an ensemble of CTCF contacts functionally affects spatial distances
between control elements and target genes contributing to chromosomal
organization required for transcription.

PMCID: PMC3439919
PMID: 22705794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Sep;40(16):7858-69. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks477. Epub 2012
Jun 8.

Integrated genome analysis suggests that most conserved non-coding sequences are 
regulatory factor binding sites.

Hemberg M(1), Gray JM, Cloonan N, Kuersten S, Grimmond S, Greenberg ME, Kreiman
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. martin.hemberg@childrens.harvard.edu

More than 98% of a typical vertebrate genome does not code for proteins. Although
non-coding regions are sprinkled with short (<200 bp) islands of evolutionarily
conserved sequences, the function of most of these unannotated conserved islands 
remains unknown. One possibility is that unannotated conserved islands could
encode non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs); alternatively, unannotated conserved islands
could serve as promoter-distal regulatory factor binding sites (RFBSs) like
enhancers. Here we assess these possibilities by comparing unannotated conserved 
islands in the human and mouse genomes to transcribed regions and to RFBSs,
relying on a detailed case study of one human and one mouse cell type. We define 
transcribed regions by applying a novel transcript-calling algorithm to RNA-Seq
data obtained from total cellular RNA, and we define RFBSs using ChIP-Seq and
DNAse-hypersensitivity assays. We find that unannotated conserved islands are
four times more likely to coincide with RFBSs than with unannotated ncRNAs.
Thousands of conserved RFBSs can be categorized as insulators based on the
presence of CTCF or as enhancers based on the presence of p300/CBP and H3K4me1.
While many unannotated conserved RFBSs are transcriptionally active to some
extent, the transcripts produced tend to be unspliced, non-polyadenylated and
expressed at levels 10 to 100-fold lower than annotated coding or ncRNAs.
Extending these findings across multiple cell types and tissues, we propose that 
most conserved non-coding genomic DNA in vertebrate genomes corresponds to
promoter-distal regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC3439890
PMID: 22684627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Cell Cycle. 2012 Jun 1;11(11):2052. doi: 10.4161/cc.20659. Epub 2012 Jun 1.

Cancer cell death and selection: unexpected putative roles for pRb2/p130, BORIS
and CTCF in endoplasmic stress response maintained by the T-antigen.

Bronner C(1), Hamiche A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR7104, Institut National de la Santé et 
de la Recherche Médicale U964, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
bronnerc@igbmc.fr

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2012 May 1;11(9):1841-50.

PMID: 22627611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Cell Cycle. 2012 Jun 15;11(12):2233-8. doi: 10.4161/cc.20318. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

The specific contributions of cohesin-SA1 to cohesion and gene expression:
implications for cancer and development.

Cuadrado A(1), Remeseiro S, Gómez-López G, Pisano DG, Losada A.

Author information: 
(1)Chromosome Dynamics Group, Molecular Oncology Programme, Spanish National
Cancer Research Centre, Madrid, Spain. acuadrado@cnio.es

Besides its well-established role in sister chromatid cohesion, cohesin has
recently emerged as major player in the organization of interphase chromatin.
Such important function is related to its ability to entrap two DNA segments also
in cis, thereby facilitating long-range DNA looping which is crucial for
transcriptional regulation, organization of replication factories and V(D)J
recombination. Vertebrate somatic cells have two different versions of cohesin,
containing Smc1, Smc3, Rad21/Scc1 and either SA1 or SA2, but their functional
specificity has been largely ignored. We recently generated a knockout mouse
model for the gene encoding SA1, and found that this protein is essential to
complete embryonic development. Cohesin-SA1 mediates cohesion at telomeres, which
is required for their replication. Telomere defects in SA1- deficient cells
provoke chromosome segregation errors resulting in aneuploidy despite robust
centromere cohesion. This aneuploidy could explain why heterozygous animals have 
an earlier onset of tumorigenesis. In addition, the genome-wide distribution of
cohesin changes dramatically in the absence of SA1, and the complex shows reduced
accumulation at promoters and CTCF sites. As a consequence, gene expression is
altered, leading to downregulation of biological processes related to a
developmental disorder linked to cohesin function, the Cornelia de Lange Syndrome
(CdLS). These results point out a prominent role of cohesin-SA1 in
transcriptional regulation, with clear implications in the etiology of CdLS.

PMID: 22617390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36891. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036891. Epub 2012 May 17.

Epigenetic repression of RARRES1 is mediated by methylation of a proximal
promoter and a loss of CTCF binding.

Peng Z(1), Shen R, Li YW, Teng KY, Shapiro CL, Lin HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Technology, School of Allied Medical Professions, the Ohio
State University Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The cis-acting promoter element responsible for epigenetic silencing 
of retinoic acid receptor responder 1 (RARRES1) by methylation is unclear.
Likewise, how aberrant methylation interplays effectors and thus affects breast
neoplastic features remains largely unknown.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We first compared methylation occurring at the
sequences (-664~+420) flanking the RARRES1 promoter in primary breast carcinomas 
to that in adjacent benign tissues. Surprisingly, tumor cores displayed
significantly elevated methylation occurring solely at the upstream region
(-664~-86), while the downstream element (-85~+420) proximal to the
transcriptional start site (+1) remained largely unchanged. Yet, hypermethylation
at the former did not result in appreciable silencing effect. In contrast, the
proximal sequence displayed full promoter activity and methylation of which
remarkably silenced RARRES1 transcription. This phenomenon was recapitulated in
breast cancer cell lines, in which methylation at the proximal region strikingly 
coincided with downregulation. We also discovered that CTCF occupancy was
enriched at the unmethylayed promoter bound with transcription-active histone
markings. Furthermore, knocking-down CTCF expression hampered RARRES1 expression,
suggesting CTCF positively regulated RARRES1 transcription presumably by binding 
to unmethylated promoter poised at transcription-ready state. Moreover, RARRES1
restoration not only impeded cell invasion but also promoted death induced by
chemotherapeutic agents, denoting its tumor suppressive effect. Its role of
attenuating invasion agreed with data generated from clinical specimens revealing
that RARRES1 was generally downregulated in metastatic lymph nodes compared to
the tumor cores.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: This report delineated silencing of RARRES1 by
hypermethylation is occurring at a proximal promoter element and is associated
with a loss of binding to CTCF, an activator for RARRES1 expression. We also
revealed the tumor suppressive roles exerted by RARRES1 in part by promoting
breast epithelial cell death and by impeding cell invasion that is an important
property for metastatic spread.

PMCID: PMC3355180
PMID: 22615834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 5;109(23):8799-800. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1206195109. Epub 2012 May 21.

CTCF and cohesin help neurons raise their self-awareness.

Dekker J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Systems Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA
01605-0103, USA. Job.Dekker@umassmed.edu

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 5;109(23):9125-30.

PMCID: PMC3384181
PMID: 22615386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e33994. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033994. Epub 2012 May 11.

A regulatory potential of the Xist gene promoter in vole M. rossiaemeridionalis.

Orishchenko KE(1), Pavlova SV, Elisaphenko EA, Sherstyuk VV, Prinz AV, Shevchenko
AI, Dementyeva EV, Zakian SM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Siberian
Branch, Novosibirsk, Russia.

Comment in
    Evol Dev. 2013 Jan;15(1):1-2; discussion 3-4.

X chromosome inactivation takes place in the early development of female mammals 
and depends on the Xist gene expression. The mechanisms of Xist expression
regulation have not been well understood so far. In this work, we compared Xist
promoter region of vole Microtus rossiaemeridionalis and other mammalian species.
We observed three conserved regions which were characterized by computational
analysis, DNaseI in vitro footprinting, and reporter construct assay. Regulatory 
factors potentially involved in Xist activation and repression in voles were
determined. The role of CpG methylation in vole Xist expression regulation was
established. A CTCF binding site was found in the 5' flanking region of the Xist 
promoter on the active X chromosome in both males and females. We suggest that
CTCF acts as an insulator which defines an inactive Xist domain on the active X
chromosome in voles.

PMCID: PMC3350511
PMID: 22606223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 5;109(23):9125-30. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1205074109. Epub 2012 May 1.

Role of CCCTC binding factor (CTCF) and cohesin in the generation of single-cell 
diversity of protocadherin-a gene expression.

Monahan K(1), Rudnick ND, Kehayova PD, Pauli F, Newberry KM, Myers RM, Maniatis
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, NY 10032, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 5;109(23):8799-800.

Extraordinary single-cell diversity is generated in the vertebrate nervous system
by the combinatorial expression of the clustered protocadherin genes (Pcdha, -ß, 
and -<U+03B3>). This diversity is generated by a combination of stochastic promoter
choice and alternative pre-mRNA splicing. Here we show that both the
insulator-binding protein CTCF and the cohesin complex subunit Rad21 bind to two 
highly conserved DNA sequences, the first within and the second downstream of
transcriptionally active Pcdha promoters. Both CTCF and Rad21 bind to these sites
in vitro and in vivo, this binding directly correlates with alternative isoform
expression, and knocking down CTCF expression reduces alternative isoform
expression. Remarkably, a similarly spaced pair of CTCF/Rad21 binding sites was
identified within a distant enhancer element (HS5-1), which is required for
normal levels of alternative isoform expression. We also identify an additional, 
unique regulatory role for cohesin, as Rad21 binds to another enhancer (HS7)
independently of CTCF, and knockdown of Rad21 reduces expression of the
constitutive, biallelically expressed Pcdha isoforms ac1 and ac2. We propose that
CTCF and the cohesin complex initiate and maintain Pcdha promoter choice by
mediating interactions between Pcdha promoters and enhancers.

PMCID: PMC3384188
PMID: 22550178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Cell Cycle. 2012 May 1;11(9):1841-50. doi: 10.4161/cc.20242. Epub 2012 May 1.

Integrating role of T antigen, Rb2/p130, CTCF and BORIS in mediating
non-canonical endoplasmic reticulum-dependent death pathways triggered by chronic
ER stress in mouse medulloblastoma.

Macaluso M(1), Caracciolo V, Rizzo V, Sun A, Montanari M, Russo G, Bellipanni G, 
Khalili K, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Center for
Biotechnology, College of Science and Technology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2012 Jun 1;11(11):2052.

Distinct molecular pathways could be constitutively active in mouse T-Antigen
positive and T-Antigen negative medulloblastoma cell lines, contributing to their
phenotypic differences as well as to cellular responses, cell cycle progression, 
cell death and survival. The diversity of these responses may be due, at least in
part, to distinct activities of Rb2/p130, CTCF and BORIS proteins in response to 
an altered network of signaling evoked by the T-Ag presence. Here, we provided
evidence supporting a role for the T-Antigen in causing chronic endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress and aberrant Caspase-12 expression and activation,
subsequently driving to both massive cell death, and perhaps selection of cells
with a higher malignant phenotype. Furthermore, we observed that the endoplasmic 
stress, either chronically caused by T-Ag or transiently induced by glucose
deprivation, is accompanied by the formation of complexes between the
retinoblastoma related protein Rb2/p130 and the chromatin insulator CCCTC-binding
factor CTCF, or the CTCF-paralogue BORIS. Our study represents the first evidence
supporting a role of the T-Antigen in inducing/maintaining chronic ER-stress, as 
well as, indicating a role of Rb2/p130, CTCF and BORIS as potential mediators of 
non-canonical ER-dependent death pathway in mouse medulloblastoma.

PMID: 22544282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Blood. 2012 Jun 28;119(26):6209-18. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-03-402586. Epub 2012 
Apr 26.

DNA-binding factor CTCF and long-range gene interactions in V(D)J recombination
and oncogene activation.

Ribeiro de Almeida C(1), Stadhouders R, Thongjuea S, Soler E, Hendriks RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center (MC) Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Regulation of V(D)J recombination events at immunoglobulin (Ig) and T-cell
receptor loci in lymphoid cells is complex and achieved via changes in substrate 
accessibility. Various studies over the last year have identified the DNA-binding
zinc-finger protein CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) as a crucial regulator of
long-range chromatin interactions. CTCF often controls specific interactions by
preventing inappropriate communication between neighboring regulatory elements or
independent chromatin domains. Although recent gene targeting experiments
demonstrated that the presence of the CTCF protein is not required for the
process of V(D)J recombination per se, CTCF turned out to be essential to control
order, lineage specificity and to balance the Ig V gene repertoire. Moreover,
CTCF was shown to restrict activity of <U+03BA> enhancer elements to the Ig <U+03BA> locus. In 
this review, we discuss CTCF function in the regulation of V(D)J recombination on
the basis of established knowledge on CTCF-mediated chromatin loop domains in
various other loci, including the imprinted H19-Igf2 locus as well as the complex
ß-globin, MHC class II and IFN-<U+03B3> loci. Moreover, we discuss that loss of
CTCF-mediated restriction of enhancer activity may well contribute to oncogenic
activation, when in chromosomal translocations Ig enhancer elements and oncogenes
appear in a novel genomic context.

PMID: 22538856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34915. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034915. Epub 2012 Apr 20.

Loss of maternal CTCF is associated with peri-implantation lethality of Ctcf null
embryos.

Moore JM(1), Rabaia NA, Smith LE, Fagerlie S, Gurley K, Loukinov D, Disteche CM, 
Collins SJ, Kemp CJ, Lobanenkov VV, Filippova GN.

Author information: 
(1)Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington, United States of America.

CTCF is a highly conserved, multifunctional zinc finger protein involved in
critical aspects of gene regulation including transcription regulation, chromatin
insulation, genomic imprinting, X-chromosome inactivation, and higher order
chromatin organization. Such multifunctional properties of CTCF suggest an
essential role in development. Indeed, a previous report on maternal depletion of
CTCF suggested that CTCF is essential for pre-implantation development. To
distinguish between the effects of maternal and zygotic expression of CTCF, we
studied pre-implantation development in mice harboring a complete loss of
function Ctcf knockout allele. Although we demonstrated that homozygous deletion 
of Ctcf is early embryonically lethal, in contrast to previous observations, we
showed that the Ctcf nullizygous embryos developed up to the blastocyst stage
(E3.5) followed by peri-implantation lethality (E4.5-E5.5). Moreover, one-cell
stage Ctcf nullizygous embryos cultured ex vivo developed to the 16-32 cell stage
with no obvious abnormalities. Using a single embryo assay that allowed both
genotype and mRNA expression analyses of the same embryo, we demonstrated that
pre-implantation development of the Ctcf nullizygous embryos was associated with 
the retention of the maternal wild type Ctcf mRNA. Loss of this stable maternal
transcript was temporally associated with loss of CTCF protein expression,
apoptosis of the developing embryo, and failure to further develop an inner cell 
mass and trophoectoderm ex vivo. This indicates that CTCF expression is critical 
to early embryogenesis and loss of its expression rapidly leads to apoptosis at a
very early developmental stage. This is the first study documenting the presence 
of the stable maternal Ctcf transcript in the blastocyst stage embryos.
Furthermore, in the presence of maternal CTCF, zygotic CTCF expression does not
seem to be required for pre-implantation development.

PMCID: PMC3332108
PMID: 22532833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. BMC Genomics. 2012 Apr 24;13:147. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-147.

Genome-wide analysis of Pax8 binding provides new insights into thyroid
functions.

Ruiz-Llorente S(1), Carrillo Santa de Pau E, Sastre-Perona A, Montero-Conde C,
Gómez-López G, Fagin JA, Valencia A, Pisano DG, Santisteban P.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto Sols", Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas-CSIC y Universidad Autónoma de Madrid-UAM, C/Arturo
Duperier 4, Madrid 28029, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor Pax8 is essential for the differentiation of
thyroid cells. However, there are few data on genes transcriptionally regulated
by Pax8 other than thyroid-related genes. To better understand the role of Pax8
in the biology of thyroid cells, we obtained transcriptional profiles of
Pax8-silenced PCCl3 thyroid cells using whole genome expression arrays and
integrated these signals with global cis-regulatory sequencing studies performed 
by ChIP-Seq analysis
RESULTS: Exhaustive analysis of Pax8 immunoprecipitated peaks demonstrated
preferential binding to intragenic regions and CpG-enriched islands, which
suggests a role of Pax8 in transcriptional regulation of orphan CpG regions. In
addition, ChIP-Seq allowed us to identify Pax8 partners, including proteins
involved in tertiary DNA structure (CTCF) and chromatin remodeling (Sp1), and
these direct transcriptional interactions were confirmed in vivo. Moreover, both 
factors modulate Pax8-dependent transcriptional activation of the sodium iodide
symporter (Nis) gene promoter. We ultimately combined putative and novel Pax8
binding sites with actual target gene expression regulation to define
Pax8-dependent genes. Functional classification suggests that Pax8-regulated
genes may be directly involved in important processes of thyroid cell function
such as cell proliferation and differentiation, apoptosis, cell polarity, motion 
and adhesion, and a plethora of DNA/protein-related processes.
CONCLUSION: Our study provides novel insights into the role of Pax8 in thyroid
biology, exerted through transcriptional regulation of important genes involved
in critical thyrocyte processes. In addition, we found new transcriptional
partners of Pax8, which functionally cooperate with Pax8 in the regulation of
thyroid gene transcription. Besides, our data demonstrate preferential location
of Pax8 in non-promoter CpG regions. These data point to an orphan CpG
island-mediated mechanism that represents a novel role of Pax8 in the
transcriptional output of the thyrocyte.

PMCID: PMC3403905
PMID: 22531031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Nature. 2012 Apr 11;485(7398):376-80. doi: 10.1038/nature11082.

Topological domains in mammalian genomes identified by analysis of chromatin
interactions.

Dixon JR(1), Selvaraj S, Yue F, Kim A, Li Y, Shen Y, Hu M, Liu JS, Ren B.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California 
92093, USA.

The spatial organization of the genome is intimately linked to its biological
function, yet our understanding of higher order genomic structure is coarse,
fragmented and incomplete. In the nucleus of eukaryotic cells, interphase
chromosomes occupy distinct chromosome territories, and numerous models have been
proposed for how chromosomes fold within chromosome territories. These models,
however, provide only few mechanistic details about the relationship between
higher order chromatin structure and genome function. Recent advances in genomic 
technologies have led to rapid advances in the study of three-dimensional genome 
organization. In particular, Hi-C has been introduced as a method for identifying
higher order chromatin interactions genome wide. Here we investigate the
three-dimensional organization of the human and mouse genomes in embryonic stem
cells and terminally differentiated cell types at unprecedented resolution. We
identify large, megabase-sized local chromatin interaction domains, which we term
'topological domains', as a pervasive structural feature of the genome
organization. These domains correlate with regions of the genome that constrain
the spread of heterochromatin. The domains are stable across different cell types
and highly conserved across species, indicating that topological domains are an
inherent property of mammalian genomes. Finally, we find that the boundaries of
topological domains are enriched for the insulator binding protein CTCF,
housekeeping genes, transfer RNAs and short interspersed element (SINE)
retrotransposons, indicating that these factors may have a role in establishing
the topological domain structure of the genome.

PMCID: PMC3356448
PMID: 22495300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Kidney Int. 2012 Aug;82(3):278-91. doi: 10.1038/ki.2012.102. Epub 2012 Apr 11.

In vivo regulation of the heme oxygenase-1 gene in humanized transgenic mice.

Kim J(1), Zarjou A, Traylor AM, Bolisetty S, Jaimes EA, Hull TD, George JF,
Mikhail FM, Agarwal A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294, USA.

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2012 Aug;82(3):253-5.

Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) catalyzes the rate-limiting step in heme degradation,
producing equimolar amounts of carbon monoxide, iron, and biliverdin. Induction
of HO-1 is a beneficial response to tissue injury in diverse animal models of
diseases including acute kidney injury. In vitro analysis has shown that the
human HO-1 gene is transcriptionally regulated by changes in chromatin
conformation, but whether such control occurs in vivo is not known. To enable
such an analysis, we generated transgenic mice, harboring an 87-kb bacterial
artificial chromosome expressing human HO-1 mRNA and protein and bred these mice 
with HO-1 knockout mice to generate humanized BAC transgenic mice. This
successfully rescued the phenotype of the knockout mice including reduced birth
rates, tissue iron overload, splenomegaly, anemia, leukocytosis, dendritic cell
abnormalities, and survival after acute kidney injury induced by rhabdomyolysis
or cisplatin nephrotoxicity. Transcription factors such as USF1/2, JunB, Sp1, and
CTCF were found to associate with regulatory regions of the human HO-1 gene in
the kidney following rhabdomyolysis. Chromosome conformation capture and
ChIP-loop assays confirmed this in the formation of chromatin looping in vivo.
Thus, these bacterial artificial chromosome humanized HO-1 mice are a valuable
model to study the human HO-1 gene, providing insight to the in vivo architecture
of the gene in acute kidney injury and other diseases.

PMCID: PMC3396739
PMID: 22495295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Apr;29(2):176-80. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2012.02.013.

[A versatile role of transcription regulator CTCF in epigenetics and diseases].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu QY(1), Qin Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, West China School of
Preclinical and Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, People's
Republic of China.

CTCF as a multivalent eukaryotic transcription factor plays a diverse range of
roles in regulation of various genes through the binding of its 11 zinc fingers
to CTCF consensus sites or various proteins. CTCF is involved in multiple aspects
of epigenetic regulation including regulation of chromatin remodeling and genomic
imprinting. Deregulation of these processes result in a group of diseases are
characterized by growth, development, and neurological dysfunction. This paper
reviews recent researches that highlight the links between CTCF, epigenetics and 
diseases.

PMID: 22487828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Apr 27;421(1):91-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.03.120. Epub 2012 Apr 1.

Selective death of cancer cells by preferential induction of reactive oxygen
species in response to (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate.

Min NY(1), Kim JH, Choi JH, Liang W, Ko YJ, Rhee S, Bang H, Ham SW, Park AJ, Lee 
KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Natural Science, Chung-Ang University, 
Seoul 156-756, Republic of Korea.

(-)-Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) induces apoptosis in cancer cells without
adversely affecting normal cells. Understanding the cancer-specific cytotoxic
activity of EGCG is very important in defining the mechanism of tumorigenesis and
identifying superb chemotherapeutic agents against cancer. We comparatively
assayed human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT)-mediated apoptosis by
EGCG-induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) in normal cells and cancer cells. EGCG
showed differential levels of ROS induction between the cell types; ROS,
especially hydrogen peroxide, was highly induced in cancer cells, while it was
not in normal cells. In addition, the higher level of ROS down-regulated hTERT
via binding of CCCTC binding factor (CTCF) to the core promoter region of hTERT, 
which repressed hTERT expression. CTCF binding was epigenetically controlled by
the demethylation of the previously hypermethylated site for CTCF, which was
induced by down-regulation of DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1). In contrast, hTERT
down-regulation was not observed in normal cells. These results suggest that
preferential death of cancer cells by EGCG could be caused by the cancer-specific
induction of ROS and epigenetic modulation of expression of apoptosis-related
genes, such as hTERT.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22487794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. BMC Res Notes. 2012 Apr 5;5:178. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-5-178.

DNA fragments binding CTCF in vitro and in vivo are capable of blocking enhancer 
activity.

Didych DA(1), Kotova ES, Akopov SB, Nikolaev LG, Sverdlov ED.

Author information: 
(1)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Russian Academy of
Sciences, 16/10 Miklukho-Maklaya, Moscow 117997, Russia.

BACKGROUND: Earlier we identified ten 100-300-bp long CTCF-binding DNA fragments 
selected earlier from a 1-Mb human chromosome 19 region. Here the
positive-negative selection technique was used to check the ability of
CTCF-binding human genomic fragments to block enhancer-promoter interaction when 
inserted into the genome.
RESULTS: Ten CTCF-binding DNA fragments were inserted between the CMV enhancer
and CMV minimal promoter driving the herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase
(HSV-tk) gene in a vector expressing also the neoR gene under a separate
promoter. The constructs were then integrated into the genome of CHO cells, and
the cells resistant to neomycin and ganciclovir (positive-negative selection)
were picked up, and their DNAs were PCR analyzed to confirm the presence of the
fragments between the enhancer and promoter in both orientations.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated that all sequences identified by their CTCF binding 
both in vitro and in vivo had enhancer-blocking activity when inserted between
the CMV minimal promoter and enhancer in stably transfected CHO cells.

PMCID: PMC3369819
PMID: 22480385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Front Genet. 2012 Mar 28;3:41. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2012.00041. eCollection 2012.

No Evidence for a Parent-of-Origin Specific Differentially Methylated Region
Linked to RASGRF1.

Pitamber PN(1), Lombard Z, Ramsay M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, School of Pathology, Faculty of Health Sciences,
National Health Laboratory Service and University of the Witwatersrand
Johannesburg, South Africa.

Imprinted genes are expressed from one parental allele in a parent-of-origin
manner. This monoallelic behavior is regulated by allele-specific DNA methylation
that is confined to differentially methylated regions (DMRs). To date there are
over 80 known human imprinted genes of which only three are known to have
paternally methylated DMRs. In mice there exists an additional paternally
methylated DMR associated with Rasgrf1. The Rasgrf1 gene forms part of the MAPK
signaling pathway and plays a role in long-term memory formation and growth
control. A RASGRF1-associated parent-of-origin specific DMR in humans and its
methylation status in sperm DNA have not been explored. The primary aim of this
study was to determine whether the human RASGRF1 gene contains a DMR and whether 
this DMR is paternally methylated and shows roughly 50% methylation in somatic
tissue. Computational assessments were done to identify putative CTCF binding
sites, CpG islands (CGIs) that could serve as potential RASGRF1 DMRs and tandem
repeats within or adjacent to these CGIs. The methylation status of three
putative CGIs was assessed using quantitative pyrosequencing technology. None of 
the putative CTCF binding sites was found to occur in the predicted CGIs. The
three putative CGIs linked to RASGRF1 did not display allele-specific
methylation. While one of the three CGIs was found to be hypomethylated in both
blood DNA and sperm DNA, the other two were found to be hypermethylated. The CGIs
evaluated in this study did not fit the criteria of being a allele-specific DMR. 
Unlike the mouse Rasgrf1 locus, the human RASGRF1-associated CpG rich regions do 
not exhibit differential methylation in a parent-of-origin manner.

PMCID: PMC3314240
PMID: 22470404  [PubMed]


14. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(3):e1002599. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002599. Epub 2012 Mar 
22.

Widespread site-dependent buffering of human regulatory polymorphism.

Maurano MT(1), Wang H, Kutyavin T, Stamatoyannopoulos JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
United States of America.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2012 May;13(5):297.

The average individual is expected to harbor thousands of variants within
non-coding genomic regions involved in gene regulation. However, it is currently 
not possible to interpret reliably the functional consequences of genetic
variation within any given transcription factor recognition sequence. To address 
this, we comprehensively analyzed heritable genome-wide binding patterns of a
major sequence-specific regulator (CTCF) in relation to genetic variability in
binding site sequences across a multi-generational pedigree. We localized and
quantified CTCF occupancy by ChIP-seq in 12 related and unrelated individuals
spanning three generations, followed by comprehensive targeted resequencing of
the entire CTCF-binding landscape across all individuals. We identified hundreds 
of variants with reproducible quantitative effects on CTCF occupancy (both
positive and negative). While these effects paralleled protein-DNA recognition
energetics when averaged, they were extensively buffered by striking local
context dependencies. In the significant majority of cases buffering was
complete, resulting in silent variants spanning every position within the DNA
recognition interface irrespective of level of binding energy or evolutionary
constraint. The prevalence of complex partial or complete buffering effects
severely constrained the ability to predict reliably the impact of variation
within any given binding site instance. Surprisingly, 40% of variants that
increased CTCF occupancy occurred at positions of human-chimp divergence,
challenging the expectation that the vast majority of functional regulatory
variants should be deleterious. Our results suggest that, even in the presence of
"perfect" genetic information afforded by resequencing and parallel studies in
multiple related individuals, genomic site-specific prediction of the
consequences of individual variation in regulatory DNA will require systematic
coupling with empirical functional genomic measurements.

PMCID: PMC3310774
PMID: 22457641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Trends Immunol. 2012 Apr;33(4):153-9. doi: 10.1016/j.it.2012.02.004. Epub 2012
Mar 20.

Cohesin, CTCF and lymphocyte antigen receptor locus rearrangement.

Seitan VC(1), Krangel MS, Merkenschlager M.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College London, London, UK.

The somatic recombination of lymphocyte antigen receptor loci is integral to
lymphocyte differentiation and adaptive immunity. Here we review the relation of 
this highly choreographed process with the zinc finger protein CTCF and with
cohesin, a protein complex best known for its essential functions in
post-replicative DNA repair and chromosome segregation during the cell cycle. At 
lymphocyte antigen receptor loci, CTCF and cohesin shape long-range interactions 
and contribute to V(D)J recombination by facilitating lineage- and
developmental-stage-specific transcription and accessibility.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3352889
PMID: 22440186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Jun;5(6):1536-40. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.833. Epub 2012 Mar 13.

Loss of imprinting of IGF2 correlates with hypomethylation of the H19
differentially methylated region in the tumor tissue of colorectal cancer
patients.

Tian F(1), Tang Z, Song G, Pan Y, He B, Bao Q, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, Jiangsu,
People's Republic of China.

Expression of the imprinted genes insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2) and H19
depends on the methylation pattern of their differentially methylated region
(DMR) located on chromosome 11p15. In the present study, we examined the
imprinting status of the IGF2 gene in 120 human colorectal cancer (CRC) patients 
and 150 normal controls. In addition, we analyzed the DNA methylation of the
sixth CTCF-binding site in the DMR of IGF2/H19 in 81 CRC patients using bisulfate
sequencing. Of a total of 81 informative (heterozygous) samples, 51 samples
showed bialleic IGF2 expression in tumor samples; however, only 15 of 69
informative samples showed loss of imprinting (LOI) of IGF2 in normal controls.
Statistically significant differences in the methylation status between the
retention of imprinting (ROI) and LOI groups (66.1±14.9 vs. 16.7±9.2, p=0.008)
were observed. The results of the present study suggest that LOI of IGF2 is
important in the carcinogenesis of CRC. Hypomethylation of the sixth CTCF-binding
site in the DMR of IGF2/H19 is linked to LOI and the common IGF2-H19 enhancer
competition model for IGF2 imprinting does not apply to human CRC.

PMID: 22427002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Nat Methods. 2012 Mar 18;9(5):473-6. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.1937.

Unsupervised pattern discovery in human chromatin structure through genomic
segmentation.

Hoffman MM(1), Buske OJ, Wang J, Weng Z, Bilmes JA, Noble WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
USA.

We trained Segway, a dynamic Bayesian network method, simultaneously on chromatin
data from multiple experiments, including positions of histone modifications,
transcription-factor binding and open chromatin, all derived from a human chronic
myeloid leukemia cell line. In an unsupervised fashion, we identified patterns
associated with transcription start sites, gene ends, enhancers, transcriptional 
regulator CTCF-binding regions and repressed regions. Software and genome browser
tracks are at http://noble.gs.washington.edu/proj/segway/.

PMCID: PMC3340533
PMID: 22426492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Exp Cell Res. 2012 May 1;318(8):887-95. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.03.001. Epub
2012 Mar 8.

CTCF mediates effect of insulin on glucagon expression.

Tsui S(1), Gao J, Wang C, Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine University of
California Los Angeles, Torrance, CA 90502, USA.

Pancreatic islet a-cell development and glucagon production are mainly regulated 
by Pax6 in the homeobox gene families. However, the molecular mechanism
fine-tuning the regulation of these events in a-cell still remains unclear. In
ocular cells, Pax6 transcription is regulated by CTCF through its binding to
specific sites in Pax6 promoter. In this study, CTCF-mediated regulations of
islet a-cell development and glucagon production were investigated in both CTCF
transgenic mice and a-TC-1-6 cells. Over-expression of CTCF in transgenic mice
affected development of pancreatic islets by significantly suppressing a-cell
population in both embryonic and adult pancreases. The effect of CTCF on Pax6
gene expression and subsequently, on pro-glucagon production was however,
examined in pancreatic islet a-cells. Over-expression and knock-down of CTCF
directly affected Pax6 expression. More importantly, the CTCF binding sites
upstream from Pax6 p0 promoter were required for regulating p0 promoter activity 
in islet a-cells. Stimulation of a-cells with insulin resulted in a significant
increase in CTCF expression and a decrease in Pax6 expression, and consequently
suppressed pro-glucagon expression. In contrast, these insulin-induced effects
were blocked by knockdown of CTCF mRNA with specific siRNA in a-cells.
Altogether, our results demonstrated for the first time that CTCF functions as a 
switch-like molecule between the insulin signaling and the regulations of Pax6
and glucagon expression in pancreatic islet a-cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3875169
PMID: 22426149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Curr Opin Immunol. 2012 Apr;24(2):153-9. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2012.01.003. Epub
2012 Mar 15.

The role of CTCF in regulating V(D)J recombination.

Chaumeil J(1), Skok JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, 550 First
Avenue, MSB 599, New York, NY 10016, USA.

V(D)J recombination in B and T cells is required for the generation of receptors 
with a broad spectrum of specificity to foreign antigen. A total number of three 
immunoglobulin (Ig) and four T cell receptor (Tcr) loci can be targeted by the
recombinase enzyme (RAG1/2) in a defined series of recombination events, which
drive the progression of B and T cell development. This process is regulated at
multiple levels to ensure lineage specific, ordered rearrangement and allelic
exclusion. One key component of this is modulation of chromatin looping and locus
contraction, which is important in bringing widely separated gene segments into
close contact with each other to enable synapse formation for lineage and stage
specific V gene rearrangement [2,3,4(),5,6()]. Recent studies provide new
insight into looping and its role in these processes. In this review we focus on 
the contribution of the 11 zinc finger nuclear protein, CTCF, in mediating loop
formation and conformational changes that are important for the regulation of Ig 
and Tcr rearrangement.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3444155
PMID: 22424610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Aug;113(8):2607-21. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24136.

Perinuclear positioning of the inactive human cystic fibrosis gene depends on
CTCF, A-type lamins and an active histone deacetylase.

Muck JS(1), Kandasamy K, Englmann A, Günther M, Zink D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (IBN), Department of Cell and
Tissue Engineering, 31 Biopolis Way, The Nanos, Singapore 138669.

The nuclear positioning of mammalian genes often correlates with their functional
state. For instance, the human cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
regulator (CFTR) gene associates with the nuclear periphery in its inactive
state, but occupies interior positions when active. It is not understood how
nuclear gene positioning is determined. Here, we investigated trichostatin A
(TSA)-induced repositioning of CFTR in order to address molecular mechanisms
controlling gene positioning. Treatment with the histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor TSA induced increased histone acetylation and CFTR repositioning
towards the interior within 20 <U+2009>min. When CFTR localized in the nuclear interior 
(either after TSA treatment or when the gene was active) consistent histone H3
hyperacetylation was observed at a CTCF site close to the CFTR promoter.
Knockdown experiments revealed that CTCF was essential for perinuclear CFTR
positioning and both, CTCF knockdown as well as TSA treatment had similar and
CFTR-specific effects on radial positioning. Furthermore, knockdown experiments
revealed that also A-type lamins were required for the perinuclear positioning of
CFTR. Together, the results showed that CTCF, A-type lamins and an active HDAC
were essential for perinuclear positioning of CFTR and these components acted on 
a CTCF site adjacent to the CFTR promoter. The results are consistent with the
idea that CTCF bound close to the CFTR promoter, A-type lamins and an active HDAC
form a complex at the nuclear periphery, which becomes disrupted upon inhibition 
of the HDAC, leading to the observed release of CFTR.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22422629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. EMBO J. 2012 May 2;31(9):2090-102. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.60. Epub 2012 Mar 13.

A unique role of cohesin-SA1 in gene regulation and development.

Remeseiro S(1), Cuadrado A, Gómez-López G, Pisano DG, Losada A.

Author information: 
(1)Chromosome Dynamics Group, Molecular Oncology Programme, Spanish National
Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2012 May 2;31(9):2061-3.

Vertebrates have two cohesin complexes that consist of Smc1, Smc3, Rad21/Scc1 and
either SA1 or SA2, but their functional specificity is unclear. Mouse embryos
lacking SA1 show developmental delay and die before birth. Comparison of the
genome-wide distribution of cohesin in wild-type and SA1-null cells reveals that 
SA1 is largely responsible for cohesin accumulation at promoters and at sites
bound by the insulator protein CTCF. As a consequence, ablation of SA1 alters
transcription of genes involved in biological processes related to Cornelia de
Lange syndrome (CdLS), a genetic disorder linked to dysfunction of cohesin. We
show that the presence of cohesin-SA1 at the promoter of myc and of protocadherin
genes positively regulates their expression, a task that cannot be assumed by
cohesin-SA2. Lack of SA1 also alters cohesin-binding pattern along some gene
clusters and leads to dysregulation of genes within. We hypothesize that impaired
cohesin-SA1 function in gene expression underlies the molecular aetiology of
CdLS.

PMCID: PMC3343463
PMID: 22415368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Epigenetics. 2012 Apr;7(4):361-9. doi: 10.4161/epi.19487. Epub 2012 Apr 1.

CTCF-binding sites within the H19 ICR differentially regulate local chromatin
structures and cis-acting functions.

Guibert S(1), Zhao Z, Sjölinder M, Göndör A, Fernandez A, Pant V, Ohlsson R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Genetics, Evolution Biology Centre, Uppsala
University, Uppsala, Sweden. sguibert@unistra.fr

It is generally assumed that CTCF-binding sites are synonymous with the
demarcation of expression domains by promoting the formation of chromatin loops. 
We have proposed earlier, however, that such features may be context-dependent.
In support of this notion, we show here that chromatin loop structures, impinging
on CTCF-binding sites 1/2 and 3/4 at the 5' and 3'-ends, respectively, within the
maternal allele of the H19 imprinting control region (ICR), differ significantly.
Although abrogation of CTCF binding to the maternal H19 ICR allele results in
loss of chromatin loops in the 3'-region, there is a dramatic gain of long-range 
chromatin loops impinging on the 5'-region. As the degree of occupancy of its
four CTCF-binding sites discriminates between the chromatin insulator and
replication timing functions, we submit that the CTCF-binding sites within the
H19 ICR are functionally diverse and organize context-dependent higher order
chromatin conformations.

PMID: 22415163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Transcription. 2012 Mar-Apr;3(2):73-7. doi: 10.4161/trns.19634. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

CTCF-dependent chromatin insulator as a built-in attenuator of angiogenesis.

Lu J(1), Tang M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA. jrlu@ufl.edu

VEGF is a pivotal pro-angiogenic growth factor and its dosage decisively impacts 
vascularization. We recently identified a CTCF-dependent chromatin insulator that
critically restrains the transcriptional induction of VEGF and angiogenesis. We
postulate that CTCF may exert enhancer blocking by mediating chromatin looping
and/or RNA polymerase pausing at the VEGF locus.

PMCID: PMC3337828
PMID: 22414750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e31484. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031484. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

Mapping and functional characterisation of a CTCF-dependent insulator element at 
the 3' border of the murine Scl transcriptional domain.

Follows GA(1), Ferreira R, Janes ME, Spensberger D, Cambuli F, Chaney AF, Kinston
SJ, Landry JR, Green AR, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. gf246@cam.ac.uk

The Scl gene encodes a transcription factor essential for haematopoietic
development. Scl transcription is regulated by a panel of cis-elements spread
over 55 kb with the most distal 3' element being located downstream of the
neighbouring gene Map17, which is co-regulated with Scl in haematopoietic cells. 
The Scl/Map17 domain is flanked upstream by the ubiquitously expressed Sil gene
and downstream by a cluster of Cyp genes active in liver, but the mechanisms
responsible for delineating the domain boundaries remain unclear. Here we report 
identification of a DNaseI hypersensitive site at the 3' end of the Scl/Map17
domain and 45 kb downstream of the Scl transcription start site. This element is 
located at the boundary of active and inactive chromatin, does not function as a 
classical tissue-specific enhancer, binds CTCF and is both necessary and
sufficient for insulator function in haematopoietic cells in vitro. Moreover, in 
a transgenic reporter assay, tissue-specific expression of the Scl promoter in
brain was increased by incorporation of 350 bp flanking fragments from the +45
element. Our data suggests that the +45 region functions as a boundary element
that separates the Scl/Map17 and Cyp transcriptional domains, and raise the
possibility that this element may be useful for improving tissue-specific
expression of transgenic constructs.

PMCID: PMC3291548
PMID: 22396734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Epigenetics. 2012 Feb;7(2):155-63. doi: 10.4161/epi.7.2.18910.

Epigenetic and genetic variation at the IGF2/H19 imprinting control region on
11p15.5 is associated with cerebellum weight.

Pidsley R(1), Dempster E, Troakes C, Al-Sarraj S, Mill J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, London, UK.

IGF2 is a paternally expressed imprinted gene with an important role in
development and brain function. Allele-specific expression of IGF2 is regulated
by DNA methylation at three differentially methylated regions (DMRs) spanning the
IGF2/H19 domain on human 11p15.5. We have comprehensively assessed DNA
methylation and genotype across the three DMRs and the H19 promoter using tissue 
from a unique collection of well-characterized and neuropathologically-dissected 
post-mortem human cerebellum samples (n = 106) and frontal cortex samples (n =
51). We show that DNA methylation, particularly in the vicinity of a key
CTCF-binding site (CTCF3) in the imprinting control region (ICR) upstream of H19,
is strongly correlated with cerebellum weight. DNA methylation at CTCF3 uniquely 
explains ~25% of the variance in cerebellum weight. In addition, we report that
genetic variation in this ICR is strongly associated with cerebellum weight in a 
parental-origin specific manner, with maternally-inherited alleles associated
with a 16% increase in cerebellum weight compared with paternally-inherited
alleles. Given the link between structural brain abnormalities and
neuropsychiatric disease, an understanding of the epigenetic and parent-of-origin
specific genetic factors associated with brain morphology provides important
clues about the etiology of disorders such as schizophrenia and autism.

PMCID: PMC3335909
PMID: 22395465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Front Genet. 2012 Feb 22;3:10. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2012.00010. eCollection 2012.

The effect of preconception paternal alcohol exposure on epigenetic remodeling of
the h19 and rasgrf1 imprinting control regions in mouse offspring.

Knezovich JG(1), Ramsay M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Division of Human Genetics, University of the
Witwatersrand Johannesburg, South Africa.

Imprinted loci play a critical role in fetal development. Their expression is
often regulated by CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) protein binding at imprinting
control regions (ICRs). Prenatal alcohol exposure has been shown to reduce global
DNA methylation in the developing mouse fetus. This study explored the effect of 
preconception paternal alcohol exposure on DNA methylation at two paternally
methylated ICRs (H19 and Rasgrf1) in the sperm of exposed males and somatic DNA
of sired offspring. Significant reductions at the H19 CTCF 1 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0027) and
CTCF 2 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0009) binding sites were observed in the offspring of
ethanol-treated sires, which was significantly correlated with reduced weight at 
postnatal days 35-42 (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). As birth weight was unaffected and growth was
only delayed during the postnatal weaning period, with subsequent re-convergence,
we hypothesize that this may be the result of a mental deficit causing delayed
establishment of independent feeding following weaning and would explain why this
effect is transient. No difference in DNA methylation was observed in the sperm
of alcohol-exposed males, indicating that the transmission of the epigenetic
signal at conception is not due to altered methylation, but may be the result of 
an RNA-mediated mechanism or altered chromatin remodeling.

PMCID: PMC3284254
PMID: 22371710  [PubMed]


27. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jul;40(12):5262-70. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks158. Epub 2012
Feb 25.

CTCF binds to sites in the major histocompatibility complex that are rapidly
reconfigured in response to interferon-gamma.

Ottaviani D(1), Lever E, Mao S, Christova R, Ogunkolade BW, Jones TA, Szary J,
Aarum J, Mumin MA, Pieri CA, Krawetz SA, Sheer D.

Author information: 
(1)Blizard Institute, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Queen Mary University of London, Newark St, London E1 2AT, UK.

Activation of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) by interferon-gamma
(IFN-<U+03B3>) is a fundamental step in the adaptive immune response to pathogens. Here,
we show that reorganization of chromatin loop domains in the MHC is evident
within the first 30 min of IFN-<U+03B3> treatment of fibroblasts, and that further
dynamic alterations occur up to 6 h. These very rapid changes occur at genomic
sites which are occupied by CTCF and are close to IFN-<U+03B3>-inducible MHC genes.
Early responses to IFN-<U+03B3> are thus initiated independently of CIITA, the master
regulator of MHC class II genes and prepare the MHC for subsequent induction of
transcription.

PMCID: PMC3384298
PMID: 22367884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Apr;32(8):1529-41. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06478-11. Epub 2012 Feb
21.

Higher-order chromatin regulation and differential gene expression in the human
tumor necrosis factor/lymphotoxin locus in hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Watanabe T(1), Ishihara K, Hirosue A, Watanabe S, Hino S, Ojima H, Kanai Y,
Sasaki Y, Nakao M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, and the Global Center of Excellence Cell Fate Regulation Research and
EducationUnit,Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

The three-dimensional context of endogenous chromosomal regions may contribute to
the regulation of gene clusters by influencing interactions between
transcriptional regulatory elements. In this study, we investigated the effects
of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) signaling on spatiotemporal enhancer-promoter
interactions in the human tumor necrosis factor (TNF)/lymphotoxin (LT) gene
locus, mediated by CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)-dependent chromatin insulators.
The cytokine genes LTa, TNF, and LTß are differentially regulated by NF-<U+03BA>B
signaling in inflammatory and oncogenic responses. We identified at least four
CTCF-enriched sites with enhancer-blocking activities and a TNF-responsive TE2
enhancer in the TNF/LT locus. One of the CTCF-enriched sites is located between
the early-inducible LTa/TNF promoters and the late-inducible LTß promoter.
Depletion of CTCF reduced TNF expression and accelerated LTß induction. After TNF
stimulation, via intrachromosomal dynamics, these insulators mediated
interactions between the enhancer and the LTa/TNF promoters, followed by
interaction with the LTß promoter. These results suggest that insulators mediate 
the spatiotemporal control of enhancer-promoter associations in the TNF/LT gene
cluster.

PMCID: PMC3318582
PMID: 22354988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 6;287(15):12469-79. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.286641. Epub 2012
Feb 21.

De-SUMOylation of CCCTC binding factor (CTCF) in hypoxic stress-induced human
corneal epithelial cells.

Wang J(1), Wang Y, Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, Torrance, California 90502, USA.

Epigenetic factor CCCTC binding factor (CTCF) plays important roles in the
genetic control of cell fate. Previous studies found that CTCF is positively and 
negatively regulated at the transcriptional level by epidermal growth factor
(EGF) and ultraviolet (UV) stimulation, respectively. However, it is unknown
whether other stresses modify the CTCF protein. Here, we report that regulation
of CTCF by de-SUMOylation is dependent upon hypoxic and oxidative stresses. We
found that stimulation of human corneal epithelial cells with hypoxic stress
suppressed a high molecular mass form of CTCF (150 kDa), but not a lower
molecular weight form of CTCF (130 kDa). Further investigation revealed that the 
hypoxic stress-suppressed 150-kDa CTCF was a small ubiquitin-related modifier
(SUMO)ylated form of the protein. Hypoxic stress-induced de-SUMOylation of human 
CTCF was associated with lysine 74 and 689 residues, but not to the
phosphorylation of CTCF. Overexpression of SENP1 induced de-SUMOylation of CTCF. 
However, knockdown of SENP1 could not rescue hypoxic stress-induced CTCF
de-SUMOylation. Overexpression of SUMO1 and SUMO2 increased SUMOylation of CTCF
and partially blocked hypoxic stress-induced CTCF de-SUMOylation, suggesting that
free cellular SUMO proteins play roles in regulating hypoxia-induced CTCF
de-SUMOylation. In addition, hypoxic stress significantly inhibited PAX6 mRNA and
protein expressions by suppression of PAX6-P0 promoter activity. The result was
further supported by data showing that knockdown of CTCF significantly enhanced
expression of PAX6 and abolished hypoxia-induced suppression of PAX6. Thus, we
conclude that hypoxic stress induces de-SUMOylation of CTCF to functionally
regulate CTCF activity.

PMCID: PMC3320996
PMID: 22354964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Development. 2012 Mar;139(6):1045-57. doi: 10.1242/dev.065268.

CTCF: insights into insulator function during development.

Herold M(1), Bartkuhn M, Renkawitz R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Genetik, Justus-Liebig-Universität Giessen, Heinrich-Buff-Ring
58-62, 35392 Giessen, Germany.

The genome of higher eukaryotes exhibits a patchwork of inactive and active
genes. The nuclear protein CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) when bound to insulator
sequences can prevent undesirable crosstalk between active and inactive genomic
regions, and it can also shield particular genes from enhancer function, a role
that has many applications in development. Exciting recent work has demonstrated 
roles for CTCF in, for example, embryonic, neuronal and haematopoietic
development. Here, we discuss the underlying mechanisms of developmentally
regulated CTCF-dependent transcription in relation to model genes, and highlight 
genome-wide results indicating that CTCF might play a master role in regulating
both activating and repressive transcription events at sites throughout the
genome.

PMID: 22354838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31416. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031416. Epub 2012 Feb 8.

CTCF mediates the cell-type specific spatial organization of the Kcnq5 locus and 
the local gene regulation.

Ren L(1), Wang Y, Shi M, Wang X, Yang Z, Zhao Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioreactor Engineering, East China University of
Science and Technology, Shanghai, China.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(3). doi:10.1371/annotation/c6d76c92-dc6c-4102-86c0-03b996376778.

Chromatin loops play important roles in the dynamic spatial organization of genes
in the nucleus. Growing evidence has revealed that the multivalent functional
zinc finger protein CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a master regulator of genome
spatial organization, and mediates the ubiquitous chromatin loops within the
genome. Using circular chromosome conformation capture (4C) methodology, we
discovered that CTCF may be a master organizer in mediating the spatial
organization of the kcnq5 gene locus. We characterized the cell-type specific
spatial organization of the kcnq5 gene locus mediated by CTCF in detail using
chromosome conformation capture (3C) and 3C-derived techniques. Cohesion also
participated in mediating the organization of this locus. RNAi-mediated knockdown
of CTCF sharply diminished the interaction frequencies between the chromatin
loops of the kcnq5 gene locus and down-regulated local gene expression.
Functional analysis showed that the interacting chromatin loops of the kcnq5 gene
locus can repress the gene expression in a luciferase reporter assay. These
interacting chromatin fragments were a series of repressing elements whose
contacts were mediated by CTCF. Therefore, these findings suggested that the
dynamical spatial organization of the kcnq5 locus regulates local gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC3275579
PMID: 22347474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Immunol. 2012 Mar 15;188(6):2556-66. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102763. Epub 2012
Feb 17.

Germline deletion of Igh 3' regulatory region elements hs 5, 6, 7 (hs5-7) affects
B cell-specific regulation, rearrangement, and insulation of the Igh locus.

Volpi SA(1), Verma-Gaur J, Hassan R, Ju Z, Roa S, Chatterjee S, Werling U, Hou H 
Jr, Will B, Steidl U, Scharff M, Edelman W, Feeney AJ, Birshtein BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
10461, USA.

Regulatory elements located within an ~28-kb region 3' of the Igh gene cluster
(3' regulatory region) are required for class switch recombination and for high
levels of IgH expression in plasma cells. We previously defined novel DNase I
hypersensitive sites (hs) 5, 6, 7 immediately downstream of this region. The hs
5-7 region (hs5-7) contains a high density of binding sites for CCCTC-binding
factor (CTCF), a zinc finger protein associated with mammalian insulator
activity, and is an anchor for interactions with CTCF sites flanking the D(H)
region. To test the function of hs5-7, we generated mice with an 8-kb deletion
encompassing all three hs elements. B cells from hs5-7 knockout (KO) (hs5-7KO)
mice showed a modest increase in expression of the nearest downstream gene. In
addition, Igh alleles in hs5-7KO mice were in a less contracted configuration
compared with wild-type Igh alleles and showed a 2-fold increase in the usage of 
proximal V(H)7183 gene families. Hs5-7KO mice were essentially indistinguishable 
from wild-type mice in B cell development, allelic regulation, class switch
recombination, and chromosomal looping. We conclude that hs5-7, a high-density
CTCF-binding region at the 3' end of the Igh locus, impacts usage of V(H) regions
as far as 500 kb away.

PMCID: PMC3430471
PMID: 22345664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Virol. 2012 May;86(9):5278-87. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06883-11. Epub 2012 Feb 15.

Induction of the cellular microRNA, Hs_154, by West Nile virus contributes to
virus-mediated apoptosis through repression of antiapoptotic factors.

Smith JL(1), Grey FE, Uhrlaub JL, Nikolich-Zugich J, Hirsch AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute, Oregon Health and Science University,
Beaverton, Oregon, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of noncoding small RNAs that regulate multiple
cellular processes, as well as the replication and pathogenesis of many DNA
viruses and some RNA viruses. Examination of cellular miRNA profiles in West Nile
virus (WNV)-infected HEK293 and SK-N-MC cells revealed increased expression of
multiple miRNA species. One of these miRNAs, Hs_154, was significantly induced
not only in WNV-infected neuronal cells in culture but also in the central
nervous system tissues of infected mice and, upon transfection, caused a
significant reduction in viral replication. Analysis of mRNA transcripts enriched
through immunoprecipitation of the RNA-induced silencing complex identified
several transcripts that contain seed sequence matches to Hs_154 in their 3'
untranslated regions (UTRs). Two of these targets, the CCCTC-binding factor
(CTCF) and the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-coamplified and
overexpressed protein (ECOP/VOPP1) proteins display reduced expression in
WNV-infected cells, and the 3' UTRs of these transcripts were sufficient to cause
downregulation of expression in infected cells or in cells transfected with
Hs_154, findings consistent with miRNA targeting of these transcripts. CTCF and
ECOP have been shown to be associated with cell survival, implicating
miRNA-directed repression of these targets in WNV-induced cell death. Consistent 
with this hypothesis, expression of these genes in WNV-infected cells results in 
a reduction in the number of cells undergoing apoptosis. These observations
suggest that induction of Hs_154 expression after WNV infection modulates the
apoptotic response to WNV and that cellular miRNA expression can be quickly
altered during WNV infection to control aspects of the host response.

PMCID: PMC3347395
PMID: 22345437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jun;40(11):4754-64. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks139. Epub 2012
Feb 16.

Integrated analysis identifies a class of androgen-responsive genes regulated by 
short combinatorial long-range mechanism facilitated by CTCF.

Taslim C(1), Chen Z, Huang K, Huang TH, Wang Q, Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Recently, much attention has been given to elucidate how long-range gene
regulation comes into play and how histone modifications and distal transcription
factor binding contribute toward this mechanism. Androgen receptor (AR), a key
regulator of prostate cancer, has been shown to regulate its target genes via
distal enhancers, leading to the hypothesis of global long-range gene regulation.
However, despite numerous flows of newly generated data, the precise mechanism
with respect to AR-mediated long-range gene regulation is still largely unknown. 
In this study, we carried out an integrated analysis combining several types of
high-throughput data, including genome-wide distribution data of H3K4
di-methylation (H3K4me2), CCCTC binding factor (CTCF), AR and FoxA1 cistrome data
as well as androgen-regulated gene expression data. We found that a subset of
androgen-responsive genes was significantly enriched near AR/H3K4me2 overlapping 
regions and FoxA1 binding sites within the same CTCF block. Importantly, genes in
this class were enriched in cancer-related pathways and were downregulated in
clinical metastatic versus localized prostate cancer. Our results suggest a
relatively short combinatorial long-range regulation mechanism facilitated by
CTCF blocking. Under such a mechanism, H3K4me2, AR and FoxA1 within the same CTCF
block combinatorially regulate a subset of distally located androgen-responsive
genes involved in prostate carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3367180
PMID: 22344698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Aging Cell. 2012 Jun;11(3):553-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2012.00809.x. Epub
2012 Mar 12.

Quantitative assessment of higher-order chromatin structure of the INK4/ARF locus
in human senescent cells.

Hirosue A(1), Ishihara K, Tokunaga K, Watanabe T, Saitoh N, Nakamoto M, Chandra
T, Narita M, Shinohara M, Nakao M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Global Center of Excellence Cell Fate Regulation Research and Education
Unit, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

Somatic cells can be reset to oncogene-induced senescent (OIS) cells or induced
pluripotent stem (iPS) cells by expressing specified factors. The INK4/ARF locus 
encodes p15(INK4b) , ARF, and p16(INK4a) genes in human chromosome 9p21, the
products of which are known as common key reprogramming regulators. Compared with
growing fibroblasts, the CCCTC-binding factor CTCF is remarkably up-regulated in 
iPS cells with silencing of the three genes in the locus and is reversely
down-regulated in OIS cells with high expression of p15(INK4b) and p16(INK4a)
genes. There are at least three CTCF-enriched sites in the INK4/ARF locus, which 
possess chromatin loop-forming activities. These CTCF-enriched sites and the
p16(INK4a) promoter associate to form compact chromatin loops in growing
fibroblasts, while CTCF depletion disrupts the loop structure. Interestingly, the
loose chromatin structure is found in OIS cells. In addition, the INK4/ARF locus 
has an intermediate type of chromatin compaction in iPS cells. These results
suggest that senescent cells have distinct higher-order chromatin signature in
the INK4/ARF locus.

© 2012 The Authors. Aging Cell © 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society
of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMID: 22340434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Epigenomics. 2012 Feb;4(1):67-80. doi: 10.2217/epi.11.112.

Chromatin insulator elements: establishing barriers to set heterochromatin
boundaries.

Barkess G(1), West AG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Sciences, College of Medical, Veterinary & Life Sciences, 
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland, UK.

Epigenomic profiling has revealed that substantial portions of genomes in higher 
eukaryotes are organized into extensive domains of transcriptionally repressive
chromatin. The boundaries of repressive chromatin domains can be fixed by DNA
elements known as barrier insulators, to both shield neighboring gene expression 
and to maintain the integrity of chromosomal silencing. Here, we examine the
current progress in identifying vertebrate barrier elements and their binding
factors. We overview the design of the reporter assays used to define
enhancer-blocking and barrier insulators. We look at the mechanisms vertebrate
barrier proteins, such as USF1 and VEZF1, employ to counteract Polycomb- and
heterochromatin-associated repression. We also undertake a critical analysis of
whether CTCF could also act as a barrier protein. There is good evidence that
barrier elements in vertebrates can form repressive chromatin domain boundaries. 
Future studies will determine whether barriers are frequently used to define
repressive domain boundaries in vertebrates.

PMID: 22332659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Jul;1819(7):644-51. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.01.016.
Epub 2012 Feb 2.

Chromatin domains, insulators, and the regulation of gene expression.

Ghirlando R(1), Giles K, Gowher H, Xiao T, Xu Z, Yao H, Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Key Diseases, National Insitute of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 
20892-0540, USA.

The DNA sequence elements called insulators have two basic kinds of properties.
Barrier elements block the propagation of heterochromatic structures into
adjacent euchromatin. Enhancer blocking elements interfere with interaction
between an enhancer and promoter when placed between them. We have dissected a
compound insulator element found at the 5' end of the chicken ß-globin locus,
which possesses both activities. Barrier insulation is mediated by two kinds of
DNA binding proteins: USF1/USF2, a heterodimer which recruits multiple enzyme
complexes capable of marking histone on adjacent nucleosomes with 'activating'
marks, and Vezf1, which protects against DNA methylation. We have found that the 
heterochromatic region upstream of the insulator element is maintained in its
silent state by a dicer-dependent mechanism, suggesting a mechanism for Vezf1
function in the insulator. Enhancer blocking function in the ß-globin insulator
element is conferred by a binding site for CTCF. Consistent with this property,
CTCF binding was found some years ago to be essential for imprinted expression at
the Igf2/H19 locus. Work in many laboratories has since demonstrated that CTCF
helps stabilize long-range interactions in the nucleus. We have recently shown
that in the case of the human insulin locus such an interaction, over a distance 
of ~300kb, can result in stimulation of a target gene which itself is important
for insulin secretion. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled:
Chromatin in time and space.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3484685
PMID: 22326678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mol Biol Evol. 2012 Jul;29(7):1757-67. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mss022. Epub 2012 Jan 
27.

Evolutionary conservation of histone modifications in mammals.

Woo YH(1), Li WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolution, The University of Chicago, USA.

Histone modification is an important mechanism of gene regulation in eukaryotes. 
Why many histone modifications can be stably maintained in the midst of genetic
and environmental changes is a fundamental question in evolutionary biology. We
obtained genome-wide profiles of three histone marks, H3 lysine 4 tri-methylation
(H3K4me3), H3 lysine 4 mono-methylation (H3K4me1), and H3 lysine 27 acetylation
(H3K27ac), for several cell types from human and mouse. We identified histone
modifications that were stable among different cell types in human and histone
modifications that were evolutionarily conserved between mouse and human in the
same cell type. We found that histone modifications that were stable among cell
types were also likely to be conserved between species. This trend was
consistently observed in promoter, intronic, and intergenic regions for all of
the histone marks tested. Importantly, the trend was observed regardless of the
expression breadth of the nearby gene, indicating that slow evolution of
housekeeping genes was not the major reason for the correlation. These regions
showed distinct genetic and epigenetic properties, such as clustered
transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs), high GC content, and CTCF binding at 
flanking sides. Based on our observations, we proposed that TFBS clustering in or
near a histone modification plays a significant role in stabilizing and
conserving the histone modification because TFBS clustering promotes TFBS
conservation, which in turn promotes histone modification conservation. In
summary, the results of this study support the view that in mammalian genomes a
common mechanism maintains histone modifications against both genetic and
environmental (cellular) changes.

PMCID: PMC3375473
PMID: 22319170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Cell Res. 2012 Mar;22(3):450-2. doi: 10.1038/cr.2012.22. Epub 2012 Feb 7.

CTCF: from insulators to alternative splicing regulation.

Kornblihtt AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Fisiología y Biología Molecular, Departamento de Fisiología,
Biología Molecular y Celular, IFIBYNE-CONICET, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y
Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
ark@fbmc.fcen.uba.ar

PMCID: PMC3292291
PMID: 22310241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2012;136(2):89-96. doi: 10.1159/000335752. Epub 2012 Jan
25.

Changes of the nucleolus architecture in absence of the nuclear factor CTCF.

Hernández-Hernández A(1), Soto-Reyes E, Ortiz R, Arriaga-Canon C,
Echeverría-Martinez OM, Vázquez-Nin GH, Recillas-Targa F.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Departamento de Genética Molecular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, México.

CTCF is a multifunctional nuclear factor involved in many cellular processes like
gene regulation, chromatin insulation and genomic organization. Recently, CTCF
has been shown to be involved in the transcriptional regulation of ribosomal
genes and nucleolar organization in Drosophila cells and different murine cell
types, including embryonic stem cells. Moreover, it has been suggested that CTCF 
could be associated to the nucleolus of human erythroleukemic K562 cells. In the 
present work, we took advantage of efficient small hairpin RNA interference
against human CTCF to analyze nucleolar organization in HeLa cells. We have found
that key components of the nucleolar architecture are altered. As a consequence
of such alterations, an upregulation of ribosomal gene transcription was
observed. We propose that CTCF contributes to the structural organization of the 
nucleolus and, through epigenetic mechanisms, to the regulation of the ribosomal 
gene expression.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22286186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. BMC Cancer. 2012 Jan 25;12:40. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-40.

Disruption of CTCF at the miR-125b1 locus in gynecological cancers.

Soto-Reyes E(1), González-Barrios R, Cisneros-Soberanis F, Herrera-Goepfert R,
Pérez V, Cantú D, Prada D, Castro C, Recillas-Targa F, Herrera LA.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Investigación Biomédica en Cáncer, Instituto Nacional de
Cancerología (INCan), Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), México, DF,
México.

BACKGROUND: In cancer cells, transcriptional gene silencing has been associated
with genetic and epigenetic defects. The disruption of DNA methylation patterns
and covalent histone marks has been associated with cancer development. Until
recently, microRNA (miRNA) gene silencing was not well understood. In particular,
miR-125b1 has been suggested to be an miRNA with tumor suppressor activity, and
it has been shown to be deregulated in various human cancers. In the present
study, we evaluated the DNA methylation at the CpG island proximal to the
transcription start site of miR-125b1 in cancer cell lines as well as in normal
tissues and gynecological tumor samples. In addition, we analyzed the association
of CTCF and covalent histone modifications at the miR-125b1 locus.
METHODS: To assess the DNA methylation status of the miR-125b1, genomic DNA was
transformed with sodium bisulfite, and then PCR-amplified with modified primers
and sequenced. The miR-125b1 gene expression was analyzed by qRT-PCR using U6 as 
a control for constitutive gene expression. CTCF repressive histone marks
abundance was evaluated by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays.
RESULTS: The disruption of CTCF in breast cancer cells correlated with the
incorporation of repressive histone marks such H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 as well as
with aberrant DNA methylation patterns. To determine the effect of DNA
methylation at the CpG island of miR-125b1 on the expression of this gene, we
performed a qRT-PCR assay. We observed a significant reduction on the expression 
of miR-125b1 in cancer cells in comparison with controls, suggesting that DNA
methylation at the CpG island might reduce miR-125b1 expression. These effects
were observed in other gynecological cancers, including ovarian and cervical
tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: A reduction of miR-125b1 expression in cancers, correlated with
methylation, repressive histone marks and loss of CTCF binding at the promoter
region.

PMCID: PMC3297514
PMID: 22277129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Genomics. 2012 Apr;99(4):209-19. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2012.01.002. Epub 2012 Jan 
15.

Characterization of DNA methylation and its association with other biological
systems in lymphoblastoid cell lines.

Zhang Z(1), Liu J, Kaur M, Krantz ID.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biomedical Informatics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. zhangz@email.chop.edu

Lymphoblastoid cell line (LCL) is a common tool to study genetic disorders.
However, it has not been fully characterized to what degree LCLs preserve the in 
vivo status of non-genetic biological systems, such as DNA methylation and gene
transcription. We previously reported that DNA methylation in LCLs is highly
variable in a data set of ~27,000 CpG dinucleotide sites around transcription
start site (TSS) and 63 human subjects including healthy controls and probands of
genetic disorders. Disease-causing mutations are linked to differential
methylation at some CpG sites, but account for a small proportion of the total
variance. In this study, we repeated the experiments to ensure that the high
variance is not due to technical error and scrutinized the characteristics of DNA
methylation and its association with other biological systems. Using sequence
information and ChIP-seq data, we conclude that local CpG density and histone
modifications not only correlate to baseline methylation level, but also affect
the direction of methylation change in LCLs. Integrative analysis of gene
transcription and DNA methylation data of the same subjects shows that medium or 
high methylation around TSS blocks the transcription while low methylation is a
necessary, but not sufficient condition of downstream gene transcription. We
utilized epigenetic information around TSS to predict active gene transcription
via logistic regression models. The multivariate model using DNA methylation,
eight histone modifications, and two regulatory protein complexes (CTCF and
cohesin) as predictors has better performance (accuracy=95.1%) than any
univariate models of single predictors. Linear regression analysis further shows 
that the transcriptional levels predicted by epigenetic markers have significant 
correlation to microarray measurements (p=2.2e-10). This study provides new
insights into the epigenetic systems of LCLs and suggests that more specifically 
designed experiments are needed to improve our understanding on this topic.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22269447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012 Feb 23;53(2):946-51. doi: 10.1167/iovs.11-8747.
Print 2012 Feb.

Role of CTCF in EGF-induced migration of immortalized human corneal epithelial
cells.

Wang L(1), Deng SX, Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Jules Stein Eye Institute, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, CA 90502, USA.

PURPOSE: EGF-induced activation of the epigenetic CCCTC binding factor (CTCF)
plays an important role in corneal epithelial cell proliferation by suppressing
the Pax6 gene. The present study focused on further understanding the role of
CTCF in mediating EGF-induced migration of immortalized human corneal epithelial 
cells.
METHODS: CTCF activities in human corneal epithelial cells immortalized by
telomerase (HTCE cells) and SV-40 (HCE cells) transformation were suppressed and 
enhanced by CTCF mRNA knockdown and by overexpressing CTCF cDNA, respectively.
EGF-induced cell migration was evaluated by linear scratch wound healing, a cell 
migration assay, and live cell motility GFP-tracking with a fluorescence
microscope. Immunochemical analysis was performed for detecting focal adhesion
changes in EGF-induced and CTCF activity-altered cells.
RESULTS: EGF-induced wound closure and cell migration rates of human corneal
epithelial cells were significantly suppressed and enhanced by CTCF mRNA
knockdown and by overexpression of CTCF, respectively. CTCF mRNA knockdown also
markedly suppressed cell motility, determined by using a live-cell-tracking
system in GFP-tag-expressed HTCE cells. Finally, alterations of EGF-stimulated
focal adhesion were observed in CTCF knockdown HTCE cells by immunostaining of
F-actin and vinculin in cytoskeleton reorganization.
CONCLUSIONS: CTCF, an epigenetic regulator and transcription factor, involves
EGF-induced increases in cell motility and migration. CTCF plays an essential
role in growth factor-regulated human corneal epithelial cell wound healing.

PMCID: PMC3317431
PMID: 22247490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Cell. 2012 Jan 20;148(1-2):335-48. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.11.058. Epub 2012 Jan
12.

Waves of retrotransposon expansion remodel genome organization and CTCF binding
in multiple mammalian lineages.

Schmidt D(1), Schwalie PC, Wilson MD, Ballester B, Gonçalves A, Kutter C, Brown
GD, Marshall A, Flicek P, Odom DT.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Cambridge Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson
Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK.

Erratum in
    Cell. 2012 Feb 17;148(4):832.

CTCF-binding locations represent regulatory sequences that are highly constrained
over the course of evolution. To gain insight into how these DNA elements are
conserved and spread through the genome, we defined the full spectrum of
CTCF-binding sites, including a 33/34-mer motif, and identified over five
thousand highly conserved, robust, and tissue-independent CTCF-binding locations 
by comparing ChIP-seq data from six mammals. Our data indicate that activation of
retroelements has produced species-specific expansions of CTCF binding in
rodents, dogs, and opossum, which often functionally serve as chromatin and
transcriptional insulators. We discovered fossilized repeat elements flanking
deeply conserved CTCF-binding regions, indicating that similar retrotransposon
expansions occurred hundreds of millions of years ago. Repeat-driven dispersal of
CTCF binding is a fundamental, ancient, and still highly active mechanism of
genome evolution in mammalian lineages.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3368268
PMID: 22244452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Apr;40(8):3378-91. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr1260. Epub 2011
Dec 30.

Identification of CTCF as a master regulator of the clustered protocadherin
genes.

Golan-Mashiach M(1), Grunspan M, Emmanuel R, Gibbs-Bar L, Dikstein R, Shapiro E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

The brain is a large and complex network of neurons. Specific neuronal
connectivity is thought to be based on the combinatorial expression of the 52
protocadherins (Pcdh) membrane adhesion proteins, whereby each neuron expresses
only a specific subset. Pcdh genes are arranged in tandem, in a cluster of three 
families: Pcdha, Pcdhß and Pcdh<U+03B3>. The expression of each Pcdh gene is regulated
by a promoter that has a regulatory conserved sequence element (CSE), common to
all 52 genes. The mechanism and factors controlling individual Pcdh gene
expression are currently unknown. Here we show that the promoter of each Pcdh
gene contains a gene-specific conserved control region, termed specific sequence 
element (SSE), located adjacent and upstream to the CSE and activates
transcription together with the CSE. We purified the complex that specifically
binds the SSE-CSE region and identified the CCTC binding-factor (CTCF) as a key
molecule that binds and activates Pcdh promoters. Our findings point to CTCF as a
factor essential for Pcdh expression and probably governing neuronal
connectivity.

PMCID: PMC3333863
PMID: 22210889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Pathogens. 2012 Sep 17;1(1):37-51. doi: 10.3390/pathogens1010037.

Similarities between the Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) Nuclear Protein EBNA1 and the
Pioneer Transcription Factor FoxA: Is EBNA1 a "Bookmarking" Oncoprotein that
Alters the Host Cell Epigenotype?

Niller HH(1), Minarovits J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Regensburg,
Franz-Josef-Strauß Allee 11, Regensburg D-93053, Germany.
hans-helmut.niller@klinik.uni-regensburg.de. (2)Microbiological Research Group,
National Center for Epidemiology, Piheno u. 1., Budapest H-1529, Hungary.
minimicrobi@hotmail.com.

EBNA1, a nuclear protein expressed in all EBV-associated neoplasms is
indispensable for the maintenance of the viral episomes in latently infected
cells. EBNA1 may induce genetic alterations by upregulating cellular
recombinases, production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and affecting p53
levels and function. All these changes may contribute to tumorigenesis. In this
overview we focus, however, on the epigenetic alterations elicited by EBNA1 by
drawing a parallel between EBNA1 and the FoxA family of pioneer transcription
factors. Both EBNA1 and FoxA induce local DNA demethylation, nucleosome
destabilization and bind to mitotic chromosomes. Local DNA demethylation and
nucleosome rearrangement mark active promoters and enhancers. In addition, EBNA1 
and FoxA, when associated with mitotic chromatin may "bookmark" active genes and 
ensure their reactivation in postmitotic cells (epigenetic memory). We speculate 
that DNA looping induced by EBNA1-EBNA1 interactions may reorganize the cellular 
genome. Such chromatin loops, sustained in mitotic chromatin similarly to the
long-distance interactions mediated by the insulator protein CTCF, may also
mediate the epigenetic inheritance of gene expression patterns. We suggest that
EBNA1 has the potential to induce patho-epigenetic alterations contributing to
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4235684
PMID: 25436603  [PubMed]


47. J Cell Biol. 2011 Dec 26;195(7):1123-40. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201108121.

Cdc6 expression represses E-cadherin transcription and activates adjacent
replication origins.

Sideridou M(1), Zakopoulou R, Evangelou K, Liontos M, Kotsinas A, Rampakakis E,
Gagos S, Kahata K, Grabusic K, Gkouskou K, Trougakos IP, Kolettas E, Georgakilas 
AG, Volarevic S, Eliopoulos AG, Zannis-Hadjopoulos M, Moustakas A, Gorgoulis VG.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Carcinogenesis Group, Department of Histology and Embryology, School
of Medicine, University of Athens, 11527 Athens, Greece.

E-cadherin (CDH1) loss occurs frequently in carcinogenesis, contributing to
invasion and metastasis. We observed that mouse and human epithelial cell lines
overexpressing the replication licensing factor Cdc6 underwent phenotypic changes
with mesenchymal features and loss of E-cadherin. Analysis in various types of
human cancer revealed a strong correlation between increased Cdc6 expression and 
reduced E-cadherin levels. Prompted by these findings, we discovered that Cdc6
repressed CDH1 transcription by binding to the E-boxes of its promoter, leading
to dissociation of the chromosomal insulator CTCF, displacement of the histone
variant H2A.Z, and promoter heterochromatinization. Mutational analysis
identified the Walker B motif and C-terminal region of Cdc6 as essential for CDH1
transcriptional suppression. Strikingly, CTCF displacement resulted in activation
of adjacent origins of replication. These data demonstrate that Cdc6 acts as a
molecular switch at the E-cadherin locus, linking transcriptional repression to
activation of replication, and provide a telling example of how replication
licensing factors could usurp alternative programs to fulfill distinct cellular
functions.

PMCID: PMC3246883
PMID: 22201124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 17;287(8):5600-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.289843. Epub 2011 
Dec 20.

Functional regulation of pre-B-cell leukemia homeobox interacting protein 1
(PBXIP1/HPIP) in erythroid differentiation.

Manavathi B(1), Lo D, Bugide S, Dey O, Imren S, Weiss MJ, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Oncology Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry, School
of Life Sciences, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad-500046, India.
manavathibsl@uohyd.ernet.in

Pre-B-cell leukemia homeobox interacting protein 1 or human PBX1 interacting
protein (PBXIP1/HPIP) is a co-repressor of pre-B-cell leukemia homeobox 1 (PBX1) 
and is also known to regulate estrogen receptor functions by associating with the
microtubule network. Despite its initial discovery in the context of
hematopoietic cells, little is yet known about the role of HPIP in hematopoiesis.
Here, we show that lentivirus-mediated overexpression of HPIP in human CD34(+)
cells enhances hematopoietic colony formation in vitro, whereas HPIP knockdown
leads to a reduction in the number of such colonies. Interestingly, erythroid
colony number was significantly higher in HPIP-overexpressing cells. In addition,
forced expression of HPIP in K562 cells, a multipotent erythro-megakaryoblastic
leukemia cell line, led to an induction of erythroid differentiation. HPIP
overexpression in both CD34(+) and K562 cells was associated with increased
activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway, and corresponding treatment with a
PI3K-specific inhibitor, LY-294002, caused a reduction in clonogenic progenitor
number in HPIP-expressing CD34(+) cells and decreased K562 cell differentiation. 
Combined, these findings point to an important role of the PI3K/AKT pathway in
mediating HPIP-induced effects on the growth and differentiation of hematopoietic
cells. Interestingly, HPIP gene expression was found to be induced in K562 cells 
in response to erythroid differentiation signals such as DMSO and erythropoietin.
The erythroid lineage-specific transcription factor GATA1 binds to the HPIP
promoter and activates HPIP gene transcription in a CCCTC-binding factor
(CTCF)-dependent manner. Co-immunoprecipitation and co-localization experiments
revealed the association of CTCF with GATA1 indicating the recruitment of
CTCF/GATA1 transcription factor complex onto the HPIP promoter. Together, this
study provides evidence that HPIP is a target of GATA1 and CTCF in erythroid
cells and plays an important role in erythroid differentiation by modulating the 
PI3K/AKT pathway.

PMCID: PMC3285334
PMID: 22187427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Transl Med. 2011 Dec 14;9:213. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-9-213.

Expression of the epigenetic factor BORIS (CTCFL) in the human genome.

de Necochea-Campion R(1), Ghochikyan A, Josephs SF, Zacharias S, Woods E,
Karimi-Busheri F, Alexandrescu DT, Chen CS, Agadjanyan MG, Carrier E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, School of Medicine, Loma Linda
University, Loma Linda, CA 92354, USA.

BORIS, or CTCFL, the so called Brother of the Regulator of Imprinted Sites
because of the extensive homology in the central DNA binding region of the
protein to the related regulator, CTCF, is expressed in early gametogenesis and
in multiple cancers but not in differentiated somatic cells. Thus it is a member 
of the cancer testes antigen group (CTAs). Since BORIS and CTCF target common DNA
binding sites, these proteins function on two levels, the first level is their
regulation via the methylation context of the DNA target site and the second
level is their distinct and different epigenetic associations due to differences 
in the non-homologous termini of the proteins. The regulation on both of these
levels is extensive and complex and the sphere of influence of each of these
proteins is associated with vastly different cellular signaling processes. On the
level of gene expression, BORIS has three known promoters and multiple spliced
mRNAs which adds another level of complexity to this intriguing regulator. BORIS 
expression is observed in the majority of cancer tissues and cell lines analyzed 
up to today. The expression profile and essential role of BORIS in cancer make
this molecule very attractive target for cancer immunotherapy. This review
summarizes what is known about BORIS regarding its expression, structure, and
function and then presents some theoretical considerations with respect to its
genome wide influence and its potential for use as a vaccine for cancer
immunotherapy.

PMCID: PMC3264669
PMID: 22168535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jan 6;417(1):387-92. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.11.123. Epub 2011 Dec 6.

DNA methylation of the 5'-untranslated region at +298 and +351 represses BACE1
expression in mouse BV-2 microglial cells.

Byun CJ(1), Seo J, Jo SA, Park YJ, Klug M, Rehli M, Park MH, Jo I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Ewha Womans University Medical School,
Seoul, South Korea.

BACE1, which cleaves the amyloid precursor protein, is the rate-limiting enzyme
for ß-amyloid peptide production, leading to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's
disease (AD). A high plasma level of homocysteine, acting as a potent
methyltransferase inhibitor, is assumed to be a risk factor for AD onset. Using
the demethylating drug 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza), we tested whether and how 
BACE1 expression is regulated in mouse BV-2 microglial cells. 5-Aza increased
both BACE1 mRNA and protein levels in a dose-dependent manner.
Bisulfite-sequencing analysis revealed that two CpG sites at positions +298 and
+351 in the 5'-untranslated region (5'-UTR) of the BACE1 gene were specifically
demethylated in BV-2 cells treated with 5-Aza. In silico analysis showed that the
+351 site is the STAT3/CTCF-binding site; the function of the +298 site has not
been identified. To assess whether these two CpG sites play an important role in 
5-Aza-induced transcriptional activation of BACE1, we constructed a BACE1 gene
promoter including the 5'-UTR (-1136 to +500) fused to a CpG-free luciferase gene
(pCpGL-BACE1) and its mutant pCpGL-BACE1-AA, which has substituted CG
dinucleotides at the two CpG sites of pCpGL-BACE1 to AA. Promoter analysis showed
a significant decrease (~30%) in the activity of pCpGL-BACE1-AA compared with
that of pCpGL-BACE1. Furthermore, in vitro methylation of these two reporter
constructs showed a complete silencing of their promoter activities. Our data
demonstrate that BACE1 gene expression is regulated by DNA methylation of at
least two CpG sites at positions +298 and +351 in the 5'-UTR in BV-2 microglial
cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22166205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. EMBO J. 2012 Feb 15;31(4):986-99. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.450. Epub 2011 Dec 13.

Dynamic long-range chromatin interactions control Myb proto-oncogene
transcription during erythroid development.

Stadhouders R(1), Thongjuea S, Andrieu-Soler C, Palstra RJ, Bryne JC, van den
Heuvel A, Stevens M, de Boer E, Kockx C, van der Sloot A, van den Hout M, van
Ijcken W, Eick D, Lenhard B, Grosveld F, Soler E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The key haematopoietic regulator Myb is essential for coordinating proliferation 
and differentiation. ChIP-Sequencing and Chromosome Conformation Capture
(3C)-Sequencing were used to characterize the structural and protein-binding
dynamics of the Myb locus during erythroid differentiation. In proliferating
cells expressing Myb, enhancers within the Myb-Hbs1l intergenic region were shown
to form an active chromatin hub (ACH) containing the Myb promoter and first
intron. This first intron was found to harbour the transition site from
transcription initiation to elongation, which takes place around a conserved CTCF
site. Upon erythroid differentiation, Myb expression is downregulated and the ACH
destabilized. We propose a model for Myb activation by distal enhancers
dynamically bound by KLF1 and the GATA1/TAL1/LDB1 complex, which primarily
function as a transcription elongation element through chromatin looping.

PMCID: PMC3280550
PMID: 22157820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Cell. 2011 Dec 9;147(6):1408-19. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.11.013.

Comprehensive genome-wide protein-DNA interactions detected at single-nucleotide 
resolution.

Rhee HS(1), Pugh BF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Eukaryotic Gene Regulation, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, 
USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2011 Feb;13(2):71.
    Nat Methods. 2012 Feb;9(2):130.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP-chip and ChIP-seq) assays identify where
proteins bind throughout a genome. However, DNA contamination and DNA
fragmentation heterogeneity produce false positives (erroneous calls) and
imprecision in mapping. Consequently, stringent data filtering produces false
negatives (missed calls). Here we describe ChIP-exo, where an exonuclease trims
ChIP DNA to a precise distance from the crosslinking site. Bound locations are
detectable as peak pairs by deep sequencing. Contaminating DNA is degraded or
fails to form complementary peak pairs. With the single bp accuracy provided by
ChIP-exo, we show an unprecedented view into genome-wide binding of the yeast
transcription factors Reb1, Gal4, Phd1, Rap1, and human CTCF. Each of these
factors was chosen to address potential limitations of ChIP-exo. We found that
binding sites become unambiguous and reveal diverse tendencies governing in vivo 
DNA-binding specificity that include sequence variants, functionally distinct
motifs, motif clustering, secondary interactions, and combinatorial modules
within a compound motif.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3243364
PMID: 22153082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Clin Genet. 2012 Apr;81(4):350-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01822.x. Epub
2012 Jan 16.

Epigenetic and genetic disturbance of the imprinted 11p15 region in
Beckwith-Wiedemann and Silver-Russell syndromes.

Demars J(1), Gicquel C.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics in Human Health and Disease, Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes
Institute, 75 Commercial Road, Melbourne, VIC 3004, Australia.

Genomic imprinting is a particularly attractive example of epigenetic regulation 
leading to the parental-origin-specific expression of genes. In several ways, the
11p15 imprinted region is an exemplary model for regulation of genomic
imprinting. The two imprinted domains are controlled by imprinting control
regions (ICRs) which carry opposite germ line imprints and they are regulated by 
two major mechanisms of imprinting control. Dysregulation of 11p15 genomic
imprinting results in two fetal growth disorders [Silver-Russell (SRS) and
Beckwith-Wiedemann (BWS) syndromes], with opposite growth phenotypes. BWS and SRS
result from abnormal imprinting involving either, both domains or only one of
them, with ICR1 and ICR2 more often involved in SRS and BWS respectively. DNA
methylation defects affecting ICR1 or ICR2 account for approximately 60% of SRS
and BWS patients. Recent studies have identified new cis-acting regulatory
elements, as well as new trans-acting factors involved in the regulation of 11p15
imprinting, therefore establishing new mechanisms of BWS and SRS. Those studies
also showed that, apart of CTCF, other transcription factors, including factors
of the pluripotency network, play a crucial role in the regulation of 11p15
genomic imprinting. Those new findings have direct consequences in molecular
testing, risk assessment and genetic counseling of BWS and SRS patients.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22150955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. BMC Genomics. 2011 Dec 5;12:593. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-593.

A co-ordinated interaction between CTCF and ER in breast cancer cells.

Ross-Innes CS(1), Brown GD, Carroll JS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Cambridge Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson
Way, Cambridge CB20RE, UK.

BACKGROUND: CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a conserved zinc finger transcription 
factor that is involved in both intra- and interchromasomal looping. Recent
research has shown a role for CTCF in estrogen receptor (ER) biology, at some
individual loci, but a multi-context global analysis of CTCF binding and
transcription activity is lacking.
RESULTS: We now map CTCF binding genome wide in breast cancer cells and find that
CTCF binding is unchanged in response to estrogen or tamoxifen treatment. We find
a small but reproducible set of CTCF binding events that overlap with both the
nuclear receptor, estrogen receptor, and the forkhead protein FOXA1. These
overlapping binding events are likely functional as they are biased towards
estrogen-regulated genes, compared to regions lacking either CTCF or ER binding. 
In addition we identify cell-line specific CTCF binding events. These binding
events are more likely to be associated with cell-line specific ER binding events
and are also more likely to be adjacent to genes that are expressed in that
particular cell line.
CONCLUSION: The evolving role for CTCF in ER biology is complex, but is likely to
be multifunctional and possibly influenced by the specific genomic locus. Our
data suggest a positive, pro-transcriptional role for CTCF in ER-mediated gene
expression in breast cancer cells. CTCF not only provides boundaries for
accessible and 'protected' transcriptional blocks, but may also influence the
actual binding of ER to the chromatin, thereby modulating the estrogen-mediated
gene expression changes observed in breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3248577
PMID: 22142239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Virol. 2012 Feb;86(3):1862-73. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06295-11. Epub 2011 Nov 30.

The insulator protein CTCF binding sites in the orf73/LANA promoter region of
herpesvirus saimiri are involved in conferring episomal stability in latently
infected human T cells.

Zielke K(1), Full F, Teufert N, Schmidt M, Müller-Fleckenstein I, Alberter B,
Ensser A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische und Molekulare Virologie, Friedrich-Alexander
Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

Herpesviruses establish latency in suitable cells of the host organism after a
primary lytic infection. Subgroup C strains of herpesvirus saimiri (HVS), a
primate gamma-2 herpesvirus, are able to transform human and other primate T
lymphocytes to stable growth in vitro. The viral genomes persist as
nonintegrated, circular, and histone-associated episomes in the nuclei of those
latently infected T cells. Epigenetic modifications of episomes are essential to 
restrict the transcription during latency to selected viral genes, such as the
viral oncogenes stpC/tip and the orf73/LANA. In this study, we describe a
genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation-on-chip (ChIP-on-chip) analysis to
profile the occupancy of CTCF on the latent HVS genome. We then focused on two
distinct, conserved CTCF binding sites (CBS) within the orf73/LANA promoter
region. Analysis of recombinant viruses harboring deletions or mutations within
the CBS indicated that the lytic replication of such viruses is not substantially
influenced by CTCF. However, T cells latently infected with CBS mutants were
impaired in their proliferation abilities and showed a significantly reduced
episomal maintenance. We detected a reduced transcription of the orf73/LANA gene 
in the T cells, corresponding to the reduced viral genomes; this might contribute
to the loss of HVS episomes, as LANA is central in the maintenance of viral
episomes in the dividing T cell populations. These data demonstrate that the
episomal stability of HVS genomes in latently infected human T cells is dependent
on CTCF.

PMCID: PMC3264369
PMID: 22130528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Genetika. 2011 Sep;47(9):1184-9.

[Study of the enhancer-blocking activities of new boundaries in the bithorax
complex of Drosophila melanogaster].

[Article in Russian]

Ivliva TA, Georgiev PG, Kyrchanova OV.

It was shown earlier that the Mcp, Fab-7, and Fab-8 boundaries of the bithorax
complex contain insulators that effectively block the enhancers of the yellow and
white genes. Other boundaries have not been studied so far. The recent mapping of
binding sites for the insulator protein dCTCF in the regulatory regions of the
bithorax complex genes permitted the Fab-3, Fab-4, and Fab-6 boundaries to be
localized. Here, we showed despite the presence of dCTCF-binding sites fragments 
of the Fab-3, Fab-4, and Fab-6 boundaries do not exhibit the properties of
insulators in the model system with the yellow and white genes. Moreover, in some
regions of the genome the Fab-4 and Fab-6 boundaries display the properties of
silencers.

PMID: 22117402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Cell Res. 2012 Feb;22(2):280-2. doi: 10.1038/cr.2011.188. Epub 2011 Nov 22.

CTCF-cohesin complex: architect of chromatin structure regulates V(D)J
rearrangement.

Feeney AJ(1), Verma-Gaur J.

Author information: 
(1)The Scripps Research Institute, Department of Immunology and Microbial
Science, IMM22, 10550 N. Torrey Pines Rd., La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
feeney@scripps.edu

PMCID: PMC3271585
PMID: 22105486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Genome Res. 2012 Jan;22(1):9-24. doi: 10.1101/gr.127597.111. Epub 2011 Nov 16.

Cell-type specific and combinatorial usage of diverse transcription factors
revealed by genome-wide binding studies in multiple human cells.

Lee BK(1), Bhinge AA, Battenhouse A, McDaniell RM, Liu Z, Song L, Ni Y, Birney E,
Lieb JD, Furey TS, Crawford GE, Iyer VR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biology, Section of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA.

Cell-type diversity is governed in part by differential gene expression programs 
mediated by transcription factor (TF) binding. However, there are few systematic 
studies of the genomic binding of different types of TFs across a wide range of
human cell types, especially in relation to gene expression. In the ENCODE
Project, we have identified the genomic binding locations across 11 different
human cell types of CTCF, RNA Pol II (RNAPII), and MYC, three TFs with diverse
roles. Our data and analysis revealed how these factors bind in relation to
genomic features and shape gene expression and cell-type specificity. CTCF bound 
predominantly in intergenic regions while RNAPII and MYC preferentially bound to 
core promoter regions. CTCF sites were relatively invariant across diverse cell
types, while MYC showed the greatest cell-type specificity. MYC and RNAPII
co-localized at many of their binding sites and putative target genes. Cell-type 
specific binding sites, in particular for MYC and RNAPII, were associated with
cell-type specific functions. Patterns of binding in relation to gene features
were generally conserved across different cell types. RNAPII occupancy was higher
over exons than adjacent introns, likely reflecting a link between
transcriptional elongation and splicing. TF binding was positively correlated
with the expression levels of their putative target genes, but combinatorial
binding, in particular of MYC and RNAPII, was even more strongly associated with 
higher gene expression. These data illuminate how combinatorial binding of
transcription factors in diverse cell types is associated with gene expression
and cell-type specific biology.

PMCID: PMC3246210
PMID: 22090374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Virol. 2012 Feb;86(3):1683-95. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06113-11. Epub 2011 Nov 16.

Epigenetic regulation of the latency-associated region of Marek's disease virus
in tumor-derived T-cell lines and primary lymphoma.

Brown AC(1), Nair V, Allday MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Virology, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, Norfolk
Place, London.

Meq is the major Marek's disease virus (MDV)-encoded oncoprotein and is essential
for T-cell lymphomagenesis. Meq and several noncoding RNAs, including three
microRNA (MiR) clusters, are expressed from the repeats of the MDV genome during 
latent infection of T cells. To investigate the state of the chromatin in this
and flanking regions, we carried out chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
analysis of covalent histone modifications and associated bound proteins. T-cell 
lines and a lymphoma were compared. The chromatin around the promoters for Meq
and the noncoding RNAs in both cell lines and the lymphoma were associated with
H3K9 acetylation and H3K4 trimethylation, which are marks of transcriptionally
active chromatin. These correlated with bound Meq-c-Jun heterodimers. The only
binding site for Meq homodimers is located at the lytic origin of replication
(OriLyt), next to the lytic gene pp38. This region lacked active marks and was
associated with repressive histone modifications (H3K27 and H3K9 trimethylation).
DNA CpG methylation was investigated using methylated DNA precipitation (MeDP).
In cell lines, DNA methylation was abundant across the repeats but noticeably
reduced or absent around the active promoters. In primary tumors, CpG methylation
occurred less than 2 months after infection, focused within the ICP4 gene. These 
data suggest that nonrandom de novo DNA methylation occurs early in
lymphomagenesis. In addition, the histone data indicate a role for Meq in the
epigenetic regulation of the MDV genome repeats in transformed T cells and
suggest that the OriLyt region and the Meq/MiR region might be separated by
chromatin boundary elements, and preliminary data on CTCF binding are consistent 
with this.

PMCID: PMC3264385
PMID: 22090140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Genome Biol. 2011 Nov 14;12(11):R113. doi: 10.1186/gb-2011-12-11-r113.

Discovery of active enhancers through bidirectional expression of short
transcripts.

Melgar MF(1), Collins FS, Sethupathy P.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Technology Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

BACKGROUND: Long-range regulatory elements, such as enhancers, exert substantial 
control over tissue-specific gene expression patterns. Genome-wide discovery of
functional enhancers in different cell types is important for our understanding
of genome function as well as human disease etiology.
RESULTS: In this study, we developed an in silico approach to model the
previously reported phenomenon of transcriptional pausing, accompanied by
divergent transcription, at active promoters. We then used this model for
large-scale prediction of non-promoter-associated bidirectional expression of
short transcripts. Our predictions were significantly enriched for DNase
hypersensitive sites, histone H3 lysine 27 acetylation (H3K27ac), and other
chromatin marks associated with active rather than poised or repressed enhancers.
We also detected modest bidirectional expression at binding sites of the
CCCTC-factor (CTCF) genome-wide, particularly those that overlap H3K27ac.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that the signature of bidirectional expression
of short transcripts, learned from promoter-proximal transcriptional pausing, can
be used to predict active long-range regulatory elements genome-wide, likely due 
in part to specific association of RNA polymerase with enhancer regions.

PMCID: PMC3334599
PMID: 22082242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Virol. 2012 Jan;86(2):1034-45. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05923-11. Epub 2011 Nov 9.

Contributions of CTCF and DNA methyltransferases DNMT1 and DNMT3B to Epstein-Barr
virus restricted latency.

Hughes DJ(1), Marendy EM, Dickerson CA, Yetming KD, Sample CE, Sample JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Pennsylvania State University
College of Medicine, and Penn State Hershey Cancer Institute, Hershey,
Pennsylvania, USA.

Establishment of persistent Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection requires
transition from a program of full viral latency gene expression (latency III) to 
one that is highly restricted (latency I and 0) within memory B lymphocytes. It
is well established that DNA methylation plays a critical role in EBV gene
silencing, and recently the chromatin boundary protein CTCF has been implicated
as a pivotal regulator of latency via its binding to several loci within the EBV 
genome. One notable site is upstream of the common EBNA gene promoter Cp, at
which CTCF may act as an enhancer-blocking factor to initiate and maintain
silencing of EBNA gene transcription. It was previously suggested that increased 
expression of CTCF may underlie its potential to promote restricted latency, and 
here we also noted elevated levels of DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and DNMT3B 
associated with latency I. Within B-cell lines that maintain latency I, however, 
stable knockdown of CTCF, DNMT1, or DNMT3B or of DNMT1 and DNMT3B in combination 
did not result in activation of latency III protein expression or EBNA gene
transcription, nor did knockdown of DNMTs significantly alter CpG methylation
within Cp. Thus, differential expression of CTCF and DNMT1 and -3B is not
critical for maintenance of restricted latency. Finally, mutant EBV lacking the
Cp CTCF binding site exhibited sustained Cp activity relative to wild-type EBV in
a recently developed B-cell superinfection model but ultimately was able to
transition to latency I, suggesting that CTCF contributes to but is not
necessarily essential for the establishment of restricted latency.

PMCID: PMC3255836
PMID: 22072770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Feb;40(4):1596-608. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr964. Epub 2011
Nov 7.

YY1 associates with the macrosatellite DXZ4 on the inactive X chromosome and
binds with CTCF to a hypomethylated form in some male carcinomas.

Moseley SC(1), Rizkallah R, Tremblay DC, Anderson BR, Hurt MM, Chadwick BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL
32306-4295, USA.

DXZ4 is an X-linked macrosatellite composed of 12-100 tandemly arranged 3-kb
repeat units. In females, it adopts opposite chromatin arrangements at the two
alleles in response to X-chromosome inactivation. In males and on the active X
chromosome, it is packaged into heterochromatin, but on the inactive X chromosome
(Xi), it adopts a euchromatic conformation bound by CTCF. Here we report that the
ubiquitous transcription factor YY1 associates with the euchromatic form of DXZ4 
on the Xi. The binding of YY1 close to CTCF is reminiscent of that at other
epigenetically regulated sequences, including sites of genomic imprinting, and at
the X-inactivation centre, suggesting a common mode of action in this
arrangement. As with CTCF, binding of YY1 to DXZ4 in vitro is not blocked by CpG 
methylation, yet in vivo both proteins are restricted to the hypomethylated form.
In several male carcinoma cell lines, DXZ4 can adopt a Xi-like conformation in
response to cellular transformation, characterized by CpG hypomethylation and
binding of YY1 and CTCF. Analysis of a male melanoma cell line and normal skin
cells from the same individual confirmed that a transition in chromatin state
occurred in response to transformation.

PMCID: PMC3287207
PMID: 22064860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26109. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026109. Epub 2011 Oct 17.

Direct identification of insulator components by insertional chromatin
immunoprecipitation.

Fujita T(1), Fujii H.

Author information: 
(1)Combined Program on Microbiology and Immunology, Research Institute for
Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Comprehensive understanding of mechanisms of epigenetic regulation requires
identification of molecules bound to genomic regions of interest in vivo.
However, non-biased methods to identify molecules bound to specific genomic loci 
in vivo are limited. Here, we applied insertional chromatin immunoprecipitation
(iChIP) to direct identification of components of insulator complexes, which
function as boundaries of chromatin domain. We found that the chicken ß-globin
HS4 (cHS4) insulator complex contains an RNA helicase protein, p68/DDX5; an RNA
species, steroid receptor RNA activator 1; and a nuclear matrix protein,
Matrin-3, in vivo. Binding of p68 and Matrin-3 to the cHS4 insulator core
sequence was mediated by CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF). Thus, our results showed
that it is feasible to directly identify proteins and RNA bound to a specific
genomic region in vivo by using iChIP.

PMCID: PMC3197142
PMID: 22043306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Immunity. 2011 Oct 28;35(4):501-13. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.07.014.

The DNA-binding protein CTCF limits proximal V<U+03BA> recombination and restricts <U+03BA>
enhancer interactions to the immunoglobulin <U+03BA> light chain locus.

Ribeiro de Almeida C(1), Stadhouders R, de Bruijn MJ, Bergen IM, Thongjuea S,
Lenhard B, van Ijcken W, Grosveld F, Galjart N, Soler E, Hendriks RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Erasmus MC Rotterdam, P.O. Box 2040, 3000 CA
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Regulation of immunoglobulin (Ig) V(D)J gene rearrangement is dependent on
higher-order chromatin organization. Here, we studied the in vivo function of the
DNA-binding zinc-finger protein CTCF, which regulates interactions between
enhancers and promoters. By conditional deletion of the Ctcf gene in the B cell
lineage, we demonstrate that loss of CTCF allowed Ig heavy chain recombination,
but pre-B cell proliferation and differentiation was severely impaired. In the
absence of CTCF, the Ig<U+03BA> light chain locus showed increased proximal and reduced 
distal V<U+03BA> usage. This was associated with enhanced proximal V<U+03BA> and reduced J<U+03BA>
germline transcription. Chromosome conformation capture experiments demonstrated 
that CTCF limits interactions of the Ig<U+03BA> enhancers with the proximal V(<U+03BA>) gene
region and prevents inappropriate interactions between these strong enhancers and
elements outside the Ig<U+03BA> locus. Thus, although Ig gene recombination can occur in
the absence of CTCF, it is a critical factor determining V<U+03BA> segment choice for
recombination.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22035845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Int J Cancer. 2012 Apr 15;130(8):1715-25. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27316. Epub 2011 Dec
5.

Cellular senescence and tumor suppressor gene p16.

Rayess H(1), Wang MB, Srivatsan ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare system, West Los
Angeles, CA, USA.

Cellular senescence is an irreversible arrest of cell growth. Biochemical and
morphological changes occur during cellular senescence, including the formation
of a unique cellular morphology such as flattened cytoplasm. Function of
mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum and lysosomes are affected resulting in the
inhibition of lysosomal and proteosomal pathways. Cellular senescence can be
triggered by a number of factors including, aging, DNA damage, oncogene
activation and oxidative stress. While the molecular mechanism of senescence
involves p16 and p53 tumor suppressor genes and telomere shortening, this review 
is focused on the mechanism of p16 control. The p16-mediated senescence acts
through the retinoblastoma (Rb) pathway inhibiting the action of the cyclin
dependant kinases leading to G1 cell cycle arrest. Rb is maintained in a
hypophosphorylated state resulting in the inhibition of transcription factor
E2F1. Regulation of p16 expression is complex and involves epigenetic control and
multiple transcription factors. PRC1 (Pombe repressor complex (1) and PRC2 (Pombe
repressor complex (2) proteins and histone deacetylases play an important role in
the promoter hypermethylation for suppressing p16 expression. While transcription
factors YY1 and Id1 suppress p16 expression, transcription factors CTCF, Sp1 and 
Ets family members activate p16 transcription. Senescence occurs with the
inactivation of suppressor elements leading to the enhanced expression of p16.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3288293
PMID: 22025288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Eur J Cancer. 2012 Apr;48(6):929-35. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2011.09.009. Epub 2011
Oct 21.

BORIS in human cancers -- a review.

Martin-Kleiner I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ruder Bokovic Institute, Division of Molecular Medicine, P.O. Box 180, 10002 
Zagreb, Croatia. kleiner@irb.hr

Brother of the regulator of the imprinted site (BORIS) or CTCFL is an 11 zinc
finger (ZF) protein, which is considered to be a new oncogene. It is a paralogue 
of CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), generated by a duplication event. BORIS is highly
expressed in primary spermatocytes, although it is silenced at later stages of
spermatogenesis. BORIS has either not been found in normal human tissues or cells
or has been detected at very low levels. The expression of the BORIS gene is
predominantly controlled by DNA-methylation, while its activation requires the
demethylation of its promoter. Re-expression of BORIS in cancers is due to the
hypomethylation of its promoter. High expression of BORIS protein and RNA
correlates with the tumour size and grade in cancer patients. High percentages of
BORIS transcripts were detected in breast, endometrial, prostatic and colon
cancer patients. Lower percentages of BORIS were found in patients with melanoma 
and cancers of the head and neck. The expression of BORIS varied from low to high
in lung, colon and ovarian cancer, melanoma and leukaemic cell lines. Lower
expressions of BORIS were found in head and neck, breast, kidney, bladder,
testicular and prostate carcinoma cell lines. An inhibitor of DNA methylation,
5-aza-2'deoxy-cytidine (5-azadC), and histone deacetylase inhibitors induced or
enhanced the expression of BORIS in various carcinoma cell lines. The silencing
of BORIS induced apoptosis in tumorous cell lines. BORIS antitumor vaccines have 
been tested in mice with several cancers, based on the deletion of the
DNA-binding ZF-region of the BORIS.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22019212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mol Immunol. 2011 Dec;49(3):441-52. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2011.09.005. Epub 2011 
Oct 19.

Proteomic profiling of the human T-cell nucleolus.

Jarboui MA(1), Wynne K, Elia G, Hall WW, Gautier VW.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research in Infectious Diseases, School of Medicine and Medical
Science, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.

The nucleolus, site of ribosome biogenesis, is a dynamic subnuclear organelle
involved in diverse cellular functions. The size, number and organisation of
nucleoli are cell-specific and while it remains to be established, the nucleolar 
protein composition would be expected to reflect lineage-specific transcriptional
regulation of rDNA genes and have cell-type functional components. Here, we
describe the first characterisation of the human T-cell nucleolar proteome. Using
the Jurkat T-cell line and a reproducible organellar proteomic approach, we
identified 872 nucleolar proteins. In addition to ribosome biogenesis and RNA
processing networks, network modeling and topological analysis of nucleolar
proteome revealed distinct macromolecular complexes known to orchestrate
chromatin structure and to contribute to the regulation of gene expression,
replication, recombination and repair, and chromosome segregation. Furthermore,
among our dataset, we identified proteins known to functionally participate in
T-cell biology, including RUNX1, ILF3, ILF2, STAT3, LSH, TCF-1, SATB1, CTCF,
HMGB3, BCLAF1, FX4L1, ZAP70, TIAM1, RAC2, THEMIS, LCP1, RPL22, TOPK, RETN,
IFI-16, MCT-1, ISG15, and 14-3-3t, which support cell-specific composition of the
Jurkat nucleolus. Subsequently, the nucleolar localisation of RUNX1, ILF3, STAT3,
ZAP70 and RAC2 was further validated by Western Blot analysis and
immunofluorescence microscopy. Overall, our T-cell nucleolar proteome dataset not
only further expands the existing repertoire of the human nucleolar proteome but 
support a cell type-specific composition of the nucleolus in T cell and
highlights the potential roles of the nucleoli in lymphocyte biology.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22014684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Nat Genet. 2011 Oct 16;43(11):1059-65. doi: 10.1038/ng.947.

Probabilistic modeling of Hi-C contact maps eliminates systematic biases to
characterize global chromosomal architecture.

Yaffe E(1), Tanay A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, Weizmann Institute of 
Science, Rehovot, Israel.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2011 Nov;43(11):1047-8.

Hi-C experiments measure the probability of physical proximity between pairs of
chromosomal loci on a genomic scale. We report on several systematic biases that 
substantially affect the Hi-C experimental procedure, including the distance
between restriction sites, the GC content of trimmed ligation junctions and
sequence uniqueness. To address these biases, we introduce an integrated
probabilistic background model and develop algorithms to estimate its parameters 
and renormalize Hi-C data. Analysis of corrected human lymphoblast contact maps
provides genome-wide evidence for interchromosomal aggregation of active
chromatin marks, including DNase-hypersensitive sites and transcriptionally
active foci. We observe extensive long-range (up to 400 kb) cis interactions at
active promoters and derive asymmetric contact profiles next to transcription
start sites and CTCF binding sites. Clusters of interacting chromosomal domains
suggest physical separation of centromere-proximal and centromere-distal regions.
These results provide a computational basis for the inference of chromosomal
architectures from Hi-C experiments.

PMID: 22001755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e25590. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025590. Epub 2011 Oct 3.

Impact of the genome on the epigenome is manifested in DNA methylation patterns
of imprinted regions in monozygotic and dizygotic twins.

Coolen MW(1), Statham AL, Qu W, Campbell MJ, Henders AK, Montgomery GW, Martin
NG, Clark SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics Research Group, Cancer Program, Garvan Institute of Medical
Research, Sydney, Australia.

One of the best studied read-outs of epigenetic change is the differential
expression of imprinted genes, controlled by differential methylation of
imprinted control regions (ICRs). To address the impact of genotype on the
epigenome, we performed a detailed study in 128 pairs of monozygotic (MZ) and 128
pairs of dizygotic (DZ) twins, interrogating the DNA methylation status of the
ICRs of IGF2, H19, KCNQ1, GNAS and the non-imprinted gene RUNX1. While we found a
similar overall pattern of methylation between MZ and DZ twins, we also observed 
a high degree of variability in individual CpG methylation levels, notably at the
H19/IGF2 loci. A degree of methylation plasticity independent of the genome
sequence was observed, with both local and regional CpG methylation changes,
discordant between MZ and DZ individual pairs. However, concordant gains or
losses of methylation, within individual twin pairs were more common in MZ than
DZ twin pairs, indicating that de novo and/or maintenance methylation is
influenced by the underlying DNA sequence. Specifically, for the first time we
showed that the rs10732516 [A] polymorphism, located in a critical CTCF binding
site in the H19 ICR locus, is strongly associated with increased hypermethylation
of specific CpG sites in the maternal H19 allele. Together, our results highlight
the impact of the genome on the epigenome and demonstrate that while DNA
methylation states are tightly maintained between genetically identical and
related individuals, there remains considerable epigenetic variation that may
contribute to disease susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC3184992
PMID: 21991322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Biochem J. 2012 Jan 15;441(2):645-52. doi: 10.1042/BJ20111417.

ADP-ribose polymers localized on Ctcf-Parp1-Dnmt1 complex prevent methylation of 
Ctcf target sites.

Zampieri M(1), Guastafierro T, Calabrese R, Ciccarone F, Bacalini MG, Reale A,
Perilli M, Passananti C, Caiafa P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biotechnologies and Hematology, Faculty of Pharmacy and
Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, V.le Regina Elena 324, 00161 Rome, Italy.

PARylation [poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation] is involved in the maintenance of genomic
methylation patterns through its control of Dnmt1 [DNA
(cytosine-5)-methyltransferase 1] activity. Our previous findings indicated that 
Ctcf (CCCTC-binding factor) may be an important player in key events whereby
PARylation controls the unmethylated status of some CpG-rich regions. Ctcf is
able to activate Parp1 [poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1], which ADP-ribosylates
itself and, in turn, inhibits DNA methylation via non-covalent interaction
between its ADP-ribose polymers and Dnmt1. By such a mechanism, Ctcf may preserve
the epigenetic pattern at promoters of important housekeeping genes. The results 
of the present study showed Dnmt1 as a new protein partner of Ctcf. Moreover, we 
show that Ctcf forms a complex with Dnmt1 and PARylated Parp1 at specific Ctcf
target sequences and that PARylation is responsible for the maintenance of the
unmethylated status of some Ctcf-bound CpGs. We suggest a mechanism by which
Parp1, tethered and activated at specific DNA target sites by Ctcf, preserves
their methylation-free status.

PMCID: PMC3258657
PMID: 21985173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Biochem Cell Biol. 2011 Oct;89(5):505-13. doi: 10.1139/o11-052.

CTCF, cohesin, and histone variants: connecting the genome.

Millau JF(1), Gaudreau L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, QC J1K 2R1, Canada. Jean-Francois.Millau@usherbrooke.ca

During the last decades our view of the genome organization has changed. We moved
from a linear view to a looped view of the genome. It is now well established
that inter- and intra-connections occur between chromosomes and play a major role
in gene regulations. These interconnections are mainly orchestrated by the CTCF
protein, which is also known as the "master weaver" of the genome. Recent
advances in sequencing and genome-wide studies revealed that CTCF binds to DNA at
thousands of sites within the human genome, providing the possibility to form
thousands of genomic connection hubs. Strikingly, two histone variants, namely
H2A.Z and H3.3, strongly co-localize at CTCF binding sites. In this article, we
will review the recent advances in CTCF biology and discuss the role of histone
variants H2A.Z and H3.3 at CTCF binding sites.

PMID: 21970734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Nature. 2011 Nov 3;479(7371):74-9. doi: 10.1038/nature10442.

CTCF-promoted RNA polymerase II pausing links DNA methylation to splicing.

Shukla S(1), Kavak E, Gregory M, Imashimizu M, Shutinoski B, Kashlev M,
Oberdoerffer P, Sandberg R, Oberdoerffer S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Mouse Cancer Genetics Program, National Cancer
Institute at Frederick, Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

Alternative splicing of pre-messenger RNA is a key feature of transcriptome
expansion in eukaryotic cells, yet its regulation is poorly understood.
Spliceosome assembly occurs co-transcriptionally, raising the possibility that
DNA structure may directly influence alternative splicing. Supporting such an
association, recent reports have identified distinct histone methylation
patterns, elevated nucleosome occupancy and enriched DNA methylation at exons
relative to introns. Moreover, the rate of transcription elongation has been
linked to alternative splicing. Here we provide the first evidence that a
DNA-binding protein, CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), can promote inclusion of weak
upstream exons by mediating local RNA polymerase II pausing both in a mammalian
model system for alternative splicing, CD45, and genome-wide. We further show
that CTCF binding to CD45 exon 5 is inhibited by DNA methylation, leading to
reciprocal effects on exon 5 inclusion. These findings provide a mechanistic
basis for developmental regulation of splicing outcome through heritable
epigenetic marks.

PMID: 21964334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Oct 11;108(41):17195-200. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1114357108. Epub 2011 Sep 26.

Regulatory elements required for the activation and repression of the
protocadherin-alpha gene cluster.

Kehayova P(1), Monahan K, Chen W, Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA.

The mouse protocadherin (Pcdh) -a, -ß, and -<U+03B3> gene clusters encode more than 50
protein isoforms, the combinatorial expression of which generates vast
single-cell diversity in the brain. At present, the mechanisms by which this
diversity is expressed are not understood. Here we show that two transcriptional 
enhancer elements, HS5-1 and HS7, play a critical role in Pcdha gene expression
in mice. We show that the HS5-1 element functions as an enhancer in neurons and a
silencer in nonneuronal cells. The enhancer activity correlates with the binding 
of zinc finger DNA binding protein CTCF to the target promoters, and the silencer
activity requires the binding of the REST/NRSF repressor complex in nonneuronal
cells. Thus, the HS5-1 element functions as a neuron-specific enhancer and
nonneuronal cell repressor. In contrast, the HS7 element functions as a Pcdha
cluster-wide transcription enhancer element. These studies reveal a complex
organization of regulatory elements required for generating single cell Pcdh
diversity.

PMCID: PMC3193253
PMID: 21949399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mol Cell Biochem. 2012 Jan;360(1-2):243-51. doi: 10.1007/s11010-011-1063-3. Epub 
2011 Sep 23.

CTCF and cohesin cooperatively mediate the cell-type specific interchromatin
interaction between Bcl11b and Arhgap6 loci.

Ren L(1), Shi M, Wang Y, Yang Z, Wang X, Zhao Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioreactor Engineering, East China University of
Science and Technology, Shanghai, China.

CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a master organizer of genome spatial organization 
and plays an important role in mediating extensive chromatin interactions.
Circular chromosome conformation capture (4C) is a high-throughput approach that 
allows genome-wide screening for unknown potential interaction partners. Using a 
conserved CTCF binding site on the Bcl11b locus as bait, an interaction partner
at the Arhgap6 locus on a different chromosome was identified by 4C. Additional
experiments verified that the interchromatin interaction between the Bcl11b and
Arhgap6 loci was cell-type specific, which was cooperatively mediated by CTCF and
cohesin. Functional analysis showed that the interchromatin interaction partners 
were repressing regulatory elements. These results indicate that interaction
chromatin loops regulate the expression of the relevant genes.

PMID: 21948239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Mol Immunol. 2011 Oct;49(1-2):297-303. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2011.08.024. Epub
2011 Sep 25.

Interaction between the immunoglobulin heavy chain 3' regulatory region and the
IgH transcription unit during B cell differentiation.

Ju Z(1), Chatterjee S, Birshtein BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY,
USA.

The immunoglobulin heavy (Igh) chain locus is subject to precisely regulated
processes, such as variable region gene formation through recombination of
variable (V(H)), diversity (D(H)), and joining (J(H)) segments, class switching
and somatic hypermutation. The 3' regulatory region (3' RR) is a key regulator of
the Igh locus, and, as revealed by deletions in mouse plasma cell lines and mice,
is required for IgH expression as well as class switching. One of the mechanisms 
by which the 3' RR regulates its targets is through long-range physical
interactions. Such interactions between elements of the 3' RR and a target site
in the IgH transcription unit have been detected in plasma cells, and in resting 
and switching B cells, where they have been associated with IgH expression and
class switching, respectively. Here, we report that lentiviral shRNA knockdown of
transcription factors, CTCF, Oct-2, or OBF-1/OCA-B, had no discernible defects in
loop formation or H chain expression in plasma cells. J(H)-3' RR interactions in 
pre-B cell lines were specifically associated with IgH expression. J(H)-3' RR
interactions were not detected in either Pax5-deficient or RAG-deficient pro-B
cells, but were apparent in an Abelson-derived pro-B cell line. These
observations imply that the 3' RR has different loop interactions with target Igh
sequences at different stages of B cell development and Igh regulation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3238056
PMID: 21945019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Biochem Cell Biol. 2011 Oct;89(5):469-78. doi: 10.1139/o11-043. Epub 2011 Sep 21.

Setting up and maintaining differential insulators and boundaries for genomic
imprinting.

Murrell A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, London, England. amm207@cam.ac.uk

It is becoming increasingly clear that gene expression is strongly regulated by
the surrounding chromatin and nuclear environment. Gene regulatory elements can
influence expression over long distances and the genome needs mechanisms whereby 
transcription can be contained. Our current understanding of the mechanisms
whereby insulator/boundary elements organise the genome into active and silent
domains is based on chromatin looping models that separate genes and regulatory
elements. Imprinted genes have parent-of-origin specific chromatin conformation
that seems to be maintained in somatic tissues and reprogrammed in the germline. 
This review focuses on the proteins found to be present at insulator/boundary
sequences at imprinted genes and examines the experimental evidence at the
IGF2-H19 locus for a model in which CTCF or other proteins determine primary
looping scaffolds that are maintained in most cell lineages and speculates how
these loops may enable dynamic secondary associations that can activate or
silence genes.

PMID: 21936680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jan;40(2):511-29. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr750. Epub 2011 Sep 
19.

Genome-wide prediction and analysis of human chromatin boundary elements.

Wang J(1), Lunyak VV, Jordan IK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA.

Boundary elements partition eukaryotic chromatin into active and repressive
domains, and can also block regulatory interactions between domains. Boundary
elements act via diverse mechanisms making accurate feature-based computational
predictions difficult. Therefore, we developed an unbiased algorithm that
predicts the locations of human boundary elements based on the genomic
distributions of chromatin and transcriptional states, as opposed to any
intrinsic characteristics that they may possess. Application of our algorithm to 
ChIP-seq data for histone modifications and RNA Pol II-binding data in human
CD4(+) T cells resulted in the prediction of 2542 putative chromatin boundary
elements genome wide. Predicted boundary elements display two distinct features: 
first, position-specific open chromatin and histone acetylation that is
coincident with the recruitment of sequence-specific DNA-binding factors such as 
CTCF, EVI1 and YYI, and second, a directional and gradual increase in histone
lysine methylation across predicted boundaries coincident with a gain of
expression of non-coding RNAs, including examples of boundaries encoded by tRNA
and other non-coding RNA genes. Accordingly, a number of the predicted human
boundaries may function via the synergistic action of sequence-specific
recruitment of transcription factors leading to non-coding RNA transcriptional
interference and the blocking of facultative heterochromatin propagation by
transcription-associated chromatin remodeling complexes.

PMCID: PMC3258141
PMID: 21930510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Dev Cell. 2011 Sep 13;21(3):389-90. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.08.022.

Wt1 flip-flops chromatin in a CTCF domain.

Gurudatta BV(1), Corces VG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2011 Sep 13;21(3):559-74.

CTCF plays diverse roles in nuclear organization and transcriptional regulation. 
In this issue of Developmental Cell, Essafi et al. (2011) report a mechanism by
which the repressive or active state of chromatin in a domain defined by CTCF can
be switched by the Wt1 transcription factor to regulate gene expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3175091
PMID: 21920307  [PubMed]


79. Biochem Cell Biol. 2011 Oct;89(5):489-94. doi: 10.1139/o11-040. Epub 2011 Sep 14.

The role of CTCF in coordinating the expression of single gene loci.

Gillen AE(1), Harris A.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Children's Memorial Research Center,
Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine
Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

The CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), which binds insulator elements in vertebrates,
also facilitates coordinated gene expression at several gene clusters, including 
the ß-globin, Igf2/H19 (insulin like growth factor 2/H19 noncoding RNA), and
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II loci. CTCF controls expression of
these genes both by enabling insulator function and facilitating higher order
chromatin interactions. While the role of CTCF in gene regulation is best studied
at these multi-gene loci, there is also evidence that CTCF contributes to the
regulated expression of single genes. Here, we discuss how CTCF participates in
coordinating gene expression at the CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator) and IFNG (interferon-gamma) loci. We consider the
structural similarities between the loci with regard to CTCF-binding elements,
the possible interaction between nuclear receptors and CTCF, and the role of CTCF
in chromatin looping at these genes. These comparisons reveal a functional model 
that may be applicable to other single-gene loci that require CTCF for
coordinated gene expression.

PMID: 21916612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jan;40(1):132-47. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr610. Epub 2011 Sep 
13.

An insulator loop resides between the synthetically interacting elements of the
human/rat conserved breast cancer susceptibility locus MCS5A/Mcs5a.

Smits BM(1), Traun BD, Devries TL, Tran A, Samuelson D, Haag JD, Gould M.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Oncology, School of
Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706,
USA.

Many low-penetrance breast cancer susceptibility loci are found to be located in 
non-protein-coding regions, suggesting their involvement in gene expression
regulation. We identified the human/rat-conserved breast cancer susceptibility
locus MCS5A/Mcs5a. This locus has been shown to act in a non-mammary
cell-autonomous fashion through the immune system. The resistant Mcs5a allele
from the Wistar-Kyoto (WKy) rat strain consists of two non-protein-coding genetic
elements that must be located on the same chromosome to elicit the phenotype. In 
this study, we show the presence of a conserved higher order chromatin structure 
in MCS5A/Mcs5a located in between the synthetically interacting genetic elements.
The looped elements are shown to be bound by CTCF and cohesin. We identify the
downregulation of Fbxo10 expression in T cells as a strong candidate mechanism
through which the interacting genetic elements of the resistant Mcs5a allele
modulate mammary carcinoma susceptibility. Finally, we show that the human MCS5A 
polymorphisms associated with breast cancer risk are located at both sides of the
looped structure and functionally interact to downregulate transcriptional
activity, similar to rat Mcs5a. We propose a mechanistic model for MCS5a/Mcs5a in
which a CTCF-mediated insulator loop encompassing the TOMM5/Tomm5 gene, resides
in between and brings into closer physical proximity the synthetically and
functionally interacting resistant genetic variants.

PMCID: PMC3245909
PMID: 21914726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23984. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023984. Epub 2011 Aug 30.

Activation of oxidative stress-regulated Bcl-3 suppresses CTCF in corneal
epithelial cells.

Wang Y(1), Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California Los Angeles, Torrance, California, United States of America.

Epigenetic factor CTCF (CCCTC binding factor) plays important roles in genetic
controls of the cell fate. Previous studies found in corneal epithelial cells
that CTCF is regulated by epidermal growth factor (EGF) through activation of
NF-<U+03BA>B p65/p50. It also found that CTCF is suppressed in ultraviolet (UV)
stress-induced corneal epithelial cells. However, it is still unknown how UV
stress down-regulates CTCF affecting the cell fate. In the present study, we
report that regulation of CTCF by extracellular stress signals is dependent upon 
activations of an oxidative stress-regulated protein Bcl-3. We found that
activated Bcl-3 was able to bind to the <U+03BA>B sites identified in the CTCF promoter 
region. Bcl-3 was activated by UV irradiation to interact with NF-<U+03BA>B p50 by
forming a Bcl-3/p50 heterodimer complex. The Bcl-3/p50 complex suppressed CTCF
promoter activity to down-regulate CTCF transcription. Unlike the effect of EGF, 
UV stress-induced Bcl-3 activation suppressed CTCF activity without involving the
I<U+03BA>Ba and p65 pathway. Thus, results of the study reveal a novel mechanism for
regulatory control of CTCF in UV stress-induced human corneal epithelial cells,
which requires activation and formation of Bcl-3/p50 complex through a
noncanonical NF-<U+03BA>B pathway.

PMCID: PMC3166060
PMID: 21912613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jan;40(1):270-83. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr737. Epub 2011 Sep 
12.

Genomic binding of Pol III transcription machinery and relationship with TFIIS
transcription factor distribution in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Carrière L(1), Graziani S, Alibert O, Ghavi-Helm Y, Boussouar F, Humbertclaude H,
Jounier S, Aude JC, Keime C, Murvai J, Foglio M, Gut M, Gut I, Lathrop M,
Soutourina J, Gérard M, Werner M.

Author information: 
(1)Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique et aux Energies Alternatives, iBiTec-S,
F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France.

RNA polymerase (Pol) III synthesizes the tRNAs, the 5S ribosomal RNA and a small 
number of untranslated RNAs. In vitro, it also transcribes short interspersed
nuclear elements (SINEs). We investigated the distribution of Pol III and its
associated transcription factors on the genome of mouse embryonic stem cells
using a highly specific tandem ChIP-Seq method. Only a subset of the annotated
class III genes was bound and thus transcribed. A few hundred SINEs were
associated with the Pol III transcription machinery. We observed that Pol III and
its transcription factors were present at 30 unannotated sites on the mouse
genome, only one of which was conserved in human. An RNA was associated with >80%
of these regions. More than 2200 regions bound by TFIIIC transcription factor
were devoid of Pol III. These sites were associated with cohesins and often
located close to CTCF-binding sites, suggesting that TFIIIC might cooperate with 
these factors to organize the chromatin. We also investigated the genome-wide
distribution of the ubiquitous TFIIS variant, TCEA1. We found that, as in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, TFIIS is associated with class III genes and also with 
SINEs suggesting that TFIIS is a Pol III transcription factor in mammals.

PMCID: PMC3245943
PMID: 21911356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Nature. 2011 Sep 11;477(7365):424-30. doi: 10.1038/nature10495.

CTCF-binding elements mediate control of V(D)J recombination.

Guo C(1), Yoon HS, Franklin A, Jain S, Ebert A, Cheng HL, Hansen E, Despo O,
Bossen C, Vettermann C, Bates JG, Richards N, Myers D, Patel H, Gallagher M,
Schlissel MS, Murre C, Busslinger M, Giallourakis CC, Alt FW.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Children's Hospital, The Immune Disease
Institute, Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 300 Longwood Avenue,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) variable region exons are assembled from V(H), D
and J(H) gene segments in developing B lymphocytes. Within the 2.7-megabase mouse
Igh locus, V(D)J recombination is regulated to ensure specific and diverse
antibody repertoires. Here we report in mice a key Igh V(D)J recombination
regulatory region, termed intergenic control region 1 (IGCR1), which lies between
the V(H) and D clusters. Functionally, IGCR1 uses CTCF looping/insulator
factor-binding elements and, correspondingly, mediates Igh loops containing
distant enhancers. IGCR1 promotes normal B-cell development and balances antibody
repertoires by inhibiting transcription and rearrangement of D(H)-proximal V(H)
gene segments and promoting rearrangement of distal V(H) segments. IGCR1
maintains ordered and lineage-specific V(H)(D)J(H) recombination by suppressing
V(H) joining to D segments not joined to J(H) segments, and V(H) to DJ(H) joins
in thymocytes, respectively. IGCR1 is also required for feedback regulation and
allelic exclusion of proximal V(H)-to-DJ(H) recombination. Our studies elucidate 
a long-sought Igh V(D)J recombination control region and indicate a new role for 
the generally expressed CTCF protein.

© 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

PMCID: PMC3342812
PMID: 21909113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Sep 13;108(37):15231-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1104662108. Epub 2011 Sep 6.

Restraint of angiogenesis by zinc finger transcription factor CTCF-dependent
chromatin insulation.

Tang M(1), Chen B, Lin T, Li Z, Pardo C, Pampo C, Chen J, Lien CL, Wu L, Ai L,
Wang H, Yao K, Oh SP, Seto E, Smith LE, Siemann DW, Kladde MP, Cepko CL, Lu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610-3633, USA.

Angiogenesis is meticulously controlled by a fine balance between positive and
negative regulatory activities. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a
predominant angiogenic factor and its dosage is precisely regulated during normal
vascular formation. In cancer, VEGF is commonly overproduced, resulting in
abnormal neovascularization. VEGF is induced in response to various stimuli
including hypoxia; however, very little is known about the mechanisms that
confine its induction to ensure proper angiogenesis. Chromatin insulation is a
key transcription mechanism that prevents promiscuous gene activation by
interfering with the action of enhancers. Here we show that the chromatin
insulator-binding factor CTCF binds to the proximal promoter of VEGF. Consistent 
with the enhancer-blocking mode of chromatin insulators, CTCF has little effect
on basal expression of VEGF but specifically affects its activation by enhancers.
CTCF knockdown cells are sensitized for induction of VEGF and exhibit elevated
proangiogenic potential. Cancer-derived CTCF missense mutants are mostly
defective in blocking enhancers at the VEGF locus. Moreover, during mouse retinal
development, depletion of CTCF causes excess angiogenesis. Therefore,
CTCF-mediated chromatin insulation acts as a crucial safeguard against
hyperactivation of angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3174592
PMID: 21896759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Biochem Cell Biol. 2011 Oct;89(5):459-68. doi: 10.1139/o11-033. Epub 2011 Sep 7.

CTCF function is modulated by neighboring DNA binding factors.

Weth O(1), Renkawitz R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, D35392 Giessen,
Germany. oliver.weth@gen.bio.uni-giessen.de

The zinc-finger protein CTCF was originally identified in the context of gene
silencing and gene repression (Baniahmad et al. 1990; Lobanenkov et al. 1990).
CTCF was later shown to be involved in several transcriptional mechanisms such as
gene activation (Vostrov et al. 2002) and enhancer blocking (Filippova et al.
2001; Hark et al. 2000; Kanduri et al. 2000; Lutz et al. 2003; Szabó et al. 2000;
Tanimoto et al. 2003; Phillips and Corces 2009; Bell et al. 1999; Zlatanova and
Caiafa 2009a, 2009b). Insulators block the action of enhancers when positioned
between enhancer and promoter. CTCF was found to be required in almost all cases 
of enhancer blocking tested in vertebrates. This CTCF-mediated enhancer blocking 
is in many instances conferred by constitutive CTCF action. For some examples
however, a modulation of the enhancer blocking activity was documented (Lutz et
al. 2003; Weth et al. 2010). One mechanism is achieved by regulation of binding
to DNA. It was shown that CTCF is not able to bind to those binding-sites
containing methylated CpG sequences. At the imprinting control region (ICR) of
the Igf2/H19 locus the binding-site for CTCF on the paternal allele is
methylated. This prevents DNA-binding of CTCF, resulting in the loss of enhancer 
blocking (Bell and Felsenfeld 2000; Chao et al. 2002; Filippova et al. 2001; Hark
et al. 2000; Kanduri et al. 2000, 2002; Szabó et al. 2000; Takai et al. 2001).
Not only can DNA methylation interfere with CTCF binding to DNA, it was also
shown in one report that RNA transcription through the CTCF binding site results 
in CTCF eviction (Lefevre et al. 2008). In contrast to these cases most of the
DNA sites are not differentially bound by CTCF. Even CTCF interaction with its
cofactor cohesin does not seem to differ in different cell types (Schmidt et al. 
2010). These results indicate that regulation of CTCF activity might be achieved 
by neighboring factors bound to DNA. In fact, whole genome analyses of CTCF
binding sites identified several classes of neighboring sequences (Dickson et al.
2010; Boyle et al. 2010; Essien et al. 2009). Therefore, in this review we will
summarize those results for which a combined action of CTCF with factors bound
adjacently was found. These neighboring factors include the RNA polymerases I, II
and III, another zinc finger factor VEZF1 and the factors YY1, SMAD, TR and Oct4.
Each of these seems to influence, modulate or determine the function of CTCF.
Thereby, at least some of the pleiotropic effects of CTCF can be explained.

PMID: 21895576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Cell. 2011 Sep 2;146(5):720-31. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.08.005.

Control of embryonic stem cell lineage commitment by core promoter factor, TAF3.

Liu Z(1), Scannell DR, Eisen MB, Tjian R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Molecular and Cell Biology Department,
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

Deciphering the molecular basis of pluripotency is fundamental to our
understanding of development and embryonic stem cell function. Here, we report
that TAF3, a TBP-associated core promoter factor, is highly enriched in ES cells.
In this context, TAF3 is required for endoderm lineage differentiation and
prevents premature specification of neuroectoderm and mesoderm. In addition to
its role in the core promoter recognition complex TFIID, genome-wide binding
studies reveal that TAF3 localizes to a subset of chromosomal regions bound by
CTCF/cohesin that are selectively associated with genes upregulated by TAF3.
Notably, CTCF directly recruits TAF3 to promoter distal sites and TAF3-dependent 
DNA looping is observed between the promoter distal sites and core promoters
occupied by TAF3/CTCF/cohesin. Together, our findings support a new role of TAF3 
in mediating long-range chromatin regulatory interactions that safeguard the
finely-balanced transcriptional programs underlying pluripotency.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3191068
PMID: 21884934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Virol. 2011 Nov;85(21):11159-69. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00720-11. Epub 2011 Aug 31.

Mechanism of glycyrrhizic acid inhibition of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus: disruption of CTCF-cohesin-mediated RNA polymerase II pausing and
sister chromatid cohesion.

Kang H(1), Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104-4268, USA.

Glycyrrhizic acid (GA), a derivative of licorice, selectively inhibits the growth
of lymphocytes latently infected with Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus.
The mechanism involves the deregulation of the multicistronic latency transcript,
including the failure to generate the mature forms of viral mRNA encoding LANA.
We show here that GA disrupts an RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) complex that
accumulates at the CTCF-cohesin binding site within the first intron of the
latency transcript. GA altered the enrichment of the RNAPII pausing complex,
along with pausing factors SPT5 and NELF-A, at the intragenic CTCF-cohesin
binding sites. GA blocked the interaction of cohesin subunit SMC3 with another
cohesin subunit, RAD21, and reduced SPT5 interaction with RNAPII. Covalent
coupling of GA to a solid support revealed that GA interacts with several
cellular proteins, including SMC3 and SPT5, but not their respective interaction 
partners RAD21 and RNAPII. GA treatment also inhibited the transcription of some 
cellular genes, like c-myc, which contain a similar CTCF-cohesin binding site
within the first intron. We also found that GA leads to a more general loss of
sister chromatid cohesion for cellular chromosomes. These findings suggest that
RNAPII pauses at intragenic CTCF-cohesin binding sites and that abrogation of
this pausing by GA leads to loss of proper mRNA production and defects in sister 
chromatid cohesion, a process important for both viral and cellular chromosome
stability.

PMCID: PMC3194953
PMID: 21880767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Aug;7(8):e1002140. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002140. Epub 2011
Aug 18.

Coordination of KSHV latent and lytic gene control by CTCF-cohesin mediated
chromosome conformation.

Kang H(1), Wiedmer A, Yuan Y, Robertson E, Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Herpesvirus persistence requires a dynamic balance between latent and lytic cycle
gene expression, but how this balance is maintained remains enigmatic. We have
previously shown that the Kaposi's Sarcoma-Associated Herpesvirus (KSHV) major
latency transcripts encoding LANA, vCyclin, vFLIP, v-miRNAs, and Kaposin are
regulated, in part, by a chromatin organizing element that binds CTCF and
cohesins. Using viral genome-wide chromatin conformation capture (3C) methods, we
now show that KSHV latency control region is physically linked to the promoter
regulatory region for ORF50, which encodes the KSHV immediate early protein RTA. 
Other linkages were also observed, including an interaction between the 5' and 3'
end of the latency transcription cluster. Mutation of the CTCF-cohesin binding
site reduced or eliminated the chromatin conformation linkages, and deregulated
viral transcription and genome copy number control. siRNA depletion of CTCF or
cohesin subunits also disrupted chromosomal linkages and deregulated viral latent
and lytic gene transcription. Furthermore, the linkage between the latent and
lytic control region was subject to cell cycle fluctuation and disrupted during
lytic cycle reactivation, suggesting that these interactions are dynamic and
regulatory. Our findings indicate that KSHV genomes are organized into chromatin 
loops mediated by CTCF and cohesin interactions, and that these inter-chromosomal
linkages coordinate latent and lytic gene control.

PMCID: PMC3158054
PMID: 21876668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Dev Cell. 2011 Sep 13;21(3):559-74. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.07.014. Epub 2011 
Aug 25.

A wt1-controlled chromatin switching mechanism underpins tissue-specific wnt4
activation and repression.

Essafi A(1), Webb A, Berry RL, Slight J, Burn SF, Spraggon L, Velecela V,
Martinez-Estrada OM, Wiltshire JH, Roberts SG, Brownstein D, Davies JA, Hastie
ND, Hohenstein P.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit and Institute for Genetics and Molecular Medicine,
Western General Hospital, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK. aessa<U+FB01>@hgu.mrc.ac.uk

Comment on
    Dev Cell. 2011 Sep 13;21(3):389-90.

Wt1 regulates the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in the epicardium and
the reverse process (MET) in kidney mesenchyme. The mechanisms underlying these
reciprocal functions are unknown. Here, we show in both embryos and cultured
cells that Wt1 regulates Wnt4 expression dichotomously. In kidney cells, Wt1
recruits Cbp and p300 as coactivators; in epicardial cells it enlists Basp1 as a 
corepressor. Surprisingly, in both tissues, Wt1 loss reciprocally switches the
chromatin architecture of the entire Ctcf-bounded Wnt4 locus, but not the
flanking regions; we term this mode of action "chromatin flip-flop." Ctcf and
cohesin are dispensable for Wt1-mediated chromatin flip-flop but essential for
maintaining the insulating boundaries. This work demonstrates that a
developmental regulator coordinates chromatin boundaries with the transcriptional
competence of the flanked region. These findings also have implications for
hierarchical transcriptional regulation in development and disease.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3604688
PMID: 21871842  [PubMed]


90. Methods Mol Biol. 2011;780:293-312. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-270-0_18.

Generation of poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation deficient mutants of the transcription
factor, CTCF.

Farrar D(1), Chernukhin I, Klenova E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Wivenhoe Park,
Colchester, Essex, UK.

Generation of the mutated versions of proteins deficient for
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation (PARylation) is a major challenge because there is no
clearly defined consensus site for PARylation. In this chapter, we describe
possible strategies to produce such mutants, demonstrated by the example of CTCF,
a transcription factor. To achieve this in our study, the protein domain modified
by PARylation was mapped and the amino acids, which can be potentially PARylated,
selected. Mutations of such individual amino acids as either single or
combinatorial mutations were introduced by site-directed mutagenesis, using
mutagenic primers and the wild-type sequences as a template. Mutants were
validated by DNA sequencing and assessed for the presence of the PARylation mark.
The latter was achieved by ectopic expression of mutated proteins in cells,
followed by immunoprecipitation with the polyclonal anti-PAR antibody and Western
analysis with a protein-specific antibody. The PARylation-deficient CTCF mutant
was identified and compared with the wild-type protein. Based on several general 
characteristics (nuclear distribution/localisation, stability and levels of
expression in the cell), the PARylation-deficient mutant was comparable with the 
wild-type CTCF.

PMID: 21870268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Feb;20(2):240-3. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.166. Epub 2011 Aug 
24.

Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome caused by maternally inherited mutation of an
OCT-binding motif in the IGF2/H19-imprinting control region, ICR1.

Poole RL(1), Leith DJ, Docherty LE, Shmela ME, Gicquel C, Splitt M, Temple IK,
Mackay DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.

The imprinted expression of the IGF2 and H19 genes is controlled by the
imprinting control region 1 (ICR1) located at chromosome 11p15.5. DNA methylation
defects involving ICR1 result in two growth disorders with opposite phenotypes:
an overgrowth disorder, the Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (maternal ICR1
hypermethylation in 10% of BWS cases) and a growth retardation disorder, the
Silver-Russell syndrome (paternal ICR1 loss of methylation in 60% of SRS cases). 
In familial BWS, hypermethylation of ICR1 has been found in association with
microdeletion of repetitive DNA motifs within ICR1 that bind the zinc finger
protein CTCF; but more recently, ICR1 point mutations were described in BWS
pedigrees. We present a case report of two brothers with BWS and prolonged
post-pubertal growth resulting in very large stature. A maternally inherited
point mutation was identified in ICR1 in both brothers, which altered binding of 
OCT transcription factors. The same mutation was present on the paternally
inherited allele of their unaffected mother. This is a second report of a point
mutation causing ICR1 hypermethylation by altering an OCT-binding motif. The
atypical growth phenotype of the brothers may be connected to the unusual
underlying cause of their BWS.

PMCID: PMC3260935
PMID: 21863054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Nov 15;20(22):4452-61. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr376. Epub 2011 Aug
23.

Genomic imprinting at a boundary element flanking the SDHD locus.

Baysal BE(1), McKay SE, Kim YJ, Zhang Z, Alila L, Willett-Brozick JE, Pacak K,
Kim TH, Shadel GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06510, USA. bora.baysal@roswellpark.org

Germline mutations in SDHD, a mitochondrial complex II (succinate dehydrogenase) 
subunit gene at chromosome band 11q23, cause highly penetrant paraganglioma (PGL)
tumors when transmitted through fathers. In contrast, maternal transmission
rarely, if ever, leads to tumor development. The mechanism underlying this
unusual monogenic tumor predisposition pattern is poorly understood. Here, we
describe identification of imprinted methylation within an alternative promoter
for a large intergenic non-coding RNA located at a distant gene desert boundary
flanking SDHD. Methylation at this site primarily occurs within two consecutive
HpaII restriction enzyme sites in a tissue-specific manner, most commonly in the 
adrenal gland. Informative fetal tissues and PGL tumors demonstrate maternal
allelic hypermethylation. While a strong binding site for the enhancer-blocking
protein CTCF within the alternative promoter shows no evidence of methylation,
hyper-methylated adrenal tissues show increased binding of the chromatin-looping 
factor cohesin relative to the hypo-methylated tissues. These results suggest
that the differential allelic methylation we observe at this locus is associated 
with altered chromatin architectures. These results provide molecular evidence
for imprinting at a boundary element flanking the SDHD locus and suggest that
epigenetic suppression of the maternal allele is the underlying mechanism of the 
imprinted penetrance of SDHD mutations.

PMCID: PMC3196894
PMID: 21862453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Genes Dev. 2011 Aug 15;25(16):1686-701. doi: 10.1101/gad.16651211.

RNAi-independent role for Argonaute2 in CTCF/CP190 chromatin insulator function.

Moshkovich N(1), Nisha P, Boyle PJ, Thompson BA, Dale RK, Lei EP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

A major role of the RNAi pathway in Schizosaccharomyces pombe is to nucleate
heterochromatin, but it remains unclear whether this mechanism is conserved. To
address this question in Drosophila, we performed genome-wide localization of
Argonaute2 (AGO2) by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-seq in two different
embryonic cell lines and found that AGO2 localizes to euchromatin but not
heterochromatin. This localization pattern is further supported by
immunofluorescence staining of polytene chromosomes and cell lines, and these
studies also indicate that a substantial fraction of AGO2 resides in the nucleus.
Intriguingly, AGO2 colocalizes extensively with CTCF/CP190 chromatin insulators
but not with genomic regions corresponding to endogenous siRNA production.
Moreover, AGO2, but not its catalytic activity or Dicer-2, is required for
CTCF/CP190-dependent Fab-8 insulator function. AGO2 interacts physically with
CTCF and CP190, and depletion of either CTCF or CP190 results in genome-wide loss
of AGO2 chromatin association. Finally, mutation of CTCF, CP190, or AGO2 leads to
reduction of chromosomal looping interactions, thereby altering gene expression. 
We propose that RNAi-independent recruitment of AGO2 to chromatin by insulator
proteins promotes the definition of transcriptional domains throughout the
genome.

PMCID: PMC3165934
PMID: 21852534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Biochem Cell Biol. 2011 Oct;89(5):479-88. doi: 10.1139/o11-031. Epub 2011 Aug 17.

Insulation of tumor suppressor genes by the nuclear factor CTCF.

Recillas-Targa F(1), de la Rosa-Velázquez IA, Soto-Reyes E.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Departamento de Genética Molecular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Apartado Postal 70-242, México D.F.
04510, México. frecilla@ifc.unam.mx

One of the most outstanding nuclear factors, which has chromatin insulator and
transcriptional properties and also contribute to genomic organization, is the
zinc-finger protein CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF). Among its multiple functions, a 
growing amount of evidence implicates CTCF in the epigenetic regulation of genes 
responsible for the control of the cell cycle, and its mis-regulation can lead to
aberrant epigenetic silencing of genes involved in cancer development. Detailed
studies are now revealing that CTCF can serve as a barrier against the spread of 
DNA methylation and histone repressive marks over promoter regions of tumor
suppressor genes. Moreover, new evidences points out to the capacity of CTCF to
be covalently modified, in particular, through poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation with
regulatory consequences. An unexplored aspect of CTCF is its intergenic and
intragenic distribution in certain loci. Such distribution seems to facilitate
the formation of an optimal chromatin structure and the recruitment of chromatin 
remodelers with the possible incorporation of RNA polymerase II. Therefore, in
the context of tumor suppressor genes and cancer development, CTCF appears to
play a relevant role by incorporating a combination of mechanisms involved in the
protection against epigenetic silencing components and the maintenance of optimal
higher-order organization of the corresponding loci.

PMID: 21846316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Genetics. 2011 Oct;189(2):441-54. doi: 10.1534/genetics.111.132662. Epub 2011 Aug
11.

A boundary element between Tsix and Xist binds the chromatin insulator Ctcf and
contributes to initiation of X-chromosome inactivation.

Spencer RJ(1), del Rosario BC, Pinter SF, Lessing D, Sadreyev RI, Lee JT.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

In mammals, X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) equalizes X-linked gene expression
between XY males and XX females and is controlled by a specialized region known
as the X-inactivation center (Xic). The Xic harbors two chromatin interaction
domains, one centered around the noncoding Xist gene and the other around the
antisense Tsix counterpart. Previous work demonstrated the existence of a
chromatin transitional zone between the two domains. Here, we investigate the
region and discover a conserved element, RS14, that presents a strong binding
site for Ctcf protein. RS14 possesses an insulatory function suggestive of a
boundary element and is crucial for cell differentiation and growth. Knocking out
RS14 results in compromised Xist induction and aberrant XCI in female cells.
These data demonstrate that a junction element between Tsix and Xist contributes 
to the initiation of XCI.

PMCID: PMC3189804
PMID: 21840866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Nature. 2011 Aug 10;476(7361):467-71. doi: 10.1038/nature10312.

A role for cohesin in T-cell-receptor rearrangement and thymocyte
differentiation.

Seitan VC(1), Hao B, Tachibana-Konwalski K, Lavagnolli T, Mira-Bontenbal H, Brown
KE, Teng G, Carroll T, Terry A, Horan K, Marks H, Adams DJ, Schatz DG, Aragon L, 
Fisher AG, Krangel MS, Nasmyth K, Merkenschlager M.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Development Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College
London, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK.

Cohesin enables post-replicative DNA repair and chromosome segregation by holding
sister chromatids together from the time of DNA replication in S phase until
mitosis. There is growing evidence that cohesin also forms long-range chromosomal
cis-interactions and may regulate gene expression in association with CTCF,
mediator or tissue-specific transcription factors. Human cohesinopathies such as 
Cornelia de Lange syndrome are thought to result from impaired non-canonical
cohesin functions, but a clear distinction between the cell-division-related and 
cell-division-independent functions of cohesion--as exemplified in
Drosophila--has not been demonstrated in vertebrate systems. To address this,
here we deleted the cohesin locus Rad21 in mouse thymocytes at a time in
development when these cells stop cycling and rearrange their T-cell receptor
(TCR) a locus (Tcra). Rad21-deficient thymocytes had a normal lifespan and
retained the ability to differentiate, albeit with reduced efficiency. Loss of
Rad21 led to defective chromatin architecture at the Tcra locus, where
cohesion-binding sites flank the TEA promoter and the Ea enhancer, and demarcate 
Tcra from interspersed Tcrd elements and neighbouring housekeeping genes. Cohesin
was required for long-range promoter-enhancer interactions, Tcra transcription,
H3K4me3 histone modifications that recruit the recombination machinery and Tcra
rearrangement. Provision of pre-rearranged TCR transgenes largely rescued
thymocyte differentiation, demonstrating that among thousands of potential target
genes across the genome, defective Tcra rearrangement was limiting for the
differentiation of cohesin-deficient thymocytes. These findings firmly establish 
a cell-division-independent role for cohesin in Tcra locus rearrangement and
provide a comprehensive account of the mechanisms by which cohesin enables
cellular differentiation in a well-characterized mammalian system.

PMCID: PMC3179485
PMID: 21832993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Jul;7(7):e1002180. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002180. Epub 2011
Jul 28.

EBV latency types adopt alternative chromatin conformations.

Tempera I(1), Klichinsky M, Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) can establish latent infections with distinct gene
expression patterns referred to as latency types. These different latency types
are epigenetically stable and correspond to different promoter utilization. Here 
we explore the three-dimensional conformations of the EBV genome in different
latency types. We employed Chromosome Conformation Capture (3C) assay to
investigate chromatin loop formation between the OriP enhancer and the promoters 
that determine type I (Qp) or type III (Cp) gene expression. We show that OriP is
in close physical proximity to Qp in type I latency, and to Cp in type III
latency. The cellular chromatin insulator and boundary factor CTCF was implicated
in EBV chromatin loop formation. Combining 3C and ChIP assays we found that CTCF 
is physically associated with OriP-Qp loop formation in type I and OriP-Cp loop
formation in type III latency. Mutations in the CTCF binding site located at Qp
disrupt loop formation between Qp and OriP, and lead to the activation of Cp
transcription. Mutation of the CTCF binding site at Cp, as well as siRNA
depletion of CTCF eliminates both OriP-associated loops, indicating that CTCF
plays an integral role in loop formation. These data indicate that epigenetically
stable EBV latency types adopt distinct chromatin architectures that depend on
CTCF and mediate alternative promoter targeting by the OriP enhancer.

PMCID: PMC3145795
PMID: 21829357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Epigenetics. 2011 Sep 1;6(9):1068-77. doi: 10.4161/epi.6.9.16683. Epub 2011 Sep
1.

Transcriptional and epigenetic regulation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene.

Saldaña-Meyer R(1), Recillas-Targa F.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Departamento de Genética Molecular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F., México.

The p53 tumor suppressor is one of the most studied molecules in cancer research.
Despite the fact that there is a detailed understanding involving multiple
aspects of the p53-associated biology, many aspects of its transcriptional
regulation are still not well clarified. Limited information is available on how 
the p53 gene is transcriptional and epigenetically regulated. The p53 gene
expression is tightly controlled through a variety of transcription factors,
miRNAs, its anti-sense RNA Wrap53, the insulator protein CTCF and very likely by 
other genetic and epigenetic mechanisms. It's the intent of this article to
review in depth important aspects concerning the transcriptional regulation of
the p53 gene and perhaps serve as a stepping-stone to begin a conceptual change
on how future p53 research can be approached.

PMID: 21814038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2011 Aug 3;4:13. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-4-13.

The relationship between transcription initiation RNAs and CCCTC-binding factor
(CTCF) localization.

Taft RJ(1), Hawkins PG, Mattick JS, Morris KV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Kellogg School of
Science and Technology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. 
kmorris@scripps.edu.

BACKGROUND: Transcription initiation RNAs (tiRNAs) are nuclear localized 18
nucleotide RNAs derived from sequences immediately downstream of RNA polymerase
II (RNAPII) transcription start sites. Previous reports have shown that tiRNAs
are intimately correlated with gene expression, RNA polymerase II binding and
behaviors, and epigenetic marks associated with transcription initiation, but not
elongation.
RESULTS: In the present work, we show that tiRNAs are commonly found at genomic
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) binding sites in human and mouse, and that CTCF sites
that colocalize with RNAPII are highly enriched for tiRNAs. To directly
investigate the relationship between tiRNAs and CTCF we examined tiRNAs
originating near the intronic CTCF binding site in the human tumor suppressor
gene, p21 (cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1A gene, also known as CDKN1A).
Inhibition of CTCF-proximal tiRNAs resulted in increased CTCF localization and
increased p21 expression, while overexpression of CTCF-proximal tiRNA mimics
decreased CTCF localization and p21 expression. We also found that
tiRNA-regulated CTCF binding influences the levels of trimethylated H3K27 at the 
alternate upstream p21 promoter, and affects the levels of alternate p21 (p21alt)
transcripts. Extending these studies to another randomly selected locus with
conserved CTCF binding we found that depletion of tiRNA alters nucleosome density
proximal to sites of tiRNA biogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these data suggest that tiRNAs modulate local
epigenetic structure, which in turn regulates CTCF localization.

PMCID: PMC3170176
PMID: 21813016  [PubMed]


100. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2011 Aug 3;4:14. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-4-14.

Allele-specific transcriptional elongation regulates monoallelic expression of
the IGF2BP1 gene.

Thomas BJ(1), Rubio ED, Krumm N, Broin PO, Bomsztyk K, Welcsh P, Greally JM,
Golden AA, Krumm A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington
School of Medicine, 815 Mercer St,, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
akrumm@u.washington.edu.

BACKGROUND: Random monoallelic expression contributes to phenotypic variation of 
cells and organisms. However, the epigenetic mechanisms by which individual
alleles are randomly selected for expression are not known. Taking cues from
chromatin signatures at imprinted gene loci such as the insulin-like growth
factor 2 gene 2 (IGF2), we evaluated the contribution of CTCF, a zinc finger
protein required for parent-of-origin-specific expression of the IGF2 gene, as
well as a role for allele-specific association with DNA methylation, histone
modification and RNA polymerase II.
RESULTS: Using array-based chromatin immunoprecipitation, we identified 293
genomic loci that are associated with both CTCF and histone H3 trimethylated at
lysine 9 (H3K9me3). A comparison of their genomic positions with those of
previously published monoallelically expressed genes revealed no significant
overlap between allele-specifically expressed genes and colocalized CTCF/H3K9me3.
To analyze the contributions of CTCF and H3K9me3 to gene regulation in more
detail, we focused on the monoallelically expressed IGF2BP1 gene. In vitro
binding assays using the CTCF target motif at the IGF2BP1 gene, as well as
allele-specific analysis of cytosine methylation and CTCF binding, revealed that 
CTCF does not regulate mono- or biallelic IGF2BP1 expression. Surprisingly, we
found that RNA polymerase II is detected on both the maternal and paternal
alleles in B lymphoblasts that express IGF2BP1 primarily from one allele. Thus,
allele-specific control of RNA polymerase II elongation regulates the allelic
bias of IGF2BP1 gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Colocalization of CTCF and H3K9me3 does not represent a reliable
chromatin signature indicative of monoallelic expression. Moreover, association
of individual alleles with both active (H3K4me3) and silent (H3K27me3) chromatin 
modifications (allelic bivalent chromatin) or with RNA polymerase II also fails
to identify monoallelically expressed gene loci. The selection of individual
alleles for expression occurs in part during transcription elongation.

PMCID: PMC3174113
PMID: 21812971  [PubMed]


101. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22399. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022399. Epub 2011 Jul 19.

Widespread expression of BORIS/CTCFL in normal and cancer cells.

Jones TA(1), Ogunkolade BW, Szary J, Aarum J, Mumin MA, Patel S, Pieri CA, Sheer 
D.

Author information: 
(1)Queen Mary University of London, Centre for Neuroscience and Trauma, Blizard
Institute, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, United 
Kingdom.

BORIS (CTCFL) is the paralog of CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor; NM_006565), a
ubiquitously expressed DNA-binding protein with diverse roles in gene expression 
and chromatin organisation. BORIS and CTCF have virtually identical zinc finger
domains, yet display major differences in their respective C- and N-terminal
regions. Unlike CTCF, BORIS expression has been reported only in the testis and
certain malignancies, leading to its classification as a "cancer-testis" antigen.
However, the expression pattern of BORIS is both a significant and unresolved
question in the field of DNA binding proteins. Here, we identify BORIS in the
cytoplasm and nucleus of a wide range of normal and cancer cells. We compare the 
localization of CTCF and BORIS in the nucleus and demonstrate enrichment of BORIS
within the nucleolus, inside the nucleolin core structure and adjacent to
fibrillarin in the dense fibrillar component. In contrast, CTCF is not enriched
in the nucleolus. Live imaging of cells transiently transfected with GFP tagged
BORIS confirmed the nucleolar accumulation of BORIS. While BORIS transcript
levels are low compared to CTCF, its protein levels are readily detectable. These
findings show that BORIS expression is more widespread than previously believed, 
and suggest a role for BORIS in nucleolar function.

PMCID: PMC3139640
PMID: 21811597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Gene. 2011 Oct 15;486(1-2):65-73. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2011.07.016. Epub 2011 Jul 
20.

Transcriptional repression by the proximal exonic region at the human TERT gene.

Wong TC(1), Sokol ES, Schep AN, Punjiya M, Tran DA, Allan D, Drewell RA.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Harvey Mudd College, Claremont, CA 91711, USA.

In humans, the enzyme telomerase (hTERT) is responsible for the synthesis of new 
repeat sequences at the telomeres of chromosomes. Although active in early
embryogenesis, the hTERT gene is transcriptionally silenced in almost all somatic
cells in the adult, but is aberrantly re-activated in over 90% of human cancers. 
The molecular mechanisms responsible for repression of this gene are thought to
involve the transcription factor CTCF. In this study, we bioinformatically
identify putative CTCF binding sites in the hTERT proximal exonic region (PER)
and determine their functional relevance in mediating transcriptional silencing
at this gene. Tests using a reporter gene assay in HeLa cancer cells demonstrate 
that a sub-region of the PER exhibits strong transcriptional repressive activity.
This repression is independent of the previously identified CTCF binding site
near the transcriptional start site of the hTERT gene. In addition, site directed
mutagenesis of three predicted CTCF binding sites, including a previously
characterized in vivo site in exon 2, does not result in a loss of the repression
mediated by the PER. The results from this study indicate that expression of the 
hTERT gene in HeLa cells is regulated by sequences in the PER. This
transcriptional control is mediated through additional regulatory molecular
mechanisms, independent of CTCF binding.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21787851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 9;286(36):31875-84. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.251173. Epub 2011
Jul 19.

Brain-specific expression of N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase IX (GnT-IX) is
regulated by epigenetic histone modifications.

Kizuka Y(1), Kitazume S, Yoshida M, Taniguchi N.

Author information: 
(1)Disease Glycomics Team, Systems Glycobiology Research Group, Advanced Science 
Institute, RIKEN, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

It is well known that biosynthesis of glycans takes place in organ- and
tissue-specific manners and glycan expression is controlled by various factors
including glycosyltransferases. The expression mechanism of glycosyltransferases,
however, is poorly understood. Here we investigated the expression mechanism of a
brain-specific glycosyltransferase, GnT-IX (N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase IX,
also designated as GnT-Vb), which synthesizes branched O-mannose glycan. Using an
epigenetic approach, we revealed that the genomic region around the
transcriptional start site of the GnT-IX gene was highly associated with active
chromatin histone marks in a neural cell-specific manner, indicating that
brain-specific GnT-IX expression is under control of an epigenetic "histone
code." By EMSA and ChIP analyses we identified two regulatory proteins, NeuroD1
and CTCF that bind to and activate the GnT-IX promoter. We also revealed that
GnT-IX expression was suppressed in CTCF- and NeuroD1-depleted cells, indicating 
that a NeuroD1- and CTCF-dependent epigenetic mechanism governs brain-specific
GnT-IX expression. Several other neural glycosyltransferase genes are also found 
to be regulated by epigenetic histone modifications. This is the first report
demonstrating a molecular mechanism at the chromatin level underlying
tissue-specific glycan expression.

PMCID: PMC3173087
PMID: 21771782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Genome Res. 2011 Oct;21(10):1757-67. doi: 10.1101/gr.121541.111. Epub 2011 Jul
12.

Open chromatin defined by DNaseI and FAIRE identifies regulatory elements that
shape cell-type identity.

Song L(1), Zhang Z, Grasfeder LL, Boyle AP, Giresi PG, Lee BK, Sheffield NC, Gräf
S, Huss M, Keefe D, Liu Z, London D, McDaniell RM, Shibata Y, Showers KA, Simon
JM, Vales T, Wang T, Winter D, Zhang Z, Clarke ND, Birney E, Iyer VR, Crawford
GE, Lieb JD, Furey TS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Duke University, Durham, North
Carolina 27708, USA.

The human body contains thousands of unique cell types, each with specialized
functions. Cell identity is governed in large part by gene transcription
programs, which are determined by regulatory elements encoded in DNA. To identify
regulatory elements active in seven cell lines representative of diverse human
cell types, we used DNase-seq and FAIRE-seq (Formaldehyde Assisted Isolation of
Regulatory Elements) to map "open chromatin." Over 870,000 DNaseI or FAIRE sites,
which correspond tightly to nucleosome-depleted regions, were identified across
the seven cell lines, covering nearly 9% of the genome. The combination of DNaseI
and FAIRE is more effective than either assay alone in identifying likely
regulatory elements, as judged by coincidence with transcription factor binding
locations determined in the same cells. Open chromatin common to all seven cell
types tended to be at or near transcription start sites and to be coincident with
CTCF binding sites, while open chromatin sites found in only one cell type were
typically located away from transcription start sites and contained DNA motifs
recognized by regulators of cell-type identity. We show that open chromatin
regions bound by CTCF are potent insulators. We identified clusters of open
regulatory elements (COREs) that were physically near each other and whose
appearance was coordinated among one or more cell types. Gene expression and RNA 
Pol II binding data support the hypothesis that COREs control gene activity
required for the maintenance of cell-type identity. This publicly available atlas
of regulatory elements may prove valuable in identifying noncoding DNA sequence
variants that are causally linked to human disease.

PMCID: PMC3202292
PMID: 21750106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Oct 1;20(19):3798-810. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr298. Epub 2011 Jul
1.

Neuron-specific impairment of inter-chromosomal pairing and transcription in a
novel model of human 15q-duplication syndrome.

Meguro-Horike M(1), Yasui DH, Powell W, Schroeder DI, Oshimura M, Lasalle JM,
Horike S.

Author information: 
(1)Frontier Science Organization, Kanazawa University, 13-1 Takaramachi,
Kanazawa, Japan. sihorike@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Although the etiology of autism remains largely unknown, cytogenetic and genetic 
studies have implicated maternal copy number gains of 15q11-q13 in 1-3% of autism
cases. In order to understand how maternal 15q duplication leads to dysregulation
of gene expression and altered chromatin interactions, we used microcell-mediated
chromosome transfer to generate a novel maternal 15q duplication model in a human
neuronal cell line. Our 15q duplication neuronal model revealed that by
quantitative RT-PCR, transcript levels of NDN, SNRPN, GABRB3 and CHRNA7 were
reduced compared with expected levels despite having no detectable alteration in 
promoter DNA methylation. Since 15q11-q13 alleles have been previously shown to
exhibit homologous pairing in mature human neurons, we assessed homologous
pairing of 15q11-q13 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Homologous pairing of
15q11-q13 was significantly disrupted by 15q duplication. To further understand
the extent and mechanism of 15q11-q13 homologous pairing, we mapped the minimal
region of homologous pairing to a ~500 kb region at the 3' end of GABRB3 which
contains multiple binding sites for chromatin regulators MeCP2 and CTCF. Both
active transcription and the chromatin factors MeCP2 and CTCF are required for
the homologous pairing of 15q11-q13 during neuronal maturational differentiation.
These data support a model where 15q11-q13 genes are regulated epigenetically at 
the level of both inter- and intra-chromosomal associations and that chromosome
imbalance disrupts the epigenetic regulation of genes in 15q11-q13.

PMCID: PMC3168289
PMID: 21725066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. DNA Cell Biol. 2011 Dec;30(12):995-1005. doi: 10.1089/dna.2011.1268. Epub 2011
Jun 28.

Enhancer-blocking activity is associated with hypersensitive site V sequences in 
the human growth hormone locus control region.

Jin Y(1), Oomah K, Cattini PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

Activation of the human growth hormone gene (hGH-N) is linked to a locus control 
region (LCR) containing four (I-III, V) hypersensitive sites (HS). Pit-1 binding 
to HS I/II is required for efficient pituitary expression. However, inclusion of 
HS III and V, located about 28 and 32 kb upstream of the hGH-N gene,
respectively, is also required for consistent hGH-N expression levels in vivo. HS
V is referred to as a boundary for the hGH LCR, but no specific enhancer blocking
or barrier function is reported. We examined a 547 bp fragment containing HS V
sequences (nucleotides -32,718/-32,172 relative to hGH-N) for enhancer-blocking
activity using a well-established transient gene transfer system and assessed
these sequences for CCCTC binding factor (CTCF), which is linked to
enhancer-blocking activity. The 547 bp HS V fragment decreased enhancer activity 
with a reverse-orientation preference when inserted between HS III enhancer
sequences and a minimal thymidine kinase promoter (TKp). These sequences are
associated with CTCF in human pituitary and nonpituitary chromatin.
Enhancer-blocking activity with an orientation preference was further localized
to a 45 bp sub-fragment, with evidence of CTCF and upstream binding factor 1
(USF1) binding; USF1 is linked more closely with barrier function. The presence
of yin and yang 1 (Yy1) that cooperates with CTCF in the regulation of
X-chromosome inactivation was also seen. A decrease in CTCF and Yy1 RNA levels
was associated with a significant reduction in enhancer-blocking activity.
Assessment of CpG-dinucleotides in the TKp indicates that the presence of HS V
sequences are associated with an increased incidence of CpG-dinucleotide
methylation of the GC box region. These data support association of CTCF and
enhancer-blocking activity with HS V that is consistent with a role as a (LCR)
boundary element and also implicates Yy1 in this process.

PMID: 21711161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20954. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020954. Epub 2011 Jun 13.

Regulation of Pax6 by CTCF during induction of mouse ES cell differentiation.

Gao J(1), Wang J, Wang Y, Dai W, Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Torrance, California, United
States of America.

Pax6 plays an important role in embryonic cell (ES) differentiation during
embryonic development. Expression of Pax6 undergoes from a low level to high
levels following ES cell differentiation to neural stem cells, and then fades
away in most of the differentiated cell types. There is a limited knowledge
concerning how Pax6 is regulated in ES cell differentiation. We report that Pax6 
expression in mouse ES cells was controlled by CCCTC binding factor (CTCF)
through a promoter repression mechanism. Pax6 expression was significantly
enhanced while CTCF activity was kept in the constant during ES cell
differentiation to radial glial cells. Instead, the interaction of CTCF with Pax6
gene was regulated by decreased CTCF occupancy in its binding motifs upstream
from Pax6 P0 promoter following the course of ES cell differentiation. Reduced
occupancy of CTCF in the binding motif region upstream from the P0 promoter was
due to increased DNA methylations in the CpG sites identified in the region.
Furthermore, changes in DNA methylation levels in vitro and in vivo effectively
altered methylation status of these identified CpG sites, which affected ability 
of CTCF to interact with the P0 promoter, resulting in increases in Pax6
expression. We conclude that there is an epigenetic mechanism involving
regulations of Pax6 gene during ES cell differentiation to neural stem cells,
which is through increases or decreases in methylation levels of Pax6 gene to
effectively alter the ability of CTCF in control of Pax6 expression,
respectively.

PMCID: PMC3113856
PMID: 21695148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Neuron. 2011 Jun 23;70(6):1071-84. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.05.027.

CTCF regulates ataxin-7 expression through promotion of a convergently
transcribed, antisense noncoding RNA.

Sopher BL(1), Ladd PD, Pineda VV, Libby RT, Sunkin SM, Hurley JB, Thienes CP,
Gaasterland T, Filippova GN, La Spada AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195, USA.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 7 (SCA7) is a neurodegenerative disorder caused by
CAG/polyglutamine repeat expansions in the ataxin-7 gene. Ataxin-7 is a component
of two different transcription coactivator complexes, and recent work indicates
that disease protein normal function is altered in polyglutamine
neurodegeneration. Given this, we studied how ataxin-7 gene expression is
regulated. The ataxin-7 repeat and translation start site are flanked by binding 
sites for CTCF, a highly conserved multifunctional transcription regulator. When 
we analyzed this region, we discovered an adjacent alternative promoter and a
convergently transcribed antisense noncoding RNA, SCAANT1. To understand how CTCF
regulates ataxin-7 gene expression, we introduced ataxin-7 mini-genes into mice, 
and found that CTCF is required for SCAANT1 expression. Loss of SCAANT1
derepressed ataxin-7 sense transcription in a cis-dependent fashion and was
accompanied by chromatin remodeling. Discovery of this pathway underscores the
importance of altered epigenetic regulation for disease pathology at repeat loci 
exhibiting bidirectional transcription.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3139428
PMID: 21689595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Nat Genet. 2011 Jun 19;43(7):630-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.857.

CTCF-mediated functional chromatin interactome in pluripotent cells.

Handoko L(1), Xu H, Li G, Ngan CY, Chew E, Schnapp M, Lee CW, Ye C, Ping JL,
Mulawadi F, Wong E, Sheng J, Zhang Y, Poh T, Chan CS, Kunarso G, Shahab A,
Bourque G, Cacheux-Rataboul V, Sung WK, Ruan Y, Wei CL.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2011 Aug;43(8):815.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2011 Jul;43(7):615-6.

Mammalian genomes are viewed as functional organizations that orchestrate spatial
and temporal gene regulation. CTCF, the most characterized insulator-binding
protein, has been implicated as a key genome organizer. However, little is known 
about CTCF-associated higher-order chromatin structures at a global scale. Here
we applied chromatin interaction analysis by paired-end tag (ChIA-PET) sequencing
to elucidate the CTCF-chromatin interactome in pluripotent cells. From this
analysis, we identified 1,480 cis- and 336 trans-interacting loci with high
reproducibility and precision. Associating these chromatin interaction loci with 
their underlying epigenetic states, promoter activities, enhancer binding and
nuclear lamina occupancy, we uncovered five distinct chromatin domains that
suggest potential new models of CTCF function in chromatin organization and
transcriptional control. Specifically, CTCF interactions demarcate
chromatin-nuclear membrane attachments and influence proper gene expression
through extensive cross-talk between promoters and regulatory elements. This
highly complex nuclear organization offers insights toward the unifying
principles that govern genome plasticity and function.

PMCID: PMC3436933
PMID: 21685913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Sep 1;39(17):7428-43. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr443. Epub 2011 
Jun 17.

Genome-wide analysis of the relationships between DNaseI HS, histone
modifications and gene expression reveals distinct modes of chromatin domains.

Shu W(1), Chen H, Bo X, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 100850, China.

To understand the molecular mechanisms that underlie global transcriptional
regulation, it is essential to first identify all the transcriptional regulatory 
elements in the human genome. The advent of next-generation sequencing has
provided a powerful platform for genome-wide analysis of different species and
specific cell types; when combined with traditional techniques to identify
regions of open chromatin [DNaseI hypersensitivity (DHS)] or specific binding
locations of transcription factors [chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)], and
expression data from microarrays, we become uniquely poised to uncover the
mysteries of the genome and its regulation. To this end, we have performed global
meta-analysis of the relationship among data from DNaseI-seq, ChIP-seq and
expression arrays, and found that specific correlations exist among regulatory
elements and gene expression across different cell types. These correlations
revealed four distinct modes of chromatin domain structure reflecting different
functions: repressive, active, primed and bivalent. Furthermore, CCCTC-binding
factor (CTCF) binding sites were identified based on these integrative data. Our 
findings uncovered a complex regulatory process involving by DNaseI HS sites and 
histone modifications, and suggest that these dynamic elements may be responsible
for maintaining chromatin structure and integrity of the human genome. Our
integrative approach provides an example by which data from diverse technology
platforms may be integrated to provide more meaningful insights into global
transcriptional regulation.

PMCID: PMC3177195
PMID: 21685456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 19;286(33):29303-12. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.243543. Epub
2011 Jun 17.

Dynamic changes in binding of immunoglobulin heavy chain 3' regulatory region to 
protein factors during class switching.

Chatterjee S(1), Ju Z, Hassan R, Volpi SA, Emelyanov AV, Birshtein BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New
York 10461, USA.

The 3' regulatory region (3' RR) of the Igh locus works at long distances on
variable region (V(H)) and switch region (I) region promoters to initiate germ
line (non-coding) transcription (GT) and promote class switch recombination
(CSR). The 3' RR contains multiple elements, including enhancers (hs3a, hs1.2,
hs3b, and hs4) and a proposed insulator region containing CTCF (CCCTC-binding
factor) binding sites, i.e. hs5/6/7 and the downstream region ("38"). Notably,
deletion of each individual enhancer (hs3a-hs4) has no significant phenotypic
consequence, suggesting that the 3' RR has considerable structural flexibility in
its function. To better understand how the 3' RR functions, we identified
transcription factor binding sites and used chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) 
assays to monitor their occupancy in splenic B cells that initiate GT and undergo
CSR (LPS±IL4), are deficient in GT and CSR (p50(-/-)), or do not undergo CSR
despite efficient GT (anti-IgM+IL4). Like 3' RR enhancers, hs5-7 and the 38
region were observed to contain multiple Pax5 binding sites (in addition to
multiple CTCF sites). We found that the Pax5 binding profile to the 3' RR
dynamically changed during CSR independent of the specific isotype to which
switching was induced, and binding focused on hs1.2, hs4, and hs7.
CTCF-associated and CTCF-independent cohesin interactions were also identified.
Our observations are consistent with a scaffold model in which a platform of
active protein complexes capable of facilitating GT and CSR can be formed by
varying constellations of 3' RR elements.

PMCID: PMC3190736
PMID: 21685395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. BMC Cancer. 2011 Jun 10;11:232. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-11-232.

Gain of DNA methylation is enhanced in the absence of CTCF at the human
retinoblastoma gene promoter.

Dávalos-Salas M(1), Furlan-Magaril M, González-Buendía E, Valdes-Quezada C,
Ayala-Ortega E, Recillas-Targa F.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Departamento de Genética Molecular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México DF, México.

BACKGROUND: Long-term gene silencing throughout cell division is generally
achieved by DNA methylation and other epigenetic processes. Aberrant DNA
methylation is now widely recognized to be associated with cancer and other human
diseases. Here we addressed the contribution of the multifunctional nuclear
factor CTCF to the epigenetic regulation of the human retinoblastoma (Rb) gene
promoter in different tumoral cell lines.
METHODS: To assess the DNA methylation status of the Rb promoter, genomic DNA
from stably transfected human erythroleukemic K562 cells expressing a GFP
reporter transgene was transformed with sodium bisulfite, and then PCR-amplified 
with modified primers and sequenced. Single- and multi-copy integrants with the
CTCF binding site mutated were isolated and characterized by Southern blotting.
Silenced transgenes were reactivated using 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and
Trichostatin-A, and their expression was monitored by fluorescent cytometry. Rb
gene expression and protein abundance were assessed by RT-PCR and Western
blotting in three different glioma cell lines, and DNA methylation of the
promoter region was determined by sodium bisulfite sequencing, together with CTCF
dissociation and methyl-CpG-binding protein incorporation by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays.
RESULTS: We found that the inability of CTCF to bind to the Rb promoter causes a 
dramatic loss of gene expression and a progressive gain of DNA methylation.
CONCLUSIONS: This study indicates that CTCF plays an important role in
maintaining the Rb promoter in an optimal chromatin configuration. The absence of
CTCF induces a rapid epigenetic silencing through a progressive gain of DNA
methylation. Consequently, CTCF can now be seen as one of the epigenetic
components that allows the proper configuration of tumor suppressor gene
promoters. Its aberrant dissociation can then predispose key genes in cancer
cells to acquire DNA methylation and epigenetic silencing.

© 2011 Dávalos-Salas et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3145615
PMID: 21663659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Sep 1;20(17):3517-24. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr250. Epub 2011 Jun 
8.

Interrogating the complex role of chromosome 16p13.13 in multiple sclerosis
susceptibility: independent genetic signals in the CIITA-CLEC16A-SOCS1 gene
complex.

Zuvich RL(1), Bush WS, McCauley JL, Beecham AH, De Jager PL; International
Multiple Sclerosis Genetics Consortium, Ivinson AJ, Compston A, Hafler DA, Hauser
SL, Sawcer SJ, Pericak-Vance MA, Barcellos LF, Mortlock DP, Haines JL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics Research, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN 37232-0700, USA. rebecca.l.zuvich@vanderbilt.edu

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a neurodegenerative, autoimmune disease of the central
nervous system, and numerous studies have shown that MS has a strong genetic
component. Independent studies to identify MS-associated genes have often
indicated multiple signals in physically close genomic regions, although by their
proximity it is not always clear if these data indicate redundant or truly
independent genetic signals. Recently, three MS study samples were genotyped in
parallel using an Illumina Custom BeadChip. These revealed multiple significantly
associated single-nucleotide polymorphisms within a 600 kb stretch on chromosome 
16p13. Here we present a detailed analysis of variants in this region that
clarifies the independent nature of these signals. The linkage disequilibrium
patterns in the region and logistic regression analysis of the associations
suggest that this region likely harbors three independent MS disease loci.
Further, we examined cis-expression QTLs, histone modifications and CCCTC-binding
factor (CTCF) binding data in the region. We also tested for correlated
expression of the genes from the region using whole-genome expression array data 
from lymphoblastoid cell lines. Three of the genes show expression correlations
across loci. Furthermore, in the GM12878 lymphoblastoid cell line, these three
genes are in a continuous region devoid of H3K27 methylation, suggesting an open 
chromatin configuration. This region likely only contributes minimal risk to MS; 
however, investigation of this region will undoubtedly provide insight into the
functional mechanisms of these genes. These data highlight the importance of
taking a closer look at the expression and function of chromosome 16p13 in the
pathogenesis of MS.

PMCID: PMC3153306
PMID: 21653641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Aug;31(15):3094-104. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01449-10. Epub 2011 May
31.

Nonallelic transcriptional roles of CTCF and cohesins at imprinted loci.

Lin S(1), Ferguson-Smith AC, Schultz RM, Bartolomei MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The cohesin complex holds sister chromatids together and is essential for
chromosome segregation. Recently, cohesins have been implicated in
transcriptional regulation and insulation through genome-wide colocalization with
the insulator protein CTCF, including involvement at the imprinted H19/Igf2
locus. CTCF binds to multiple imprinted loci and is required for proper imprinted
expression at the H19/Igf2 locus. Here we report that cohesins colocalize with
CTCF at two additional imprinted loci, the Dlk1-Dio3 and the Kcnq1/Kcnq1ot1 loci.
Similar to the H19/Igf2 locus, CTCF and cohesins preferentially bind to the Gtl2 
differentially methylated region (DMR) on the unmethylated maternal allele. To
determine the functional importance of the binding of CTCF and cohesins at the
three imprinted loci, CTCF and cohesins were depleted in mouse embryonic
fibroblast cells. The monoallelic expression of imprinted genes at these three
loci was maintained. However, mRNA levels for these genes were typically
increased; for H19 and Igf2 the increased level of expression was independent of 
the CTCF-binding sites in the imprinting control region. Results of these
experiments demonstrate an unappreciated role for CTCF and cohesins in the
repression of imprinted genes in somatic cells.

PMCID: PMC3147605
PMID: 21628529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jun 7;108(23):9566-71. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1019391108. Epub 2011 May 23.

CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) and cohesin influence the genomic architecture of the
Igh locus and antisense transcription in pro-B cells.

Degner SC(1), Verma-Gaur J, Wong TP, Bossen C, Iverson GM, Torkamani A,
Vettermann C, Lin YC, Ju Z, Schulz D, Murre CS, Birshtein BK, Schork NJ,
Schlissel MS, Riblet R, Murre C, Feeney AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbial Science, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Compaction and looping of the ~2.5-Mb Igh locus during V(D)J rearrangement is
essential to allow all V(H) genes to be brought in proximity with D(H)-J(H)
segments to create a diverse antibody repertoire, but the proteins directly
responsible for this are unknown. Because CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) has been
demonstrated to be involved in long-range chromosomal interactions, we
hypothesized that CTCF may promote the contraction of the Igh locus. ChIP
sequencing was performed on pro-B cells, revealing colocalization of CTCF and
Rad21 binding at ~60 sites throughout the V(H) region and 2 other sites within
the Igh locus. These numerous CTCF/cohesin sites potentially form the bases of
the multiloop rosette structures at the Igh locus that compact during Ig heavy
chain rearrangement. To test whether CTCF was involved in locus compaction, we
used 3D-FISH to measure compaction in pro-B cells transduced with CTCF shRNA
retroviruses. Reduction of CTCF binding resulted in a decrease in Igh locus
compaction. Long-range interactions within the Igh locus were measured with the
chromosomal conformation capture assay, revealing direct interactions between
CTCF sites 5' of DFL16 and the 3' regulatory region, and also the intronic
enhancer (Eµ), creating a D(H)-J(H)-Eµ-C(H) domain. Knockdown of CTCF also
resulted in the increase of antisense transcription throughout the D(H) region
and parts of the V(H) locus, suggesting a widespread regulatory role for CTCF.
Together, our findings demonstrate that CTCF plays an important role in the 3D
structure of the Igh locus and in the regulation of antisense germline
transcription and that it contributes to the compaction of the Igh locus.

PMCID: PMC3111298
PMID: 21606361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 Jun;18(6):708-14. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2059. Epub 2011 May
22.

Genome-wide CTCF distribution in vertebrates defines equivalent sites that aid
the identification of disease-associated genes.

Martin D(1), Pantoja C, Fernández Miñán A, Valdes-Quezada C, Moltó E, Matesanz F,
Bogdanovic O, de la Calle-Mustienes E, Domínguez O, Taher L, Furlan-Magaril M,
Alcina A, Cañón S, Fedetz M, Blasco MA, Pereira PS, Ovcharenko I, Recillas-Targa 
F, Montoliu L, Manzanares M, Guigó R, Serrano M, Casares F, Gómez-Skarmeta JL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomic Regulation, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.

Erratum in
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 Sep;18(9):1084.

Many genomic alterations associated with human diseases localize in noncoding
regulatory elements located far from the promoters they regulate, making it
challenging to link noncoding mutations or risk-associated variants with target
genes. The range of action of a given set of enhancers is thought to be defined
by insulator elements bound by the 11 zinc-finger nuclear factor CCCTC-binding
protein (CTCF). Here we analyzed the genomic distribution of CTCF in various
human, mouse and chicken cell types, demonstrating the existence of
evolutionarily conserved CTCF-bound sites beyond mammals. These sites
preferentially flank transcription factor-encoding genes, often associated with
human diseases, and function as enhancer blockers in vivo, suggesting that they
act as evolutionarily invariant gene boundaries. We then applied this concept to 
predict and functionally demonstrate that the polymorphic variants associated
with multiple sclerosis located within the EVI5 gene impinge on the adjacent gene
GFI1.

PMCID: PMC3196567
PMID: 21602820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Dev Biol. 2011 Jul 15;355(2):349-57. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.04.036. Epub 2011 
May 10.

Novel cis-regulatory function in ICR-mediated imprinted repression of H19.

Ideraabdullah FY(1), Abramowitz LK, Thorvaldsen JL, Krapp C, Wen SC, Engel N,
Bartolomei MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, 415 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Expression of coregulated imprinted genes, H19 and Igf2, is monoallelic and
parent-of-origin-dependent. Like most imprinted genes, H19 and Igf2 are regulated
by a differentially methylated imprinting control region (ICR). CTCF binding
sites and DNA methylation at the ICR have previously been identified as key
cis-acting elements required for proper H19/Igf2 imprinting. Here, we use mouse
models to elucidate further the mechanism of ICR-mediated gene regulation. We
specifically address the question of whether sequences outside of CTCF sites at
the ICR are required for paternal H19 repression. To this end, we generated two
types of mutant ICRs in the mouse: (i) deletion of intervening sequence between
CTCF sites (H19(ICR<U+2206>IVS)), which changes size and CpG content at the ICR; and
(ii) CpG depletion outside of CTCF sites (H19(ICR-8nrCG)), which only changes CpG
content at the ICR. Individually, both mutant alleles (H19(ICR<U+2206>IVS) and
H19(ICR-8nrCG)) show loss of imprinted repression of paternal H19. Interestingly,
this loss of repression does not coincide with a detectable change in methylation
at the H19 ICR or promoter. Thus, neither intact CTCF sites nor hypermethylation 
at the ICR is sufficient for maintaining the fully repressed state of the
paternal H19 allele. Our findings demonstrate, for the first time in vivo, that
sequence outside of CTCF sites at the ICR is required in cis for ICR-mediated
imprinted repression at the H19/Igf2 locus. In addition, these results strongly
implicate a novel role of ICR size and CpG density in paternal H19 repression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3125397
PMID: 21600199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. PLoS One. 2011 May 12;6(5):e19470. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019470.

RAD21 cooperates with pluripotency transcription factors in the maintenance of
embryonic stem cell identity.

Nitzsche A(1), Paszkowski-Rogacz M, Matarese F, Janssen-Megens EM, Hubner NC,
Schulz H, de Vries I, Ding L, Huebner N, Mann M, Stunnenberg HG, Buchholz F.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden, Germany.

For self-renewal, embryonic stem cells (ESCs) require the expression of specific 
transcription factors accompanied by a particular chromosome organization to
maintain a balance between pluripotency and the capacity for rapid
differentiation. However, how transcriptional regulation is linked to chromosome 
organization in ESCs is not well understood. Here we show that the cohesin
component RAD21 exhibits a functional role in maintaining ESC identity through
association with the pluripotency transcriptional network. ChIP-seq analyses of
RAD21 reveal an ESC specific cohesin binding pattern that is characterized by
CTCF independent co-localization of cohesin with pluripotency related
transcription factors Oct4, Nanog, Sox2, Esrrb and Klf4. Upon ESC
differentiation, most of these binding sites disappear and instead new CTCF
independent RAD21 binding sites emerge, which are enriched for binding sites of
transcription factors implicated in early differentiation. Furthermore,
knock-down of RAD21 causes expression changes that are similar to expression
changes after Nanog depletion, demonstrating the functional relevance of the
RAD21--pluripotency transcriptional network association. Finally, we show that
Nanog physically interacts with the cohesin or cohesin interacting proteins STAG1
and WAPL further substantiating this association. Based on these findings we
propose that a dynamic placement of cohesin by pluripotency transcription factors
contributes to a chromosome organization supporting the ESC expression program.

PMCID: PMC3093395
PMID: 21589869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2011 Jul 1;3(7). pii: a002592. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a002592.

Mammalian genomic imprinting.

Bartolomei MS(1), Ferguson-Smith AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19063, USA.
bartolom@mail.med.upenn.edu

Normal mammalian development requires a maternal and paternal contribution, which
is attributed to imprinted genes, or genes that are expressed from a single
parental allele. Approximately 100 imprinted genes have been reported in mammals 
thus far. Imprinted genes are controlled by cis-acting regulatory elements,
termed imprinting control regions (ICRs), which have parental-specific epigenetic
modifications, including DNA methylation. ICRs are methylated by de novo DNA
methyltransferases during germline development; these parental-specific
modifications must be maintained following fertilization when the genome is
extensively reprogrammed. Many imprinted genes reside in ~1-megabase clusters,
with two major mechanisms of imprinting regulation currently recognized,
CTCF-dependent insulators and long noncoding RNAs. Unclustered imprinted genes
are generally regulated by germline-derived differential promoter methylation.
Here, we describe the identification and functions of imprinted genes, cis-acting
control sequences, trans-acting factors, and imprinting mechanisms in clusters.
Finally, we define questions that require more extensive research.

PMCID: PMC3119911
PMID: 21576252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. BMC Genet. 2011 May 17;12:47. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-12-47.

Relationship of porcine IGF2 imprinting status to DNA methylation at the H19 DMD 
and the IGF2 DMRs 1 and 2.

Braunschweig MH(1), Owczarek-Lipska M, Stahlberger-Saitbekova N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, 3001 Berne,
Switzerland. martin.braunschweig@vetsuisse.unibe.ch

BACKGROUND: Porcine IGF2 and the H19 genes are imprinted. The IGF2 is paternally 
expressed, while the H19 gene is maternally expressed. Extensive studies in mice 
established a boundary model indicating that the H19 differentially methylated
domain (DMD) controls, upon binding with the CTCF protein, reciprocal imprinting 
of the IGF2 and the H19 genes. IGF2 transcription is tissue and development
specific involving the use of 4 promoters. In the liver of adult Large White
boars IGF2 is expressed from both parental alleles, whereas in skeletal muscle
and kidney tissues we observed variable relaxation of IGF2 imprinting. We
hypothesized that IGF2 expression from both paternal alleles and relaxation of
IGF2 imprinting is reflected in differences in DNA methylation patterns at the
H19 DMD and IGF2 differentially methylated regions 1 and 2 (DMR1 and DMR2).
RESULTS: Bisulfite sequencing analysis did not show any differences in DNA
methylation at the three porcine CTCF binding sites in the H19 DMD between liver,
muscle and kidney tissues of adult pigs. A DNA methylation analysis using
methyl-sensitive restriction endonuclease SacII and 'hot-stop' PCR gave
consistent results with those from the bisulfite sequencing analysis. We found
that porcine H19 DMD is distinctly differentially methylated, at least for the
region formally confirmed by two SNPs, in liver, skeletal muscle and kidney of
foetal, newborn and adult pigs, independent of the combined imprinting status of 
all IGF2 expressed transcripts. DNA methylation at CpG sites in DMR1 of foetal
liver was significantly lower than in the adult liver due to the presence of
hypomethylated molecules. An allele specific analysis was performed for IGF2 DMR2
using a SNP in the IGF2 3'-UTR. The maternal IGF2 DMR2 of foetal and newborn
liver revealed a higher DNA methylation content compared to the respective
paternal allele.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that the IGF2 imprinting status is
transcript-specific. Biallelic IGF2 expression in adult porcine liver and
relaxation of IGF2 imprinting in porcine muscle were a common feature. These
results were consistent with the IGF2 promoter P1 usage in adult liver and IGF2
promoter P2, P3 and P4 usages in muscle. The results showed further that
bialellic IGF2 expression in liver and relaxation of imprinting in muscle and
kidney were not associated with DNA methylation variation at and around at least 
one CTCF binding site in H19 DMD. The imprinting status in adult liver, muscle
and kidney tissues were also not reflected in the methylation patterns of IGF2
DMRs 1 and 2.

PMCID: PMC3112248
PMID: 21575277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Eur J Med Genet. 2011 Jul-Aug;54(4):e451-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2011.04.009. Epub
2011 May 4.

A novel microdeletion in the IGF2/H19 imprinting centre region defines a
recurrent mutation mechanism in familial Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome.

De Crescenzo A(1), Coppola F, Falco P, Bernardo I, Ausanio G, Cerrato F, Falco L,
Riccio A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Science, University of Naples 2, Caserta, Italy.

The overgrowth disorder Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is associated with
dysregulation of imprinted genes at chromosome 11p15.5. The molecular defects are
heterogeneous but most of the cases are associated with defective DNA methylation
at either one of two Imprinting Control Regions (IC1 and IC2) or Uniparental
paternal Disomy (UPD) at 11p15.5. In rare cases, the BWS phenotype has been found
associated with maternal transmission of IC1 microdeletions. We describe a family
with a novel 1.8 kb deletion that is associated with hypermethylation at IC1. The
mutation results from recombination between highly homologous sequences
containing target sites for the zinc-finger protein CTCF (CTSs). This finding
supports the hypothesis that the function of IC1 and the penetrance of the
clinical phenotype depend on the spacing of the CTSs resulting from recombination
in the mutant allele.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3133689
PMID: 21571108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Gene Ther. 2012 Jan;19(1):15-24. doi: 10.1038/gt.2011.70. Epub 2011 May 12.

CTF/NF1 transcription factors act as potent genetic insulators for integrating
gene transfer vectors.

Gaussin A(1), Modlich U, Bauche C, Niederländer NJ, Schambach A, Duros C, Artus
A, Baum C, Cohen-Haguenauer O, Mermod N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Gene transfer-based therapeutic approaches have greatly benefited from the
ability of some viral vectors to efficiently integrate within the cell genome and
ensure persistent transmission of newly acquired transgenes to the target cell
progeny. However, integration of provirus has been associated with epigenetic
repercussions that may influence the expression of both the transgene and
cellular genes close to vector integration loci. The exploitation of genetic
insulator elements may overcome both issues through their ability to act as
barriers that limit transgene silencing and/or as enhancer-blockers preventing
the activation of endogenous genes by the vector enhancer. We established
quantitative plasmid-based assay systems to screen enhancer-blocker and barrier
genetic elements. Short synthetic insulators that bind to nuclear factor-I
protein family transcription factors were identified to exert both
enhancer-blocker and barrier functions, and were compared to binding sites for
the insulator protein CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor). Gamma-retroviral vectors
enclosing these insulator elements were produced at titers similar to their
non-insulated counterparts and proved to be less genotoxic in an in vitro
immortalization assay, yielding lower activation of Evi1 oncogene expression and 
reduced clonal expansion of bone marrow cells.

PMID: 21562592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Int J Alzheimers Dis. 2011 Apr 26;2011:154325. doi: 10.4061/2011/154325.

Bioinformatics identification of modules of transcription factor binding sites in
Alzheimer's disease-related genes by in silico promoter analysis and microarrays.

Augustin R(1), Lichtenthaler SF, Greeff M, Hansen J, Wurst W, Trümbach D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Genetics, Helmholtz Centre Munich, German Research 
Centre for Environmental Health (GmbH), Technical University Munich, Ingolstädter
Landstraße 1, Munich 85764, Neuherberg, Germany.

The molecular mechanisms and genetic risk factors underlying Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) pathogenesis are only partly understood. To identify new factors, which may 
contribute to AD, different approaches are taken including proteomics, genetics, 
and functional genomics. Here, we used a bioinformatics approach and found that
distinct AD-related genes share modules of transcription factor binding sites,
suggesting a transcriptional coregulation. To detect additional coregulated
genes, which may potentially contribute to AD, we established a new
bioinformatics workflow with known multivariate methods like support vector
machines, biclustering, and predicted transcription factor binding site modules
by using in silico analysis and over 400 expression arrays from human and mouse. 
Two significant modules are composed of three transcription factor families:
CTCF, SP1F, and EGRF/ZBPF, which are conserved between human and mouse APP
promoter sequences. The specific combination of in silico promoter and
multivariate analysis can identify regulation mechanisms of genes involved in
multifactorial diseases.

PMCID: PMC3090009
PMID: 21559189  [PubMed]


124. Virology. 2011 Jun 20;415(1):1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2011.04.004. Epub 2011 May
8.

Occupancy of chromatin organizers in the Epstein-Barr virus genome.

Holdorf MM(1), Cooper SB, Yamamoto KR, Miranda JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
California-San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

The human CCCTC-binding factor, CTCF, regulates transcription of the
double-stranded DNA genomes of herpesviruses. The architectural complex cohesin
and RNA Polymerase II also contribute to this organization. We profiled the
occupancy of CTCF, cohesin, and RNA Polymerase II on the episomal genome of the
Epstein-Barr virus in a cell culture model of latent infection. CTCF colocalizes 
with cohesin but not RNA Polymerase II. CTCF and cohesin bind specific sequences 
throughout the genome that are found not just proximal to the regulatory elements
of latent genes, but also near lytic genes. In addition to tracking with known
transcripts, RNA Polymerase II appears at two unannotated positions, one of which
lies within the latent origin of replication. The widespread occupancy profile of
each protein reveals binding near or at a myriad of regulatory elements and
suggests context-dependent functions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3808970
PMID: 21550623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Cell Biol. 2011 May 2;193(3):475-87. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201101021.

Interruption of intrachromosomal looping by CCCTC binding factor decoy proteins
abrogates genomic imprinting of human insulin-like growth factor II.

Zhang H(1), Niu B, Hu JF, Ge S, Wang H, Li T, Ling J, Steelman BN, Qian G,
Hoffman AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Ninth People's Hospital,
Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.

Monoallelic expression of IGF2 is regulated by CCCTC binding factor (CTCF)
binding to the imprinting control region (ICR) on the maternal allele, with
subsequent formation of an intrachromosomal loop to the promoter region. The
N-terminal domain of CTCF interacts with SUZ12, part of the polycomb repressive
complex-2 (PRC2), to silence the maternal allele. We synthesized decoy CTCF
proteins, fusing the CTCF deoxyribonucleic acid-binding zinc finger domain to CpG
methyltransferase Sss1 or to enhanced green fluorescent protein. In normal human 
fibroblasts and breast cancer MCF7 cell lines, the CTCF decoy proteins bound to
the unmethylated ICR and to the IGF2 promoter region but did not interact with
SUZ12. EZH2, another part of PRC2, was unable to methylate histone H3-K27 in the 
IGF2 promoter region, resulting in reactivation of the imprinted allele. The
intrachromosomal loop between the maternal ICR and the IGF2 promoters was not
observed when IGF2 imprinting was lost. CTCF epigenetically governs allelic gene 
expression of IGF2 by orchestrating chromatin loop structures involving PRC2.

PMCID: PMC3087012
PMID: 21536749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Reproduction. 2011 Jul;142(1):73-86. doi: 10.1530/REP-10-0536. Epub 2011 Apr 21.

Key gene regulatory sequences with distinctive ontological signatures associate
with differentially endonuclease-accessible mouse sperm chromatin.

Saida M(1), Iles D, Elnefati A, Brinkworth M, Miller D.

Author information: 
(1)Leeds Institute of Genetics, Health and Therapeutics, University of Leeds,
Leeds, UK.

Erratum in
    Reproduction. 2011 Nov;142(5):757.

Using a well-established endonuclease-based chromatin dissection procedure in
conjunction with both experimental comparative genome hybridisation (CGH) array
profiling and in silico data mining, we show that mouse spermatozoa contain
chromatin that is sensitive and resistant to digestion with micrococcal nuclease 
(MNase). Sequences represented in the micrococcal nuclease digestion solubilised 
(MNDS) but not the MND insoluble (MNDI) chromatin are strongly enriched in
chromosomal regions of high gene density. Furthermore, by fluorescence in situ
hybridisation (FISH) analysis, we show that MNDS and MNDI DNAs occupy distinct
domains of decondensed mouse sperm nuclei that may also retain abundant histones.
More detailed in silico analysis of CGH probe location in relation to known
promoters and sequences recognised by CCCTC binding factor (CTCF) shows a
significant excess of both in MNDS chromatin. A functional analysis of gene
promoters reveals strong ontological signatures for ion transport on methylated
promoters associated with CTCF binding sequences in MNDS chromatin. Sensory
perception is the only strong ontological signature present in MNDI chromatin,
driven by promoters that are not associated with CTCF regardless of their
methylation status.

PMID: 21511886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 May 3;108(18):7391-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1018279108. Epub 2011 Apr 18.

Conserved, developmentally regulated mechanism couples chromosomal looping and
heterochromatin barrier activity at the homeobox gene A locus.

Kim YJ(1), Cecchini KR, Kim TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, 
New Haven, CT 06520-8005, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Nov;108(47):19096.

Establishment and segregation of distinct chromatin domains are essential for
proper genome function. The insulator protein CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is
involved in creating boundaries that segregate chromatin and functional domains
and in organizing higher-order chromatin structures by promoting chromosomal
loops across the vertebrate genome. Here, we investigate the insulation
properties of CTCF at the human and mouse homeobox gene A (HOXA) loci. Although
cohesin loading at the CTCF binding site is required for looping, we found that
cohesin is dispensable for chromatin barrier activity at that site. Using mouse
embryonic stem cells in both a pluripotent and differentiated neuronal progenitor
state, we determined that embryonic stem cell pluripotency factor OCT4
antagonizes cohesin loading at the CTCF binding site. Loss of OCT4 in the
committed and differentiated neuronal progenitor cells results in loading of
cohesin and chromosome looping, which contributes to heterochromatin partitioning
and selective gene activation across the HOXA locus. Our analysis reveals that
chromatin barrier activity of CTCF is evolutionarily conserved and is responsible
for the coordinated establishment of chromatin structure, higher-order
architecture, and developmental expression of the HOXA locus.

PMCID: PMC3088595
PMID: 21502535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 6;6(4):e18455. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018455.

Genetic and metabolic characterization of insomnia.

Ban HJ(1), Kim SC, Seo J, Kang HB, Choi JK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bio-Medical Informatics, National Institute of Health, Korea
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Choongchung-Buk-do, Korea.

Insomnia is reported to chronically affect 10~15% of the adult population.
However, very little is known about the genetics and metabolism of insomnia. Here
we surveyed 10,038 Korean subjects whose genotypes have been previously profiled 
on a genome-wide scale. About 16.5% reported insomnia and displayed distinct
metabolic changes reflecting an increase in insulin secretion, a higher risk of
diabetes, and disrupted calcium signaling. Insomnia-associated genotypic
differences were highly concentrated within genes involved in neural function.
The most significant SNPs resided in ROR1 and PLCB1, genes known to be involved
in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, respectively. Putative enhancers, as
indicated by the histone mark H3K4me1, were discovered within both genes near the
significant SNPs. In neuronal cells, the enhancers were bound by PAX6, a neural
transcription factor that is essential for central nervous system development.
Open chromatin signatures were found on the enhancers in human pancreas, a tissue
where PAX6 is known to play a role in insulin secretion. In PLCB1, CTCF was found
to bind downstream of the enhancer and interact with PAX6, suggesting that it can
probably inhibit gene activation by PAX6. PLCB4, a circadian gene that is closely
located downstream of PLCB1, was identified as a candidate target gene. Hence,
dysregulation of ROR1, PLCB1, or PLCB4 by PAX6 and CTCF may be one mechanism that
links neural and pancreatic dysfunction not only in insomnia but also in the
relevant psychiatric disorders that are accompanied with circadian rhythm
disruption and metabolic syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3071826
PMID: 21494683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Genome Biol. 2011;12(4):R37. doi: 10.1186/gb-2011-12-4-r37. Epub 2011 Apr 13.

Characterization of DXZ4 conservation in primates implies important functional
roles for CTCF binding, array expression and tandem repeat organization on the X 
chromosome.

McLaughlin CR(1), Chadwick BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Florida State University, 319 Stadium Drive,
3076 King Building, Tallahassee, FL 32306-4295, USA.

Comment in
    Genome Biol. 2011;12(4):110.

BACKGROUND: Comparative sequence analysis is a powerful means with which to
identify functionally relevant non-coding DNA elements through conserved
nucleotide sequence. The macrosatellite DXZ4 is a polymorphic, uninterrupted,
tandem array of 3-kb repeat units located exclusively on the human X chromosome. 
While not obviously protein coding, its chromatin organization suggests differing
roles for the array on the active and inactive X chromosomes.
RESULTS: In order to identify important elements within DXZ4, we explored
preservation of DNA sequence and chromatin conformation of the macrosatellite in 
primates. We found that DXZ4 DNA sequence conservation beyond New World monkeys
is limited to the promoter and CTCF binding site, although DXZ4 remains a GC-rich
tandem array. Investigation of chromatin organization in macaques revealed that
DXZ4 in males and on the active X chromosome is packaged into heterochromatin,
whereas on the inactive X, DXZ4 was euchromatic and bound by CTCF.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these data suggest an important conserved role for
DXZ4 on the X chromosome involving expression, CTCF binding and tandem
organization.

© 2011 McLaughlin and Chadwick; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3218863
PMID: 21489251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Aug;39(14):5893-906. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr209. Epub 2011
Apr 7.

Long-range chromatin interactions at the mouse Igf2/H19 locus reveal a novel
paternally expressed long non-coding RNA.

Court F(1), Baniol M, Hagege H, Petit JS, Lelay-Taha MN, Carbonell F, Weber M,
Cathala G, Forne T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier, UMR5535 CNRS Universités
Montpellier I et Montpellier II, 1919 Route de Mende, 34293 Montpellier cedex 5, 
France.

Parental genomic imprinting at the Igf2/H19 locus is controlled by a
methylation-sensitive CTCF insulator that prevents the access of downstream
enhancers to the Igf2 gene on the maternal chromosome. However, on the paternal
chromosome, it remains unclear whether long-range interactions with the enhancers
are restricted to the Igf2 promoters or whether they encompass the entire gene
body. Here, using the quantitative chromosome conformation capture assay, we show
that, in the mouse liver, the endodermal enhancers have low contact frequencies
with the Igf2 promoters but display, on the paternal chromosome, strong
interactions with the intragenic differentially methylated regions 1 and 2.
Interestingly, we found that enhancers also interact with a so-far poorly
characterized intergenic region of the locus that produces a novel imprinted long
non-coding transcript that we named the paternally expressed Igf2/H19 intergenic 
transcript (PIHit) RNA. PIHit is expressed exclusively from the paternal
chromosome, contains a novel discrete differentially methylated region in a
highly conserved sequence and, surprisingly, does not require an intact ICR/H19
gene region for its imprinting. Altogether, our data reveal a novel imprinted
domain in the Igf2/H19 locus and lead us to propose a model for chromatin folding
of this locus on the paternal chromosome.

PMCID: PMC3152352
PMID: 21478171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Aug;112(8):2030-45. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23123.

The mouse RANKL gene locus is defined by a broad pattern of histone H4
acetylation and regulated through distinct distal enhancers.

Martowicz ML(1), Meyer MB, Pike JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706, USA.

RANKL is a stromal cell-derived tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-like factor that
plays a primary role in osteoclast formation and function. Recent studies suggest
that 1,25(OH)(2) D(3) induces Rankl expression via vitamin D receptor (VDR)
interaction at several enhancers located up to 76 <U+2009>kb upstream of the gene's
transcriptional start site (TSS). In the current studies, we explored these
interactions further using ChIP-chip and RNA analysis. We confirm VDR and RXR
binding to the five enhancers described previously and identify two additional
sites, one located within the Rankl coding region. We also show that RNA
polymerase II is recruited to these enhancers, most likely through transcription 
factors TBP, TFIIB, and TAF(II) 250. Interestingly, the recruitment of these
factors leads to the production of RNA transcripts, although their role at
present is unknown. We also discovered that histone H4 acetylation (H4ac) marks
many upstream Rankl enhancers under basal conditions and that H4ac is increased
upon 1,25(OH)(2) D(3) treatment. Surprisingly, the hormone also induces C/EBPß
binding across the Rankl locus. C/EBPß binding correlates directly with increased
H4ac activity following 1,25(OH)(2) D(3) treatment. Finally, elevated H4ac is
restricted to an extended region located between two potential insulator sites
occupied by CTCF and Rad21. These data suggest a mechanism whereby 1,25(OH)(2)
D(3) functions via the VDR and C/EBPß to upregulate Rankl expression.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3135786
PMID: 21465526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Feb;227(2):479-92. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22780.

The tumor suppressor role of CTCF.

Fiorentino FP(1), Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Center for
Biotechnology, Department of Biology, College of Science and Technology, Temple
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122, USA.

CTCF is an evolutionary conserved and ubiquitously expressed protein that binds
thousands of sites in the human genome. Ectopic expression of CTCF in various
normal and tumoral human cell lines inhibits cell division and clonogenicity,
with the consequence to consider CTCF a potential tumor-suppressor factor. In
this review article, we focused on the molecular mechanisms engaged by CTCF to
modulate the expression of several key-regulators of differentiation, cellular
senescence, cell cycle control and progression, whose expression is frequently
altered in tumors. Moreover, we discussed common features of CTCF at each
tumor-related DNA-binding sequence, such as protein-partners, post-translational 
modifications, and distinctive epigenetic marks establishment. The investigation 
of the molecular mechanisms engaged by CTCF to modulate tumor-related genes
emphasizes the cell-type dependency of its tumor suppressor role. Indeed, the
ability of CTCF to bind their promoters strictly depends by cell-type features as
DNA methylation, BORIS-binding and post-translational modifications as
PARYlation.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21465478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 20;286(20):17870-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.207365. Epub 2011
Mar 29.

Cohesin mediates chromatin interactions that regulate mammalian ß-globin
expression.

Chien R(1), Zeng W, Kawauchi S, Bender MA, Santos R, Gregson HC, Schmiesing JA,
Newkirk DA, Kong X, Ball AR Jr, Calof AL, Lander AD, Groudine MT, Yokomori K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, University of
California, Irvine, California 92697-1700, USA.

The ß-globin locus undergoes dynamic chromatin interaction changes in
differentiating erythroid cells that are thought to be important for proper
globin gene expression. However, the underlying mechanisms are unclear. The
CCCTC-binding factor, CTCF, binds to the insulator elements at the 5' and 3'
boundaries of the locus, but these sites were shown to be dispensable for globin 
gene activation. We found that, upon induction of differentiation, cohesin and
the cohesin loading factor Nipped-B-like (Nipbl) bind to the locus control region
(LCR) at the CTCF insulator and distal enhancer regions as well as at the
specific target globin gene that undergoes activation upon differentiation.
Nipbl-dependent cohesin binding is critical for long-range chromatin
interactions, both between the CTCF insulator elements and between the LCR distal
enhancer and the target gene. We show that the latter interaction is important
for globin gene expression in vivo and in vitro. Furthermore, the results
indicate that such cohesin-mediated chromatin interactions associated with gene
regulation are sensitive to the partial reduction of Nipbl caused by heterozygous
mutation. This provides the first direct evidence that Nipbl haploinsufficiency
affects cohesin-mediated chromatin interactions and gene expression. Our results 
reveal that dynamic Nipbl/cohesin binding is critical for developmental chromatin
organization and the gene activation function of the LCR in mammalian cells.

© 2011 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3093862
PMID: 21454523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Jun;31(11):2174-83. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05093-11. Epub 2011 Mar 
28.

Specific sites in the C terminus of CTCF interact with the SA2 subunit of the
cohesin complex and are required for cohesin-dependent insulation activity.

Xiao T(1), Wallace J, Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Recent studies have shown that the protein CTCF, which plays an important role in
insulation and in large-scale organization of chromatin within the eukaryotic
nucleus, depends for both activities on recruitment of the cohesin complex. We
show here that the interaction of CTCF with the cohesin complex involves direct
contacts between the cohesin subunit SA2 and specific regions of the C-terminal
tail of CTCF. All other cohesin components are recruited through their
interaction with SA2. Expression in vivo of CTCF mutants lacking the C-terminal
domain, or with mutations at sites within it required for SA2 binding, disrupts
the normal expression profile of the imprinted genes IGF2-H19 and also results in
a loss of insulation activity. Taken together, our results demonstrate that
specific sites on the C terminus of CTCF are essential for cohesin binding and
insulator function. The only direct interaction between CTCF and cohesin involves
contact with SA2, which is external to the cohesin ring. This suggests that in
recruiting cohesin to CTCF, SA2 could bind first and the ring could assemble
subsequently.

PMCID: PMC3133248
PMID: 21444719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Hum Genet. 2011 May;56(5):390-7. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2011.25. Epub 2011 Mar 17.

Familial skewed X-chromosome inactivation linked to a component of the cohesin
complex, SA2.

Renault NK(1), Renault MP, Copeland E, Howell RE, Greer WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

The gene dosage inequality between females with two X-chromosomes and males with 
one is compensated for by X-chromosome inactivation (XCI), which ensures the
silencing of one X in every somatic cell of female mammals. XCI in humans results
in a mosaic of two cell populations: those expressing the maternal X-chromosome
and those expressing the paternal X-chromosome. We have previously shown that the
degree of mosaicism (the X-inactivation pattern) in a Canadian family is directly
related to disease severity in female carriers of the X-linked recessive bleeding
disorder, haemophilia A. The distribution of X-inactivation patterns in this
family was consistent with a genetic trait having a co-dominant mode of
inheritance, suggesting that XCI choice may not be completely random. To identify
genetic elements that could be responsible for biased XCI choice, a linkage
analysis was undertaken using an approach tailored to accommodate the continuous 
nature of the X-inactivation pattern phenotype in the Canadian family. Several
X-linked regions were identified, one of which overlaps with a region previously 
found to be linked to familial skewed XCI. SA2, a component of the cohesin
complex is identified as a candidate gene that could participate in XCI through
its association with CTCF.

PMID: 21412246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. PLoS Genet. 2011 Mar;7(3):e1002008. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002008. Epub 2011 
Mar 3.

Diverse roles and interactions of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex
revealed using global approaches.

Euskirchen GM(1), Auerbach RK, Davidov E, Gianoulis TA, Zhong G, Rozowsky J,
Bhardwaj N, Gerstein MB, Snyder M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, California,
United States of America.

A systems understanding of nuclear organization and events is critical for
determining how cells divide, differentiate, and respond to stimuli and for
identifying the causes of diseases. Chromatin remodeling complexes such as
SWI/SNF have been implicated in a wide variety of cellular processes including
gene expression, nuclear organization, centromere function, and chromosomal
stability, and mutations in SWI/SNF components have been linked to several types 
of cancer. To better understand the biological processes in which chromatin
remodeling proteins participate, we globally mapped binding regions for several
components of the SWI/SNF complex throughout the human genome using ChIP-Seq.
SWI/SNF components were found to lie near regulatory elements integral to
transcription (e.g. 5' ends, RNA Polymerases II and III, and enhancers) as well
as regions critical for chromosome organization (e.g. CTCF, lamins, and DNA
replication origins). Interestingly we also find that certain configurations of
SWI/SNF subunits are associated with transcripts that have higher levels of
expression, whereas other configurations of SWI/SNF factors are associated with
transcripts that have lower levels of expression. To further elucidate the
association of SWI/SNF subunits with each other as well as with other nuclear
proteins, we also analyzed SWI/SNF immunoprecipitated complexes by mass
spectrometry. Individual SWI/SNF factors are associated with their own family
members, as well as with cellular constituents such as nuclear matrix proteins,
key transcription factors, and centromere components, implying a ubiquitous role 
in gene regulation and nuclear function. We find an overrepresentation of both
SWI/SNF-associated regions and proteins in cell cycle and chromosome
organization. Taken together the results from our ChIP and immunoprecipitation
experiments suggest that SWI/SNF facilitates gene regulation and genome function 
more broadly and through a greater diversity of interactions than previously
appreciated.

PMCID: PMC3048368
PMID: 21408204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Nature. 2011 Mar 10;471(7337):235-9. doi: 10.1038/nature09727.

CREBBP mutations in relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Mullighan CG(1), Zhang J, Kasper LH, Lerach S, Payne-Turner D, Phillips LA,
Heatley SL, Holmfeldt L, Collins-Underwood JR, Ma J, Buetow KH, Pui CH, Baker SD,
Brindle PK, Downing JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105, USA.

Relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) is a leading cause of death due to
disease in young people, but the biological determinants of treatment failure
remain poorly understood. Recent genome-wide profiling of structural DNA
alterations in ALL have identified multiple submicroscopic somatic mutations
targeting key cellular pathways, and have demonstrated substantial evolution in
genetic alterations from diagnosis to relapse. However, DNA sequence mutations in
ALL have not been analysed in detail. To identify novel mutations in relapsed
ALL, we resequenced 300 genes in matched diagnosis and relapse samples from 23
patients with ALL. This identified 52 somatic non-synonymous mutations in 32
genes, many of which were novel, including the transcriptional coactivators
CREBBP and NCOR1, the transcription factors ERG, SPI1, TCF4 and TCF7L2,
components of the Ras signalling pathway, histone genes, genes involved in
histone modification (CREBBP and CTCF), and genes previously shown to be targets 
of recurring DNA copy number alteration in ALL. Analysis of an extended cohort of
71 diagnosis-relapse cases and 270 acute leukaemia cases that did not relapse
found that 18.3% of relapse cases had sequence or deletion mutations of CREBBP,
which encodes the transcriptional coactivator and histone acetyltransferase
CREB-binding protein (CREBBP, also known as CBP). The mutations were either
present at diagnosis or acquired at relapse, and resulted in truncated alleles or
deleterious substitutions in conserved residues of the histone acetyltransferase 
domain. Functionally, the mutations impaired histone acetylation and
transcriptional regulation of CREBBP targets, including glucocorticoid responsive
genes. Several mutations acquired at relapse were detected in subclones at
diagnosis, suggesting that the mutations may confer resistance to therapy. These 
results extend the landscape of genetic alterations in leukaemia, and identify
mutations targeting transcriptional and epigenetic regulation as a mechanism of
resistance in ALL.

PMCID: PMC3076610
PMID: 21390130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Reprod Toxicol. 2011 May;31(4):507-12. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2011.02.009. Epub 
2011 Mar 5.

Prenatal exposure to ethanol: a specific effect on the H19 gene in sperm.

Stouder C(1), Somm E, Paoloni-Giacobino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic and Laboratory Medicine, Geneva University Hospital,
1211 Geneva 14, Switzerland.

Alcohol exposure during pregnancy induces a range of disorders in the offspring. 
Methylation changes in imprinted genes may play a role in the teratogenic effects
of alcohol. We evaluated the possible effects of alcohol administration in
pregnant mice on the methylation pattern of 5 imprinted genes (H19, Gtl2, Peg1,
Snrpn and Peg3) in somatic and sperm cell DNAs of the male offspring. The effects
observed were a 3% (p < 0.005) decrease in the number of methylated CpGs of H19
in the F1 offspring sperm, a 4% (p < 0.005) decrease in the number of methylated 
CpGs of H19 in the F2 offspring brain and a 26% (p < 0.05) decrease in the mean
sperm concentration. CpGs 1 and 2 of the H19 CTCF-binding site 2 exhibited
significant methylation percentage losses. H19 CTCF-binding sites are important
for the regulation of Igf2 gene expression. The hypomethylation of H19 may
contribute to the decreased spermatogenesis in the offspring.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21382472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 16;6(2):e16432. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016432.

An integrated pipeline for the genome-wide analysis of transcription factor
binding sites from ChIP-Seq.

Mercier E(1), Droit A, Li L, Robertson G, Zhang X, Gottardo R.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology Unit, Institut de Recherche Clinique de Montreal,
Montreal, Canada.

ChIP-Seq has become the standard method for genome-wide profiling DNA association
of transcription factors. To simplify analyzing and interpreting ChIP-Seq data,
which typically involves using multiple applications, we describe an integrated, 
open source, R-based analysis pipeline. The pipeline addresses data input, peak
detection, sequence and motif analysis, visualization, and data export, and can
readily be extended via other R and Bioconductor packages. Using a standard
multicore computer, it can be used with datasets consisting of tens of thousands 
of enriched regions. We demonstrate its effectiveness on published human ChIP-Seq
datasets for FOXA1, ER, CTCF and STAT1, where it detected co-occurring motifs
that were consistent with the literature but not detected by other methods. Our
pipeline provides the first complete set of Bioconductor tools for sequence and
motif analysis of ChIP-Seq and ChIP-chip data.

PMCID: PMC3040171
PMID: 21358819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Jul;39(12):4949-60. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq1326. Epub 2011
Feb 25.

Integrative genomic analysis of human ribosomal DNA.

Zentner GE(1), Saiakhova A, Manaenkov P, Adams MD, Scacheri PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, 
USA.

The transcription of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is critical to life. Despite its
importance, ribosomal DNA (rDNA) is not included in current genome assemblies
and, consequently, genomic analyses to date have excluded rDNA. Here, we show
that short sequence reads can be aligned to a genome assembly containing a single
rDNA repeat. Integrated analysis of ChIP-seq, DNase-seq, MNase-seq and RNA-seq
data reveals several novel findings. First, the coding region of active rDNA is
contained within nucleosome-depleted open chromatin that is highly
transcriptionally active. Second, histone modifications are located not only at
the rDNA promoter but also at novel sites within the intergenic spacer. Third,
the distributions of active modifications are more similar within and between
different cell types than repressive modifications. Fourth, UBF, a positive
regulator of rRNA transcription, binds to sites throughout the genome. Lastly,
the insulator binding protein CTCF associates with the spacer promoter of rDNA,
suggesting that transcriptional insulation plays a role in regulating the
transcription of rRNA. Taken together, these analyses confirm and expand the
results of previous ChIP studies of rDNA and provide novel avenues for
exploration of chromatin-mediated regulation of rDNA.

PMCID: PMC3130253
PMID: 21355038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Immunity. 2011 Feb 25;34(2):175-87. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.02.005.

The distal V(H) gene cluster of the Igh locus contains distinct regulatory
elements with Pax5 transcription factor-dependent activity in pro-B cells.

Ebert A(1), McManus S, Tagoh H, Medvedovic J, Salvagiotto G, Novatchkova M, Tamir
I, Sommer A, Jaritz M, Busslinger M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna Biocenter, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 7,
Vienna, Austria.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2011 Feb 25;34(2):139-41.

V(H)-DJ(H) recombination of the immunoglobulin heavy chain (Igh) locus is
temporally and spatially controlled during early B cell development, and yet no
regulatory elements other than the V(H) gene promoters have been identified
throughout the entire V(H) gene cluster. Here, we discovered regulatory sequences
that are interspersed in the distal V(H) gene region. These conserved repeat
elements were characterized by the presence of Pax5 transcription
factor-dependent active chromatin by binding of the regulators Pax5, E2A, CTCF,
and Rad21, as well as by Pax5-dependent antisense transcription in pro-B cells.
The Pax5-activated intergenic repeat (PAIR) elements were no longer bound by Pax5
in pre-B and B cells consistent with the loss of antisense transcription, whereas
E2A and CTCF interacted with PAIR elements throughout early B cell development.
The pro-B cell-specific and Pax5-dependent activity of the PAIR elements suggests
that they are involved in the regulation of distal V(H)-DJ(H) recombination at
the Igh locus.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21349430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 Mar;18(3):372-8. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1993. Epub 2011 Feb 
20.

Mapping of INS promoter interactions reveals its role in long-range regulation of
SYT8 transcription.

Xu Z(1), Wei G, Chepelev I, Zhao K, Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Insulin (INS) synthesis and secretion from pancreatic ß-cells are tightly
regulated; their deregulation causes diabetes. Here we map INS-associated loci in
human pancreatic islets by 4C and 3C techniques and show that the INS gene
physically interacts with the SYT8 gene, located over 300 kb away. This
interaction is elevated by glucose and accompanied by increases in SYT8
expression. Inactivation of the INS promoter by promoter-targeting siRNA reduces 
SYT8 gene expression. SYT8-INS interaction and SYT8 transcription are attenuated 
by CTCF depletion. Furthermore, SYT8 knockdown decreases insulin secretion in
islets. These results reveal a nonredundant role for SYT8 in insulin secretion
and indicate that the INS promoter acts from a distance to stimulate SYT8
transcription. This suggests a function for the INS promoter in coordinating
insulin transcription and secretion through long-range regulation of SYT8
expression in human islets.

PMID: 21336277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Nucleus. 2010 Jan-Feb;1(1):30-6. doi: 10.4161/nucl.1.1.10799.

D4Z4 as a prototype of CTCF and lamins-dependent insulator in human cells.

Ottaviani A(1), Schluth-Bolard C, Gilson E, Magdinier F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire de la Cellule, CNRS UMR5239, Ecole Normale
Supérieure de Lyon, UCBL1, Lyon, France.

Using cellular models that mimic the organizations of the subtelomeric 4q35 locus
found in patients affected with Facio-Scapulo-Humeral Dystrophy (FSHD) and in
healthy individuals, we recently investigated the biological function of the D4Z4
macrosatellite in this subtelomeric context.We demonstrated that D4Z4 acts as a
CTCF and A-type lamins dependent insulator element exhibiting both enhancer-
blocking and barrier activities, and displaces a telomere towards the nuclear
periphery. This peripheral positioning activity lies within a short sequence that
interacts with CTCF and A-type lamins. Depletion in either of these two proteins 
suppresses these perinuclear activities, revealing the existence of a
subtelomeric sequence that is sufficient to position an adjacent telomere to the 
nuclear periphery. We discuss here the biological implications of these results
in the light of our current knowledge in related fields and the potential
implication of other CTCF and A-type lamins insulators in the light of human
pathologies.

PMCID: PMC3035130
PMID: 21327102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Genes Immun. 2011 Jun;12(4):291-9. doi: 10.1038/gene.2010.77. Epub 2011 Feb 17.

DNA methylation dysregulates and silences the HLA-DQ locus by altering chromatin 
architecture.

Majumder P(1), Boss JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School Of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

The major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) locus encodes a cluster of
highly polymorphic genes HLA-DR, -DQ and -DP that are co-expressed in mature B
lymphocytes. Two cell lines were established over 30 years ago from a patient
diagnosed with acute lymphocytic leukemia. Laz221 represented the leukemic cells 
of the patient; whereas Laz388 represented the normal B cells of the patient.
Although Laz388 expressed both HLA-DR and HLA-DQ surface and gene products,
Laz221 expressed only HLA-DR genes. The discordant expression of HLA-DR and
HLA-DQ genes was due to epigenetic silencing of the HLA-DQ region CCCTC
transcription factor (CTCF)-binding insulators that separate the MHC-II
sub-regions by DNA methylation. These epigenetic modifications resulted in the
loss of binding of the insulator protein CTCF to the HLA-DQ flanking insulator
regions and the MHC-II-specific transcription factors to the HLA-DQ promoter
regions. These events led to the inability of the HLA-DQ promoter regions to
interact with flanking insulators that control HLA-DQ expression. Inhibition of
DNA methylation by treatment with 5'-deoxyazacytidine reversed each of these
changes and restored expression of the HLA-DQ locus. These results highlight the 
consequence of disrupting an insulator within the MHC-II region and may be a
normal developmental mechanism or one used by tumor cells to escape immune
surveillance.

PMCID: PMC3107363
PMID: 21326318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Mol Cancer Res. 2011 Feb;9(2):225-33. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0493.

CTCF and BORIS regulate Rb2/p130 gene transcription: a novel mechanism and a new 
paradigm for understanding the biology of lung cancer.

Fiorentino FP(1), Macaluso M, Miranda F, Montanari M, Russo A, Bagella L,
Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Health Research Organization, Center for Biotechnology, College of
Science and Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Cancer Res. 2013 Oct;11(10):1292.

Although innumerable investigations regarding the biology of lung cancer have
been carried out, many aspects thereof remain to be addressed, including the role
played by the retinoblastoma-related protein Rb2/p130 during the evolution of
this disease. Here we report novel findings on the mechanisms that control
Rb2/p130 gene expression in lung fibroblasts and characterize the effects of
Rb2/p130 deregulation on the proliferative features of lung cancer cells. We
revealed for the first time that in lung fibroblasts the expression of Rb2/p130
gene is directly controlled by the chromatin insulator CCCTC-binding factor,
CTCF, which by binding to the Rb2/p130 gene promoter induces, and/or maintains, a
specific local chromatin organization that in turn governs the transcriptional
activity of Rb2/p130 gene. However, in lung cancer cells the activity of CTCF in 
controlling Rb2/p130 gene expression is impaired by BORIS, a CTCF-paralogue,
which by binding to the Rb2/p130 gene could trigger changes in the chromatin
asset established by CTCF, thereby affecting CTCF regulatory activity on Rb2/p130
transcription. These studies not only provide essential basic insights into the
molecular mechanisms that control Rb2/p130 gene expression in lung cancer, but
also offer a potential paradigm for the actions of other activators and/or
corepressors, such as CTCF and BORIS, that could be crucial in explaining how
alterations in the mechanism regulating Rb2/p130 gene expression may accelerate
the progression of lung tumors, or favor the onset of recurrence after cancer
treatment.

PMID: 21325284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Genome Res. 2011 Mar;21(3):422-32. doi: 10.1101/gr.111203.110. Epub 2011 Feb 3.

Dioxin receptor and SLUG transcription factors regulate the insulator activity of
B1 SINE retrotransposons via an RNA polymerase switch.

Román AC(1), González-Rico FJ, Moltó E, Hernando H, Neto A, Vicente-Garcia C,
Ballestar E, Gómez-Skarmeta JL, Vavrova-Anderson J, White RJ, Montoliu L,
Fernández-Salguero PM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias,
Universidad de Extremadura, 06071 Badajoz, Spain.

Complex genomes utilize insulators and boundary elements to help define spatial
and temporal gene expression patterns. We report that a genome-wide B1 SINE
(Short Interspersed Nuclear Element) retrotransposon (B1-X35S) has potent
intrinsic insulator activity in cultured cells and live animals. This insulation 
is mediated by binding of the transcription factors dioxin receptor (AHR) and
SLUG (SNAI2) to consensus elements present in the SINE. Transcription of B1-X35S 
is required for insulation. While basal insulator activity is maintained by RNA
polymerase (Pol) III transcription, AHR-induced insulation involves release of
Pol III and engagement of Pol II transcription on the same strand. B1-X35S
insulation is also associated with enrichment of heterochromatin marks H3K9me3
and H3K27me3 downstream of B1-X35S, an effect that varies with cell type. B1-X35S
binds parylated CTCF and, consistent with a chromatin barrier activity, its
positioning between two adjacent genes correlates with their differential
expression in mouse tissues. Hence, B1 SINE retrotransposons represent
genome-wide insulators activated by transcription factors that respond to
developmental, oncogenic, or toxicological stimuli.

PMCID: PMC3044856
PMID: 21324874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2011 Apr;21(2):199-206. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2011.01.018. Epub
2011 Feb 14.

Cohesin: genomic insights into controlling gene transcription and development.

Dorsett D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Edward A. Doisy Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saint Louis 
University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63104, United States.
dorsettd@slu.edu

Over the past decade it has emerged that the cohesin protein complex, which
functions in sister chromatid cohesion, chromosome segregation, and DNA repair,
also regulates gene expression and development. Even minor changes in cohesin
activity alter several aspects of development. Genome-wide analysis indicates
that cohesin directly regulates transcription of genes involved in cell
proliferation, pluripotency, and differentiation through multiple mechanisms.
These mechanisms are poorly understood, but involve both partial gene repression 
in concert with Polycomb group proteins, and facilitating long-range looping,
both between enhancers and promoters, and between CTCF protein binding sites.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3070859
PMID: 21324671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Apr;31(8):1757-70. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00961-10. Epub 2011 Feb
14.

Chromosome-wide analysis of parental allele-specific chromatin and DNA
methylation.

Singh P(1), Wu X, Lee DH, Li AX, Rauch TA, Pfeifer GP, Mann JR, Szabó PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Beckman Research Institute, City
of Hope, 1450 E. Duarte Road, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

To reveal the extent of domain-wide epigenetic features at imprinted gene
clusters, we performed a high-resolution allele-specific chromatin analysis of
over 100 megabases along the maternally or paternally duplicated distal
chromosome 7 (Chr7) and Chr15 in mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs). We found that
reciprocal allele-specific features are limited to imprinted genes and their
differentially methylated regions (DMRs), whereas broad local enrichment of
H3K27me3 (BLOC) is a domain-wide feature at imprinted clusters. We uncovered
novel allele-specific features of BLOCs. A maternally biased BLOC was found along
the H19-Igf2 domain. A paternal allele-specific gap was found along Kcnq1ot1,
interrupting a biallelic BLOC in the Kcnq1-Cdkn1c domain. We report novel
allele-specific chromatin marks at the Peg13 and Slc38a4 DMRs, Cdkn1c upstream
region, and Inpp5f_v2 DMR and paternal allele-specific CTCF binding at the Peg13 
DMR. Additionally, we derived an imprinted gene predictor algorithm based on our 
allele-specific chromatin mapping data. The binary predictor H3K9ac and CTCF or
H3K4me3 in one allele and H3K9me3 in the reciprocal allele, using a
sliding-window approach, recognized with precision the parental allele
specificity of known imprinted genes, H19, Igf2, Igf2as, Cdkn1c, Kcnq1ot1, and
Inpp5f_v2 on Chr7 and Peg13 and Slc38a4 on Chr15. Chromatin features, therefore, 
can unequivocally identify genes with imprinted expression.

PMCID: PMC3126330
PMID: 21321082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Addict Biol. 2012 Jan;17(1):156-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1369-1600.2010.00288.x. Epub
2011 Feb 10.

The SLC6A4 VNTR genotype determines transcription factor binding and epigenetic
variation of this gene in response to cocaine in vitro.

Vasiliou SA(1), Ali FR, Haddley K, Cardoso MC, Bubb VJ, Quinn JP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Translational Medicine, University of Liverpool, UK.

We demonstrated that the genotype of the variable number tandem repeats (VNTRs)
in the linked polymorphic region (LPR) of the 5' promoter and in the intron 2
(Stin2) transcriptional regulatory domains of the serotonin transporter SLC6A4
gene determined its promoter interactions with transcription factors and
co-activators in response to cocaine in the JAr cell line. The LPR variants
contain 14 (short, s) or 16 (long, l) copies of a 22-23 bp repeat element,
whereas the Stin2 VNTR exists as three variants containing 9, 10 or 12 copies of 
a 16-17 bp repeat. We observed a differential effect of cocaine on the
association of the promoter with the transcription factor CTCF, which bound to
both LPR alleles prior to cocaine exposure but only to the l-allele following
exposure. Significantly, this differential effect of cocaine was correlated with 
the binding of the transcriptional regulator MeCP2 specifically to the s-allele
and recruiting the histone deacetylase complex (HDAC). Concurrently, cocaine
increased the association of positive histone marks over the SLC6A4 gene locus.
At the Stin2 domain, we lost binding of the transcription factor YB-1, while CTCF
remained bound. Our biochemical data are consistent with differential reporter
gene activity directed by the individual or dual domains in response to cocaine
in an Epstein-Barr virus-based episome model of stable transfections. These
observations suggest that exposure of JAr cells to cocaine may result in
differential binding of transcription factors and activators based on a specific 
genotype that might alter epigenetic parameters affecting gene expression after
the initial challenge.

© 2011 The Authors, Addiction Biology © 2011 Society for the Study of Addiction.

PMID: 21309950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Carcinogenesis. 2011 Jun;32(6):812-21. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgr017. Epub 2011 Feb 
8.

Estrogen-mediated epigenetic repression of the imprinted gene cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor 1C in breast cancer cells.

Rodriguez BA(1), Weng YI, Liu TM, Zuo T, Hsu PY, Lin CH, Cheng AL, Cui H, Yan PS,
Huang TH.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology,
and Medical Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

While tumor suppressor genes frequently undergo epigenetic silencing in cancer,
how the instructions directing this transcriptional repression are transmitted in
cancer cells remain largely unclear. Expression of cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor 1C (CDKN1C), an imprinted gene on chromosomal band 11 p15.5, is reduced
or lost in the majority of breast cancers. Here, we report that CDKN1C is
suppressed by estrogen through epigenetic mechanisms involving the
chromatin-interacting noncoding RNA KCNQ1OT1 and CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF).
Activation of estrogen signaling reduced CDKN1C expression 3-fold (P < 0.001) and
established repressive histone modifications at the 5' regulatory region of the
locus. These events were concomitant with induction of KCNQ1OT1 expression as
well as increased recruitment of CTCF to both the distal KCNQ1OT1
promoter-associated imprinting control region (ICR) and the CDKN1C locus.
Transient depletion of CTCF by small interfering RNA increased CDKN1C expression 
and significantly reduced the estrogen-mediated repression of CDKN1C. Further
studies in breast cancer cell lines indicated that the epigenetic silencing of
CDKN1C occurs in part as the result of genetic loss of the inactive methylated
11p15.5 ICR allele (R(2) = 0.612, P < 0.001). We also found a novel cis-encoded
antisense transcript, CDKN1C-AS, which is induced by estrogen signaling following
pharmacologic inhibition of DNA methyltransferase and histone deacetylase
activity. Forced expression of CDKN1C-AS was capable of repressing endogenous
CDKN1C in vivo. Our findings suggest that in addition to promoter
hypermethylation, epigenetic repression of tumor suppressor genes by CTCF and
noncoding RNA transcripts could be more common and important than previously
understood.

PMCID: PMC3106431
PMID: 21304052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2011 Apr;4(2):145-55. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.110.957563. Epub 2011 Feb 8.

Dense genotyping of candidate gene loci identifies variants associated with
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol.

Edmondson AC(1), Braund PS, Stylianou IM, Khera AV, Nelson CP, Wolfe ML,
Derohannessian SL, Keating BJ, Qu L, He J, Tobin MD, Tomaszewski M, Baumert J,
Klopp N, Döring A, Thorand B, Li M, Reilly MP, Koenig W, Samani NJ, Rader DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Translational Medicine and Therapeutics, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6160, USA.

BACKGROUND: Plasma levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) are
known to be heritable, but only a fraction of the heritability is explained. We
used a high-density genotyping array containing single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) from HDL-C candidate genes selected on known biology of HDL-C metabolism, 
mouse genetic studies, and human genetic association studies. SNP selection was
based on tagging SNPs and included low-frequency nonsynonymous SNPs.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Association analysis in a cohort containing extremes of
HDL-C (case-control, n=1733) provided a discovery phase, with replication in 3
additional populations for a total meta-analysis in 7857 individuals. We
replicated the majority of loci identified through genome-wide association
studies and present on the array (including ABCA1, APOA1/C3/A4/A5, APOB,
APOE/C1/C2, CETP, CTCF-PRMT8, FADS1/2/3, GALNT2, LCAT, LILRA3, LIPC, LIPG, LPL,
LRP4, SCARB1, TRIB1, ZNF664) and provide evidence that suggests an association in
several previously unreported candidate gene loci (including ABCG1, GPR109A/B/81,
NFKB1, PON1/2/3/4). There was evidence for multiple, independent association
signals in 5 loci, including association with low-frequency nonsynonymous
variants.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic loci associated with HDL-C are likely to harbor multiple,
independent causative variants, frequently with opposite effects on the HDL-C
phenotype. Cohorts comprising subjects at the extremes of the HDL-C distribution 
may be efficiently used in a case-control discovery of quantitative traits.

PMCID: PMC3319351
PMID: 21303902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Apr 15;17(8):2170-80. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2315.
Epub 2011 Feb 4.

Coordinated cancer germline antigen promoter and global DNA hypomethylation in
ovarian cancer: association with the BORIS/CTCF expression ratio and advanced
stage.

Woloszynska-Read A(1), Zhang W, Yu J, Link PA, Mhawech-Fauceglia P, Collamat G,
Akers SN, Ostler KR, Godley LA, Odunsi K, Karpf AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
SUNY Buffalo, Buffalo, New York 14263, USA.

PURPOSE: Cancer germline (CG) antigens are frequently expressed and
hypomethylated in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC), but the relationship of this
phenomenon to global DNA hypomethylation is unknown. In addition, the potential
mechanisms leading to DNA hypomethylation, and its clinicopathologic significance
in EOC, have not been determined.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We used quantitative mRNA expression and DNA methylation
analyses to determine the relationship between expression and methylation of
X-linked (MAGE-A1, NY-ESO-1, XAGE-1) and autosomal (BORIS, SOHLH2) CG genes,
global DNA methylation (5mdC levels, LINE-1, Alu, and Sat-a methylation), and
clinicopathology, using 75 EOC samples. In addition, we examined the association 
between these parameters and a number of mechanisms proposed to contribute to DNA
hypomethylation in cancer.
RESULTS: CG genes were coordinately expressed in EOC and this was associated with
promoter DNA hypomethylation. Hypomethylation of CG promoters was highly
correlated and strongly associated with LINE-1 and Alu methylation, moderately
with 5mdC levels, and rarely with Sat-a methylation. BORIS and LINE-1
hypomethylation, and BORIS expression, were associated with advanced stage.
GADD45A expression, MTHFR genotype, DNMT3B isoform expression, and BORIS mRNA
expression did not associate with methylation parameters. In contrast, the
BORIS/CTCF expression ratio was associated with DNA hypomethylation, and
furthermore correlated with advanced stage and decreased survival.
CONCLUSIONS: DNA hypomethylation coordinately affects CG antigen gene promoters
and specific repetitive DNA elements in EOC, and correlates with advanced stage
disease. The BORIS/CTCF mRNA expression ratio is closely associated with DNA
hypomethylation and confers poor prognosis in EOC.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3079045
PMID: 21296871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 8;286(14):12483-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.164574. Epub 2011
Feb 2.

CTCF promotes muscle differentiation by modulating the activity of myogenic
regulatory factors.

Delgado-Olguín P(1), Brand-Arzamendi K, Scott IC, Jungblut B, Stainier DY,
Bruneau BG, Recillas-Targa F.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, Department of Biochemistry and 
Biophysics, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

CTCF nuclear factor regulates many aspects of gene expression, largely as a
transcriptional repressor or via insulator function. Its roles in cellular
differentiation are not clear. Here we show an unexpected role for CTCF in
myogenesis. Ctcf is expressed in myogenic structures during mouse and zebrafish
development. Gain- and loss-of-function approaches in C2C12 cells revealed CTCF
as a modulator of myogenesis by regulating muscle-specific gene expression. We
addressed the functional connection between CTCF and myogenic regulatory factors 
(MRFs). CTCF enhances the myogenic potential of MyoD and myogenin and establishes
direct interactions with MyoD, indicating that CTCF regulates MRF-mediated muscle
differentiation. Indeed, CTCF modulates functional interactions between MyoD and 
myogenin in co-activation of muscle-specific gene expression and facilitates MyoD
recruitment to a muscle-specific promoter. Finally, ctcf loss-of-function
experiments in zebrafish embryos revealed a critical role of CTCF in myogenic
development and linked CTCF to broader aspects of development via regulation of
Wnt signaling. We conclude that CTCF modulates MRF functional interactions in the
orchestration of myogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3069451
PMID: 21288905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 20;6(1):e16401. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016401.

The CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) of Drosophila contributes to the regulation of
the ribosomal DNA and nucleolar stability.

Guerrero PA(1), Maggert KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry/Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College Station, 
Texas, United States of America.

In the repeat array of ribosomal DNA (rDNA), only about half of the genes are
actively transcribed while the others are silenced. In arthropods, transposable
elements interrupt a subset of genes, often inactivating transcription of those
genes. Little is known about the establishment or separation of juxtaposed active
and inactive chromatin domains, or preferential inactivation of transposable
element interrupted genes, despite identity in promoter sequences. CTCF is a
sequence-specific DNA binding protein which is thought to act as a
transcriptional repressor, block enhancer-promoter communication, and delimit
juxtaposed domains of active and inactive chromatin; one or more of these
activities might contribute to the regulation of this repeated gene cluster. In
support of this hypothesis, we show that the Drosophila nucleolus contains CTCF, 
which is bound to transposable element sequences within the rDNA. Reduction in
CTCF gene activity results in nucleolar fragmentation and reduced rDNA silencing,
as does disruption of poly-ADP-ribosylation thought to be necessary for CTCF
nucleolar localization. Our data establish a role for CTCF as a component
necessary for proper control of transposable element-laden rDNA transcription and
nucleolar stability.

PMCID: PMC3024428
PMID: 21283722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Apr 1;20(7):1363-74. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr018. Epub 2011 Jan
31.

Disruption of genomic neighbourhood at the imprinted IGF2-H19 locus in
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome and Silver-Russell syndrome.

Nativio R(1), Sparago A, Ito Y, Weksberg R, Riccio A, Murrell A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Cancer Research UK Cambridge Research Institute,
University of Cambridge, LiKaShing Centre, Cambridge, UK.

Hyper- and hypomethylation at the IGF2-H19 imprinting control region (ICR) result
in reciprocal changes in IGF2-H19 expression and the two contrasting growth
disorders, Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) and Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS).
DNA methylation of the ICR controls the reciprocal imprinting of IGF2 and H19 by 
preventing the binding of the insulator protein, CTCF. We here show that local
changes in histone modifications and CTCF--cohesin binding at the ICR in BWS and 
SRS together with DNA methylation correlate with the higher order chromatin
structure at the locus. In lymphoblastoid cells from control individuals, we
found the repressive histone H3K9me3 and H4K20me3 marks associated with the
methylated paternal ICR allele and the bivalent H3K4me2/H3K27me3 mark together
with H3K9ac and CTCF--cohesin associated with the non-methylated maternal allele.
In patient-derived cell lines, the mat/pat asymmetric distribution of these
epigenetic marks was lost with H3K9me3 and H4K20me3 becoming biallelic in the BWS
and H3K4me2, H3K27me3 and H3K9ac together with CTCF-cohesin becoming biallelic in
the SRS. We further show that in BWS and SRS cells, there is opposing chromatin
looping conformation mediated by CTCF--cohesin binding sites surrounding the
locus. In normal cells, lack of CTCF--cohesin binding at the paternal ICR is
associated with monoallelic interaction between two CTCF sites flanking the
locus. CTCF--cohesin binding at the maternal ICR blocks this interaction by
associating with the CTCF site downstream of the enhancers. The two alternative
chromatin conformations are differently favoured in BWS and SRS likely
predisposing the locus to the activation of IGF2 or H19, respectively.

PMCID: PMC3049359
PMID: 21282187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2011 Jan 31;4(1):1. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-4-1.

Quantitative analysis of DNA methylation at all human imprinted regions reveals
preservation of epigenetic stability in adult somatic tissue.

Woodfine K(1), Huddleston JE, Murrell A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Cancer Research UK Cambridge 
Research Institute, Cambridge, UK. amm207@cam.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Genes subject to genomic imprinting are mono-allelically expressed in
a parent-of-origin dependent manner. Each imprinted locus has at least one
differentially methylated region (DMR) which has allele specific DNA methylation 
and contributes to imprinted gene expression. Once DMRs are established, they are
potentially able to withstand normal genome reprogramming events that occur
during cell differentiation and germ-line DMRs are stably maintained throughout
development. These DMRs, in addition to being either maternally or paternally
methylated, have differences in whether methylation was acquired in the germ-line
or post fertilization and are present in a variety of genomic locations with
different Cytosine-phosphate guanine (CpG) densities and CTCF binding capacities.
We therefore examined the stability of maintenance of DNA methylation imprints
and determined the normal baseline DNA methylation levels in several adult
tissues for all imprinted genes. In order to do this, we first developed and
validated 50 highly specific, quantitative DNA methylation pyrosequencing assays 
for the known DMRs associated with human imprinted genes.
RESULTS: Remarkable stability of the DNA methylation imprint was observed in all 
germ-line DMRs and paternally methylated somatic DMRs (which maintained average
methylation levels of between 35% - 65% in all somatic tissues, independent of
gene expression). Maternally methylated somatic DMRs were found to have more
variation with tissue specific methylation patterns. Most DMRs, however, showed
some intra-individual variability for DNA methylation levels in peripheral blood,
suggesting that more than one DMR needs to be examined in order to get an overall
impression of the epigenetic stability in a tissue. The plasticity of DNA
methylation at imprinted genes was examined in a panel of normal and cancer cell 
lines. All cell lines showed changes in DNA methylation, especially at the
paternal germ-line and the somatic DMRs.
CONCLUSIONS: Our validated pyrosequencing methylation assays can be widely used
as a tool to investigate DNA methylation levels of imprinted genes in clinical
samples. This first comprehensive analysis of normal methylation levels in adult 
somatic tissues at human imprinted regions confirm that, despite intra-individual
variability and tissue specific expression, imprinted genes faithfully maintain
their DNA methylation in healthy adult tissue. DNA methylation levels of a
selection of imprinted genes are, therefore, a valuable indicator for epigenetic 
stability.

PMCID: PMC3038880
PMID: 21281512  [PubMed]


157. Virology. 2011 Mar 30;412(1):136-45. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2010.12.053. Epub 2011 
Jan 26.

Insertion of CTCF-binding sites into a first-generation adenovirus vector reduces
the innate inflammatory response and prolongs transgene expression.

Schaack J(1), Qiao L, Walkiewicz MP, Stonehouse M, Engel DA, Vazquez-Torres A,
Nordeen SK, Shao J, Moorhead JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Colorado Medical School, Aurora, CO 
80045, USA. jerry.schaack@ucdenver.edu

We have made improvements to E1-deleted adenovirus (Ad) transducing vectors that 
both substantially reduce the innate inflammatory response provoked by the virus 
in BALB/c mouse ears and increase the duration of expression of the GFP transgene
in BALB/c mouse liver. These improvements result from testing the hypothesis that
induction of strong innate responses is primarily a result of the powerful
enhancer contained within the strong CMV promoter activating expression of Ad
genes retained within the vector. A DNA fragment containing four CTCF-binding
sites, which was expected to act as a chromatin insulator, was introduced 5', 3',
or both 5' and 3' of a CMV-GFP cassette in an attempt to reduce activation of Ad 
gene expression by the enhancer. The presence of this sequence in any of the
configurations led to reduction of the innate immune response, as assayed by
mouse ear swelling, to the low level induced by a virus deleted for the E1 region
and carrying no introduced sequence. In addition, the duration of GFP expression 
in the liver more than doubled. The prolonged GFP expression indicates that GFP
does not play the limiting role in shutting down vector expression. The
CTCF-binding sequence introduced appears to act as a chromatin insulator in Ad
DNA, but position-independence of the elements in reducing the innate immune
response indicate unanticipated complexities in the mechanism by which Ad vectors
induce innate immune responses.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21272906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. BMC Evol Biol. 2011 Jan 24;11:23. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-11-23.

Lineage-specific evolution of the vertebrate Otopetrin gene family revealed by
comparative genomic analyses.

Hurle B(1), Marques-Bonet T, Antonacci F, Hughes I, Ryan JF; NISC Comparative
Sequencing Program, Eichler EE, Ornitz DM, Green ED.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Technology Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the Otopetrin 1 gene (Otop1) in mice and fish produce an
unusual bilateral vestibular pathology that involves the absence of otoconia
without hearing impairment. The encoded protein, Otop1, is the only functionally 
characterized member of the Otopetrin Domain Protein (ODP) family; the extended
sequence and structural preservation of ODP proteins in metazoans suggest a
conserved functional role. Here, we use the tools of sequence- and
cytogenetic-based comparative genomics to study the Otop1 and the Otop2-Otop3
genes and to establish their genomic context in 25 vertebrates. We extend our
evolutionary study to include the gene mutated in Usher syndrome (USH) subtype 1G
(Ush1g), both because of the head-to-tail clustering of Ush1g with Otop2 and
because Otop1 and Ush1g mutations result in inner ear phenotypes.
RESULTS: We established that OTOP1 is the boundary gene of an inversion
polymorphism on human chromosome 4p16 that originated in the common
human-chimpanzee lineage more than 6 million years ago. Other lineage-specific
evolutionary events included a three-fold expansion of the Otop genes in Xenopus 
tropicalis and of Ush1g in teleostei fish. The tight physical linkage between
Otop2 and Ush1g is conserved in all vertebrates. To further understand the
functional organization of the Ushg1-Otop2 locus, we deduced a putative map of
binding sites for CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), a mammalian insulator
transcription factor, from genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing
(ChIP-seq) data in mouse and human embryonic stem (ES) cells combined with
detection of CTCF-binding motifs.
CONCLUSIONS: The results presented here clarify the evolutionary history of the
vertebrate Otop and Ush1g families, and establish a framework for studying the
possible interaction(s) of Ush1g and Otop in developmental pathways.

PMCID: PMC3038909
PMID: 21261979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Genetika. 2010 Oct;46(10):1397-400.

[Role of G(-43)A polymorphism in the promoter region of the Xist gene in
non-random X-chromosome inactivation in intraspecific hybrid voles].

[Article in Russian]

Orishchenko KE, Elisafenko EA, Zakiian SM.

Interaction of transcription factor CTCF with the minimal promoter of Xist gene
was investigated in intraspecific hybrids ofcommon voles. CTCF was shown to bind 
with the minimal promoter region in vivo. However, the experiments of the delay
in gel resulted in the absence of interaction between the CTCF factor and its
potential binding site. Probably, G(-43)A substitution influences binding
efficacy of another transcription factor such as activator protein 2, AP2.

PMID: 21254564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 May;39(9):3594-606. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq1342. Epub 2011
Jan 19.

Epigenetic profile of the euchromatic region of human Y chromosome.

Singh NP(1), Madabhushi SR, Srivastava S, Senthilkumar R, Neeraja C, Khosla S,
Mishra RK.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research, Uppal Road, Hyderabad 500007, India.

The genome of a multi-cellular organism acquires various functional capabilities 
in different cell types by means of distinct chromatin modifications and
packaging states. Acquired during early development, the cell type-specific
epigenotype is maintained by cellular memory mechanisms that involve epigenetic
modifications. Here we present the epigenetic status of the euchromatic region of
the human Y chromosome that has mostly been ignored in earlier whole genome
epigenetic mapping studies. Using ChIP-on-chip approach, we mapped H3K9ac,
H3K9me3, H3K27me3 modifications and CTCF binding sites while DNA methylation
analysis of selected CpG islands was done using bisulfite sequencing. The global 
pattern of histone modifications observed on the Y chromosome reflects the
functional state and evolutionary history of the sequences that constitute it.
The combination of histone and DNA modifications, along with CTCF association in 
some cases, reveals the transcriptional potential of all protein coding genes
including the sex-determining gene SRY and the oncogene TSPY. We also observe
preferential association of histone marks with different tandem repeats,
suggesting their importance in genome organization and gene regulation. Our
results present the first large scale epigenetic analysis of the human Y
chromosome and link a number of cis-elements to epigenetic regulatory mechanisms,
enabling an understanding of such mechanisms in Y chromosome linked disorders.

© The Author(s) 2011. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC3089472
PMID: 21252296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. PLoS Genet. 2011 Jan 13;7(1):e1001274. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001274.

Transcription initiation patterns indicate divergent strategies for gene
regulation at the chromatin level.

Rach EA(1), Winter DR, Benjamin AM, Corcoran DL, Ni T, Zhu J, Ohler U.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Duke University, Durham, 
North Carolina, United States of America.

The application of deep sequencing to map 5' capped transcripts has confirmed the
existence of at least two distinct promoter classes in metazoans: "focused"
promoters with transcription start sites (TSSs) that occur in a narrowly defined 
genomic span and "dispersed" promoters with TSSs that are spread over a larger
window. Previous studies have explored the presence of genomic features, such as 
CpG islands and sequence motifs, in these promoter classes, but virtually no
studies have directly investigated the relationship with chromatin features.
Here, we show that promoter classes are significantly differentiated by
nucleosome organization and chromatin structure. Dispersed promoters display
higher associations with well-positioned nucleosomes downstream of the TSS and a 
more clearly defined nucleosome free region upstream, while focused promoters
have a less organized nucleosome structure, yet higher presence of RNA polymerase
II. These differences extend to histone variants (H2A.Z) and marks (H3K4
methylation), as well as insulator binding (such as CTCF), independent of the
expression levels of affected genes. Notably, differences are conserved across
mammals and flies, and they provide for a clearer separation of promoter
architectures than the presence and absence of CpG islands or the occurrence of
stalled RNA polymerase. Computational models support the stronger contribution of
chromatin features to the definition of dispersed promoters compared to focused
start sites. Our results show that promoter classes defined from 5' capped
transcripts not only reflect differences in the initiation process at the core
promoter but also are indicative of divergent transcriptional programs
established within gene-proximal nucleosome organization.

PMCID: PMC3020932
PMID: 21249180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Genes Immun. 2011 Mar;12(2):126-35. doi: 10.1038/gene.2010.62. Epub 2011 Jan 20.

Transcriptional repression and DNA looping associated with a novel regulatory
element in the final exon of the lymphotoxin-ß gene.

Wicks K(1), Knight JC.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Transcriptional regulation has a critical role in the coordinate and
context-specific expression of a cluster of genes encoding members of the tumour 
necrosis factor (TNF) superfamily found at chromosome 6p21, comprising TNF, LTA
(encoding lymphotoxin-a) and LTB (encoding lymphotoxin-ß). This is important, as 
dysregulated expression of these genes is implicated in susceptibility to many
autoimmune, inflammatory and infectious diseases. We describe here a novel
regulatory element in the fourth exon of LTB, which is highly conserved,
localises to the only CpG island in the locus, and is associated with a DNase I
hypersensitive site and specific histone modifications. We find evidence of
binding by Yin Yang 1 (YY1), cyclic AMP response element (CRE)-binding protein
(CREB) and CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) to this region in Jurkat T cells, which is
associated with transcriptional repression on reporter gene analysis. Chromatin
conformation capture experiments show evidence of DNA looping, involving
interaction of this element with the LTB promoter, LTA promoter and TNF 3'
untranslated region (UTR). Small interfering RNA (siRNA) experiments demonstrate 
a functional role for YY1 and CREB in LTB expression. Our findings provide
evidence of additional complexity in the transcriptional regulation of LTB with
implications for coordinate expression of genes in this important genomic locus.

PMCID: PMC3049238
PMID: 21248773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 May;39(9):3574-81. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq1344. Epub 2011
Jan 18.

Identification of a novel epigenetic regulatory region within the pluripotency
associated microRNA cluster, EEmiRC.

Tata PR(1), Tata NR, Kühl M, Sirbu IO.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11,
89081 Ulm, Germany.

The miR-290 cluster is expressed in embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and is important 
for the maintenance of pluripotency, but little is known about the mechanisms
regulating the early embryonic microRNA cluster (EEmiRC) expression. Here we
report the identification of a 332-bp intragenic enhancer (IE) able to modulate
the transcription of the mouse EEmiRC locus, presumably through binding of
transcription modulators like Oct3/4, Sox2 and CTCF. This IE also contains a CpG 
island showing a differential pattern of DNA and histone methylation marks during
differentiation of ESCs, which places EEmiRC in a novel regulatory feedback loop 
with DNA methylases. Deletion of IE significantly reduced the transcription of
the EEmiRC, further proving the importance of this region in regulating the
expression of EEmiRC.

© The Author(s) 2011. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC3089473
PMID: 21247880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. BMC Cell Biol. 2010 Dec 31;11:101. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-11-101.

The chromosomal association/dissociation of the chromatin insulator protein Cp190
of Drosophila melanogaster is mediated by the BTB/POZ domain and two acidic
regions.

Oliver D(1), Sheehan B, South H, Akbari O, Pai CY.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, University of Nevada, Reno, NV 89557, USA.

BACKGROUND: Chromatin insulators or boundary elements are a class of functional
elements in the eukaryotic genome. They regulate gene transcription by
interfering with promoter-enhancer communication. The Cp190 protein of Drosophila
melanogaster is essential to the function of at least three-types of chromatin
insulator complexes organized by Su(Hw), CTCF and BEAF32.
RESULTS: We mapped functional regions of Cp190 in vivo and identified three
domains that are essential for the insulator function and for the viability of
flies: the BTB/POZ domain, an aspartic acid-rich (D-rich) region and a C-terminal
glutamic acid-rich (E-rich) region. Other domains including the centrosomal
targeting domain and the zinc fingers are dispensable. The N-terminal CP190BTB-D 
fragment containing the BTB/POZ domain and the D-rich region is sufficient to
mediate association with all three types of insulator complexes. The fragment
however is not sufficient for insulator activity or viability. The Cp190 and
CP190BTB-D are regulated differently in cells treated with heat-shock. The Cp190 
dissociated from chromosomes during heat-shock, indicating that dissociation of
Cp190 with chromosomes can be regulated. In contrast, the CP190BTB-D fragment
didn't dissociate from chromosomes in the same heat-shocked condition, suggesting
that the deleted C-terminal regions have a role in regulating the dissociation of
Cp190 with chromosomes.
CONCLUSIONS: The N-terminal fragment of Cp190 containing the BTB/POZ domain and
the D-rich region mediates association of Cp190 with all three types of insulator
complexes and that the E-rich region of Cp190 is required for dissociation of
Cp190 from chromosomes during heat-shock. The heat-shock-induced dissociation is 
strong evidence indicating that dissociation of the essential insulator protein
Cp190 from chromosomes is regulated. Our results provide a mechanism through
which activities of an insulator can be modulated by internal and external cues.

PMCID: PMC3022720
PMID: 21194420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Cancers (Basel). 2011 Mar 25;3(2):1550-65. doi: 10.3390/cancers3021550.

Epigenetic regulation of glucose transporters in non-small cell lung cancer.

O'Byrne KJ(1), Baird AM, Kilmartin L, Leonard J, Sacevich C, Gray SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, Thoracic Oncology Research Group, Institute
of Molecular Medicine, Trinity Centre for Health Sciences, St James´s Hospital,
Dublin 8, Ireland. sgray@stjames.ie.

Due to their inherently hypoxic environment, cancer cells often resort to
glycolysis, or the anaerobic breakdown of glucose to form ATP to provide for
their energy needs, known as the Warburg effect. At the same time, overexpression
of the insulin receptor in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is associated with 
an increased risk of metastasis and decreased survival. The uptake of glucose
into cells is carried out via glucose transporters or GLUTs. Of these, GLUT-4 is 
essential for insulin-stimulated glucose uptake. Following treatment with the
epigenetic targeting agents histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi), GLUT-3 and
GLUT-4 expression were found to be induced in NSCLC cell lines, with minimal
responses in transformed normal human bronchial epithelial cells (HBECs). Similar
results for GLUT-4 were observed in cells derived from liver, muscle, kidney and 
pre-adipocytes. Bioinformatic analysis of the promoter for GLUT-4 indicates that 
it may also be regulated by several chromatin binding factors or complexes
including CTCF, SP1 and SMYD3. Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies demonstrate 
that the promoter for GLUT-4 is dynamically remodeled in response to HDACi.
Overall, these results may have value within the clinical setting as (a) it may
be possible to use this to enhance fluorodeoxyglucose (18F) positron emission
tomography (FDG-PET) imaging sensitivity; (b) it may be possible to target NSCLC 
through the use of HDACi and insulin mediated uptake of the metabolic targeting
drugs such as 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG); or (c) enhance or sensitize NSCLC to
chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC3757377
PMID: 24212773  [PubMed]


166. Genome Biol. 2010;11(12):R126. doi: 10.1186/gb-2010-11-12-r126. Epub 2010 Dec 23.

ArchAlign: coordinate-free chromatin alignment reveals novel architectures.

Lai WK(1), Buck MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and the Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics and 
Life Sciences, State University of New York at Buffalo, 701 Ellicott St, Buffalo,
New York 14203, USA. wklai2@buffalo.edu

To facilitate identification and characterization of genomic functional elements,
we have developed a chromatin architecture alignment algorithm (ArchAlign).
ArchAlign identifies shared chromatin structural patterns from high-resolution
chromatin structural datasets derived from next-generation sequencing or tiled
microarray approaches for user defined regions of interest. We validated
ArchAlign using well characterized functional elements, and used it to explore
the chromatin structural architecture at CTCF binding sites in the human genome. 
ArchAlign is freely available at
http://www.acsu.buffalo.edu/~mjbuck/ArchAlign.html.

PMCID: PMC3046486
PMID: 21182771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. BMC Mol Biol. 2010 Dec 21;11:101. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-101.

The CTCF insulator protein forms an unusual DNA structure.

MacPherson MJ(1), Sadowski PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

BACKGROUND: The CTCF insulator protein is a highly conserved zinc finger protein 
that has been implicated in many aspects of gene regulation and nuclear
organization. The protein has been hypothesized to organize the human genome by
forming DNA loops.
RESULTS: In this paper, we report biochemical evidence to support the role for
CTCF in forming DNA loops. We have measured DNA bending by CTCF at the chicken
HS4 ß-globin FII insulator element in vitro and have observed a unique DNA
structure with aberrant electrophoretic mobility which we believe to be a DNA
loop. CTCF is able to form this unusual DNA structure at two other binding sites:
the c-myc P2 promoter and the chicken F1 lysozyme gene silencer. We also
demonstrate that the length though not the sequence of the DNA downstream of the 
binding site is important for the ability of CTCF to form this unusual DNA
structure. We hypothesize that a single CTCF protein molecule is able to act as a
"looper" possibly through the use of several of its zinc fingers.
CONCLUSIONS: CTCF is able to form an unusual DNA structure through the zinc
finger domain of the protein. This unusual DNA structure is formed in a
directional manner by the CTCF protein. The findings described in this paper
suggest mechanisms by which CTCF is able to form DNA loops, organize the
mammalian genome and function as an insulator protein.

PMCID: PMC3014928
PMID: 21176138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2011;132(4):239-47. doi: 10.1159/000322627. Epub 2010 Dec
16.

Characterization of differentially methylated regions in 3 bovine imprinted
genes: a model for studying human germ-cell and embryo development.

Hansmann T(1), Heinzmann J, Wrenzycki C, Zechner U, Niemann H, Haaf T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, Germany.

Correct imprinting is crucial for normal fetal and placental development in
mammals. Experimental evidence in animal models and epidemiological studies in
humans suggest that assisted reproductive technologies (ARTs) can interfere with 
imprinted gene regulation in gametogenesis and early embryogenesis. Bos taurus is
an agriculturally important species in which ARTs are commonly employed. Because 
this species exhibits a similar preimplantation development and gestation length 
as humans, it is increasingly being used as a model for human germ-cell and
embryo development. However, in contrast to humans and mice, there is relatively 
little information on bovine imprinted genes. Here, we characterized the bovine
intergenic IGF2-H19 imprinting control region (ICR) spanning approximately 3 kb. 
We identified a 300-bp differentially methylated region (DMR) approximately 6 kb 
upstream of the H19 promoter, containing a CpG island with CTCF-binding site and 
high sequence similarity with the human intergenic ICR. Additional differentially
methylated CpG islands lie -6 kb to -3 kb upstream of the promoter, however these
are less conserved. Both classical bisulfite sequencing and bisulfite
pyrosequencing demonstrated complete methylation of the IGF2-H19 ICR in sperm,
complete demethylation in parthenogenetic embryos having only the female genome, 
and differential methylation in placental and somatic tissues. In addition, we
established pyrosequencing assays for the previously reported bovine SNRPN and
PEG3 DMRs. The observed methylation patterns were consistent with genomic
imprinting in all analyzed tissues/cell types. The identified IGF2-H19 ICR and
the developed quantitative methylation assays may prove useful for further
studies on the relationship between ARTs and imprinting defects in the bovine
model.

Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21160170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Nat Genet. 2011 Jan;43(1):27-33. doi: 10.1038/ng.730. Epub 2010 Dec 12.

FOXA1 is a key determinant of estrogen receptor function and endocrine response.

Hurtado A(1), Holmes KA, Ross-Innes CS, Schmidt D, Carroll JS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Cambridge Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre,
Cambridge, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2011 Jan;43(1):11-2.

Estrogen receptor-a (ER) is the key feature of most breast cancers and binding of
ER to the genome correlates with expression of the Forkhead protein FOXA1 (also
called HNF3a). Here we show that FOXA1 is a key determinant that can influence
differential interactions between ER and chromatin. Almost all ER-chromatin
interactions and gene expression changes depended on the presence of FOXA1 and
FOXA1 influenced genome-wide chromatin accessibility. Furthermore, we found that 
CTCF was an upstream negative regulator of FOXA1-chromatin interactions. In
estrogen-responsive breast cancer cells, the dependency on FOXA1 for tamoxifen-ER
activity was absolute; in tamoxifen-resistant cells, ER binding was independent
of ligand but depended on FOXA1. Expression of FOXA1 in non-breast cancer cells
can alter ER binding and function. As such, FOXA1 is a major determinant of
estrogen-ER activity and endocrine response in breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3024537
PMID: 21151129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Mar;19(3):307-12. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.187. Epub 2010 Dec
8.

Tumour-specific methylation of PTPRG intron 1 locus in sporadic and Lynch
syndrome colorectal cancer.

van Roon EH(1), de Miranda NF, van Nieuwenhuizen MP, de Meijer EJ, van
Puijenbroek M, Yan PS, Huang TH, van Wezel T, Morreau H, Boer JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

DNA methylation is a hallmark in a subset of right-sided colorectal cancers.
Methylation-based screening may improve prevention and survival rate for this
type of cancer, which is often clinically asymptomatic in the early stages. We
aimed to discover prognostic or diagnostic biomarkers for colon cancer by
comparing DNA methylation profiles of right-sided colon tumours and paired normal
colon mucosa using an 8.5 k CpG island microarray. We identified a diagnostic
CpG-rich region, located in the first intron of the protein-tyrosine phosphatase 
gamma gene (PTPRG) gene, with altered methylation already in the adenoma stage,
that is, before the carcinoma transition. Validation of this region in an
additional cohort of 103 sporadic colorectal tumours and 58 paired normal mucosa 
tissue samples showed 94% sensitivity and 96% specificity. Interestingly,
comparable results were obtained when screening a cohort of Lynch
syndrome-associated cancers. Functional studies showed that PTPRG intron 1
methylation did not directly affect PTPRG expression, however, the methylated
region overlapped with a binding site of the insulator protein CTCF. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) showed that methylation of the locus was associated
with absence of CTCF binding. Methylation-associated changes in CTCF binding to
PTPRG intron 1 could have implications on tumour gene expression by enhancer
blocking, chromosome loop formation or abrogation of its insulator function. The 
high sensitivity and specificity for the PTPRG intron 1 methylation in both
sporadic and hereditary colon cancers support biomarker potential for early
detection of colon cancer.

© 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited All rights reserved 1018-4813/11

PMCID: PMC3061992
PMID: 21150880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Apr;39(8):3042-52. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq1248. Epub 2010
Dec 10.

Selective interactions of boundaries with upstream region of Abd-B promoter in
Drosophila bithorax complex and role of dCTCF in this process.

Kyrchanova O(1), Ivlieva T, Toshchakov S, Parshikov A, Maksimenko O, Georgiev P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of the Control of Genetic Processes, Institute of Gene Biology,
Russian Academy of Sciences, 34/5 Vavilov St, Moscow 119334, Russia.

Expression of the genes Ubx, abd-A, and Abd-B of the bithorax complex depends on 
its cis-regulatory region, which is divided into discrete functional domains
(iab). Boundary/insulator elements, named Mcp, Fab-6, Fab-7 and Fab-8 (PTS/F8),
have been identified at the borders of the iab domains. Recently, binding sites
for a Drosophila homolog of the vertebrate insulator protein CTCF have been
identified in Mcp, Fab-6 and Fab-8 and also in several regions that correspond to
predicted boundaries, Fab-3 and Fab-4 in particular. Taking into account the
inability of the yeast GAL4 activator to stimulate the white promoter when the
activator and the promoter are separated by a 5-kb yellow gene, we have tested
functional interactions between the boundaries. The results show that all
dCTCF-containing boundaries interact with each other. However, inactivation of
dCTCF binding sites in Mcp, Fab-6 and PTS/F8 only partially reduces their ability
to interact, suggesting the presence of additional protein(s) supporting distant 
interactions between the boundaries. Interestingly, only Fab-6, Fab-7 (which
contains no dCTCF binding sites) and PTS/F8 interact with the upstream region of 
the Abd-B promoter. Thus, the boundaries might be involved in supporting the
specific interactions between iab enhancers and promoters of the bithorax
complex.

PMCID: PMC3082887
PMID: 21149269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 11;286(6):4461-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.176040. Epub 2010 
Dec 10.

JHDM3A module as an effector molecule in guide-directed modification of target
chromatin.

Jeong YS(1), Park JS, Ko Y, Kang YK.

Author information: 
(1)Development and Differentiation Research Center, KRIBB, 111 Gwahangno,
Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-806, South Korea.

With the objective of returning cells to their undifferentiated state through
alteration of epigenetic states, small molecules have been used that specifically
inhibit proteins involved in sustaining the epigenetic system. However, this
chemical-based approach can cause chaotic epigenomic states due to random actions
of the inhibitors. We investigated whether JHDM3A/JMJD2A, a trimethylated histone
H3-lysine 9 (H3K9me3)-specific demethylase, could function as an effector
molecule to selectively demethylate target chromatin, with the aid of a guide
protein to serve as a delivery vehicle. JHDM3A, which normally locates in
euchromatin, spread out to heterochromatin when it was fused to heterochromatin
protein-1a (HP1a) or HP1ß; in these cells, demethylation efficiency was also
markedly increased. Two truncated modules, JHDM3A(GFP)(406) and JHDM3A(GFP)(701),
had contrasting modes and efficiencies of H3K9me3 demethylation; JHDM3A(GFP)(406)
showed a very uniform rate (~80%) of demethylation, whereas JHDM3A(GFP)(701) had 
a broad methylation range of 4-80%. The methylation values were highly dependent 
on the presence of the guide proteins OCT4, CTCF, and HP1. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation detected reduced H3K9me3 levels at OCT4 regulatory loci in
the cells expressing OCT4-tagged JHDM3A(GFP)(701). Derepression of the Sox2 gene 
was observed in JHDM3A(GFP)(701)OCT4-expressing cells, but not in cells that
expressed the JHDM3A(GFP)(701) module alone. JHDM3A(GFP)(701)-assisted OCT4 more 
efficiently turned on stem cell-related microRNAs than GFP-OCT4 itself. These
results suggest that JHDM3A(GFP)(701) is a suitable catalytic module that can be 
targeted, under the control of a guide protein, to specific loci where the
chromatin H3K9me3 status and the milieu of gene expression are to be modified.

PMCID: PMC3039326
PMID: 21148561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Dev Cell. 2010 Dec 14;19(6):819-30. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.11.009.

Functional analysis of CTCF during mammalian limb development.

Soshnikova N(1), Montavon T, Leleu M, Galjart N, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Switzerland.

CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a nuclear zinc-finger protein that displays
insulating activity in a variety of biological assays. For example, CTCF-binding 
sites have been suggested to isolate Hox gene clusters from neighboring
transcriptional interference. We investigated this issue during limb development,
where Hoxd genes must remain isolated from long-range effects to allow essential 
regulation within independent sub-groups. We used conditional Ctcf inactivation
in incipient forelimbs and show that the overall pattern of Hoxd gene expression 
remains unchanged. Transcriptome analysis using tiling arrays covering
chromosomes 2 and X confirmed the weak effect of CTCF depletion on global gene
regulation. However, Ctcf deletion caused massive apoptosis, leading to a nearly 
complete loss of limb structure at a later stage. We conclude that, at least in
this physiological context, rather than being an insulator, CTCF is required for 
cell survival via the direct transcriptional regulation of target genes critical 
for cellular homeostasis.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21145498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Curr Mol Pharmacol. 2011 Jun;4(2):115-25.

Role of DNA damage and epigenetic DNA methylation changes in radiation-induced
genomic instability and bystander effects in germline in vivo.

Tamminga J(1), Kovalchuk O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada.

Ionizing radiation (IR) is a curative treatment for many human malignancies, an
important diagnostic modality, and a pivotal preparative regimen for bone marrow 
transplantation. On the other hand, IR is a potent damaging agent that can affect
a variety of processes in directly exposed cells, in their descendents, and in
neighboring un-irradiated naïve 'bystander' cells. Accumulation of DNA damage
caused by IR in conjunction with disrupted cellular regulation processes can lead
to genome instability in the germline, and therefore to transgenerational genome 
instability in offspring of exposed males. The exact mechanisms of IR-induced
genome instability in directly exposed and in naïve bystander germ cells remain
obscure, yet accumulating evidence points to the role of DNA damage and DNA
methylation changes in genome instability development. In the current study, we
used a well-established murine model to define the role of DNA methylation, DNA
damage, as well as two important germline regulators of DNA methylation, Brother 
of the Regulator of Imprinted Sites (BORIS) and CCCTC binding factor (CTCF), in
IR and bystander responses of the male germline. Here we report that irradiation 
leads to a significant accumulation of DNA damage in the exposed and bystander
testis tissue, and to altered DNA methylation and dysregulated BORIS expression
in the exposed testis tissue. The possible molecular mechanisms and biological
consequences of the observed changes are discussed.

PMID: 21143184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 24;5(11):e15013. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015013.

The insulator protein SU(HW) fine-tunes nuclear lamina interactions of the
Drosophila genome.

van Bemmel JG(1), Pagie L, Braunschweig U, Brugman W, Meuleman W, Kerkhoven RM,
van Steensel B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Regulation, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Specific interactions of the genome with the nuclear lamina (NL) are thought to
assist chromosome folding inside the nucleus and to contribute to the regulation 
of gene expression. High-resolution mapping has recently identified hundreds of
large, sharply defined lamina-associated domains (LADs) in the human genome, and 
suggested that the insulator protein CTCF may help to demarcate these domains.
Here, we report the detailed structure of LADs in Drosophila cells, and
investigate the putative roles of five insulator proteins in LAD organization. We
found that the Drosophila genome is also organized in discrete LADs, which are
about five times smaller than human LADs but contain on average a similar number 
of genes. Systematic comparison to new and published insulator binding maps shows
that only SU(HW) binds preferentially at LAD borders and at specific positions
inside LADs, while GAF, CTCF, BEAF-32 and DWG are mostly absent from these
regions. By knockdown and overexpression studies we demonstrate that SU(HW)
weakens genome - NL interactions through a local antagonistic effect, but we did 
not obtain evidence that it is essential for border formation. Our results
provide insights into the evolution of LAD organization and identify SU(HW) as a 
fine-tuner of genome - NL interactions.

PMCID: PMC2991331
PMID: 21124834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. PLoS Genet. 2010 Nov 24;6(11):e1001224. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001224.

CTCF-dependent chromatin bias constitutes transient epigenetic memory of the
mother at the H19-Igf2 imprinting control region in prospermatogonia.

Lee DH(1), Singh P, Tsai SY, Oates N, Spalla A, Spalla C, Brown L, Rivas G,
Larson G, Rauch TA, Pfeifer GP, Szabó PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Beckman Research Institute,
Duarte, CA, USA.

Genomic imprints-parental allele-specific DNA methylation marks at the
differentially methylated regions (DMRs) of imprinted genes-are erased and
reestablished in germ cells according to the individual's sex. Imprint
establishment at paternally methylated germ line DMRs occurs in fetal male germ
cells. In prospermatogonia, the two unmethylated alleles exhibit different rates 
of de novo methylation at the H19/Igf2 imprinting control region (ICR) depending 
on parental origin. We investigated the nature of this epigenetic memory using
bisulfite sequencing and allele-specific ChIP-SNuPE assays. We found that the
chromatin composition in fetal germ cells was biased at the ICR between the two
alleles with the maternally inherited allele exhibiting more H3K4me3 and less
H3K9me3 than the paternally inherited allele. We determined genetically that the 
chromatin bias, and also the delayed methylation establishment in the maternal
allele, depended on functional CTCF insulator binding sites in the ICR. Our data 
suggest that, in primordial germ cells, maternally inherited allele-specific CTCF
binding sets up allele-specific chromatin differences at the ICR. The erasure of 
these allele-specific chromatin marks is not complete before the process of de
novo methylation imprint establishment begins. CTCF-dependent allele-specific
chromatin composition imposes a maternal allele-specific delay on de novo
methylation imprint establishment at the H19/Igf2 ICR in prospermatogonia.

PMCID: PMC2991272
PMID: 21124827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Jan;1809(1):24-33. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2010.11.004. 
Epub 2010 Nov 24.

Long-range DNA interactions are specifically altered by locked nucleic
acid-targeting of a CTCF binding site.

Ling JQ(1), Hou A, Hoffman AR.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Service, VA Palo Alto Health Care System and Department of Medicine,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

Long-range DNA interactions play an important role in gene expression.
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), a ubiquitously expressed and evolutionarily
conserved 11-zinc-finger DNA binding protein, is intimately involved in gene
regulation, helping to establish and maintain chromatin architecture and
long-range DNA interactions. In order to study the effects of manipulating long
range chromatin interactions in the regulation of the neurofibromatosis gene NF1,
we targeted Zorro locked nucleic acids (Zorro LNA) to a single CTCF binding site 
at an NF1 locus in human fibroblast cells. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation,
we determined that this Zorro LNA altered CTCF and RNA polymerase II binding at
three separate and distinct regions in the NF1 gene. This change in protein
binding was associated with changes in long-range DNA interactions at the NF1
locus and downregulation of NF1 gene expression. This study describes an
efficient and convenient method to manipulate chromatin structure and alter gene 
expression that is regulated by long-range DNA interactions without changing the 
DNA sequence. The use of specific Zorro LNA probes may facilitate our efforts to 
understand the interactions between chromatin architecture and gene expression.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 21111075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Genome Res. 2011 Mar;21(3):456-64. doi: 10.1101/gr.112656.110. Epub 2010 Nov 24.

High-resolution genome-wide in vivo footprinting of diverse transcription factors
in human cells.

Boyle AP(1), Song L, Lee BK, London D, Keefe D, Birney E, Iyer VR, Crawford GE,
Furey TS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genome Sciences & Policy, Duke University, Durham, North
Carolina 27708, USA.

Regulation of gene transcription in diverse cell types is determined largely by
varied sets of cis-elements where transcription factors bind. Here we demonstrate
that data from a single high-throughput DNase I hypersensitivity assay can
delineate hundreds of thousands of base-pair resolution in vivo footprints in
human cells that precisely mark individual transcription factor-DNA interactions.
These annotations provide a unique resource for the investigation of
cis-regulatory elements. We find that footprints for specific transcription
factors correlate with ChIP-seq enrichment and can accurately identify functional
versus nonfunctional transcription factor motifs. We also find that footprints
reveal a unique evolutionary conservation pattern that differentiates functional 
footprinted bases from surrounding DNA. Finally, detailed analysis of CTCF
footprints suggests multiple modes of binding and a novel DNA binding motif
upstream of the primary binding site.

PMCID: PMC3044859
PMID: 21106903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Dec 14;107(50):21836-41. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1002130107. Epub 2010 Nov 24.

Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)-regulated DNA methylation alters
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)/cohesin binding and transcription at the BDNF locus.

Chang J(1), Zhang B, Heath H, Galjart N, Wang X, Milbrandt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, and Hope Center for Neurological Disorders, Washington
University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Cellular metabolism alters patterns of gene expression through a variety of
mechanisms, including alterations in histone modifications and transcription
factor activity. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)-dependent proteins such 
as poly(ADP ribose) polymerases (PARPs) and sirtuin deacetylases play important
roles in this regulation, thus NAD provides a crucial link between metabolism and
these cellular signaling processes. Here, we found that lowering NAD levels in
mouse primary cortical neurons led to decreased activity-dependent BDNF
expression. The altered BDNF transcription occurred independently of Sirt or Parp
activities; instead, low NAD levels promoted increased DNA methylation of the
activity-dependent BDNF promoter. Increased methylation at this promoter
triggered the dissociation of the insulator protein CTCF as well as the
accompanying cohesin from the BDNF locus. The loss of these proteins resulted in 
histone acetylation and methylation changes at this locus consistent with
chromatin compaction and gene silencing. Because BDNF is critical for neuronal
function, these results suggest that age- or nutrition-associated declines in NAD
levels as well as deficits in cohesin function associated with disease modulate
BDNF expression and could contribute to cognitive impairment.

PMCID: PMC3003122
PMID: 21106760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Biochem Cell Biol. 2010 Dec;88(6):885-98. doi: 10.1139/O10-111.

Gene insulation. Part II: natural strategies in vertebrates.

Amouyal M(1).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-Interactions à Distance, Paris, France. michele.amouyal@club.fr

The way a gene is insulated from its genomic environment in vertebrates is not
basically different from what is observed in yeast and Drosophila (preceding
article in this issue). If the formation of a looped chromatin domain, whether
generated by attachment to the nuclear matrix or not, has become a classic way to
confine an enhancer to a specific genomic domain and to coordinate, sequentially 
or simultaneously, gene expression in a given program, its role has been extended
to new networks of genes or regulators within the same gene. A wider definition
of the bases of the chromatin loops (nonchromosomal nuclear structures or genomic
interacting elements) is also available. However, whereas insulation in
Drosophila is due to a variety of proteins, in vertebrates insulators are still
practically limited to CTCF (the CCCTC-binding factor), which appears in all
cases to be the linchpin of an architecture that structures the assembly of
DNA-protein interactions for gene regulation. As in yeast and Drosophila, the
economy of means is the rule and the same unexpected diversion of known
transcription elements (active or poised RNA polymerases, TFIIIC elements out of 
tRNA genes, permanent histone replacement) is observed, with variants peculiar to
CTCF. Thus, besides structuring DNA looping, CTCF is a barrier to DNA methylation
or interferes with all sorts of transcription processes, such as that generating 
heterochromatin.

PMID: 21102651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. BMC Genomics. 2010 Nov 22;11:649. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-649.

Imprinted genes show unique patterns of sequence conservation.

Hutter B(1), Bieg M, Helms V, Paulsen M.

Author information: 
(1)Universität des Saarlandes, Saarbrücken, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Genomic imprinting is an evolutionary conserved mechanism of
epigenetic gene regulation in placental mammals that results in silencing of one 
of the parental alleles. In order to decipher interactions between
allele-specific DNA methylation of imprinted genes and evolutionary conservation,
we performed a genome-wide comparative investigation of genomic sequences and
highly conserved elements of imprinted genes in human and mouse.
RESULTS: Evolutionarily conserved elements in imprinted regions differ from those
associated with autosomal genes in various ways. Whereas for maternally expressed
genes strong divergence of protein-encoding sequences is most prominent,
paternally expressed genes exhibit substantial conservation of coding and
noncoding sequences. Conserved elements in imprinted regions are marked by
enrichment of CpG dinucleotides and low (TpG+CpA)/(2·CpG) ratios indicate reduced
CpG deamination. Interestingly, paternally and maternally expressed genes can be 
distinguished by differences in G+C and CpG contents that might be associated
with unusual epigenetic features. Especially noncoding conserved elements of
paternally expressed genes are exceptionally G+C and CpG rich. In addition, we
confirmed a frequent occurrence of intronic CpG islands and observed a
decelerated degeneration of ancient LINE-1 repeats. We also found a moderate
enrichment of YY1 and CTCF binding sites in imprinted regions and identified
several short sequence motifs in highly conserved elements that might act as
additional regulatory elements.
CONCLUSIONS: We discovered several novel conserved DNA features that might be
related to allele-specific DNA methylation. Our results hint at reduced CpG
deamination rates in imprinted regions, which affects mostly noncoding conserved 
elements of paternally expressed genes. Pronounced differences between maternally
and paternally expressed genes imply specific modes of evolution as a result of
differences in epigenetic features and a special response to selective pressure. 
In addition, our data support the potential role of intronic CpG islands as
epigenetic key regulatory elements and suggest that evolutionary conserved LINE-1
elements fulfill regulatory functions in imprinted regions.

PMCID: PMC3091771
PMID: 21092170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 8;5(11):e13872. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013872.

The structural complexity of the human BORIS gene in gametogenesis and cancer.

Pugacheva EM(1), Suzuki T, Pack SD, Kosaka-Suzuki N, Yoon J, Vostrov AA, Barsov
E, Strunnikov AV, Morse HC 3rd, Loukinov D, Lobanenkov V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Disease, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, United States of
America. epugacheva@niaid.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: BORIS/CTCFL is a paralogue of CTCF, the major epigenetic regulator of
vertebrate genomes. BORIS is normally expressed only in germ cells but is
aberrantly activated in numerous cancers. While recent studies demonstrated that 
BORIS is a transcriptional activator of testis-specific genes, little is
generally known about its biological and molecular functions.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we show that BORIS is expressed as 23
isoforms in germline and cancer cells. The isoforms are comprised of alternative 
N- and C-termini combined with varying numbers of zinc fingers (ZF) in the DNA
binding domain. The patterns of BORIS isoform expression are distinct in germ and
cancer cells. Isoform expression is activated by downregulation of CTCF,
upregulated by reduction in CpG methylation caused by inactivation of DNMT1 or
DNMT3b, and repressed by activation of p53. Studies of ectopically expressed
isoforms showed that all are translated and localized to the nucleus. Using the
testis-specific cerebroside sulfotransferase (CST) promoter and the IGF2/H19
imprinting control region (ICR), it was shown that binding of BORIS isoforms to
DNA targets in vitro is methylation-sensitive and depends on the number and
specific composition of ZF. The ability to bind target DNA and the presence of a 
specific long amino terminus (N258) in different isoforms are necessary and
sufficient to activate CST transcription. Comparative sequence analyses revealed 
an evolutionary burst in mammals with strong conservation of BORIS isoproteins
among primates.
CONCLUSIONS: The extensive repertoire of spliced BORIS variants in humans that
confer distinct DNA binding and transcriptional activation properties, and their 
differential patterns of expression among germ cells and neoplastic cells suggest
that the gene is involved in a range of functionally important aspects of both
normal gametogenesis and cancer development. In addition, a burst in isoform
diversification may be evolutionarily tied to unique aspects of primate
speciation.

PMCID: PMC2975627
PMID: 21079786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2010 Nov 8;3(1):19. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-3-19.

CTCF regulates the local epigenetic state of ribosomal DNA repeats.

van de Nobelen S(1), Rosa-Garrido M, Leers J, Heath H, Soochit W, Joosen L,
Jonkers I, Demmers J, van der Reijden M, Torrano V, Grosveld F, Delgado MD,
Renkawitz R, Galjart N, Sleutels F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus MC, The Netherlands.
n.galjart@erasmusmc.nl.

BACKGROUND: CCCTC binding factor (CTCF) is a highly conserved zinc finger
protein, which is involved in chromatin organization, local histone
modifications, and RNA polymerase II-mediated gene transcription. CTCF may act by
binding tightly to DNA and recruiting other proteins to mediate its various
functions in the nucleus. To further explore the role of this essential factor,
we used a mass spectrometry-based approach to screen for novel CTCF-interacting
partners.
RESULTS: Using biotinylated CTCF as bait, we identified upstream binding factor
(UBF) and multiple other components of the RNA polymerase I complex as potential 
CTCF-interacting partners. Interestingly, CTCFL, the testis-specific paralog of
CTCF, also binds UBF. The interaction between CTCF(L) and UBF is direct, and
requires the zinc finger domain of CTCF(L) and the high mobility group (HMG)-box 
1 and dimerization domain of UBF. Because UBF is involved in RNA polymerase
I-mediated ribosomal (r)RNA transcription, we analyzed CTCF binding to the rDNA
repeat. We found that CTCF bound to a site upstream of the rDNA spacer promoter
and preferred non-methylated over methylated rDNA. DNA binding by CTCF in turn
stimulated binding of UBF. Absence of CTCF in cultured cells resulted in
decreased association of UBF with rDNA and in nucleolar fusion. Furthermore, lack
of CTCF led to reduced binding of RNA polymerase I and variant histone H2A.Z near
the rDNA spacer promoter, a loss of specific histone modifications, and
diminished transcription of non-coding RNA from the spacer promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: UBF is the first common interaction partner of CTCF and CTCFL,
suggesting a role for these proteins in chromatin organization of the rDNA
repeats. We propose that CTCF affects RNA polymerase I-mediated events globally
by controlling nucleolar number, and locally by regulating chromatin at the rDNA 
spacer promoter, similar to RNA polymerase II promoters. CTCF may load UBF onto
rDNA, thereby forming part of a network that maintains rDNA genes poised for
transcription.

PMCID: PMC2993708
PMID: 21059229  [PubMed]


184. Mol Syst Biol. 2010 Nov 2;6:426. doi: 10.1038/msb.2010.79.

Intra- and inter-chromosomal interactions correlate with CTCF binding genome
wide.

Botta M(1), Haider S, Leung IX, Lio P, Mozziconacci J.

Author information: 
(1)Computer Laboratory, Cambridge University, Cambridge, UK.

A prime goal in systems biology is the comprehensive use of existing
high-throughput genomic datasets to gain a better understanding of chromatin
organization and genome function. In this report, we use chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) data that map protein-binding sites on the genome, and
Hi-C data that map interactions between DNA fragments in the genome in an
integrative approach. We first reanalyzed the contact map of the human genome as 
determined with Hi-C and found that long-range interactions are highly nonrandom;
the same DNA fragments are often found interacting together. We then show using
ChIP data that these interactions can be explained by the action of the
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF). These CTCF-mediated interactions are found both
within chromosomes and in between different chromosomes. This makes CTCF a major 
organizer of both the structure of the chromosomal fiber within each individual
chromosome and of the chromosome territories within the cell nucleus.

PMCID: PMC3010120
PMID: 21045820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Jan 1;20(1):1-15. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq427. Epub 2010 Nov 1.

Expanded CTG repeat demarcates a boundary for abnormal CpG methylation in
myotonic dystrophy patient tissues.

López Castel A(1), Nakamori M, Tomé S, Chitayat D, Gourdon G, Thornton CA,
Pearson CE.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Genome Biology, Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for Sick
Children, and Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

Myotonic dystrophy (DM1) affects multiple organs, shows age-dependent progression
and is caused by CTG expansions at the DM1 locus. We determined the DM1 CpG
methylation profile and CTG length in tissues from DM1 foetuses, DM1 adults,
non-affected individuals and transgenic DM1 mice. Analysis included CTCF binding 
sites upstream and downstream of the CTG tract, as methylation-sensitive CTCF
binding affects chromatinization and transcription of the DM1 locus. In humans,
in a given foetus, expansions were largest in heart and smallest in liver,
differing by 40-400 repeats; in adults, the largest expansions were in heart and 
cerebral cortex and smallest in cerebellum, differing by up to 5770 repeats in
the same individual. Abnormal methylation was specific to the mutant allele. In
DM1 adults, heart, liver and cortex showed high-to-moderate methylation levels,
whereas cerebellum, kidney and skeletal muscle were devoid of methylation.
Methylation decreased between foetuses and adults. Contrary to previous findings,
methylation was not restricted to individuals with congenital DM1. The expanded
repeat demarcates an abrupt boundary of methylation. Upstream sequences,
including the CTCF site, were methylated, whereas the repeat itself and
downstream sequences were not. In DM1 mice, expansion-, tissue- and age-specific 
methylation patterns were similar but not identical to those in DM1 individuals; 
notably in mice, methylation was present up- and downstream of the repeat, but
greater upstream. Thus, in humans, the CpG-free expanded CTG repeat appears to
maintain a highly polarized pattern of CpG methylation at the DM1 locus, which
varies markedly with age and tissues.

PMCID: PMC3000673
PMID: 21044947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Cell Metab. 2010 Nov 3;12(5):443-55. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2010.09.012.

Global epigenomic analysis of primary human pancreatic islets provides insights
into type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci.

Stitzel ML(1), Sethupathy P, Pearson DS, Chines PS, Song L, Erdos MR, Welch R,
Parker SC, Boyle AP, Scott LJ; NISC Comparative Sequencing Program, Margulies EH,
Boehnke M, Furey TS, Crawford GE, Collins FS.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Technology Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Erratum in
    Cell Metab. 2010 Dec 1;12(6):683.

Identifying cis-regulatory elements is important to understanding how human
pancreatic islets modulate gene expression in physiologic or pathophysiologic
(e.g., diabetic) conditions. We conducted genome-wide analysis of DNase I
hypersensitive sites, histone H3 lysine methylation modifications (K4me1, K4me3, 
K79me2), and CCCTC factor (CTCF) binding in human islets. This identified ~18,000
putative promoters (several hundred unannotated and islet-active). Surprisingly, 
active promoter modifications were absent at genes encoding islet-specific
hormones, suggesting a distinct regulatory mechanism. Of 34,039 distal
(nonpromoter) regulatory elements, 47% are islet unique and 22% are CTCF bound.
In the 18 type 2 diabetes (T2D)-associated loci, we identified 118 putative
regulatory elements and confirmed enhancer activity for 12 of 33 tested. Among
six regulatory elements harboring T2D-associated variants, two exhibit
significant allele-specific differences in activity. These findings present a
global snapshot of the human islet epigenome and should provide functional
context for noncoding variants emerging from genetic studies of T2D and other
islet disorders.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3026436
PMID: 21035756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Cancer Res. 2010 Nov 15;70(22):9175-84. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1318. Epub 
2010 Oct 26.

Epigenetically deregulated microRNA-375 is involved in a positive feedback loop
with estrogen receptor alpha in breast cancer cells.

de Souza Rocha Simonini P(1), Breiling A, Gupta N, Malekpour M, Youns M,
Omranipour R, Malekpour F, Volinia S, Croce CM, Najmabadi H, Diederichs S, Sahin 
O, Mayer D, Lyko F, Hoheisel JD, Riazalhosseini Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Functional Genome Analysis, Helmholtz-University-Young
Investigator Group Molecular RNA Biology and Cancer, German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ) & Institute of Pathology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany.

Estrogen receptor a (ERa) upregulation causes abnormal cell proliferation in
about two thirds of breast cancers, yet understanding of the underlying
mechanisms remains incomplete. Here, we show that high expression of the microRNA
miR-375 in ERa-positive breast cell lines is a key driver of their proliferation.
miR-375 overexpression was caused by loss of epigenetic marks including H3K9me2
and local DNA hypomethylation, dissociation of the transcriptional repressor CTCF
from the miR-375 promoter, and interactions of ERa with regulatory regions of
miR-375. Inhibiting miR-375 in ERa-positive MCF-7 cells resulted in reduced ERa
activation and cell proliferation. A combination of expression profiling from
tumor samples and miRNA target prediction identified RASD1 as a potential miR-375
target. Mechanistic investigations revealed that miR-375 regulates RASD1 by
targeting the 3' untranslated region in RASD1 mRNA. Additionally, we found that
RASD1 negatively regulates ERa expression. Our findings define a forward feedback
pathway in control of ERa expression, highlighting new strategies to treat
ERa-positive invasive breast tumors.

Copyright © 2010 AACR.

PMID: 20978187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Genes Dev. 2010 Nov 15;24(22):2543-55. doi: 10.1101/gad.1967810. Epub 2010 Oct
21.

Mediation of CTCF transcriptional insulation by DEAD-box RNA-binding protein p68 
and steroid receptor RNA activator SRA.

Yao H(1), Brick K, Evrard Y, Xiao T, Camerini-Otero RD, Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a DNA-binding protein that plays important roles
in chromatin organization, although the mechanism by which CTCF carries out these
functions is not fully understood. Recent studies show that CTCF recruits the
cohesin complex to insulator sites and that cohesin is required for insulator
activity. Here we showed that the DEAD-box RNA helicase p68 (DDX5) and its
associated noncoding RNA, steroid receptor RNA activator (SRA), form a complex
with CTCF that is essential for insulator function. p68 was detected at CTCF
sites in the IGF2/H19 imprinted control region (ICR) as well as other genomic
CTCF sites. In vivo depletion of SRA or p68 reduced CTCF-mediated insulator
activity at the IGF2/H19 ICR, increased levels of IGF2 expression, and increased 
interactions between the endodermal enhancer and IGF2 promoter. p68/SRA also
interacts with members of the cohesin complex. Depletion of either p68 or SRA
does not affect CTCF binding to its genomic sites, but does reduce cohesin
binding. The results suggest that p68/SRA stabilizes the interaction of cohesin
with CTCF by binding to both, and is required for proper insulator function.

PMCID: PMC2975930
PMID: 20966046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Cell. 2010 Oct 1;143(1):156-69. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.09.006.

Comparative epigenomic analysis of murine and human adipogenesis.

Mikkelsen TS(1), Xu Z, Zhang X, Wang L, Gimble JM, Lander ES, Rosen ED.

Author information: 
(1)Broad Institute, 7 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

We report the generation and comparative analysis of genome-wide chromatin state 
maps, PPAR<U+03B3> and CTCF localization maps, and gene expression profiles from murine 
and human models of adipogenesis. The data provide high-resolution views of
chromatin remodeling during cellular differentiation and allow identification of 
thousands of putative preadipocyte- and adipocyte-specific cis-regulatory
elements based on dynamic chromatin signatures. We find that the specific
locations of most such elements differ between the two models, including at
orthologous loci with similar expression patterns. Based on sequence analysis and
reporter assays, we show that these differences are determined, in part, by
evolutionary turnover of transcription factor motifs in the genome sequences and 
that this turnover may be facilitated by the presence of multiple distal
regulatory elements at adipogenesis-dependent loci. We also utilize the close
relationship between open chromatin marks and transcription factor motifs to
identify and validate PLZF and SRF as regulators of adipogenesis.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2950833
PMID: 20887899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt. 2010 Sep;30(5):446-53. doi:
10.1111/j.1475-1313.2010.00735.x.

Epigenetic control of expression of the human L- and M- pigment genes.

Deeb SS(1), Bisset D, Fu L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. sdeeb@u.washington.edu

Epigenetics alters gene expression by chromatin modification without changing the
sequence of DNA. DNA methylation is an essential signal for epigenetic gene
regulation. Methylation of cytosine bases at CpG dinucleotides in DNA results in 
chromatin condensation resulting in suppression of gene expression. DNA
methylation has been shown to play important roles in cell differentiation,
genomic imprinting and X-chromosome inactivation. We compared the CpG methylation
patterns of the promoters of the L-opsin gene (OPN1LW) and the M-opsin gene
(OPN1MW), plus a DNase I hypersensitive (DHS) site located about 8 kb (kilobases)
upstream of the OPN1LW gene. Comparisons were made using the human retinoblastoma
cell line WERI, which expresses the L and M opsin genes when treated with thyroid
hormone (T3), and a lymphoblastoid cell line GM06990 that does not express these 
genes. The results showed that the great majority of the 14 CpGs located within
the proximal 200 bp (base pairs) of each promoter, plus 20 bp of the
5'-untranslated region, were hypo-methylated in WERI-Rb-1 cells, whether or not
treated with T3, but almost totally methylated in the lymphoblastoid cell line.
Three of the CpGs that are located beyond 200 bp from the transcription start
site of OPN1LW were hyper-methylated in both WERI and lymphoblastoid cells.
Significant differential methylation was also observed within the DHS region (24 
CpGs). This DHS region contains a highly conserved motif that binds CCCTC-binding
factor (CTCF), referred to as a 'chromatin insulator or boundary element', that
has been shown to regulate gene expression at several genome locations. The
results suggest that DNA methylation is likely to contribute to regulation of
expression of the L- and M-opsin genes during differentiation, as well as to the 
retinal L:M cone ratio. In addition, thyroid hormone induction of the opsin genes
does not appear to alter DNA methylation.

© 2010 The Authors, Ophthalmic and Physiological Optics © 2010 The College of
Optometrists.

PMID: 20883327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 20;5(9):e12847. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012847.

Distinct epigenetic domains separated by a CTCF bound insulator between the
tandem genes, BLU and RASSF1A.

Chang JW(1), Hsu HS, Ni HJ, Chuang CT, Hsiung CH, Huang TH, Wang YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Tumor suppressor gene (TSG) RASSF1A and candidate TSG BLU are two
tandem head-to-tail genes located at 3p21.3. We hypothesized that there may be a 
concordance on their gene expression and promoter methylation status. If not,
then there may be an insulator located between RASSF1A and BLU genes that
provides a barrier activity.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We first identified potential transcriptionally
important CpG sites using the methylation-specific oligonucleotide array in
relation to mRNA expression of RASSF1A and BLU genes in primary lung tumors. We
demonstrated that E2F1 bound to the potential transcriptionally important CpG
sites in RASSF1A gene of a normal lung cell line expressing RASSF1A transcripts, 
whereas loss of E2F1 binding to RASSF1A in A549 cancer cell line was the result
of DNA methylation. Both RASSF1A and BLU genes had their own potential
transcriptionally important CpG regions. However, there was no correlation of
methylation status between RASSF1A and BLU. Using gel shift assay and chromatin
immunoprecipitation-PCR (ChIP-PCR), we found that CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)
bound to insulator sequences located between these two genes. Bisulfite
sequencing and ChIP-PCR revealed distinct methylation and chromatin boundaries
separated by the CTCF binding domains in normal cells, whereas such distinct
epigenetic domains were not observed in cancer cells. Note that demethylation
reagent and histone deacetylase inhibitor treatments led to CTCF binding and
recovery of barrier effect for RASSF1A and BLU genes in cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our study dissects the potential transcriptionally
important CpG sites for RASSF1A and BLU genes at the sequence level and
demonstrates that CTCF binding to the insulator of BLU gene provides a barrier
activity within separate epigenetic domains of the juxtaposed BLU and RASSF1A
loci in the 3p21.3 gene cluster region.

PMCID: PMC2942851
PMID: 20877461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Feb;39(3):862-73. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq827. Epub 2010 Sep 
28.

BORIS/CTCFL-mediated transcriptional regulation of the hTERT telomerase gene in
testicular and ovarian tumor cells.

Renaud S(1), Loukinov D, Alberti L, Vostrov A, Kwon YW, Bosman FT, Lobanenkov V, 
Benhattar J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, 1011
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Telomerase activity, not detectable in somatic cells but frequently activated
during carcinogenesis, confers immortality to tumors. Mechanisms governing
expression of the catalytic subunit hTERT, the limiting factor for telomerase
activity, still remain unclear. We previously proposed a model in which the
binding of the transcription factor CTCF to the two first exons of hTERT results 
in transcriptional inhibition in normal cells. This inhibition is abrogated,
however, by methylation of CTCF binding sites in 85% of tumors. Here, we showed
that hTERT was unmethylated in testicular and ovarian tumors and in derivative
cell lines. We demonstrated that CTCF and its paralogue, BORIS/CTCFL, were both
present in the nucleus of the same cancer cells and bound to the first exon of
hTERT in vivo. Moreover, exogenous BORIS expression in normal BORIS-negative
cells was sufficient to activate hTERT transcription with an increasing number of
cell passages. Thus, expression of BORIS was sufficient to allow hTERT
transcription in normal cells and to counteract the inhibitory effect of CTCF in 
testicular and ovarian tumor cells. These results define an important
contribution of BORIS to immortalization during tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3035453
PMID: 20876690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 8;5(9):e12630. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012630.

Complete biallelic insulation at the H19/Igf2 imprinting control region position 
results in fetal growth retardation and perinatal lethality.

Lee DH(1), Singh P, Tsark WM, Szabó PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, City of Hope National Medical
Center, Duarte, California, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The H19/Igf2 imprinting control region (ICR) functions as an
insulator exclusively in the unmethylated maternal allele, where
enhancer-blocking by CTCF protein prevents the interaction between the Igf2
promoter and the distant enhancers. DNA methylation inhibits CTCF binding in the 
paternal ICR allele. Two copies of the chicken ß-globin insulator (ChßGI)(2) are 
capable of substituting for the enhancer blocking function of the ICR.
Insulation, however, now also occurs upon paternal inheritance, because unlike
the H19 ICR, the (ChßGI)(2) does not become methylated in fetal male germ cells. 
The (ChßGI)(2) is a composite insulator, exhibiting enhancer blocking by CTCF and
chromatin barrier functions by USF1 and VEZF1. We asked the question whether
these barrier proteins protected the (ChßGI)(2) sequences from methylation in the
male germ line.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We genetically dissected the ChßGI in the mouse
by deleting the binding sites USF1 and VEZF1. The methylation of the mutant
versus normal (ChßGI)(2) significantly increased from 11% to 32% in perinatal
male germ cells, suggesting that the barrier proteins did have a role in
protecting the (ChßGI)(2) from methylation in the male germ line. Contrary to the
H19 ICR, however, the mutant (mChßGI)(2) lacked the potential to attain full de
novo methylation in the germ line and to maintain methylation in the paternal
allele in the soma, where it consequently functioned as a biallelic insulator.
Unexpectedly, a stricter enhancer blocking was achieved by CTCF alone than by a
combination of the CTCF, USF1 and VEZF1 sites, illustrated by undetectable Igf2
expression upon paternal transmission.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In this in vivo model, hypomethylation at the ICR
position together with fetal growth retardation mimicked the human Silver-Russell
syndrome. Importantly, late fetal/perinatal death occurred arguing that strict
biallelic insulation at the H19/Igf2 ICR position is not tolerated in
development.

PMCID: PMC2935888
PMID: 20838620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Semin Immunol. 2010 Dec;22(6):346-52. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2010.08.002. Epub 2010 
Sep 15.

Epigenetic and 3-dimensional regulation of V(D)J rearrangement of immunoglobulin 
genes.

Degner-Leisso SC(1), Feeney AJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Scripps Research Institute, Department of Immunology and Microbial
Science, IMM-22, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, United
States.

V(D)J recombination is a crucial component of the adaptive immune response,
allowing for the production of a diverse antigen receptor repertoire (Ig and
TCR). This review will focus on how epigenetic regulation and 3-dimensional (3D) 
interactions may control V(D)J recombination at Ig loci. The interplay between
transcription factors and post-translational modifications at the Igh, Ig<U+03BA>, and
Ig<U+03BB> loci will be highlighted. Furthermore, we propose that the spatial
organization and epigenetic boundaries of each Ig loci before and during V(D)J
recombination may be influenced in part by the CTCF/cohesin complex. Taken
together, the many epigenetic and 3D layers of control ensure that Ig loci are
only rearranged at appropriate stages of B cell development.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2981695
PMID: 20833065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Cell Cycle. 2010 Sep 1;9(17):3428-37. Epub 2010 Sep 13.

Disparate chromatin landscapes and kinetics of inactivation impact differential
regulation of p53 target genes.

Gomes NP(1), Espinosa JM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular, Cellular and
Developmental Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA.

The p53 transcription factor regulates the expression of genes involved in
cellular responses to stress, including cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. The p53 
transcriptional program is extremely malleable, with target gene expression
varying in a stress- and cell type-specific fashion. The molecular mechanisms
underlying differential p53 target gene expression remain elusive. Here we
provide evidence for gene-specific mechanisms affecting expression of three
important p53 target genes. First we show that transcription of the apoptotic
gene PUMA is regulated through intragenic chromatin boundaries, as revealed by
distinct histone modification territories that correlate with binding of the
insulator factors CTCF, Cohesins and USF1/2. Interestingly, this mode of
regulation produces an evolutionary conserved long non-coding RNA of unknown
function. Second, we demonstrate that the kinetics of transcriptional competence 
of the cell cycle arrest gene p21 and the apoptotic gene FAS are markedly
different in vivo, as predicted by recent biochemical dissection of their core
promoter elements in vitro. After a pulse of p53 activity in cells, assembly of
the transcriptional apparatus on p21 is rapidly reversed, while FAS
transcriptional activation is more sustained. Collectively these data add to a
growing list of p53-autonomous mechanisms that impact differential regulation of 
p53 target genes.

PMCID: PMC3047614
PMID: 20818159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Jan;39(1):89-103. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq740. Epub 2010 Sep 
2.

An insulator embedded in the chicken a-globin locus regulates chromatin domain
configuration and differential gene expression.

Furlan-Magaril M(1), Rebollar E, Guerrero G, Fernández A, Moltó E,
González-Buendía E, Cantero M, Montoliu L, Recillas-Targa F.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Departamento de Genética Molecular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F., México.

Genome organization into transcriptionally active domains denotes one of the
first levels of gene expression regulation. Although the chromatin domain concept
is generally accepted, only little is known on how domain organization impacts
the regulation of differential gene expression. Insulators might hold answers to 
address this issue as they delimit and organize chromatin domains. We have
previously identified a CTCF-dependent insulator with enhancer-blocking activity 
embedded in the 5' non-coding region of the chicken a-globin domain. Here, we
demonstrate that this element, called the aEHS-1.4 insulator, protects a
transgene against chromosomal position effects in stably transfected cell lines
and transgenic mice. We found that this insulator can create a regulated
chromatin environment that coincides with the onset of adult a-globin gene
expression. Furthermore, such activity is in part dependent on the in vivo
regulated occupancy of CTCF at the aEHS-1.4 element. Insulator function is also
regulated by CTCF poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation. Our results suggest that the aEHS-1.4
insulator contributes in organizing the chromatin structure of the a-globin gene 
domain and prevents activation of adult a-globin gene expression at the
erythroblast stage via CTCF.

PMCID: PMC3017597
PMID: 20813760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2010 Nov;299(5):C1058-67. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00080.2010. Epub 2010 Aug 25.

Regulation of serum response factor activity and smooth muscle cell apoptosis by 
chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein 8.

Rodenberg JM(1), Hoggatt AM, Chen M, Touw K, Jones R, Herring BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana University School
of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5120, USA.

Serum response factor (SRF) is a widely expressed protein that plays a key role
in the regulation of smooth muscle differentiation, proliferation, migration, and
apoptosis. It is generally accepted that one mechanism by which SRF regulates
these diverse functions is through pathway-specific cofactor interactions. A
novel SRF cofactor, chromodomain helicase DNA binding protein 8 (CHD8), was
isolated from a yeast two-hybrid screen using SRF as bait. CHD8 is highly
expressed in adult smooth muscle tissues. Coimmunoprecipitation assays from A10
smooth muscle cells demonstrated binding of endogenous SRF and CHD8. Data from
GST-pulldown assays indicate that the NH(2)-terminus of CHD8 can interact
directly with the MADS domain of SRF. Adenoviral-mediated knockdown of CHD8 in
smooth muscle cells resulted in attenuated expression of SRF-dependent, smooth
muscle-specific genes. Knockdown of CHD8, SRF, or CTCF, a previously described
binding partner of CHD8, in A10 VSMCs also resulted in a marked induction of
apoptosis. Mechanistically, apoptosis induced by CHD8 knockdown was accompanied
by attenuated expression of the anti-apoptotic proteins, Birc5, and CARD10,
whereas SRF knockdown attenuated expression of CARD10 and Mcl-1, but not Birc5,
and CTCF knockdown attenuated expression of Birc5. These data suggest that CHD8
plays a dual role in smooth muscle cells modulating SRF activity toward
differentiation genes and promoting cell survival through interactions with both 
SRF and CTCF to regulate expression of Birc5 and CARD10.

PMCID: PMC2980307
PMID: 20739623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Exp Med. 2010 Aug 30;207(9):1939-50. doi: 10.1084/jem.20100204. Epub 2010 Aug
23.

DNA methylation prevents CTCF-mediated silencing of the oncogene BCL6 in B cell
lymphomas.

Lai AY(1), Fatemi M, Dhasarathy A, Malone C, Sobol SE, Geigerman C, Jaye DL, Mav 
D, Shah R, Li L, Wade PA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

Aberrant DNA methylation commonly occurs in cancer cells where it has been
implicated in the epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor genes. Additional
roles for DNA methylation, such as transcriptional activation, have been
predicted but have yet to be clearly demonstrated. The BCL6 oncogene is
implicated in the pathogenesis of germinal center-derived B cell lymphomas. We
demonstrate that the intragenic CpG islands within the first intron of the human 
BCL6 locus were hypermethylated in lymphoma cells that expressed high amounts of 
BCL6 messenger RNA (mRNA). Inhibition of DNA methyltransferases decreased BCL6
mRNA abundance, suggesting a role for these methylated CpGs in positively
regulating BCL6 transcription. The enhancer-blocking transcription factor CTCF
bound to this intronic region in a methylation-sensitive manner. Depletion of
CTCF by short hairpin RNA in neoplastic plasma cells that do not express BCL6
resulted in up-regulation of BCL6 transcription. These data indicate that BCL6
expression is maintained during lymphomagenesis in part through DNA methylation
that prevents CTCF-mediated silencing.

PMCID: PMC2931164
PMID: 20733034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Aug 12;6(8):e1001048. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001048.

CTCF prevents the epigenetic drift of EBV latency promoter Qp.

Tempera I(1), Wiedmer A, Dheekollu J, Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

The establishment and maintenance of Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) latent infection
requires distinct viral gene expression programs. These gene expression programs,
termed latency types, are determined largely by promoter selection, and
controlled through the interplay between cell-type specific transcription
factors, chromatin structure, and epigenetic modifications. We used a genome-wide
chromatin-immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay to identify epigenetic modifications
that correlate with different latency types. We found that the chromatin
insulator protein CTCF binds at several key regulatory nodes in the EBV genome
and may compartmentalize epigenetic modifications across the viral genome. Highly
enriched CTCF binding sites were identified at the promoter regions upstream of
Cp, Wp, EBERs, and Qp. Since Qp is essential for long-term maintenance of viral
genomes in type I latency and epithelial cell infections, we focused on the role 
of CTCF in regulating Qp. Purified CTCF bound approximately 40 bp upstream of the
EBNA1 binding sites located at +10 bp relative to the transcriptional initiation 
site at Qp. Mutagenesis of the CTCF binding site in EBV bacmids resulted in a
decrease in the recovery of stable hygromycin-resistant episomes in 293 cells.
EBV lacking the Qp CTCF site showed a decrease in Qp transcription initiation and
a corresponding increase in Cp and Fp promoter utilization at 8 weeks
post-transfection. However, by 16 weeks post-transfection, bacmids lacking CTCF
sites had no detectable Qp transcription and showed high levels of histone H3 K9 
methylation and CpG DNA methylation at the Qp initiation site. These findings
provide direct genetic evidence that CTCF functions as a chromatin insulator that
prevents the promiscuous transcription of surrounding genes and blocks the
epigenetic silencing of an essential promoter, Qp, during EBV latent infection.

PMCID: PMC2921154
PMID: 20730088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010 Sep;17(9):1079-87. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1876. Epub 2010
Aug 15.

Tissue- and age-specific DNA replication patterns at the CTG/CAG-expanded human
myotonic dystrophy type 1 locus.

Cleary JD(1), Tomé S, López Castel A, Panigrahi GB, Foiry L, Hagerman KA, Sroka
H, Chitayat D, Gourdon G, Pearson CE.

Author information: 
(1)Program of Genetics & Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

Myotonic dystrophy, caused by DM1 CTG/CAG repeat expansions, shows varying
instability levels between tissues and across ages within patients. We determined
DNA replication profiles at the DM1 locus in patient fibroblasts and tissues from
DM1 transgenic mice of various ages showing different instability. In patient
cells, the repeat is flanked by two replication origins demarcated by CTCF sites,
with replication diminished at the expansion. In mice, the expansion replicated
from only the downstream origin (CAG as lagging template). In testes from mice of
three different ages, replication toward the repeat paused at the earliest age
and was relieved at later ages-coinciding with increased instability. Brain,
pancreas and thymus replication varied with CpG methylation at DM1 CTCF sites.
CTCF sites between progressing forks and repeats reduced replication depending on
chromatin. Thus, varying replication progression may affect tissue- and
age-specific repeat instability.

PMID: 20711191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Dec;38(22):7974-90. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq680. Epub 2010
Aug 6.

Coordinated allele-specific histone acetylation at the differentially methylated 
regions of imprinted genes.

Singh P(1), Cho J, Tsai SY, Rivas GE, Larson GP, Szabó PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, City of Hope National Medical
Center, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

Genomic imprinting is an epigenetic inheritance system characterized by parental 
allele-specific gene expression. Allele-specific DNA methylation and chromatin
composition are two epigenetic modification systems that control imprinted gene
expression. To get a general assessment of histone lysine acetylation at
imprinted genes we measured allele-specific acetylation of a wide range of lysine
residues, H3K4, H3K18, H3K27, H3K36, H3K79, H3K64, H4K5, H4K8, H4K12, H2AK5,
H2BK12, H2BK16 and H2BK46 at 11 differentially methylated regions (DMRs) in
reciprocal mouse crosses using multiplex chromatin immunoprecipitation SNuPE
assays. Histone acetylation marks generally distinguished the methylation-free
alleles from methylated alleles at DMRs in mouse embryo fibroblasts and embryos. 
Acetylated lysines that are typically found at transcription start sites
exhibited stronger allelic bias than acetylated histone residues in general.
Maternally methylated DMRs, that usually overlap with promoters exhibited higher 
levels of acetylation and a 10% stronger allele-specific bias than paternally
methylated DMRs that reside in intergenic regions. Along the H19/Igf2 imprinted
domain, allele-specific acetylation at each lysine residue depended on functional
CTCF binding sites in the imprinting control region. Our results suggest that
many different histone acetyltransferase and histone deacetylase enzymes must act
in concert in setting up and maintaining reciprocal parental allelic histone
acetylation at DMRs.

PMCID: PMC3001058
PMID: 20693536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. BMC Biol. 2010 Jul 30;8:104. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-8-104.

Insulators and imprinting from flies to mammals.

Hou C(1), Corces VG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, 1510 Clifton Road NE, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA. chou3@emory.edu

Comment on
    BMC Biol. 2010;8:105.

The nuclear factor CTCF has been shown to be necessary for the maintenance of
genetic imprinting at the mammalian H19/Igf2 locus. MacDonald and colleagues now 
report in BMC Biology that the mechanisms responsible for maintaining the
imprinted state in Drosophila may be evolutionarily conserved and that CTCF may
also play a critical role in this process. See research article
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/105.

PMCID: PMC2912829
PMID: 20687908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2010 Dec;22(6):781-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ceb.2010.07.004. Epub
2010 Jul 31.

Cohesin ties up the genome.

Carretero M(1), Remeseiro S, Losada A.

Author information: 
(1)Chromosome Dynamics Group, Molecular Oncology Programme, Spanish National
Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain.

Cohesin was originally identified as a mediator of sister chromatid cohesion both
in mitosis and meiosis. Emerging evidences suggest that it also participates in
the organization of interphase chromatin. The ring-shaped complex regulates gene 
expression by constraining chromatin topology in concert with factors such as the
insulator CTCF, at least in certain loci. The global relevance of this function
of cohesin remains to be assessed, but its contribution to the pathology of the
Cornelia de Lange syndrome seems evident. Our current knowledge of the molecular 
mechanisms underlying cohesin behavior should now be considered from the
perspective of its novel functions, which promise to be as relevant for cell
viability as cohesion.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20675112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. BMC Biol. 2010 Jul 30;8:105. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-8-105.

The Drosophila homolog of the mammalian imprint regulator, CTCF, maintains the
maternal genomic imprint in Drosophila melanogaster.

MacDonald WA(1), Menon D, Bartlett NJ, Sperry GE, Rasheva V, Meller V, Lloyd VK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
wamacd@dal.ca

Comment in
    BMC Biol. 2010;8:104.

BACKGROUND: CTCF is a versatile zinc finger DNA-binding protein that functions as
a highly conserved epigenetic transcriptional regulator. CTCF is known to act as 
a chromosomal insulator, bind promoter regions, and facilitate long-range
chromatin interactions. In mammals, CTCF is active in the regulatory regions of
some genes that exhibit genomic imprinting, acting as insulator on only one
parental allele to facilitate parent-specific expression. In Drosophila, CTCF
acts as a chromatin insulator and is thought to be actively involved in the
global organization of the genome.
RESULTS: To determine whether CTCF regulates imprinting in Drosophila, we
generated CTCF mutant alleles and assayed gene expression from the imprinted
Dp(1;f)LJ9 mini-X chromosome in the presence of reduced CTCF expression. We
observed disruption of the maternal imprint when CTCF levels were reduced, but no
effect was observed on the paternal imprint. The effect was restricted to
maintenance of the imprint and was specific for the Dp(1;f)LJ9 mini-X chromosome.
CONCLUSIONS: CTCF in Drosophila functions in maintaining parent-specific
expression from an imprinted domain as it does in mammals. We propose that
Drosophila CTCF maintains an insulator boundary on the maternal X chromosome,
shielding genes from the imprint-induced silencing that occurs on the paternally 
inherited X chromosome. See commentary:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/104.

PMCID: PMC2922095
PMID: 20673338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. PLoS Genet. 2010 Jul 22;6(7):e1001029. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001029.

Ancestry-shift refinement mapping of the C6orf97-ESR1 breast cancer
susceptibility locus.

Stacey SN(1), Sulem P, Zanon C, Gudjonsson SA, Thorleifsson G, Helgason A,
Jonasdottir A, Besenbacher S, Kostic JP, Fackenthal JD, Huo D, Adebamowo C,
Ogundiran T, Olson JE, Fredericksen ZS, Wang X, Look MP, Sieuwerts AM, Martens
JW, Pajares I, Garcia-Prats MD, Ramon-Cajal JM, de Juan A, Panadero A, Ortega E, 
Aben KK, Vermeulen SH, Asadzadeh F, van Engelenburg KC, Margolin S, Shen CY, Wu
PE, Försti A, Lenner P, Henriksson R, Johansson R, Enquist K, Hallmans G, Jonsson
T, Sigurdsson H, Alexiusdottir K, Gudmundsson J, Sigurdsson A, Frigge ML,
Gudmundsson L, Kristjansson K, Halldorsson BV, Styrkarsdottir U, Gulcher JR,
Hemminki K, Lindblom A, Kiemeney LA, Mayordomo JI, Foekens JA, Couch FJ, Olopade 
OI, Gudbjartsson DF, Thorsteinsdottir U, Rafnar T, Johannsson OT, Stefansson K.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE Genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland. simon.stacey@decode.is

We used an approach that we term ancestry-shift refinement mapping to investigate
an association, originally discovered in a GWAS of a Chinese population, between 
rs2046210[T] and breast cancer susceptibility. The locus is on 6q25.1 in
proximity to the C6orf97 and estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) genes. We identified 
a panel of SNPs that are correlated with rs2046210 in Chinese, but not
necessarily so in other ancestral populations, and genotyped them in breast
cancer case:control samples of Asian, European, and African origin, a total of
10,176 cases and 13,286 controls. We found that rs2046210[T] does not confer
substantial risk of breast cancer in Europeans and Africans (OR = 1.04, P =
0.099, and OR = 0.98, P = 0.77, respectively). Rather, in those ancestries, an
association signal arises from a group of less common SNPs typified by rs9397435.
The rs9397435[G] allele was found to confer risk of breast cancer in European (OR
= 1.15, P = 1.2 x 10(-3)), African (OR = 1.35, P = 0.014), and Asian (OR = 1.23, 
P = 2.9 x 10(-4)) population samples. Combined over all ancestries, the OR was
1.19 (P = 3.9 x 10(-7)), was without significant heterogeneity between ancestries
(P(het) = 0.36) and the SNP fully accounted for the association signal in each
ancestry. Haplotypes bearing rs9397435[G] are well tagged by rs2046210[T] only in
Asians. The rs9397435[G] allele showed associations with both estrogen receptor
positive and estrogen receptor negative breast cancer. Using early-draft data
from the 1,000 Genomes project, we found that the risk allele of a novel SNP
(rs77275268), which is closely correlated with rs9397435, disrupts a partially
methylated CpG sequence within a known CTCF binding site. These studies
demonstrate that shifting the analysis among ancestral populations can provide
valuable resolution in association mapping.

PMCID: PMC2908678
PMID: 20661439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Nov;38(21):7472-84. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq644. Epub 2010
Jul 25.

The three-dimensional architecture of Hox cluster silencing.

Ferraiuolo MA(1), Rousseau M, Miyamoto C, Shenker S, Wang XQ, Nadler M,
Blanchette M, Dostie J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, and Goodman Cancer Research Center, McGill
University, 3655 Promenade Sir-William-Osler, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Spatial chromatin organization is emerging as an important mechanism to regulate 
the expression of genes. However, very little is known about genome architecture 
at high-resolution in vivo. Here, we mapped the three-dimensional organization of
the human Hox clusters with chromosome conformation capture (3C) technology. We
show that computational modeling of 3C data sets can identify candidate
regulatory proteins of chromatin architecture and gene expression. Hox genes
encode evolutionarily conserved master regulators of development which strict
control has fascinated biologists for over 25 years. Proper transcriptional
silencing is key to Hox function since premature expression can lead to
developmental defects or human disease. We now show that the HoxA cluster is
organized into multiple chromatin loops that are dependent on transcription
activity. Long-range contacts were found in all four silent clusters but looping 
patterns were specific to each cluster. In contrast to the Drosophila homeotic
bithorax complex (BX-C), we found that Polycomb proteins are only modestly
required for human cluster looping and silencing. However, computational
three-dimensional Hox cluster modeling identified the insulator-binding protein
CTCF as a likely candidate mediating DNA loops in all clusters. Our data suggest 
that Hox cluster looping may represent an evolutionarily conserved structural
mechanism of transcription regulation.

PMCID: PMC2995065
PMID: 20660483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Pediatr Res. 2010 Nov;68(5):429-34. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e3181f1ca99.

Association of birth weight with polymorphisms in the IGF2, H19, and IGF2R genes.

Adkins RM(1), Somes G, Morrison JC, Hill JB, Watson EM, Magann EF, Krushkal J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Memphis, Tennessee 38103, USA. radkins1@uthsc.edu

There is a substantial genetic component for birth weight variation. We tested 18
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the IGF2, H19, and IGF2R genes for
associations with birth weight variation in 342 mother-newborn pairs (birth
weight 2.1-4.7 kg at term) and 527 parent-newborn trios (birth weight 2.1-5.1 kg)
across three localities. SNPs in the IGF2R (rs8191754; maternal genotype), IGF2
(rs3741205; newborn genotype), and 5' region of the H19 (rs2067051, rs2251375,
and rs4929984) genes were associated with birth weight. Detailed analyses to
distinguish direct maternal, direct newborn, and parent of origin effects for the
most strongly associated H19 SNP (rs4929984) determined that the association of
maternal genotype with newborn birth weight was due to parent of origin effects
not direct maternal effects. That SNP is located near the CTCF binding sites that
influence expression of the maternally imprinted IGF2 and paternally imprinted
H19 locus, and there are statistically significant and independent opposite
effects of the same rs4929984 allele, depending on the parent from which it was
inherited.

PMCID: PMC3063315
PMID: 20639793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 6;5(7):e11457. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011457.

Sulforaphane causes epigenetic repression of hTERT expression in human breast
cancer cell lines.

Meeran SM(1), Patel SN, Tollefsbol TO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Sulforaphane (SFN), an isothiocyanate found in cruciferous
vegetables, is a common dietary component that has histone deacetylase inhibition
activity and exciting potential in cancer prevention. The mechanisms by which SFN
imparts its chemopreventive properties are of considerable interest and little is
known of its preventive potential for breast cancer.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We found that SFN significantly inhibits the viability and
proliferation of breast cancer cells in vitro while it has negligible effects on 
normal breast cells. Inhibition of telomerase has received considerable attention
because of its high expression in cancer cells and extremely low level of
expression in normal cells. SFN treatment dose- and time-dependently inhibited
human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT), the catalytic regulatory subunit 
of telomerase, in both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells. DNA
methyltransferases (DNMTs), especially DNMT1 and DNMT3a, were also decreased in
SFN-treated breast cancer cells suggesting that SFN may repress hTERT by
impacting epigenetic pathways. Down-regulation of DNMTs in response to SFN
induced site-specific CpG demethylation occurring primarily in the first exon of 
the hTERT gene thereby facilitating CTCF binding associated with hTERT
repression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis of the hTERT promoter
revealed that SFN increased the level of active chromatin markers acetyl-H3,
acetyl-H3K9 and acetyl-H4, whereas the trimethyl-H3K9 and trimethyl-H3K27
inactive chromatin markers were decreased in a dose-dependent manner. SFN-induced
hyperacetylation facilitated the binding of many hTERT repressor proteins such as
MAD1 and CTCF to the hTERT regulatory region. Depletion of CTCF using siRNA
reduced the SFN-induced down-regulation of hTERT mRNA transcription in these
breast cancer cells. In addition, down-regulation of hTERT expression facilitated
the induction of cellular apoptosis in human breast cancer cells.
SIGNIFICANCE: Collectively, our results provide novel insights into SFN-mediated 
epigenetic down-regulation of telomerase in breast cancer prevention and may open
new avenues for approaches to SFN-mediated cancer prevention.

PMCID: PMC2897894
PMID: 20625516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Mol Hum Reprod. 2010 Nov;16(11):804-10. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gaq058. Epub 2010 Jul
7.

MicroRNA signature in testes-derived male germ-line stem cells.

Jung YH(1), Gupta MK, Shin JY, Uhm SJ, Lee HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Konkuk University, 1,
Hwayang-dong, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul 143 701, South Korea.

The testis-derived male germ-line stem (GS) cell, the in vitro counterpart of
spermatogonial stem cell (SSC), can initiate donor-derived spermatogenesis in
recipient testes and therefore, has been viewed as a future therapeutic modality 
for treatment of male infertility in azoospermic patients and in cancer patients 
who are expecting chemotherapy. Upon extended in vitro culture, GS cells also
generate a second cell type called multipotent adult germ-line stem (maGS) cell
which, upon testicular transplantation, produces teratoma instead of initiating
spermatogenesis. Here, we show that expressions of both Let-7a and Let-7d were
consistently higher while that of miR-294 (embryonic stem cell-cycle-regulating
miRNA; ESCC) was lower in GS cells than in maGS cells. Furthermore, among several
putative targets of Let-7 identified by in silico bioinformatics, expressions of 
Igf2 and H19 mRNA targets significantly differed between GS and maGS cells.
However, although the CTCF binding factor (a component of DNA methylation
machinery at Igf2-H19 cluster) was also a putative target for Let-7, the
difference in expressions of Igf2 and H19 between GS and maGS cells was not
mediated through a change in DNA methylation. Both GS and maGS cells maintained
androgenetic imprinting at the Igf2-H19 imprinting control region and Peg1
differentially methylated region. In conclusion, our study suggests that high
Let-7 expression may be a unique property of GS cells and expressions of Let-7
and ESCC miRNAs may serve as miRNA signatures to distinguish them from maGS cells
during clinical transplantation, to avoid the likelihood of teratoma formation
due to maGS cells generated during extended in vitro culture of GS cells.

PMID: 20610616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Biol Chem. 2010 Sep 10;285(37):28604-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.149658. Epub
2010 Jul 7.

CCCTC-binding factor acts upstream of FOXA1 and demarcates the genomic response
to estrogen.

Zhang Y(1), Liang J, Li Y, Xuan C, Wang F, Wang D, Shi L, Zhang D, Shang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China.

Transcription activation by estrogen receptor (ER) is rapid and dynamic. How the 
prompt and precise ER response is established and maintained is still not fully
understood. Here, we report that two boundary elements surrounding the well
defined ERalpha target TFF1 locus are occupied by the CCCTC-binding factor
(CTCF). These elements are separated by 40 kb but cluster in the nuclear space
depending on CTCF but independent of estrogen and transcription. In contrast, in 
estrogen non-responsive breast cancer cells, the spatial proximity of these two
elements is lost and the entire locus instead displays a polycomb repressive
complex 2-controlled heterochromatin characteristic. We showed that CTCF acts
upstream of the "pioneer" factor FOXA1 in determining the genomic response to
estrogen. We propose that the CTCF-bound boundary elements demarcate active
versus inactive regions, building a framework of adjacent chromosome territory
that predisposes ERalpha-regulated transcription.

PMCID: PMC2937886
PMID: 20610384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010 Aug 1;10(3):290-8. Epub 2010 Aug 21.

Targeted tumor gene therapy based on loss of IGF2 imprinting.

Pan Y(1), He B, Li T, Zhu C, Zhang L, Wang B, Xu Y, Qu L, Hoffman AR, Wang S, Hu 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Central Laboratory of Nanjing First Hospital affiliated to Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

Loss of imprinting (LOI) of the insulin-like growth factor 2 gene (IGF2) is one
of the most common epigenetic abnormalities seen in human neoplasms. LOI may be
associated with the lack of Zinc-finger DNA binding protein CTCF-mediated
enhancer insulation, presumably due to the gain of methylation on the maternal
allele of the differentially methylated domain (DMD) of the imprinting control
region. This results in an interaction between the IGF2 promoters and enhancers; 
and IGF2 is produced from both alleles. In this study we investigated the
feasibility of a novel anti-cancer adenovirus (AdDC312-DT-A) driven by H19
enhancer DMD-H19 promoter complex. Cell lines with IGF2 LOI (HCT-8, HT-29 and
H-522) that were infected with AdDC312-EGFP produced the EGFP protein. However,
in cells in which imprinting was maintained (MOI) (MCF-7 and GES-1), no EGFP
protein was produced. The AdDC312-DT-A significantly decreased cell viability and
induced apoptosis only in LOI cells in vitro, and suppressed tumour development
in HCT-8 xenografts in nude mice. In conclusion, the toxin gene therapy proves
effective in inhibiting LOI cell growth in vitro and in vivo and provides a novel
option for targeted gene therapy based on loss of IGF2 imprinting.

PMCID: PMC3040838
PMID: 20592487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Oct 15;111(3):665-75. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22751.

Sumoylation modulates a domain in CTCF that activates transcription and
decondenses chromatin.

Kitchen NS(1), Schoenherr CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

CTCF is a multipurpose transcription factor with activation, repression, and
insulator activity. It also participates in regulating chromatin architecture by 
maintaining open chromatin and mediating long-range chromosomal interactions.
Participation by CTCF in such diverse processes suggests that it has multiple
functional domains that regulate transcription and modify chromatin structure.
Using transient and integrated reporters, we identified a 107-amino-acid domain
in CTCF's N-terminal region that is capable of transcriptional activation and
chromatin decondensation. This domain demonstrated moderate transactivation when 
targeted to a promoter proximal position but showed little activity from more
distal positions and on a natural promoter. By contrast, the activation domain
dramatically decondensed the compact chromatin structure of a large transgene
array, in a manner similar to the potent activation domain in VP16. In addition, 
the activation domain is subject to conjugation by SUMO, which reduced its
transcriptional and chromatin opening activity. Moreover, mimicking full
sumoylation by fusing Sumo-1 or -3 to the activation domain eliminated its
transcriptional activity, but only Sumo-3 fusion prevented chromatin opening. We 
suggest that the activation domain's limited transactivation, but strong
chromatin decondensation allows CTCF to establish and maintain open chromatin
without necessarily activating transcription. Sumoylation may contribute to
CTCF's enhancer blocking or repression functions by reducing transactivation and 
chromatin opening.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20589758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Sep;30(17):4211-23. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00327-10. Epub 2010 Jun 
28.

CTCF controls expression and chromatin architecture of the human major
histocompatibility complex class II locus.

Majumder P(1), Boss JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA.

The major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) locus includes a dense
cluster of genes that function to initiate immune responses. Expression of
insulator CCCTC binding factor (CTCF) was found to be required for expression of 
all MHC class II genes associated with antigen presentation. Ten CTCF sites that 
divide the MHC-II locus into apparent evolutionary domains were identified. To
define the role of CTCF in mediating regulation of the MHC II genes, chromatin
conformation capture assays, which provide an architectural assessment of a
locus, were conducted across the MHC-II region. Depending on whether MHC-II genes
and the class II transactivator (CIITA) were being expressed, two CTCF-dependent 
chromatin architectural states, each with multiple configurations and
interactions, were observed. These states included the ability to express MHC-II 
gene promoter regions to interact with nearby CTCF sites and CTCF sites to
interact with each other. Thus, CTCF organizes the MHC-II locus into a novel
basal architecture of interacting foci and loop structures that rearranges in the
presence of CIITA. Disruption of the rearranged states eradicated expression,
suggesting that the formation of these structures is key to coregulation of
MHC-II genes and the locus.

PMCID: PMC2937552
PMID: 20584980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Dev Biol. 2010 Aug 15;344(2):637-49. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.05.493. Epub 2010 
May 27.

Positive regulation of c-Myc by cohesin is direct, and evolutionarily conserved.

Rhodes JM(1), Bentley FK, Print CG, Dorsett D, Misulovin Z, Dickinson EJ, Crosier
KE, Crosier PS, Horsfield JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dunedin School of Medicine, The University of Otago, 
Dunedin, New Zealand.

Contact between sister chromatids from S phase to anaphase depends on cohesin, a 
large multi-subunit protein complex. Mutations in sister chromatid cohesion
proteins underlie the human developmental condition, Cornelia de Lange syndrome. 
Roles for cohesin in regulating gene expression, sometimes in combination with
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), have emerged. We analyzed zebrafish embryos null for
cohesin subunit rad21 using microarrays to determine global effects of cohesin on
gene expression during embryogenesis. This identified Rad21-associated gene
networks that included myca (zebrafish c-myc), p53 and mdm2. In zebrafish,
cohesin binds to the transcription start sites of p53 and mdm2, and depletion of 
either Rad21 or CTCF increased their transcription. In contrast, myca expression 
was strongly downregulated upon loss of Rad21 while depletion of CTCF had little 
effect. Depletion of Rad21 or the cohesin-loading factor Nipped-B in Drosophila
cells also reduced expression of myc and Myc target genes. Cohesin bound the
transcription start site plus an upstream predicted CTCF binding site at
zebrafish myca. Binding and positive regulation of the c-Myc gene by cohesin is
conserved through evolution, indicating that this regulation is likely to be
direct. The exact mechanism of regulation is unknown, but local changes in
histone modification associated with transcription repression at the myca gene
were observed in rad21 mutants.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2941799
PMID: 20553708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Bioessays. 2010 Jul;32(7):581-8. doi: 10.1002/bies.201000019.

An embryonic story: analysis of the gene regulative network controlling Xist
expression in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Navarro P(1), Avner P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unité de Génétique Moléculaire Murine, CNRS URA2578, Paris, 
France.

Erratum in
    Bioessays. 2010 Jul;32(7):641.

In mice, dosage compensation of X-linked gene expression is achieved through the 
inactivation of one of the two X-chromosomes in XX female cells. The complex
epigenetic process leading to X-inactivation is largely controlled by Xist and
Tsix, two non-coding genes of opposing function. Xist RNA triggers X-inactivation
by coating the inactive X, while Tsix is critical for the designation of the
active X-chromosome through cis-repression of Xist RNA accumulation. Recently, a 
plethora of trans-acting factors and cis-regulating elements have been suggested 
to act as key regulators of either Xist, Tsix or both; these include ubiquitous
factors such as Yy1 and Ctcf, developmental proteins such as Nanog, Oct4 and
Sox2, and X-linked regulators such as Rnf12. In this paper we summarise recent
advances in our knowledge of the regulation of Xist and Tsix in embryonic stem
(ES) and differentiating ES cells.

PMID: 20544740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2010 Oct;20(5):555-61. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2010.05.007. Epub 
2010 Jun 11.

Cohesin: a global player in chromosome biology with local ties to gene
regulation.

Merkenschlager M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Development Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College
London, London W12 0NN, UK. matthias.merkenschlager@csc.mrc.ac.uk

Cohesin complexes hold sister chromatids together, which is essential for proper 
chromosome segregation during cell division and for post-replicative DNA repair. 
Recent studies suggest that, in addition to this global role in chromosome
biology, cohesin is recruited to specific chromosomal locations by CTCF, and
perhaps by other sequence-specific DNA binding factors. Once in position, cohesin
controls chromosome conformation at the local level. Could this be key to
understanding cohesin's role in gene expression?

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20541931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Nat Genet. 2010 Jul;42(7):631-4. doi: 10.1038/ng.600. Epub 2010 Jun 6.

Transposable elements have rewired the core regulatory network of human embryonic
stem cells.

Kunarso G(1), Chia NY, Jeyakani J, Hwang C, Lu X, Chan YS, Ng HH, Bourque G.

Author information: 
(1)Computational and Mathematical Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore.

Detection of new genomic control elements is critical in understanding
transcriptional regulatory networks in their entirety. We studied the genome-wide
binding locations of three key regulatory proteins (POU5F1, also known as OCT4;
NANOG; and CTCF) in human and mouse embryonic stem cells. In contrast to CTCF, we
found that the binding profiles of OCT4 and NANOG are markedly different, with
only approximately 5% of the regions being homologously occupied. We show that
transposable elements contributed up to 25% of the bound sites in humans and mice
and have wired new genes into the core regulatory network of embryonic stem
cells. These data indicate that species-specific transposable elements have
substantially altered the transcriptional circuitry of pluripotent stem cells.

PMID: 20526341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Sheng Wu Yi Xue Gong Cheng Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Apr;27(2):379-83.

[Preparation and application of polyclonal antibody of human transcription factor
CTCF N terminus protein].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang Y(1), Jiang L, Wei L, Chai X, Ge Y, Qin Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, West China School of
Preclinical and Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

To investigate the function of CTCF and understand the pathogenesis of tumors
better, we produced rabbit polyclonal antibody of human transcription factor CTCF
protein and detected its expression in several kinds of human cancer cells and
tissues. GST fusion protein of human CTCF-N domain was purified by GSTrap-FF
affinity chromatography and was successfully expressed under induction of IPTG in
E. coli BL21. Western blotting analysis demonstrated that the polyclonal antibody
can recognize the endogenous CTCF from HepG2, MCF-7 and HeLa cells specifically. 
The produced antibodies can be used for gene expression regulation and tissue
distribution study at protein level.

PMID: 20481323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Genes Dev. 2010 May 15;24(10):1022-34. doi: 10.1101/gad.1881010.

Gene-specific repression of the p53 target gene PUMA via intragenic CTCF-Cohesin 
binding.

Gomes NP(1), Espinosa JM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular, Cellular, and
Developmental Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2010 Jul;10(7):454.

The p53 transcriptional program orchestrates alternative responses to stress,
including cell cycle arrest and apoptosis, but the mechanism of cell fate choice 
upon p53 activation is not fully understood. Here we report that PUMA (p53
up-regulated modulator of apoptosis), a key mediator of p53-dependent cell death,
is regulated by a noncanonical, gene-specific mechanism. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, we found that the first half of the PUMA locus
(approximately 6 kb) is constitutively occupied by RNA polymerase II and general 
transcription factors regardless of p53 activity. Using various RNA analyses, we 
found that this region is constitutively transcribed to generate a long
unprocessed RNA with no known coding capacity. This permissive intragenic domain 
is constrained by sharp chromatin boundaries, as illustrated by histone marks of 
active transcription (histone H3 Lys9 trimethylation [H3K4me3] and H3K9
acetylation [H3K9Ac]) that precipitously transition into repressive marks
(H3K9me3). Interestingly, the insulator protein CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor) and
the Cohesin complex occupy these intragenic chromatin boundaries. CTCF knockdown 
leads to increased basal expression of PUMA concomitant with a reduction in
chromatin boundary signatures. Importantly, derepression of PUMA upon CTCF
depletion occurs without p53 activation or activation of other p53 target genes. 
Therefore, CTCF plays a pivotal role in dampening the p53 apoptotic response by
acting as a gene-specific repressor.

PMCID: PMC2867207
PMID: 20478995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Epigenetics. 2010 Jul 1;5(5):402-9. Epub 2010 Jul 1.

Superoxide dismutase 1 knockdown induces oxidative stress and DNA methylation
loss in the prostate.

Bhusari SS(1), Dobosy JR, Fu V, Almassi N, Oberley T, Jarrard DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and University of Wisconsin Carbone Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Madison, USA.

Increased oxidative stress and concordant DNA methylation changes are found
during aging and in many malignant processes including prostate cancer. Increased
oxidative stress has been shown to inhibit DNA methyltransferase in in vitro
assays, but whether this occurs in vivo is unknown. To generate increased
oxidative stress we utilized mice containing mutations in the CuZnSOD (Sod1)
gene, a major superoxide dismutase in mammals. Increased
8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine, an adduct indicating oxidative damage, was found in 
liver and prostate tissues at 2 and 12 mo Sod1 (+/-) mice compared to controls.
Prostate tissues from Sod1 (+/-) mice demonstrated decreased weight at 2 mo
compared to controls, but this difference was not significant at 12 mo.
Histologic changes were not seen. Global DNA methylation was significantly
decreased at 2 mo in the prostate in Sod1 (+/-) mice. 11p15 containing the
epigenetically modulated insulin-like growth factor 2 (Igf2) and H19 genes, both 
which display oncogenic functions, may be particularly sensitive to oxidative
stress. CpG island methylation at an intergenic CTCF binding site and the Igf2 P3
promoter was decreased in Sod1 mutants compared to controls. This is the first in
vivo study to show that a deficiency of Sod1 leads to a decrease in DNA
methylation. These studies indicate that increased oxidative stress, a factor
implicated in neoplasia, can induce DNA hypomethylation in prostate tissues.

PMCID: PMC3825185
PMID: 20458166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jun 4;396(3):648-50. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.04.146. Epub 2010 May 8.

Molecular architecture of CTCFL.

Campbell AE(1), Martinez SR, Miranda JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

The CTCF-like protein, CTCFL, is a DNA-binding factor that regulates the
transcriptional program of mammalian male germ cells. CTCFL consists of eleven
zinc fingers flanked by polypeptides of unknown structure and function. We
determined that the C-terminal fragment predominantly consists of extended and
unordered content. Computational analysis predicts that the N-terminal segment is
also disordered. The molecular architecture of CTCFL may then be similar to that 
of its paralog, the CCCTC-binding factor, CTCF. We speculate that sequence
divergence in the unstructured terminal segments results in differential
recruitment of cofactors, perhaps defining the functional distinction between
CTCF in somatic cells and CTCFL in the male germ line.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20438700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jun 25;285(26):19727-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.088385. Epub
2010 Apr 28.

Transforming growth factor beta promotes complexes between Smad proteins and the 
CCCTC-binding factor on the H19 imprinting control region chromatin.

Bergström R(1), Savary K, Morén A, Guibert S, Heldin CH, Ohlsson R, Moustakas A.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Uppsala University, SE-751 24 Uppsala,
Sweden.

Whether signal transduction pathways regulate epigenetic states in response to
environmental cues remains poorly understood. We demonstrate here that Smad3,
signaling downstream of transforming growth factor beta, interacts with the zinc 
finger domain of CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), a nuclear protein known to act as
"the master weaver of the genome." This interaction occurs via the Mad homology 1
domain of Smad3. Although Smad2 and Smad4 fail to interact, an alternatively
spliced form of Smad2 lacking exon 3 interacts with CTCF. CTCF does not perturb
well established transforming growth factor beta gene responses. However, Smads
and CTCF co-localize to the H19 imprinting control region (ICR), which emerges as
an insulator in cis and regulator of transcription and replication in trans via
direct CTCF binding to the ICR. Smad recruitment to the ICR requires intact CTCF 
binding to this locus. Smad2/3 binding to the ICR requires Smad4, which
potentially provides stability to the complex. Because the CTCF-Smad complex is
not essential for the chromatin insulator function of the H19 ICR, we propose
that it can play a role in chromatin cross-talk organized by the H19 ICR.

PMCID: PMC2888383
PMID: 20427289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010 May;17(5):635-40. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1794. Epub 2010 Apr
25.

Genomic binding profiles of functionally distinct RNA polymerase III
transcription complexes in human cells.

Moqtaderi Z(1), Wang J, Raha D, White RJ, Snyder M, Weng Z, Struhl K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Genome-wide occupancy profiles of five components of the RNA polymerase III (Pol 
III) machinery in human cells identified the expected tRNA and noncoding RNA
targets and revealed many additional Pol III-associated loci, mostly near short
interspersed elements (SINEs). Several genes are targets of an alternative
transcription factor IIIB (TFIIIB) containing Brf2 instead of Brf1 and have
extremely low levels of TFIIIC. Strikingly, expressed Pol III genes, unlike
nonexpressed Pol III genes, are situated in regions with a pattern of histone
modifications associated with functional Pol II promoters. TFIIIC alone
associates with numerous ETC loci, via the B box or a novel motif. ETCs are often
near CTCF binding sites, suggesting a potential role in chromosome organization. 
Our results suggest that human Pol III complexes associate preferentially with
regions near functional Pol II promoters and that TFIIIC-mediated recruitment of 
TFIIIB is regulated in a locus-specific manner.

PMCID: PMC3350333
PMID: 20418883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Cancer Res. 2010 May 1;70(9):3760-70. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3988. Epub
2010 Apr 20.

Estrogen regulation and physiopathologic significance of alternative promoters in
breast cancer.

Dutertre M(1), Gratadou L, Dardenne E, Germann S, Samaan S, Lidereau R, Driouch
K, de la Grange P, Auboeuf D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale, U590, Centre Léon
Bérard, Lyon, France.

Alternative promoters (AP) occur in >30% protein-coding genes and contribute to
proteome diversity. However, large-scale analyses of AP regulation are lacking,
and little is known about their potential physiopathologic significance. To
better understand the transcriptomic effect of estrogens, which play a major role
in breast cancer, we analyzed gene and AP regulation by estradiol in MCF7 cells
using pan-genomic exon arrays. We thereby identified novel estrogen-regulated
genes (ERG) and determined the regulation of AP-encoded transcripts in 150
regulated genes. In <30% cases, APs were regulated in a similar manner by
estradiol, whereas in >70% cases, they were regulated differentially. The
patterns of AP regulation correlated with the patterns of estrogen receptor alpha
(ERalpha) and CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) binding sites at regulated gene loci.
Interestingly, among genes with differentially regulated (DR) APs, we identified 
cases where estradiol regulated APs in an opposite manner, sometimes without
affecting global gene expression levels. This promoter switch was mediated by the
DDX5/DDX17 family of ERalpha coregulators. Finally, genes with DR promoters were 
preferentially involved in specific processes (e.g., cell structure and motility,
and cell cycle). We show, in particular, that isoforms encoded by the NET1 gene
APs, which are inversely regulated by estradiol, play distinct roles in cell
adhesion and cell cycle regulation and that their expression is differentially
associated with prognosis in ER(+) breast cancer. Altogether, this study
identifies the patterns of AP regulation in ERGs and shows the contribution of
AP-encoded isoforms to the estradiol-regulated transcriptome as well as their
physiopathologic significance in breast cancer.

(c)2010 AACR.

PMID: 20406972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 9;5(4):e10119. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010119.

Modular insulators: genome wide search for composite CTCF/thyroid hormone
receptor binding sites.

Weth O(1), Weth C, Bartkuhn M, Leers J, Uhle F, Renkawitz R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Giessen, Germany.

The conserved 11 zinc-finger protein CTCF is involved in several transcriptional 
mechanisms, including insulation and enhancer blocking. We had previously
identified two composite elements consisting of a CTCF and a TR binding site at
the chicken lysozyme and the human c-myc genes. Using these it has been
demonstrated that thyroid hormone mediates the relief of enhancer blocking even
though CTCF remains bound to its binding site. Here we wished to determine
whether CTCF and TR combined sites are representative of a general feature of the
genome, and whether such sites are functional in regulating enhancer blocking.
Genome wide analysis revealed that about 18% of the CTCF regions harbored at
least one of the four different palindromic or repeated sequence arrangements
typical for the binding of TR homodimers or TR/RXR heterodimers. Functional
analysis of 10 different composite elements of thyroid hormone responsive genes
was performed using episomal constructs. The episomal system allowed
recapitulating CTCF mediated enhancer blocking function to be dependent on poly
(ADP)-ribose modification and to mediate histone deacetylation. Furthermore,
thyroid hormone sensitive enhancer blocking could be shown for one of these new
composite elements. Remarkably, not only did the regulation of enhancer blocking 
require functional TR binding, but also the basal enhancer blocking activity of
CTCF was dependent on the binding of the unliganded TR. Thus, a number of
composite CTCF/TR binding sites may represent a subset of other modular CTCF
composite sites, such as groups of multiple CTCF sites or of CTCF/Oct4,
CTCF/Kaiso or CTCF/Yy1 combinations.

PMCID: PMC2852416
PMID: 20404925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Cell Biol. 2010 Apr 19;189(2):201-10. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200912129.

Cohesinopathies, gene expression, and chromatin organization.

Bose T(1), Gerton JL.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA.

The cohesin protein complex is best known for its role in sister chromatid
cohesion, which is crucial for accurate chromosome segregation. Mutations in
cohesin proteins or their regulators have been associated with human diseases
(termed cohesinopathies). The developmental defects observed in these diseases
indicate a role for cohesin in gene regulation distinct from its role in
chromosome segregation. In mammalian cells, cohesin stably interacts with
specific chromosomal sites and colocalizes with CTCF, a protein that promotes
long-range DNA interactions, implying a role for cohesin in genome organization. 
Moreover, cohesin defects compromise the subnuclear position of chromatin.
Therefore, defects in the cohesin network that alter gene expression and genome
organization may underlie cohesinopathies.

PMCID: PMC2856913
PMID: 20404106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Jun;38(11):e126. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq217. Epub 2010 Apr
7.

De novo motif identification improves the accuracy of predicting transcription
factor binding sites in ChIP-Seq data analysis.

Boeva V(1), Surdez D, Guillon N, Tirode F, Fejes AP, Delattre O, Barillot E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, 26 rue d'Ulm, Paris, France.

Dramatic progress in the development of next-generation sequencing technologies
has enabled accurate genome-wide characterization of the binding sites of
DNA-associated proteins. This technique, baptized as ChIP-Seq, uses a combination
of chromatin immunoprecipitation and massively parallel DNA sequencing. Other
published tools that predict binding sites from ChIP-Seq data use only positional
information of mapped reads. In contrast, our algorithm MICSA (Motif
Identification for ChIP-Seq Analysis) combines this source of positional
information with information on motif occurrences to better predict binding sites
of transcription factors (TFs). We proved the greater accuracy of MICSA with
respect to several other tools by running them on datasets for the TFs NRSF,
GABP, STAT1 and CTCF. We also applied MICSA on a dataset for the oncogenic TF
EWS-FLI1. We discovered >2000 binding sites and two functionally different
binding motifs. We observed that EWS-FLI1 can activate gene transcription when
(i) its binding site is located in close proximity to the gene transcription
start site (up to approximately 150 kb), and (ii) it contains a microsatellite
sequence. Furthermore, we observed that sites without microsatellites can also
induce regulation of gene expression--positively as often as negatively--and at
much larger distances (up to approximately 1 Mb).

PMCID: PMC2887977
PMID: 20375099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. FASEB J. 2010 Aug;24(8):2772-82. doi: 10.1096/fj.09-154294. Epub 2010 Apr 6.

Periconceptional undernutrition in normal and overweight ewes leads to increased 
adrenal growth and epigenetic changes in adrenal IGF2/H19 gene in offspring.

Zhang S(1), Rattanatray L, MacLaughlin SM, Cropley JE, Suter CM, Molloy L,
Kleemann D, Walker SK, Muhlhausler BS, Morrison JL, McMillen IC.

Author information: 
(1)Sansom Institute for Health Research, School of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences,
University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

Adverse conditions in early life result in increased activation of the
hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis and in stress responsiveness in offspring. We 
have developed a model in which "donor" ewes are either normally nourished or
overnourished prior to a period of dietary restriction, before transfer of the
embryo at 6-7 d after conception to a ewe of normal weight and nutritional
history. A moderate restriction of energy intake during the periconceptional
period in both normal weight and overweight ewes resulted in increased adrenal
mass in male and female lambs and an increased cortisol response to stress in
female lambs. The increase in adrenal weight in lambs exposed to periconceptional
undernutrition was associated with a decrease in the adrenal mRNA expression of
IGF2 and decreased methylation in the proximal CTCF-binding site in the
differentially methylated region of the IGF2/H19 gene. Thus, weight loss in both 
normal and overweight mothers during the periconceptional period results in
epigenetic modification of IGF2 in the adrenal gland, adrenal overgrowth, and
increased vulnerability to stress in offspring. Determining the appropriate
approach to weight loss in the periconceptional period may therefore be important
in overweight or obese women seeking to become pregnant.

PMID: 20371620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2010 May;71(3):237-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ando.2010.02.004.
Epub 2010 Apr 2.

Epigenetics, genomic imprinting and assisted reproductive technology.

Le Bouc Y(1), Rossignol S, Azzi S, Steunou V, Netchine I, Gicquel C.

Author information: 
(1)Explorations fonctionnelles endocriniennes, hôpital d'Enfants
Armand-Trousseau, AP-HP, 75571 Paris, France. yves.le-bouc@inserm.fr

Epigenetic mechanisms play a key role in regulating gene expression. One hallmark
of these modifications is DNA methylation at cytosine residues of CpG
dinucleotides in gene promoters, transposons and imprinting control regions.
Genomic imprinting refers to an epigenetic marking of genes that results in
monoallelic expression depending on their parental origin. There are two critical
time periods in epigenetic reprogramming: gametogenesis and early preimplantation
development. Major reprogramming takes place in primordial germ cells in which
parental imprints are erased and totipotency is restored [1]. Imprint marks are
then and re-established during spermatogenesis or oogenesis, depending on sex
[1-3]. Upon fertilization, genome-wide demethylation occurs followed by a wave of
de novo methylation, both of which are resisted by imprinted loci [4]. Epigenetic
patterns are usually faithfully maintained during development. However, this
maintenance sometimes fails, resulting in the disturbance of epigenetic patterns 
and human disorders. For example, two fetal growth disorders, the
Beckwith-Wiedemann (BWS) and the Silver-Russell (SRS) syndromes with opposite
phenotypes, are caused by abnormal DNA methylation at the 11p15 imprinted locus
[5-7]: respectively loss of methylation at the Imprinting Region Center (ICR2) or
gain of methylation at ICR1 in BWS and loss of methylation at ICR1 in SRS. Early 
embryogenesis is a critical time for epigenetic regulation, and this process is
sensitive to environmental factors. The use of assisted reproductive technology
(ART) has been shown to induce epigenetic alterations and to affect fetal growth 
and development [8-11]. In humans, several imprinting disorders, including BWS,
occur at significantly higher frequencies in children conceived with the use of
ART than in children conceived spontaneously [12,13]. The cause of these
epigenetic imprinting disorders (following ART, unfertility causes, hormonal
hyperstimulation, in vitro fertilization-IVF, Intracytoplasmic sperm
injection-ICSI, micro-manipulation of gametes, exposure to culture medium, in
vitro ovocyte maturation, time of transfer) remains unclear. However, recent data
have shown that in patients with BWS or SRS, including those born following the
use of ART, the DNA methylation defect involves imprinted loci other than 11p15
[14,15] (11p15 region: CTCF binding sites at ICR1, H19 and IGF2 DMRs, KCNQ1OT1
[ICR2], SNRPN [chromosome 15 q11-13], PEG/MEST1 [chromosome 7q31], IGF type2
receptor and ZAC1 [chromosome 6q26 et 6q24 respectively], DLK1/GTL2-IG-DMR
[chromosome 14q32] and GNAS locus [chromosome 20q13.3]). This suggests that
unfaithful maintenance of DNA methylation marks following fertilization involves 
the dysregulation of a trans-acting regulatory factor that could be altered by
ART.

Copyright 2010. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

PMID: 20362968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Genomics. 2010 Jul;96(1):17-26. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2010.03.012. Epub 2010 Mar
29.

Prediction of Polycomb target genes in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Liu Y(1), Shao Z, Yuan GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are important epigenetic regulators, yet the
underlying targeting mechanism in mammals is still poorly understood. We have
developed a computational approach to predict genome-wide PcG target genes in
mouse embryonic stem cells. We use TF binding and motif information as predictors
and apply the Bayesian Additive Regression Trees (BART) model for classification.
Our model has good prediction accuracy. The performance can be mainly explained
by five TF features (Zf5, Tcfcp2l1, Ctcf, E2f1, Myc). Our analysis of H3K27me3
and gene expression data suggests that genomic sequence is highly correlated with
the overall PcG target plasticity. We have also compared the PcG target sequence 
signatures between mouse and Drosophila and found that they are strikingly
different. Our predictions may be useful for de novo search for Polycomb response
elements (PRE) in mammals.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20353814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Jun;30(11):2693-707. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01537-09. Epub 2010 Mar
29.

Allele-specific H3K79 Di- versus trimethylation distinguishes opposite parental
alleles at imprinted regions.

Singh P(1), Han L, Rivas GE, Lee DH, Nicholson TB, Larson GP, Chen T, Szabó PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Molecular Medicine, Beckman
Research Institute, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

Imprinted gene expression corresponds to parental allele-specific DNA CpG
methylation and chromatin composition. Histone tail covalent modifications have
been extensively studied, but it is not known whether modifications in the
histone globular domains can also discriminate between the parental alleles.
Using multiplex chromatin immunoprecipitation-single nucleotide primer extension 
(ChIP-SNuPE) assays, we measured the allele-specific enrichment of H3K79
methylation and H4K91 acetylation along the H19/Igf2 imprinted domain. Whereas
H3K79me1, H3K79me2, and H4K91ac displayed a paternal-specific enrichment at the
paternally expressed Igf2 locus, H3K79me3 was paternally biased at the maternally
expressed H19 locus, including the paternally methylated imprinting control
region (ICR). We found that these allele-specific differences depended on CTCF
binding in the maternal ICR allele. We analyzed an additional 11 differentially
methylated regions (DMRs) and found that, in general, H3K79me3 was associated
with the CpG-methylated alleles, whereas H3K79me1, H3K79me2, and H4K91ac
enrichment was specific to the unmethylated alleles. Our data suggest that
allele-specific differences in the globular histone domains may constitute a
layer of the "histone code" at imprinted genes.

PMCID: PMC2876510
PMID: 20351169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. PLoS One. 2010 Mar 17;5(3):e9738. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009738.

BORIS (CTCFL) is not expressed in most human breast cell lines and high grade
breast carcinomas.

Hines WC(1), Bazarov AV, Mukhopadhyay R, Yaswen P.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley,
California, United States of America.

BORIS (CTCFL) is the only known paralog of the versatile regulatory protein CTCF,
a multifunctional DNA binding protein that mediates distinct gene regulatory
functions involved in cell growth, differentiation, and apoptosis. Unlike CTCF,
the expression of BORIS is normally restricted to specific cells in testes (the
only cells where CTCF is not expressed), where it may play a role in
reprogramming the methylation pattern of male germ line DNA. Frequent
amplification of the 20q13.2 region, which contains the BORIS gene, and
expression of BORIS transcripts in diverse human tumors and cell lines have led
to the hypothesis that aberrant expression of BORIS may play a role in
tumorigenesis by interfering with CTCF functions. However, recent studies using
more quantitative methods indicate low frequency of BORIS expression in melanoma,
ovarian, prostate, and bladder carcinomas. To investigate the relationship
between chromosome 20q13 amplification and BORIS mRNA levels within breast cancer
cell lines and tissues, we developed a quantitative RT-PCR assay to measure the
levels of BORIS mRNA. Endpoint RT-PCR assays were also used to investigate the
possible expression of alternatively spliced variants. Using multiple primer sets
and controls, we found that neither mature BORIS transcripts nor spliced variants
are commonly expressed at detectable levels in malignant breast cells or tissues,
although endogenous BORIS transcripts can be induced in MCF-7 cells following
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment. In conclusion, in most breast cancer cells,
endogenous BORIS is unlikely to be expressed at sufficient levels to interfere
with CTCF functions. Thus it is improbable that aberrant BORIS expression plays a
role in most human breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC2840027
PMID: 20305816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Heredity (Edinb). 2010 Jul;105(1):45-56. doi: 10.1038/hdy.2010.23. Epub 2010 Mar 
17.

Genomic imprinting mechanisms in embryonic and extraembryonic mouse tissues.

Hudson QJ(1), Kulinski TM, Huetter SP, Barlow DP.

Author information: 
(1)CeMM, Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of
Science, Vienna Biocenter, Vienna, Austria.

Imprinted genes in mice and humans mainly occur in clusters that are associated
with differential DNA methylation of an imprint control element (ICE) and at
least one nonprotein-coding RNA (ncRNA). Imprinted gene silencing is achieved by 
parental-specific insulator activity of the unmethylated ICE mediated by CTCF
(CCCTC-binding factor) binding, or by ncRNA expression from a promoter in the
unmethylated ICE. In many imprinted clusters, some genes, particularly those
located furthest away from the ICE, show imprinted expression only in
extraembryonic tissues. Recent research indicates that genes showing imprinted
expression only in extraembryonic tissues may be regulated by different
epigenetic mechanisms compared with genes showing imprinted expression in
extraembryonic tissues and in embryonic/adult tissues. The study of
extraembryonic imprinted expression, thus, has the potential to illuminate novel 
epigenetic strategies, but is complicated by the need to collect tissue from
early stages of mouse development, when extraembryonic tissues may be
contaminated by maternal cells or be present in limited amounts. Research in this
area would be advanced by the development of an in vitro model system in which
genetic experiments could be conducted in less time and at a lower cost than with
mouse models. Here, we summarize what is known about the mechanisms regulating
imprinted expression in mouse extraembryonic tissues and explore the
possibilities for developing an in vitro model.

PMCID: PMC2887385
PMID: 20234385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 May;30(10):2473-84. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01093-09. Epub 2010 Mar 
15.

Expression of a testis-specific form of Gal3st1 (CST), a gene essential for
spermatogenesis, is regulated by the CTCF paralogous gene BORIS.

Suzuki T(1), Kosaka-Suzuki N, Pack S, Shin DM, Yoon J, Abdullaev Z, Pugacheva E, 
Morse HC 3rd, Loukinov D, Lobanenkov V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology, National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, NIH, Rockville, MD 20852, USA.

Previously, it was shown that the CTCF paralogous gene, BORIS (brother of the
regulator of imprinted sites) is expressed in male germ cells, but its function
in spermatogenesis has not been defined. To develop an understanding of the
functional activities of BORIS, we generated BORIS knockout (KO) mice. Mice
homozygous for the null allele had a defect in spermatogenesis that resulted in
small testes associated with increased cell death. The defect was evident as
early as postnatal day 21 and was manifested by delayed production of haploid
cells. By gene expression profiling, we found that transcript levels for Gal3st1 
(also known as cerebroside sulfotransferase [CST]), known to play a crucial role 
in meiosis, were dramatically reduced in BORIS KO testes. We found that CST is
expressed in testis as a novel testis-specific isoform, CST form F(TS), that has 
a short exon 1f. We showed that BORIS bound to and activated the promoter of CST 
form F(TS). Mutation of the BORIS binding site in the promoter reduced the
ability of BORIS to activate the promoter. These findings define transcriptional 
regulation of CST expression as a critical role for BORIS in spermatogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2863697
PMID: 20231363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Genome Res. 2010 May;20(5):578-88. doi: 10.1101/gr.100479.109. Epub 2010 Mar 10.

A CTCF-independent role for cohesin in tissue-specific transcription.

Schmidt D(1), Schwalie PC, Ross-Innes CS, Hurtado A, Brown GD, Carroll JS, Flicek
P, Odom DT.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Cambridge Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre,
Cambridge CB2 0RE, United Kingdom.

The cohesin protein complex holds sister chromatids in dividing cells together
and is essential for chromosome segregation. Recently, cohesin has been
implicated in mediating transcriptional insulation, via its interactions with
CTCF. Here, we show in different cell types that cohesin functionally behaves as 
a tissue-specific transcriptional regulator, independent of CTCF binding. By
performing matched genome-wide binding assays (ChIP-seq) in human breast cancer
cells (MCF-7), we discovered thousands of genomic sites that share cohesin and
estrogen receptor alpha (ER) yet lack CTCF binding. By use of human
hepatocellular carcinoma cells (HepG2), we found that liver-specific
transcription factors colocalize with cohesin independently of CTCF at
liver-specific targets that are distinct from those found in breast cancer cells.
Furthermore, estrogen-regulated genes are preferentially bound by both ER and
cohesin, and functionally, the silencing of cohesin caused aberrant re-entry of
breast cancer cells into cell cycle after hormone treatment. We combined
chromosomal interaction data in MCF-7 cells with our cohesin binding data to show
that cohesin is highly enriched at ER-bound regions that capture
inter-chromosomal loop anchors. Together, our data show that cohesin cobinds
across the genome with transcription factors independently of CTCF, plays a
functional role in estrogen-regulated transcription, and may help to mediate
tissue-specific transcriptional responses via long-range chromosomal
interactions.

PMCID: PMC2860160
PMID: 20219941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Protein Sci. 2010 May;19(5):1110-6. doi: 10.1002/pro.367.

CTCF terminal segments are unstructured.

Martinez SR(1), Miranda JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California,
San Francisco, USA.

The human CCCTC-binding factor, CTCF, organizes and regulates transcription of
the genome by colocalizing distant DNA elements on the same and even different
chromosomes. This protein consists of 11 zinc fingers flanked by polypeptide
segments of unknown structure and function. We purified recombinant terminal
fragments and observed that both are extended, monomeric, and predominantly
consist of unordered content. We thus speculate that the role of the terminal
extensions, and perhaps all of CTCF, is to act as a scaffold for the assembly of 
other proteins on a specific binding site.

PMCID: PMC2868253
PMID: 20196073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Chromosoma. 2010 Aug;119(4):351-60. doi: 10.1007/s00412-010-0262-0. Epub 2010 Feb
20.

CTCF shapes chromatin by multiple mechanisms: the impact of 20 years of CTCF
research on understanding the workings of chromatin.

Ohlsson R(1), Bartkuhn M, Renkawitz R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Microbiology, Tumor- and Cellbiology, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden. rolf.ohlsson@ki.se

More than 10(9) base pairs of the genome in higher eucaryotes are positioned in
the interphase nucleus such that gene activation, gene repression, remote gene
regulation by enhancer elements, and reading as well as adjusting epigenetic
marks are possible. One important structural and functional component of
chromatin organization is the zinc finger factor CTCF. Two decades of research
has advanced the understanding of the fundamental role that CTCF plays in
regulating such a vast expanse of DNA.

PMCID: PMC2910314
PMID: 20174815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Dev Cell. 2010 Feb 16;18(2):191-202. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.12.017.

ATRX partners with cohesin and MeCP2 and contributes to developmental silencing
of imprinted genes in the brain.

Kernohan KD(1), Jiang Y, Tremblay DC, Bonvissuto AC, Eubanks JH, Mann MR, Bérubé 
NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, 800 Commissioners Road East, London, ON N6C 2V5,
Canada.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2010 Feb 16;18(2):169-70.

Human developmental disorders caused by chromatin dysfunction often display
overlapping clinical manifestations, such as cognitive deficits, but the
underlying molecular links are poorly defined. Here, we show that ATRX, MeCP2,
and cohesin, chromatin regulators implicated in ATR-X, RTT, and CdLS syndromes,
respectively, interact in the brain and colocalize at the H19 imprinting control 
region (ICR) with preferential binding on the maternal allele. Importantly, we
show that ATRX loss of function alters enrichment of cohesin, CTCF, and histone
modifications at the H19 ICR, without affecting DNA methylation on the paternal
allele. ATRX also affects cohesin, CTCF, and MeCP2 occupancy within the Gtl2/Dlk1
imprinted domain. Finally, we show that loss of ATRX interferes with the
postnatal silencing of the maternal H19 gene along with a larger network of
imprinted genes. We propose that ATRX, cohesin, and MeCP2 cooperate to silence a 
subset of imprinted genes in the postnatal mouse brain.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20159591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Dev Cell. 2010 Feb 16;18(2):169-70. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.01.012.

Chromatin modifiers, cognitive disorders, and imprinted genes.

Cunningham MD(1), Kassis JA, Pfeifer K.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genomics of Differentiation, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment on
    Dev Cell. 2010 Feb 16;18(2):191-202.

In this issue of Developmental Cell, Kernohan et al. link the chromatin
regulatory proteins ATRX, MeCP2, CTCF, and cohesin with silencing of H19 and
other imprinted genes during critical stages of postnatal brain development,
perhaps suggesting a common etiology for several human diseases that exhibit
defects in brain development and function.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2942756
PMID: 20159587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 5;5(2):e9059. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009059.

Genomic approaches uncover increasing complexities in the regulatory landscape at
the human SCL (TAL1) locus.

Dhami P(1), Bruce AW, Jim JH, Dillon SC, Hall A, Cooper JL, Bonhoure N, Chiang K,
Ellis PD, Langford C, Andrews RM, Vetrie D.

Author information: 
(1)The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom.

The SCL (TAL1) transcription factor is a critical regulator of haematopoiesis and
its expression is tightly controlled by multiple cis-acting regulatory elements. 
To elaborate further the DNA elements which control its regulation, we used
genomic tiling microarrays covering 256 kb of the human SCL locus to perform a
concerted analysis of chromatin structure and binding of regulatory proteins in
human haematopoietic cell lines. This approach allowed us to characterise further
or redefine known human SCL regulatory elements and led to the identification of 
six novel elements with putative regulatory function both up and downstream of
the SCL gene. They bind a number of haematopoietic transcription factors (GATA1, 
E2A LMO2, SCL, LDB1), CTCF or components of the transcriptional machinery and are
associated with relevant histone modifications, accessible chromatin and low
nucleosomal density. Functional characterisation shows that these novel elements 
are able to enhance or repress SCL promoter activity, have endogenous promoter
function or enhancer-blocking insulator function. Our analysis opens up several
areas for further investigation and adds new layers of complexity to our
understanding of the regulation of SCL expression.

PMCID: PMC2816701
PMID: 20140202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Feb 23;107(8):3651-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0912087107. Epub 2010 Feb 2.

Cell type specificity of chromatin organization mediated by CTCF and cohesin.

Hou C(1), Dale R, Dean A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

CTCF sites are abundant in the genomes of diverse species but their function is
enigmatic. We used chromosome conformation capture to determine long-range
interactions among CTCF/cohesin sites over 2 Mb on human chromosome 11
encompassing the beta-globin locus and flanking olfactory receptor genes.
Although CTCF occupies these sites in both erythroid K562 cells and fibroblast
293T cells, the long-range interaction frequencies among the sites are highly
cell type specific, revealing a more densely clustered organization in the
absence of globin gene activity. Both CTCF and cohesins are required for the
cell-type-specific chromatin conformation. Furthermore, loss of the
organizational loops in K562 cells through reduction of CTCF with shRNA results
in acquisition of repressive histone marks in the globin locus and reduces globin
gene expression whereas silent flanking olfactory receptor genes are unaffected. 
These results support a genome-wide role for CTCF/cohesin sites through loop
formation that both influences transcription and contributes to
cell-type-specific chromatin organization and function.

PMCID: PMC2840441
PMID: 20133600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Curr Genomics. 2009 Aug;10(5):294-302. doi: 10.2174/138920209788921038.

Vertebrate Protein CTCF and its Multiple Roles in a Large-Scale Regulation of
Genome Activity.

Nikolaev LG(1), Akopov SB, Didych DA, Sverdlov ED.

Author information: 
(1)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Russian Academy of
Sciences, 16/10 Miklukho-Maklaya, 117997, Moscow, Russia.

The CTCF transcription factor is an 11 zinc fingers multifunctional protein that 
uses different zinc finger combinations to recognize and bind different sites
within DNA. CTCF is thought to participate in various gene regulatory networks
including transcription activation and repression, formation of independently
functioning chromatin domains and regulation of imprinting. Sequencing of human
and other genomes opened up a possibility to ascertain the genomic distribution
of CTCF binding sites and to identify CTCF-dependent cis-regulatory elements,
including insulators. In the review, we summarized recent data on genomic
distribution of CTCF binding sites in the human and other genomes within a
framework of the loop domain hypothesis of large-scale regulation of the genome
activity. We also tried to formulate possible lines of studies on a variety of
CTCF functions which probably depend on its ability to specifically bind DNA,
interact with other proteins and form di- and multimers. These three fundamental 
properties allow CTCF to serve as a transcription factor, an insulator and a
constitutive dispersed genome-wide demarcation tool able to recruit various
factors that emerge in response to diverse external and internal signals, and
thus to exert its signal-specific function(s).

PMCID: PMC2729993
PMID: 20119526  [PubMed]


243. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 26;285(13):9373-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.094425. Epub 2010
Jan 28.

NF-kappaB subtypes regulate CCCTC binding factor affecting corneal epithelial
cell fate.

Lu L(1), Wang L, Li T, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California Los Angeles, Torrance, California 90502, USA. lluou@ucla.edu

CCCTC binding factor (CTCF) controls DNA imprinting, insulates important gene
expression, and mediates growth factor- and stress-induced cell fate. However,
regulatory mechanisms involved in intracellular CTCF activity are largely
unknown. In this study, we show that epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced
increase and UV stress-induced decrease in CTCF activities mediate human corneal 
epithelial cell proliferation and apoptosis, respectively. CTCF is regulated by
activation of different NF-kappaB subtypes via stimulation by EGF and UV stress. 
EGF-induced formation of a p65/p50 heterodimer activated CTCF transcription to
promote cellular proliferation. This was accomplished by the heterodimer binding 
to a kappaB site in the promoter region of CTCF gene. In contrast, UV stress
induced formation of a p50/p50 homodimer, which suppressed CTCF expression
leading to apoptosis. Thus, CTCF by itself plays a central role in mediating the 
dichotomous effects of growth factor- and stress-stimulated NF-kappaB activation 
on cell survival and death. These results suggest that CTCF is a downstream
component of the NF-kappaB pathway involved in the core transcriptional network
of cell fate.

PMCID: PMC2843186
PMID: 20110362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Oncogene. 2010 Apr 15;29(15):2217-27. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.509. Epub 2010 Jan
25.

Epigenetic regulation of the human p53 gene promoter by the CTCF transcription
factor in transformed cell lines.

Soto-Reyes E(1), Recillas-Targa F.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Departamento de Genética Molecular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F., México.

Epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor gene promoters has become a more
frequent phenomenon in cancer than previously anticipated. In this study we
addressed the mechanisms involved in the protection of the p53 tumor suppressor
gene against epigenetic silencing in human transformed cell lines. We
characterized a binding site for the CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) in the human p53
gene promoter that contributes to its transcriptional expression, and has the
ability to maintain this regulatory element in a local open chromatin
configuration. In the absence of CTCF we observe the incorporation of repressive 
histone marks, such as H3K9me3, H3K27me3 and H4K20me3, in different sub-domains
of the upstream regulatory sequence. This evidence suggests that CTCF protects
the p53 gene promoter against repressive histone marks. Notably, no apparent
direct correlation between repression and DNA hypermethylation has been detected.
Together, we present evidence supporting the relevant role of CTCF in the
epigenetic regulation of tumor suppressor genes and cancer. We propose that CTCF 
is a strategic component responsible for the maintenance and segregation of
epigenetic traits.

PMID: 20101205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 26;285(13):9327-38. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.098251. Epub 2010
Jan 25.

The mouse immunoglobulin heavy chain V-D intergenic sequence contains insulators 
that may regulate ordered V(D)J recombination.

Featherstone K(1), Wood AL, Bowen AJ, Corcoran AE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chromatin and Gene Expression, Babraham Institute, Babraham
Research Campus, Cambridge CB22 3AT, United Kingdom.

During immunoglobulin heavy chain (Igh) V(D)J recombination, D to J precedes V to
DJ recombination in an ordered manner, controlled by differential chromatin
accessibility of the V and DJ regions and essential for correct antibody
assembly. However, with the exception of the intronic enhancer Emu, which
regulates D to J recombination, cis-acting regulatory elements have not been
identified. We have assembled the sequence of a strategically located 96-kb V-D
intergenic region in the mouse Igh and analyzed its activity during lymphocyte
development. We show that Emu-dependent D antisense transcription, proposed to
open chromatin before D to J recombination, extends into the V-D region for more 
than 30 kb in B cells before, during, and after V(D)J recombination and in T
cells but terminates 40 kb from the first V gene. Thus, subsequent V antisense
transcription before V to DJ recombination is actively prevented and must be
independently activated. To find cis-acting elements that regulate this
differential chromatin opening, we identified six DNase I-hypersensitive sites
(HSs) in the V-D region. One conserved HS upstream of the first D gene locally
regulates D genes. Two further conserved HSs near the D region mark a sharp
decrease in antisense transcription, and both HSs bind CTCF in vivo. Further,
they both possess enhancer-blocking activity in vivo. Thus, we propose that they 
are enhancer-blocking insulators preventing Emu-dependent chromatin opening
extending into the V region. Thus, they are the first elements identified that
may control ordered V(D)J recombination and correct assembly of antibody genes.

PMCID: PMC2843181
PMID: 20100833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. PLoS Genet. 2010 Jan;6(1):e1000804. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000804. Epub 2010 
Jan 8.

VEZF1 elements mediate protection from DNA methylation.

Dickson J(1), Gowher H, Strogantsev R, Gaszner M, Hair A, Felsenfeld G, West AG.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pathology and Gene Regulation, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Glasgow, Western Infirmary, Glasgow, United Kingdom.

There is growing consensus that genome organization and long-range gene
regulation involves partitioning of the genome into domains of distinct
epigenetic chromatin states. Chromatin insulator or barrier elements are key
components of these processes as they can establish boundaries between chromatin 
states. The ability of elements such as the paradigm beta-globin HS4 insulator to
block the range of enhancers or the spread of repressive histone modifications is
well established. Here we have addressed the hypothesis that a barrier element in
vertebrates should be capable of defending a gene from silencing by DNA
methylation. Using an established stable reporter gene system, we find that HS4
acts specifically to protect a gene promoter from de novo DNA methylation.
Notably, protection from methylation can occur in the absence of histone
acetylation or transcription. There is a division of labor at HS4; the sequences 
that mediate protection from methylation are separable from those that mediate
CTCF-dependent enhancer blocking and USF-dependent histone modification
recruitment. The zinc finger protein VEZF1 was purified as the factor that
specifically interacts with the methylation protection elements. VEZF1 is a
candidate CpG island protection factor as the G-rich sequences bound by VEZF1 are
frequently found at CpG island promoters. Indeed, we show that VEZF1 elements are
sufficient to mediate demethylation and protection of the APRT CpG island
promoter from DNA methylation. We propose that many barrier elements in
vertebrates will prevent DNA methylation in addition to blocking the propagation 
of repressive histone modifications, as either process is sufficient to direct
the establishment of an epigenetically stable silent chromatin state.

PMCID: PMC2795164
PMID: 20062523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Feb 5;392(2):129-34. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.12.159. Epub 2010 Jan 4.

CTCF is a DNA methylation-sensitive positive regulator of the INK/ARF locus.

Rodriguez C(1), Borgel J, Court F, Cathala G, Forné T, Piette J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Cancérologie de Montpellier (INSERM-Université de
Montpellier I U896), CRLC Val d'Aurelle-Paul Lamarque, 34298 Montpellier-Cedex 5,
France.

The INK4B-ARF-INK4A (INK/ARF) locus is composed of three tumor suppressor genes, 
which are kept silenced by DNA methylation in different cancer types. In
addition, a non-coding RNA (ANRIL) is transcribed in the anti-sense orientation
upstream of the ARF gene. The resulting divergent promoter region is bound by the
chromatin insulator protein CTCF in association with histone H3 tri-methylated on
lysine 4, irrespective of transcription of ANRIL and ARF. Methylation of the
overlapping CpG island abolishes CTCF binding and the associated modification,
which can be restored by 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dC) treatment. shRNA knock
down of CTCF expression dramatically reduces the induction of ANRIL and ARF, but 
also that of INK4A and INK4B expression by 5-Aza-dC. We propose that CTCF is an
essential factor for transcription of the INK/ARF locus and that abrogation of
its binding by DNA methylation contributes to the permanent silencing of several 
genes of the locus in tumors.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20051228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Apr 1;19(7):1190-8. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp589. Epub 2010 Jan 4.

CTCF binding is not the epigenetic mark that establishes post-fertilization
methylation imprinting in the transgenic H19 ICR.

Matsuzaki H(1), Okamura E, Fukamizu A, Tanimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Imprinted expression of the mouse Igf2/H19 locus is controlled by
parent-of-origin-specific methylation of the imprinting control region (ICR). We 
previously demonstrated that when placed in a heterologous genomic context, the
H19 ICR fragment contains an intrinsic activity that allows it to acquire
differential methylation in somatic cells but not in germ cells. In the present
study, we investigated the requirements for the CTCF-binding sites of the ICR in 
the acquisition of post-fertilization methylation. To this end, two mutant ICR
fragments were introduced into the human beta-globin locus in a yeast artificial 
chromosome transgenic mouse (TgM) model: 4xMut had mutations in all four ICR
CTCF-binding sites that prevented CTCF binding but retained the methylation
target CpG motifs, and -9CG harbored mutations in the CpG motifs within the
CTCF-binding sites but each site retained constitutive CTCF-binding activity. In 
TgM germ cells and pre-implantation blastocysts, the absence of CTCF-binding
sites (4xMut) did not lead to hypermethylation of the transgenic H19 ICR.
However, after implantation, the mutations of CTCF sites (4xMut and -9CG)
affected the maintenance of methylation. These results demonstrated that although
the CTCF-binding sites are indispensable for maintenance of the unmethylated
state of the maternal ICR in post-implantation embryos, they are not required to 
establish paternal-allele-specific methylation of the transgenic H19 ICR in
pre-implantation embryos.

PMID: 20047949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Mar-Apr;1799(3-4):246-56. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2009.12.001. Epub 2010 Jan 4.

Epigenetic regulation of latent HSV-1 gene expression.

Bloom DC(1), Giordani NV, Kwiatkowski DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610-0266, USA. dbloom@ufl.edu

Like other alpha-herpesviruses, Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1 (HSV-1) possesses the
ability to establish latency in sensory ganglia as a non-integrated,
nucleosome-associated episome in the host cell nucleus. Transcription of the
genome is limited to the Latency-Associated Transcript (LAT), while the lytic
genes are maintained in a transcriptionally repressed state. This partitioning of
the genome into areas of active and inactive transcription suggests epigenetic
control of HSV-1 latent gene expression. During latency viral transcription is
not regulated by DNA methylation but likely by post-translational histone
modifications. The LAT region is the only region of the genome enriched in marks 
indicative of transcriptional permissiveness, specifically dimethyl H3 K4 and
acetyl H3 K9, K14, while the lytic genes appear under-enriched in those same
marks. In addition, facultative heterochromatin marks, specifically trimethyl H3 
K27 and the histone variant macroH2A, are enriched on lytic genes during latency.
The distinct epigenetic domains of the LAT and the lytic genes appear to be
separated by chromatin insulators. Binding of CTCF, a protein that binds to all
known vertebrate insulators, to sites within the HSV-1 genome likely prevents
heterochromatic spreading and blocks enhancer activity. When the latent viral
genome undergoes stress-induced reactivation, it is possible that CTCF binding
and insulator function are abrogated, enabling lytic gene transcription to ensue.
In this review we summarize our current understanding of latent HSV-1 epigenetic 
regulation as it pertains to infections in both the rabbit and mouse models. CTCF
insulator function and regulation of histone tail modifications will be
discussed. We will also present a current model of how the latent genome is
carefully controlled at the epigenetic level and how stress-induced changes to it
may trigger reactivation.

2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2838971
PMID: 20045093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Mar;30(5):1199-216. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00827-09. Epub 2009 Dec 
28.

Mutational analysis of the poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation sites of the transcription
factor CTCF provides an insight into the mechanism of its regulation by
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation.

Farrar D(1), Rai S, Chernukhin I, Jagodic M, Ito Y, Yammine S, Ohlsson R, Murrell
A, Klenova E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Wivenhoe Park,
Colchester, Essex CO4 3SQ, United Kingdom.

Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation of the conserved multifunctional transcription factor CTCF
was previously identified as important to maintain CTCF insulator and chromatin
barrier functions. However, the molecular mechanism of this regulation and also
the necessity of this modification for other CTCF functions remain unknown. In
this study, we identified potential sites of poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation within the
N-terminal domain of CTCF and generated a mutant deficient in
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation. Using this CTCF mutant, we demonstrated the requirement
of poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation for optimal CTCF function in transcriptional activation
of the p19ARF promoter and inhibition of cell proliferation. By using a newly
generated isogenic insulator reporter cell line, the CTCF insulator function at
the mouse Igf2-H19 imprinting control region (ICR) was found to be compromised by
the CTCF mutation. The association and simultaneous presence of PARP-1 and CTCF
at the ICR, confirmed by single and serial chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, 
were found to be independent of CTCF poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation. These results
suggest a model of CTCF regulation by poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation whereby CTCF and
PARP-1 form functional complexes at sites along the DNA, producing a dynamic
reversible modification of CTCF. By using bioinformatics tools, numerous sites of
CTCF and PARP-1 colocalization were demonstrated, suggesting that such regulation
of CTCF may take place at the genome level.

PMCID: PMC2820893
PMID: 20038529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Chromosoma. 2010 Apr;119(2):177-94. doi: 10.1007/s00412-009-0246-0. Epub 2009 Dec
23.

Chromatin insulators specifically associate with different levels of higher-order
chromatin organization in Drosophila.

Wallace HA(1), Plata MP, Kang HJ, Ross M, Labrador M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University of 
Tennessee, M407 Walters Life Sciences, 1414 Cumberland Avenue, Knoxville, TN
37996, USA.

Chromatin insulators are required for proper temporal and spatial expression of
genes in metazoans. Here, we have analyzed the distribution of insulator proteins
on the 56F-58A region of chromosome 2R in Drosophila polytene chromosomes to
assess the role of chromatin insulators in shaping genome architecture. Data show
that the suppressor of Hairy-wing protein [Su(Hw)] is found in three structures
differentially associated with insulator proteins: bands, interbands, and
multi-gene domains of coexpressed genes. Results show that bands are generally
formed by condensation of chromatin that belongs to genes containing one or more 
Su(Hw) binding sites, whereas, in interbands, Su(Hw) sites appear associated with
open chromatin. In addition, clusters of coexpressed genes in this region form
bands characterized by the lack of CP190 and BEAF-32 insulator proteins. This
pattern correlates with the distribution of specific chromatin marks and is
conserved in nurse cells, suggesting that this organization may not be limited to
one cell type but represents the basic organization of interphasic chromosomes.

PMID: 20033198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Mol Evol. 2010 Jan;70(1):74-84. doi: 10.1007/s00239-009-9310-x. Epub 2009 Dec
19.

The phylogenetic distribution of non-CTCF insulator proteins is limited to
insects and reveals that BEAF-32 is Drosophila lineage specific.

Schoborg TA(1), Labrador M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University 
of Tennessee, M407 Walters Life Sciences, 1414 Cumberland Ave, Knoxville, TN
37996, USA.

Erratum in
    J Mol Evol. 2010 Apr;70(4):403.

Chromatin insulators are DNA sequences found in eukaryotes that may organize
genomes into chromatin domains by blocking enhancer-promoter interactions and
preventing heterochromatin spreading. Considering that insulators play important 
roles in organizing higher order chromatin structure and modulating gene
expression, very little is known about their phylogenetic distribution. To date, 
six insulators and their associated proteins have been characterized, including
Su(Hw), Zw5, CTCF, GAF, Mod(mdg4), and BEAF-32. However, all insulator proteins, 
with the exception of CTCF, which has also been identified in vertebrates and
worms, have been exclusively described in Drosophila melanogaster. In this work, 
we have performed database searches utilizing each D. melanogaster insulator
protein as a query to find orthologs in other organisms, revealing that except
for CTCF all known insulator proteins are restricted to insects. In particular,
the boundary element-associated factor of 32 kDa (BEAF-32), which binds to
thousands of sites throughout the genome, was only found in the Drosophila
lineage. Accordingly, we also found a significant bias of BEAF-32 binding sites
in relation to transcription start sites (TSSs) in D. melanogaster but not in
Anopheles gambiae, Apis mellifera, or Tribolium castaneum. These data suggest
that DNA binding proteins such as BEAF-32 may have a dramatic impact in the
genome of single evolutionary lineages. A more thorough evaluation of the
phylogenetic distribution of insulator proteins will allow for a better
understanding of whether the mechanism by which these proteins exert their
function is conserved across phyla and their impact in genome evolution.

PMID: 20024537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Bioessays. 2010 Jan;32(1):37-50. doi: 10.1002/bies.200900118.

Does CTCF mediate between nuclear organization and gene expression?

Ohlsson R(1), Lobanenkov V, Klenova E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden. Rolf.Ohlsson@ki.se

The multifunctional zinc-finger protein CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a very
strong candidate for the role of coordinating the expression level of coding
sequences with their three-dimensional position in the nucleus, apparently
responding to a "code" in the DNA itself. Dynamic interactions between chromatin 
fibers in the context of nuclear architecture have been implicated in various
aspects of genome functions. However, the molecular basis of these interactions
still remains elusive and is a subject of intense debate. Here we discuss the
nature of CTCF-DNA interactions, the CTCF-binding specificity to its binding
sites and the relationship between CTCF and chromatin, and we examine data
linking CTCF with gene regulation in the three-dimensional nuclear space. We
discuss why these features render CTCF a very strong candidate for the role and
propose a unifying model, the "CTCF code," explaining the mechanistic basis of
how the information encrypted in DNA may be interpreted by CTCF into diverse
nuclear functions.

PMID: 20020479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Nature. 2009 Dec 17;462(7275):868-74. doi: 10.1038/nature08625.

Parental origin of sequence variants associated with complex diseases.

Kong A(1), Steinthorsdottir V, Masson G, Thorleifsson G, Sulem P, Besenbacher S, 
Jonasdottir A, Sigurdsson A, Kristinsson KT, Jonasdottir A, Frigge ML, Gylfason
A, Olason PI, Gudjonsson SA, Sverrisson S, Stacey SN, Sigurgeirsson B,
Benediktsdottir KR, Sigurdsson H, Jonsson T, Benediktsson R, Olafsson JH,
Johannsson OT, Hreidarsson AB, Sigurdsson G; DIAGRAM Consortium, Ferguson-Smith
AC, Gudbjartsson DF, Thorsteinsdottir U, Stefansson K.

Collaborators: Voight BF, Scott LJ, Steinthorsdottir V, Dina C, Zeggini E, Huth
C, Aulchenko YS, Welch RP, Thorleifsson G, McCulloch LJ, Ferreira T, Grallert H, 
Amin N, Wu G, Willer CJ, Raychaudhuri S, Purcell S, McCarroll SA, Langenberg C,
Hoffmann OM, Dupuis J, Qi L, Segrè AV, van Hoek M, Navarro P, Ardlie K, Balkau B,
Benediktsson R, Bennett AJ, Blagieva R, Boerwinkle E, Bonnycastle LL, Boström KB,
Bravenboer B, Bumpstead S, Burtt NP, Charpentier G, Chines PS, Cornelis M, Couper
DJ, Crawford G, Doney AS, Elliott KS, Elliott AL, Erdos MR, Fox CS, Franklin CS, 
Ganser M, Gieger C, Grarup N, Green T, Griffin S, Groves CJ, Guiducci C, Hadjadj 
S, Hassanali N, Herder C, Isomaa B, Jackson AU, Johnson PR, Jørgensen T, Kao WH, 
Klopp N, Kong A, Kraft P, Kuusisto J, Lauritzen T, Li M, Lieverse A, Lindgren CM,
Lyssenko V, Marre M, Meitinger T, Midthjell K, Morken MA, Narisu N, Nilsson P,
Owen KR, Payne F, Perry JR, Petersen AK, Platou C, Proença C, Prokopenko I,
Rathmann W, Rayner NW, Robertson NR, Rocheleau G, Roden M, Sampson MJ, Saxena R, 
Shields BM, Shrader P, Sigurdsson G, Smith N, Sparsø T, Strassburger K, Stringham
HM, Sun Q, Swift AJ, Thorand B, Tichet J, Tuomi T, van Dam R, van Herpt T,
Walters GB, Weedon MN, Witteman J, Bergman RN, Cauchi S, Collins FS, Gloyn AL,
Gyllensten U, Hansen T, Hide WA, Hitman GA, Hofman A, Hunter D, Hveem K, Laakso
M, Mohlke KL, Morris AD, Palmer CN, Pramstaller PP, Rudan I, Sijbrands E, Stein
LD, Tuomilehto J, Uitterlinden A, Walker M, Wareham NJ, Watanabe RM, Abecasis GR,
Barroso I, Boehm BO, Campbell H, Daly MJ, Florez JC, Frayling TM, Groop L,
Hattersley AT, Hu FB, Meigs JB, Morris AP, Pankow JS, Pedersen O, Sladek R,
Thorsteinsdottir U, Wichmann HE, Wilson JF, Illig T, Froguel P, van Duijn CM,
Stefansson K, Altshuler D, Boehnke M, McCarthy MI.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2010 Aug;139(2):689-90.

Effects of susceptibility variants may depend on from which parent they are
inherited. Although many associations between sequence variants and human traits 
have been discovered through genome-wide associations, the impact of parental
origin has largely been ignored. Here we show that for 38,167 Icelanders
genotyped using single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) chips, the parental origin
of most alleles can be determined. For this we used a combination of genealogy
and long-range phasing. We then focused on SNPs that associate with diseases and 
are within 500 kilobases of known imprinted genes. Seven independent SNP
associations were examined. Five-one with breast cancer, one with basal-cell
carcinoma and three with type 2 diabetes-have parental-origin-specific
associations. These variants are located in two genomic regions, 11p15 and 7q32, 
each harbouring a cluster of imprinted genes. Furthermore, we observed a novel
association between the SNP rs2334499 at 11p15 and type 2 diabetes. Here the
allele that confers risk when paternally inherited is protective when maternally 
transmitted. We identified a differentially methylated CTCF-binding site at 11p15
and demonstrated correlation of rs2334499 with decreased methylation of that
site.

PMCID: PMC3746295
PMID: 20016592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Mar 1;19(5):803-14. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp549. Epub 2009 Dec 9.

Analysis of the IGF2/H19 imprinting control region uncovers new genetic defects, 
including mutations of OCT-binding sequences, in patients with 11p15 fetal growth
disorders.

Demars J(1), Shmela ME, Rossignol S, Okabe J, Netchine I, Azzi S, Cabrol S, Le
Caignec C, David A, Le Bouc Y, El-Osta A, Gicquel C.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics in Human Health and Disease, Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes
Institute, Melbourne, 3004 VIC, Australia.

The imprinted expression of the IGF2 and H19 genes is controlled by the
imprinting control region 1 (ICR1) located at chromosome 11p15.5. This
methylation-sensitive chromatin insulator works by binding the zinc-finger
protein CTCF in a parent-specific manner. DNA methylation defects involving the
ICR1 H19/IGF2 domain result in two growth disorders with opposite phenotypes: an 
overgrowth disorder, the Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (maternal ICR1 gain of
methylation in 10% of BWS cases) and a growth retardation disorder, the
Silver-Russell syndrome (paternal ICR1 loss of methylation in 60% of SRS cases). 
Although a few deletions removing part of ICR1 have been described in some
familial BWS cases, little information is available regarding the mechanism of
ICR1 DNA methylation defects. We investigated the CTCF gene and the ICR1 domain
in 21 BWS patients with ICR1 gain of methylation and 16 SRS patients with ICR1
loss of methylation. We identified four constitutional ICR1 genetic defects in
BWS patients, including a familial case. Three of those defects are newly
identified imprinting defects consisting of small deletions and a single
mutation, which do not involve one of the CTCF binding sites. Moreover, two of
those defects affect OCT-binding sequences which are suggested to maintain the
unmethylated state of the maternal allele. A single-nucleotide variation was
identified in a SRS patient. Our data extends the spectrum of constitutive
genetic ICR1 abnormalities and suggests that extensive and accurate analysis of
ICR1 is required for appropriate genetic counseling in BWS patients with ICR1
gain of methylation.

PMID: 20007505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Int J Oncol. 2010 Jan;36(1):171-9.

Frequent aberrant methylation of the imprinted IGF2/H19 locus and LINE1
hypomethylation in ovarian carcinoma.

Dammann RH(1), Kirsch S, Schagdarsurengin U, Dansranjavin T, Gradhand E, Schmitt 
WD, Hauptmann S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, Justus Liebig University Giessen, Heinrich-Buff-Ring
58-62, D-35392, Giessen, Germany. reinhard.dammann@gen.bio.uni-giessen.de

Epigenetic alteration of tumor-related genes through changes of DNA methylation
is a hallmark for carcinogenesis and aberrant DNA methylation modulates the
activity of tumor suppressor genes, imprinted genes and repetitive elements. In
ovarian carcinoma, frequent loss of imprinting or aberrant methylation of
repetitive elements were reported, however, combined analysis were not performed.
We analyzed the aberrant methylation of a differentially methylated region (DMR0)
and a CTCF binding site of the IGF2-H19 locus and methylation of LINE1 and
Satellite 2 in 22 primary ovarian carcinomas (OC) and controls by a quantitative 
bisulfite restriction analysis (QUBRA). In 91% of OC, a significant
hypomethylation of DMR0 was found compared to controls (p<0.05). In 77% of OC, a 
hypermethylation of a CTCF binding site was found (p<0.05). A combined
hypomethylation of DMR0 and hypermethylation of the CTCF binding was observed in 
73% of OC. Hypomethylation of LINE1 and Satellite 2 was detected in 100 and 23%
of OC, respectively. In summary, we found frequent combined aberrant methylation 
of the IGF2-H19 locus and LINE1 in the vast majority of OC, suggesting that these
changes are important events in tumorigenesis.

PMID: 19956846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. PLoS Genet. 2009 Nov;5(11):e1000739. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000739. Epub 2009
Nov 26.

Cohesin is required for higher-order chromatin conformation at the imprinted
IGF2-H19 locus.

Nativio R(1), Wendt KS, Ito Y, Huddleston JE, Uribe-Lewis S, Woodfine K, Krueger 
C, Reik W, Peters JM, Murrell A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Cancer Research UK Cambridge 
Research Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Cohesin is a chromatin-associated protein complex that mediates sister chromatid 
cohesion by connecting replicated DNA molecules. Cohesin also has important roles
in gene regulation, but the mechanistic basis of this function is poorly
understood. In mammalian genomes, cohesin co-localizes with CCCTC binding factor 
(CTCF), a zinc finger protein implicated in multiple gene regulatory events. At
the imprinted IGF2-H19 locus, CTCF plays an important role in organizing
allele-specific higher-order chromatin conformation and functions as an enhancer 
blocking transcriptional insulator. Here we have used chromosome conformation
capture (3C) assays and RNAi-mediated depletion of cohesin to address whether
cohesin affects higher order chromatin conformation at the IGF2-H19 locus in
human cells. Our data show that cohesin has a critical role in maintaining
CTCF-mediated chromatin conformation at the locus and that disruption of this
conformation coincides with changes in IGF2 expression. We show that the
cohesin-dependent, higher-order chromatin conformation of the locus exists in
both G1 and G2 phases of the cell cycle and is therefore independent of cohesin's
function in sister chromatid cohesion. We propose that cohesin can mediate
interactions between DNA molecules in cis to insulate genes through the formation
of chromatin loops, analogous to the cohesin mediated interaction with sister
chromatids in trans to establish cohesion.

PMCID: PMC2776306
PMID: 19956766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 19;4(11):e7914. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007914.

Epigenetic silencing in Friedreich ataxia is associated with depletion of CTCF
(CCCTC-binding factor) and antisense transcription.

De Biase I(1), Chutake YK, Rindler PM, Bidichandani SI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Over 15 inherited diseases are caused by expansion of
triplet-repeats. Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) patients are homozygous for an expanded
GAA triplet-repeat sequence in intron 1 of the FXN gene. The expanded GAA
triplet-repeat results in deficiency of FXN gene transcription, which is reversed
via administration of histone deacetylase inhibitors indicating that
transcriptional silencing is at least partially due to an epigenetic abnormality.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We found a severe depletion of the chromatin
insulator protein CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor) in the 5'UTR of the FXN gene in
FRDA, and coincident heterochromatin formation involving the +1 nucleosome via
enrichment of H3K9me3 and recruitment of heterochromatin protein 1. We identified
FAST-1 (FXNAntisense Transcript - 1), a novel antisense transcript that overlaps 
the CTCF binding site in the 5'UTR, which was expressed at higher levels in FRDA.
The reciprocal relationship of deficient FXN transcript and higher levels of
FAST-1 seen in FRDA was reproduced in normal cells via knockdown of CTCF.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: CTCF depletion constitutes an epigenetic switch that
results in increased antisense transcription, heterochromatin formation and
transcriptional deficiency in FRDA. These findings provide a mechanistic basis
for the transcriptional silencing of the FXN gene in FRDA, and broaden our
understanding of disease pathogenesis in triplet-repeat diseases.

PMCID: PMC2780319
PMID: 19956589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Genetika. 2009 Oct;45(10):1341-52.

[Molecular genetic characterization of the regulatory region of the Xist gene in 
the common vole Microtus rossiaemeridionalis].

[Article in Russian]

Orishchenko KE, Elisafenko EA, Kel' AE, Zakian SM.

Two conserved regions were discovered as a result of interspecific comparison of 
the 5'-region of the Xist gene, which is the key gene in the process of
X-chromosome inactivation in mammalian females. The first region corresponds to
the minimal promoter, and the second spans between -480 bp and -400 bp from the
start of Xist transcription. Footprinting experiments revealed protected regions 
corresponding to the potential binding sites for TBP, SP1, API, SRY, ER, and some
other transcription factors. They also demonstrated the interaction with the
minimal promoter of the human recombinant transcription factor SP1 in vitro and
of the transcription factor CTCF in vivo. Experiments with reporter constructs
showed that repressors of Xist transcription were located between -100 bp and
-200 bp and between -300 bp and -400 bp and activators of Xist transcription were
located between -200 bp and -300 bp and between -400 bp and -500 bp.

PMID: 19947545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Epigenomics. 2009 Dec;1(2):232.

CTCF, cohesin and higher-order chromatin structure.

Garrick D(1), De Gobbi M, Gibbons R, Higgs DR.

Author information: 
(1)John Radcliffe Hospital, MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, The Weatherall
Institute of Molecular Medicine, Headington, Oxford, UK. doug.higgs@imm.ox.ac.uk

Comment on
    Nature. 2009 Jul 16;460(7253):410-3.

PMID: 22229157  [PubMed]


261. Genes Dev. 2009 Nov 15;23(22):2598-603. doi: 10.1101/gad.552109.

Nonallelic transvection of multiple imprinted loci is organized by the H19
imprinting control region during germline development.

Sandhu KS(1), Shi C, Sjölinder M, Zhao Z, Göndör A, Liu L, Tiwari VK, Guibert S, 
Emilsson L, Imreh MP, Ohlsson R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Genetics, Evolution Biology Centre, Uppsala
University, S-752 36 Uppsala, Sweden.

Recent observations highlight that the mammalian genome extensively communicates 
with itself via long-range chromatin interactions. The causal link between such
chromatin cross-talk and epigenetic states is, however, poorly understood. We
identify here a network of physically juxtaposed regions from the entire genome
with the common denominator of being genomically imprinted. Moreover,
CTCF-binding sites within the H19 imprinting control region (ICR) not only
determine the physical proximity among imprinted domains, but also transvect
allele-specific epigenetic states, identified by replication timing patterns, to 
interacting, nonallelic imprinted regions during germline development. We
conclude that one locus can directly or indirectly pleiotropically influence
epigenetic states of multiple regions on other chromosomes with which it
interacts.

PMCID: PMC2779760
PMID: 19933149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Genome Biol. 2009;10(11):R131. doi: 10.1186/gb-2009-10-11-r131. Epub 2009 Nov 18.

CTCF binding site classes exhibit distinct evolutionary, genomic, epigenomic and 
transcriptomic features.

Essien K(1), Vigneau S, Apreleva S, Singh LN, Bartolomei MS, Hannenhalli S.

Author information: 
(1)Penn Center for Bioinformatics, Department of Genetics, 415 Curie Boulevard,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. kobby@pcbi.upenn.edu

BACKGROUND: CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor) is an evolutionarily conserved zinc
finger protein involved in diverse functions ranging from negative regulation of 
MYC, to chromatin insulation of the beta-globin gene cluster, to imprinting of
the Igf2 locus. The 11 zinc fingers of CTCF are known to differentially
contribute to the CTCF-DNA interaction at different binding sites. It is possible
that the differences in CTCF-DNA conformation at different binding sites underlie
CTCF's functional diversity. If so, the CTCF binding sites may belong to distinct
classes, each compatible with a specific functional role.
RESULTS: We have classified approximately 26,000 CTCF binding sites in CD4+ T
cells into three classes based on their similarity to the well-characterized CTCF
DNA-binding motif. We have comprehensively characterized these three classes of
CTCF sites with respect to several evolutionary, genomic, epigenomic,
transcriptomic and functional features. We find that the low-occupancy sites tend
to be cell type specific. Furthermore, while the high-occupancy sites associate
with repressive histone marks and greater gene co-expression within a
CTCF-flanked block, the low-occupancy sites associate with active histone marks
and higher gene expression. We found that the low-occupancy sites have greater
conservation in their flanking regions compared to high-occupancy sites.
Interestingly, based on a novel class-conservation metric, we observed that human
low-occupancy sites tend to be conserved as low-occupancy sites in mouse (and
vice versa) more frequently than expected.
CONCLUSIONS: Our work reveals several key differences among CTCF occupancy-based 
classes and suggests a critical, yet distinct functional role played by
low-occupancy sites.

PMCID: PMC3091324
PMID: 19922652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jan 1;391(1):449-54. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.11.078. Epub 2009 Nov 13.

TSA-induced DNMT1 down-regulation represses hTERT expression via recruiting CTCF 
into demethylated core promoter region of hTERT in HCT116.

Choi JH(1), Min NY, Park J, Kim JH, Park SH, Ko YJ, Kang Y, Moon YJ, Rhee S, Ham 
SW, Park AJ, Lee KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Natural Science, Chung-Ang University, 
Seoul 156-756, Republic of Korea.

Trichostatin A (TSA), an inhibitor of histone deacetylase, is a well-known
antitumor agent that effectively and selectively induces tumor growth arrest and 
apoptosis. Recently, it was reported that hTERT is one of the primary targets for
TSA-induced apoptosis in cancer cells but the mechanism of which has not yet been
elucidated. In the present study, to better understand the epigenetic regulation 
mechanism responsible for the repression of hTERT by TSA, we examined expression 
of hTERT in the HCT116 colon cancer cell line after treatment with TSA and
performed site-specific CpG methylation analysis of the hTERT promoter. We found 
that TSA-induced the demethylation of site-specific CpGs on the promoter of
hTERT, which was caused by down-regulation of DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1).
Among the demethylated region, the 31st-33rd CpGs contained a binding site for
CTCF, an inhibitor of hTERT transcription. ChIP analysis revealed that
TSA-induced demethylation of the 31st-33rd CpGs promoted CTCF binding on hTERT
promoter, leading to repression of hTERT. Taken together, down-regulation of
DNMT1 by TSA caused demethylation of a CTCF binding site on the hTERT promoter,
the result of which was repression of hTERT via recruitment of CTCF to the
promoter.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19914212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Anim Breed Genet. 2009 Dec;126(6):475-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1439-0388.2009.00802.x.

DNA methylation patterns at the IGF2-H19 locus in sperm of Swiss Landrace and
Swiss Large White boars.

Giannini P(1), Braunschweig M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Berne, Berne,
Switzerland.

DNA methylation patterns at the IGF2-H19 locus were investigated in sperm DNA
from Swiss Landrace (SL) and Swiss Large White (LW) boars. The putative IGF2
differentially methylated regions (DMR) 0, 1 and 2, a quantitative trait
nucleotide (QTN) region in the intron 3 and a CpG island in the intron 4 of the
IGF2 gene as well as three regions around porcine CTCF binding sites within the
H19 differentially methylated domain (DMD) were selected for the DNA methylation 
analysis. In both breeds putative IGF2 DMR0, 1, 2 and H19 DMD were
hypermethylated. Significant differences in DNA methylation content were found
between the two breeds in the two DMD regions proximal to the H19 gene. The IGF2 
QTN region and the CpG island in the IGF2 intron 4 were hypomethylated in sperm
DNA of both breeds. The methylation analysis revealed significantly more
methylated CpG sites in the intron 4 of sperm from the LW breed than in that from
SL. No difference was found in global DNA methylation between the two breeds.
These results indicate differences in DNA methylation patterns between breeds and
it remains to be established whether variation in DNA methylation patterns
impacts on phenotypic traits.

PMID: 19912422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Genome Res. 2009 Dec;19(12):2193-201. doi: 10.1101/gr.096685.109. Epub 2009 Nov
3.

DNA methylation programming and reprogramming in primate embryonic stem cells.

Cohen NM(1), Dighe V, Landan G, Reynisdóttir S, Palsson A, Mitalipov S, Tanay A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, The Weizmann Institute
of Science, Rehovot, Israel.

DNA methylation is an important epigenetic mechanism, affecting normal
development and playing a key role in reprogramming epigenomes during stem cell
derivation. Here we report on DNA methylation patterns in native monkey embryonic
stem cells (ESCs), fibroblasts, and ESCs generated through somatic cell nuclear
transfer (SCNT), identifying and comparing epigenome programming and
reprogramming. We characterize hundreds of regions that are hyper- or
hypomethylated in fibroblasts compared to native ESCs and show that these are
conserved in human cells and tissues. Remarkably, the vast majority of these
regions are reprogrammed in SCNT ESCs, leading to almost perfect correlation
between the epigenomic profiles of the native and reprogrammed lines. At least
58% of these changes are correlated in cis to transcription changes, Polycomb
Repressive Complex-2 occupancy, or binding by the CTCF insulator. We also show
that while epigenomic reprogramming is extensive and globally accurate, the
efficiency of adding and stripping DNA methylation during reprogramming is
regionally variable. In several cases, this variability results in regions that
remain methylated in a fibroblast-like pattern even after reprogramming.

PMCID: PMC2792174
PMID: 19887575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Neurochem. 2010 Jan;112(1):296-306. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.06453.x. Epub
2009 Oct 26.

Combinatorial interaction between two human serotonin transporter gene variable
number tandem repeats and their regulation by CTCF.

Ali FR(1), Vasiliou SA, Haddley K, Paredes UM, Roberts JC, Miyajima F, Klenova E,
Bubb VJ, Quinn JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.

Two distinct variable number tandem repeats (VNTRs) within the human serotonin
transporter gene (SLC6A4) have been implicated as predisposing factors for CNS
disorders. The linked polymorphic region in the 5'-promoter exists as short (s)
and long (l) alleles of a 22 or 23 bp elements. The second within intron 2
(Stin2) exists as three variants containing 9, 10 or 12 copies of a 16 or 17 bp
element. These VNTRs, individually or in combination, supported differential
reporter gene expression in rat neonate prefrontal cortical cultures. The level
of reporter gene activity from the dual VNTR constructs indicated combinatorial
action between the two domains. Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated that
both these VNTR domains can bind the CCCTC-binding factor and this correlated
with the ability of exogenously supplied CCCTC-binding factor to modulate the
expression supported by these reporter gene constructs. We suggest that the
potential for interaction between multiple polymorphic domains should be
incorporated into genetic association studies.

PMCID: PMC2848977
PMID: 19860858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Mar-Apr;1799(3-4):228-35. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2009.10.005. Epub 2009 Oct 22.

Epigenetic regulation of latent Epstein-Barr virus promoters.

Takacs M(1), Banati F, Koroknai A, Segesdi J, Salamon D, Wolf H, Niller HH,
Minarovits J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, National Center for Epidemiology, H-1097 Budapest, Gyali
ut 2-6, Hungary.

Epigenotypes are modified cellular or viral genotypes that differ in
transcriptional activity in spite of having an identical or nearly identical DNA 
sequence. Restricted expression of latent, episomal Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
genomes is a consequence of a series of epigenetic modifications. In tight
latency, there is no virus production (lytic viral replication, associated with
the expression of all viral genes), and only a limited set of viral promoters is 
activated in a host-cell-dependent manner. The latent EBV promoters control the
expression of growth-transformation-associated viral genes. The role of major
epigenetic mechanisms in the regulation of latent EBV promoters is variable. DNA 
methylation contributes to silencing of Wp and Cp (alternative promoters for
transcripts coding for nuclear antigens EBNA 1-6) and LMP1p, LMP2Ap and LMP2Bp
(promoters for transcripts encoding transmembrane proteins). DNA methylation does
not control, however, Qp (a promoter for EBNA1 transcripts only) in B
lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs, immortalized by EBV in vitro), although in vitro
methylated Qp-reporter gene constructs are silenced. The invariably unmethylated 
Qp is probably switched off by binding of a repressor protein in LCLs. Histone
modifications may also contribute to the regulation of latent EBV promoters
because the active Cp, Qp and LMP2Ap promoters that are marked by strong binding 
of cellular regulatory proteins are located on "acetylation islands" enriched in 
diacetylated histone H3 and tetraacetylated histone H4. We speculate that binding
of the chromatin insulator protein CTCF to 3 distinct sites (within, close to and
far from the matrix attachment region) may contribute to the three-dimensional
organization of the viral episomes. We also raise the point that latent EBV
episomes may relocate to new nuclear subcompartments before the start of lytic
EBV replication. We propose that a similar relocation of EBV episomes may result 
in a promoter switch (from Qp to Cp) due to the access of Cp to a
B-lymphoblast-specific transcription factory when in vitro cultivated Burkitt's
lymphoma cells undergo a phenotypic drift.

2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19853674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Mar-Apr;1799(3-4):236-45. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2009.10.004. Epub 2009 Oct 22.

Chromatin organization of gammaherpesvirus latent genomes.

Tempera I(1), Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The gammaherpesviruses are a subclass of the herpesvirus family that establish
stable latent infections in proliferating lymphoid and epithelial cells. The
latent genomes are maintained as multicopy chromatinized episomes that replicate 
in synchrony with the cellular genome. Importantly, most of the episomes do not
integrate into the host chromosome. Therefore, it is essential that the viral
"minichromosome" establish a chromatin structure that is suitable for gene
expression, DNA replication, and chromosome segregation. Evidence suggests that
chromatin organization is important for each of these functions and plays a
regulatory role in the establishment and maintenance of latent infection. Here,
we review recent studies on the chromatin organization of the human
gammaherpesviruses, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus (KSHV). We discuss the potential role of viral origins of DNA
replication and viral encoded origin-binding proteins like EBNA1 and LANA in
establishment of viral chromosome organization during latent infection. We also
discuss the roles of host cell factors, like CTCF and cohesins, that contribute
to higher-order chromosome structures that may be important for stable gene
expression programs during latent infection in proliferating cells.

2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2839031
PMID: 19853673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Dec;37(22):7416-28. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp860.

Inactive X chromosome-specific histone H3 modifications and CpG hypomethylation
flank a chromatin boundary between an X-inactivated and an escape gene.

Goto Y(1), Kimura H.

Author information: 
(1)Nuclear Function and Dynamics Unit, Horizontal Medical Research Organization, 
Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

In mammals, the dosage compensation of sex chromosomes between males and females 
is achieved by transcriptional inactivation of one of the two X chromosomes in
females. However, a number of genes escape X-inactivation in humans. It remains
poorly understood how the transcriptional activity of these 'escape genes' is
maintained despite the chromosome-wide heterochromatin formation. To address this
question, we analyzed a putative chromatin boundary between the inactivated RBM10
and an escape gene, UBA1/UBE1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed that
trimethylated histone H3 lysine 9 and H4 lysine 20 were enriched in the last exon
through the proximal downstream region of RBM10, but were remarkably diminished
at approximately 2 kb upstream of the UBA1 transcription start site. Whereas RNA 
polymerase II was not loaded onto the intergenic region, CTCF (CCCTC binding
factor) was enriched around the boundary, where some CpG sites were
hypomethylated specifically on inactive X. These findings suggest that local DNA 
hypomethylation and CTCF binding are involved in the formation of a chromatin
boundary, which protects the UBA1 escape gene against the chromosome-wide
transcriptional silencing.

PMCID: PMC2794193
PMID: 19843608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Oct 27;106(43):18357-61. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0902573106. Epub 2009 Oct 13.

A wave of nascent transcription on activated human genes.

Wada Y(1), Ohta Y, Xu M, Tsutsumi S, Minami T, Inoue K, Komura D, Kitakami J,
Oshida N, Papantonis A, Izumi A, Kobayashi M, Meguro H, Kanki Y, Mimura I,
Yamamoto K, Mataki C, Hamakubo T, Shirahige K, Aburatani H, Kimura H, Kodama T,
Cook PR, Ihara S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Systems Biology and Medicine, Research Center for Advanced
Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Genome-wide studies reveal that transcription by RNA polymerase II (Pol II) is
dynamically regulated. To obtain a comprehensive view of a single transcription
cycle, we switched on transcription of five long human genes (>100 kbp) with
tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) and monitored (using microarrays, RNA
fluorescence in situ hybridization, and chromatin immunoprecipitation) the
appearance of nascent RNA, changes in binding of Pol II and two insulators (the
cohesin subunit RAD21 and the CCCTC-binding factor CTCF), and modifications of
histone H3. Activation triggers a wave of transcription that sweeps along the
genes at approximately 3.1 kbp/min; splicing occurs cotranscriptionally, a major 
checkpoint acts several kilobases downstream of the transcription start site to
regulate polymerase transit, and Pol II tends to stall at cohesin/CTCF binding
sites.

PMCID: PMC2761237
PMID: 19826084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Immunity. 2009 Oct 16;31(4):551-64. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.08.021. Epub 2009 
Oct 8.

CCCTC-binding factor and the transcription factor T-bet orchestrate T helper 1
cell-specific structure and function at the interferon-gamma locus.

Sekimata M(1), Pérez-Melgosa M, Miller SA, Weinmann AS, Sabo PJ, Sandstrom R,
Dorschner MO, Stamatoyannopoulos JA, Wilson CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

How cell type-specific differences in chromatin conformation are achieved and
their contribution to gene expression are incompletely understood. Here we
identify a cryptic upstream orchestrator of interferon-gamma (IFNG)
transcription, which is embedded within the human IL26 gene, compromised of a
single CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) binding site and retained in all mammals, even
surviving near-complete evolutionary deletion of the equivalent gene encoding
IL-26 in rodents. CTCF and cohesins occupy this element in vivo in a cell
type-nonspecific manner. This element is juxtaposed to two other sites located
within the first intron and downstream of Ifng, where CTCF, cohesins, and the
transcription factor T-bet bind in a T helper 1 (Th1) cell-specific manner. These
interactions, close proximity of other elements within the locus to each other
and to the gene encoding interferon-gamma, and robust murine Ifng expression are 
dependent on CTCF and T-bet. The results demonstrate that cooperation between
architectural (CTCF) and transcriptional enhancing (T-bet) factors and the
elements to which they bind is required for proper Th1 cell-specific expression
of Ifng.

PMCID: PMC2810421
PMID: 19818655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Pathol. 2010 Jan;220(1):87-96. doi: 10.1002/path.2620.

PAX5 activates the transcription of the human telomerase reverse transcriptase
gene in B cells.

Bougel S(1), Renaud S, Braunschweig R, Loukinov D, Morse HC 3rd, Bosman FT,
Lobanenkov V, Benhattar J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and
University of Lausanne, CH-1011 Lausanne, Switzerland.

Telomerase is an RNA-dependent DNA polymerase that synthesizes telomeric DNA. Its
activity is not detectable in most somatic cells but it is reactivated during
tumorigenesis. In most cancers, the combination of hTERT hypermethylation and
hypomethylation of a short promoter region is permissive for low-level hTERT
transcription. Activated and malignant lymphocytes express high telomerase
activity, through a mechanism that seems methylation-independent. The aim of this
study was to determine which mechanism is involved in the enhanced expression of 
hTERT in lymphoid cells. Our data confirm that in B cells, some T cell lymphomas 
and non-neoplastic lymph nodes, the hTERT promoter is unmethylated. Binding sites
for the B cell-specific transcription factor PAX5 were identified downstream of
the ATG translational start site through EMSA and ChIP experiments. ChIP assays
indicated that the transcriptional activation of hTERT by PAX5 does not involve
repression of CTCF binding. In a B cell lymphoma cell line, siRNA-induced
knockdown of PAX5 expression repressed hTERT transcription. Moreover, ectopic
expression of PAX5 in a telomerase-negative normal fibroblast cell line was found
to be sufficient to activate hTERT expression. These data show that activation of
hTERT in telomerase-positive B cells is due to a methylation-independent
mechanism in which PAX5 plays an important role.

PMCID: PMC3422366
PMID: 19806612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Brief Funct Genomic Proteomic. 2009 Jul;8(4):283-96. doi: 10.1093/bfgp/elp031.

Boundaries in vertebrate genomes: different solutions to adequately insulate gene
expression domains.

Moltó E(1), Fernández A, Montoliu L.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Campus de Cantoblanco,
C/Darwin 3, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

Gene expression domains are normally not arranged in vertebrate genomes according
to their expression patterns. Instead, it is not unusual to find genes expressed 
in different cell types, or in different developmental stages, sharing a
particular region of a chromosome. Therefore, the existence of boundaries, or
insulators, as non-coding gene regulatory elements, is instrumental for the
adequate organization and function of vertebrate genomes. Through the evolution
and natural selection at the molecular level, and according to available DNA
sequences surrounding a locus, previously existing or recently mobilized,
different elements have been recruited to serve as boundaries, depending on their
suitability to properly insulate gene expression domains. In this regard, several
gene regulatory elements, including scaffold/matrix-attachment regions, members
of families of DNA repetitive elements (such as LINEs or SINEs), target sites for
the zinc-finger multipurpose nuclear factor CTCF, enhancers and locus control
regions, have been reported to show functional activities as insulators. In this 
review, we will address how such a variety of apparently different genomic
sequences converge in a similar function, namely, to adequately insulate a gene
expression domain, thereby allowing the locus to be expressed according to their 
own gene regulatory elements without interfering itself and being interfered by
surrounding loci. The identification and characterization of genomic boundaries
is not only interesting as a theoretical exercise for better understanding how
vertebrate genomes are organized, but also allows devising new and improved gene 
transfer strategies to ensure the expression of heterologous DNA constructs in
ectopic genomic locations.

PMID: 19752046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. PLoS One. 2009 Sep 10;4(9):e6995. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006995.

The 3' region of the chicken hypersensitive site-4 insulator has properties
similar to its core and is required for full insulator activity.

Arumugam PI(1), Urbinati F, Velu CS, Higashimoto T, Grimes HL, Malik P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Chromatin insulators separate active transcriptional domains and block the spread
of heterochromatin in the genome. Studies on the chicken hypersensitive site-4
(cHS4) element, a prototypic insulator, have identified CTCF and USF-1/2 motifs
in the proximal 250 bp of cHS4, termed the "core", which provide enhancer
blocking activity and reduce position effects. However, the core alone does not
insulate viral vectors effectively. The full-length cHS4 has excellent insulating
properties, but its large size severely compromises vector titers. We performed a
structure-function analysis of cHS4 flanking lentivirus-vectors and analyzed
transgene expression in the clonal progeny of hematopoietic stem cells and
epigenetic changes in cHS4 and the transgene promoter. We found that the core
only reduced the clonal variegation in expression. Unique insulator activity
resided in the distal 400 bp cHS4 sequences, which when combined with the core,
restored full insulator activity and open chromatin marks over the transgene
promoter and the insulator. These data consolidate the known insulating activity 
of the canonical 5' core with a novel 3' 400 bp element with properties similar
to the core. Together, they have excellent insulating properties and viral
titers. Our data have important implications in understanding the molecular basis
of insulator function and design of gene therapy vectors.

PMCID: PMC2736623
PMID: 19746166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. DNA Res. 2009 Oct;16(5):261-73. doi: 10.1093/dnares/dsp014. Epub 2009 Sep 9.

Exhaustive search for over-represented DNA sequence motifs with CisFinder.

Sharov AA(1), Ko MS.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genomics and Aging Section, Laboratory of Genetics, National
Institute on Aging, NIH, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

We present CisFinder software, which generates a comprehensive list of motifs
enriched in a set of DNA sequences and describes them with position frequency
matrices (PFMs). A new algorithm was designed to estimate PFMs directly from
counts of n-mer words with and without gaps; then PFMs are extended over gaps and
flanking regions and clustered to generate non-redundant sets of motifs. The
algorithm successfully identified binding motifs for 12 transcription factors
(TFs) in embryonic stem cells based on published chromatin immunoprecipitation
sequencing data. Furthermore, CisFinder successfully identified alternative
binding motifs of TFs (e.g. POU5F1, ESRRB, and CTCF) and motifs for known and
unknown co-factors of genes associated with the pluripotent state of ES cells.
CisFinder also showed robust performance in the identification of motifs that
were only slightly enriched in a set of DNA sequences.

PMCID: PMC2762409
PMID: 19740934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Sep 15;15(18):5762-71. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-0329. 
Epub 2009 Sep 8.

Decreased poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation of CTCF, a transcription factor, is associated
with breast cancer phenotype and cell proliferation.

Docquier F(1), Kita GX, Farrar D, Jat P, O'Hare M, Chernukhin I, Gretton S,
Mandal A, Alldridge L, Klenova E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Essex, United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: There is compelling evidence of a relationship between
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation and tumorigenesis; however, much less is known about the
role of specific targets of poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation in tumor development. Two
forms of the multifunctional transcription factor, CTCF, were previously
identified: a 130-kDa protein (CTCF-130), characteristic for cell lines, and a
180-kDa protein (CTCF-180), modified by poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation. This study was
aimed to investigate differential poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation of CTCF in normal and
tumor breast tissues.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Western blot analysis, mass spectrometry, and
immunohistochemical and immunofluorescent stainings were used to characterize
CTCF-130 and CTCF-180 in breast cell lines, primary cultures, and normal and
tumor breast tissues. The immunoreactivity score was used for CTCF-130
quantification in tissues.
RESULTS: We discovered that only CTCF-180 is detected in the normal breast
tissues, whereas both CTCF-130 and CTCF-180 are present in breast tumors. Using
an antibody specific for CTCF-130, we observed that 87.7% of breast tumors were
positive for CTCF-130. A negative correlation existed between the levels of
CTCF-130, tumor stage, and tumor size. Significantly, a transition from CTCF-180 
to CTCF-130 was discovered in primary cultures generated from normal breast
tissues, indicating a link between CTCF-130 and proliferation. Conversely, the
appearance of CTCF-180 was observed following growth arrest in breast cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, our data suggest that the loss of CTCF
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation is associated with cell proliferation and breast tumor
development. We propose the use of CTCF-130 as a marker for tumor breast cells
and lower levels of CTCF-130 as an indicator of unfavorable prognosis.

PMID: 19737964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Sep;85(3):377-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.08.007.

Allele-specific chromatin remodeling in the ZPBP2/GSDMB/ORMDL3 locus associated
with the risk of asthma and autoimmune disease.

Verlaan DJ(1), Berlivet S, Hunninghake GM, Madore AM, Larivière M, Moussette S,
Grundberg E, Kwan T, Ouimet M, Ge B, Hoberman R, Swiatek M, Dias J, Lam KC, Koka 
V, Harmsen E, Soto-Quiros M, Avila L, Celedón JC, Weiss ST, Dewar K, Sinnett D,
Laprise C, Raby BA, Pastinen T, Naumova AK.

Author information: 
(1)McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre, Quebec, Canada.

Common SNPs in the chromosome 17q12-q21 region alter the risk for asthma, type 1 
diabetes, primary biliary cirrhosis, and Crohn disease. Previous reports by us
and others have linked the disease-associated genetic variants with changes in
expression of GSDMB and ORMDL3 transcripts in human lymphoblastoid cell lines
(LCLs). The variants also alter regulation of other transcripts, and this
domain-wide cis-regulatory effect suggests a mechanism involving long-range
chromatin interactions. Here, we further dissect the disease-linked haplotype and
identify putative causal DNA variants via a combination of genetic and functional
analyses. First, high-throughput resequencing of the region and genotyping of
potential candidate variants were performed. Next, additional mapping of allelic 
expression differences in Yoruba HapMap LCLs allowed us to fine-map the basis of 
the cis-regulatory differences to a handful of candidate functional variants.
Functional assays identified allele-specific differences in nucleosome
distribution, an allele-specific association with the insulator protein CTCF, as 
well as a weak promoter activity for rs12936231. Overall, this study shows a
common disease allele linked to changes in CTCF binding and nucleosome occupancy 
leading to altered domain-wide cis-regulation. Finally, a strong association
between asthma and cis-regulatory haplotypes was observed in three independent
family-based cohorts (p = 1.78 x 10(-8)). This study demonstrates the requirement
of multiple parallel allele-specific tools for the investigation of noncoding
disease variants and functional fine-mapping of human disease-associated
haplotypes.

PMCID: PMC2771592
PMID: 19732864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Biol. 2009 Aug 27;8(8):73. doi: 10.1186/jbiol165.

Insulators as mediators of intra- and inter-chromosomal interactions: a common
evolutionary theme.

Ong CT(1), Corces VG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, 1510 Clifton Road NE, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA.

Insulator elements mediate intra- and inter-chromosomal interactions. The
insulator protein CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is important for insulator function
in several animals but a report in BMC Molecular Biology shows that
Caenorhabditis elegans, yeast and plants lack CTCF. Alternative proteins may have
a similar function in these organisms.

PMCID: PMC2776911
PMID: 19725934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. BMC Mol Biol. 2009 Aug 27;10:84. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-10-84.

Loss of the insulator protein CTCF during nematode evolution.

Heger P(1), Marin B, Schierenberg E.

Author information: 
(1)Zoological Institute, University of Cologne, Kerpener Strasse 15, 50937 Köln, 
Germany. peter.heger@uni-koeln.de

BACKGROUND: The zinc finger (ZF) protein CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor) is highly
conserved in Drosophila and vertebrates where it has been shown to mediate
chromatin insulation at a genomewide level. A mode of genetic regulation that
involves insulators and insulator binding proteins to establish independent
transcriptional units is currently not known in nematodes including
Caenorhabditis elegans. We therefore searched in nematodes for orthologs of
proteins that are involved in chromatin insulation.
RESULTS: While orthologs for other insulator proteins were absent in all 35
analysed nematode species, we find orthologs of CTCF in a subset of nematodes. As
an example for these we cloned the Trichinella spiralis CTCF-like gene and
revealed a genomic structure very similar to the Drosophila counterpart. To
investigate the pattern of CTCF occurrence in nematodes, we performed
phylogenetic analysis with the ZF protein sets of completely sequenced nematodes.
We show that three ZF proteins from three basal nematodes cluster together with
known CTCF proteins whereas no zinc finger protein of C. elegans and other
derived nematodes does so.
CONCLUSION: Our findings show that CTCF and possibly chromatin insulation are
present in basal nematodes. We suggest that the insulator protein CTCF has been
secondarily lost in derived nematodes like C. elegans. We propose a switch in the
regulation of gene expression during nematode evolution, from the common
vertebrate and insect type involving distantly acting regulatory elements and
chromatin insulation to a so far poorly characterised mode present in more
derived nematodes. Here, all or some of these components are missing. Instead
operons, polycistronic transcriptional units common in derived nematodes,
seemingly adopted their function.

PMCID: PMC2749850
PMID: 19712444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Sep 1;106(35):14926-31. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0905443106. Epub 2009 Aug 18.

Mapping accessible chromatin regions using Sono-Seq.

Auerbach RK(1), Euskirchen G, Rozowsky J, Lamarre-Vincent N, Moqtaderi Z,
Lefrançois P, Struhl K, Gerstein M, Snyder M.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Computational Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Disruptions in local chromatin structure often indicate features of biological
interest such as regulatory regions. We find that sonication of cross-linked
chromatin, when combined with a size-selection step and massively parallel
short-read sequencing, can be used as a method (Sono-Seq) to map locations of
high chromatin accessibility in promoter regions. Sono-Seq sites frequently
correspond to actively transcribed promoter regions, as evidenced by their
co-association with RNA Polymerase II ChIP regions, transcription start sites,
histone H3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) marks, and CpG islands; signals over
other sites, such as those bound by the CTCF insulator, are also observed. The
pattern of breakage by Sono-Seq overlaps with, but is distinct from, that
observed for FAIRE and DNase I hypersensitive sites. Our results demonstrate that
Sono-Seq can be a useful and simple method by which to map many local alterations
in chromatin structure. Furthermore, our results provide insights into the
mapping of binding sites by using ChIP-Seq experiments and the value of reference
samples that should be used in such experiments.

PMCID: PMC2736440
PMID: 19706456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. EMBO J. 2009 Aug 19;28(16):2428-36. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.201. Epub 2009 Jul
30.

Identification of a perinuclear positioning element in human subtelomeres that
requires A-type lamins and CTCF.

Ottaviani A(1), Schluth-Bolard C, Rival-Gervier S, Boussouar A, Rondier D,
Foerster AM, Morere J, Bauwens S, Gazzo S, Callet-Bauchu E, Gilson E, Magdinier
F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire de la Cellule, Ecole Normale Supérieure de
Lyon, CNRS UMR 5239, UCBL1, Lyon Cedex, France.

The localization of genes within the nuclear space is of paramount importance for
proper genome functions. However, very little is known on the cis-acting elements
determining subnuclear positioning of chromosome segments. We show here that the 
D4Z4 human subtelomeric repeat localizes a telomere at the nuclear periphery.
This perinuclear activity lies within an 80 bp sequence included within a region 
known to interact with CTCF and A-type Lamins. We further show that a reduced
level of either CTCF or A-type Lamins suppresses the perinuclear activities of
D4Z4 and that an array of multimerized D4Z4 sequence, which has lost its ability 
to bind CTCF and A-type Lamins, is not localized at the periphery. Overall, these
findings reveal the existence of an 80 bp D4Z4 sequence that is sufficient to
position an adjacent telomere to the nuclear periphery in a CTCF and A-type
lamins-dependent manner. Strikingly, this sequence includes a 30 bp GA-rich
motif, which binds CTCF and is present at several locations in the human genome.

PMCID: PMC2735173
PMID: 19644448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Exp Hematol. 2009 Oct;37(10):1143-1156.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2009.07.001.
Epub 2009 Jul 14.

Dynamics of alpha-globin locus chromatin structure and gene expression during
erythroid differentiation of human CD34(+) cells in culture.

Mahajan MC(1), Karmakar S, Newburger PE, Krause DS, Weissman SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, The Anlyan Center, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study has been to establish serum-free culture 
conditions for ex vivo expansion and differentiation of human CD34(+) cells into 
erythroid lineage and to study the chromatin structure, gene expression, and
transcription factor recruitment at the alpha-globin locus in the developing
erythron.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A basal Iscove's modified Dulbecco's medium cell culture
medium with 1% bovine serum albumin as a serum replacement and a combination of
cytokines and growth factors was used for expansion and differentiation of the
CD34(+) cells. Expression patterns of the alpha- and beta-like genes at various
stages of erythropoiesis was studied by reverse transcriptase quantitative
polymerase chain reaction analysis, profile of key erythroid transcription
factors was investigated by Western blotting, and the chromatin structure and
transcription factor recruitment at the alpha-globin locus was investigated by
chromatin immunoprecipitation quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis.
RESULTS: Human CD34(+) cells in the serum-free medium undergo near synchronous
erythroid differentiation to yield large amount of cells at different
differentiation stages. We observe distinct patterns of the histone modifications
and transcription factor binding at the alpha-globin locus during erythroid
differentiation of CD34(+) cells. Nuclear factor erythroid-derived 2 (NF-E2) was 
present at upstream activator sites even before addition of erythropoietin (EPO),
while bound GATA-1 was only detectable after EPO treatment. After 7 days of EPO
treatment, H3K4Me2 modification uniformly increases throughout the alpha-globin
locus. Acetylation at H3K9 and binding of Pol II, NF-E2, and GATA-1 were
restricted to certain hypersensitive sites of the enhancer and theta gene, and
were conspicuously low at the alpha-like globin promoters. Rearrangement of the
insulator binding factor CTCF took place at and around the alpha-globin locus as 
CD34(+) cells differentiated into erythroid pathway.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that remodeling of the upstream elements may be 
the primary event in activation of alpha-globin gene expression. Activation of
alpha-globin genes upon EPO treatment involves initial binding of Pol II,
downregulation of pre-existing factors like NF-E2, removal of CTCF from the
locus, then rebinding of CTCF in an altered pattern, and concurrent or subsequent
binding of transcription factors like GATA-1.

PMCID: PMC2997688
PMID: 19607874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 Jan;18(1):73-80. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.117.

Specific epigenetic alterations of IGF2-H19 locus in spermatozoa from infertile
men.

Boissonnas CC(1), Abdalaoui HE, Haelewyn V, Fauque P, Dupont JM, Gut I, Vaiman D,
Jouannet P, Tost J, Jammes H.

Author information: 
(1)Biology of Reproduction-CECOS, Cochin-Saint Vincent de Paul Hospital, AP-HP,
Department of Genetics and Development, Cochin Institute, University
Paris-Descartes, Paris, France.

DNA methylation marks, a key modification of imprinting, are erased in primordial
germ cells and sex specifically re-established during gametogenesis. Abnormal
epigenetic programming has been proposed as a possible mechanism compromising
male fertility. We analysed by pyrosequencing the DNA methylation status of 47
CpGs located in differentially methylated regions (DMRs), the DMR0 and DMR2 of
the IGF2 gene and in the 3rd and 6th CTCF-binding sites of the H19 DMR in human
sperm from men with normal semen and patients with teratozoospermia (T) and/or
oligo-astheno-teratozoospermia (OAT). All normal semen samples presented the
expected high global methylation level for all CpGs analysed. In the
teratozoospermia group, 11 of 19 patients presented a loss of methylation at
variable CpG positions either in the IGF2 DMR2 or in both the IGF2 DMR2 and the
6th CTCF of the H19 DMR. In the OAT group, 16 of 22 patients presented a severe
loss of methylation of the 6th CTCF, closely correlated with sperm concentration.
The methylation state of DMR0 and of the 3rd CTCF was never affected by the
pathological status of sperm samples. This study demonstrates that epigenetic
perturbations of the 6th CTCF site of the H19 DMR might be a relevant biomarker
for quantitative defects of spermatogenesis in humans. Moreover, we defined a
methylation threshold sustaining the classification of patients in two groups,
unmethylated and methylated. Using this new classification of patients, the
observed intrinsic imprinting defects of spermatozoa appear not to impair
significantly the outcome of assisted reproductive technologies.

PMCID: PMC2987171
PMID: 19584898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Genome Res. 2009 Aug;19(8):1338-49. doi: 10.1101/gr.094953.109. Epub 2009 Jul 7.

Endonuclease-sensitive regions of human spermatozoal chromatin are highly
enriched in promoter and CTCF binding sequences.

Arpanahi A(1), Brinkworth M, Iles D, Krawetz SA, Paradowska A, Platts AE, Saida
M, Steger K, Tedder P, Miller D.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction and Early Development Unit, Leeds Institute of Genetics and
Health Therapeutics, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom.

During the haploid phase of mammalian spermatogenesis, nucleosomal chromatin is
ultimately repackaged by small, highly basic protamines to generate an extremely 
compact, toroidal chromatin architecture that is critical to normal spermatozoal 
function. In common with several species, however, the human spermatozoon retains
a small proportion of its chromatin packaged in nucleosomes. As nucleosomal
chromatin in spermatozoa is structurally more open than protamine-packaged
chromatin, we considered it likely to be more accessible to exogenously applied
endonucleases. Accordingly, we have used this premise to identify a population of
endonuclease-sensitive DNA sequences in human and murine spermatozoa. Our results
show unequivocally that, in contrast to the endonuclease-resistant sperm
chromatin packaged by protamines, regions of increased endonuclease sensitivity
are closely associated with gene regulatory regions, including many promoter
sequences and sequences recognized by CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF). Similar
differential packaging of promoters is observed in the spermatozoal chromatin of 
both mouse and man. These observations imply the existence of epigenetic marks
that distinguish gene regulatory regions in male germ cells and prevent their
repackaging by protamines during spermiogenesis. The ontology of genes under the 
control of endonuclease-sensitive regulatory regions implies a role for this
phenomenon in subsequent embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC2720182
PMID: 19584098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. PLoS One. 2009 Jul 1;4(7):e6109. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006109.

Targeted deletion of multiple CTCF-binding elements in the human C-MYC gene
reveals a requirement for CTCF in C-MYC expression.

Gombert WM(1), Krumm A.

Author information: 
(1)Black Lowe & Graham PLLC, Seattle, WA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Insulators and domain boundaries both shield genes from adjacent
enhancers and inhibit intrusion of heterochromatin into transgenes. Previous
studies examined the functional mechanism of the MYC insulator element MINE and
its CTCF binding sites in the context of transgenes that were randomly inserted
into the genome by transfection. However, the contribution of CTCF binding sites 
to both gene regulation and maintenance of chromatin has not been tested at the
endogenous MYC gene.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To determine the impact of CTCF binding on MYC
expression, a series of mutant human chromosomal alleles was prepared in
homologous recombination-efficient DT40 cells and individually transferred by
microcell fusion into murine cells. Functional tests reported here reveal that
deletion of CTCF binding elements within the MINE does not impact the capacity of
this locus to correctly organize an 'accessible' open chromatin domain,
suggesting that these sites are not essential for the formation of a competent,
transcriptionally active locus. Moreover, deletion of the CTCF site at the MYC P2
promoter reduces transcription but does not affect promoter acetylation or
serum-inducible transcription. Importantly, removal of either CTCF site leads to 
DNA methylation of flanking sequences, thereby contributing to progressive loss
of transcriptional activity.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings collectively demonstrate that CTCF-binding at the
human MYC locus does not repress transcriptional activity but is required for
protection from DNA methylation.

PMCID: PMC2699473
PMID: 19568426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Cell. 2009 Jun 26;137(7):1194-211. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.06.001.

CTCF: master weaver of the genome.

Phillips JE(1), Corces VG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
jephill@emory.edu

CTCF is a highly conserved zinc finger protein implicated in diverse regulatory
functions, including transcriptional activation/repression, insulation,
imprinting, and X chromosome inactivation. Here we re-evaluate data supporting
these roles in the context of mechanistic insights provided by recent genome-wide
studies and highlight evidence for CTCF-mediated intra- and interchromosomal
contacts at several developmentally regulated genomic loci. These analyses
support a primary role for CTCF in the global organization of chromatin
architecture and suggest that CTCF may be a heritable component of an epigenetic 
system regulating the interplay between DNA methylation, higher-order chromatin
structure, and lineage-specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3040116
PMID: 19563753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Trends Genet. 2009 Jul;25(7):288-97. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2009.04.007. Epub 2009
Jun 18.

Instability and chromatin structure of expanded trinucleotide repeats.

Dion V(1), Wilson JH.

Author information: 
(1)Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
vincent.dion@fmi.ch

Trinucleotide repeat expansion underlies at least 17 neurological diseases. In
affected individuals, the expanded locus is characterized by dramatic changes in 
chromatin structure and in repeat tract length. Interestingly, recent studies
show that several chromatin modifiers, including a histone acetyltransferase, a
DNA methyltransferase and the chromatin insulator CTCF can modulate repeat
instability. Here, we propose that the unusual chromatin structure of expanded
repeats directly impacts their instability. We discuss several potential models
for how this might occur, including a role for DNA repair-dependent epigenetic
reprogramming in increasing repeat instability, and the capacity of epigenetic
marks to alter sense and antisense transcription, thereby affecting repeat
instability.

PMCID: PMC3671858
PMID: 19540013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Nature. 2009 Jul 2;460(7251):128-32. doi: 10.1038/nature08098. Epub 2009 Jun 17.

The pluripotency factor Oct4 interacts with Ctcf and also controls X-chromosome
pairing and counting.

Donohoe ME(1), Silva SS, Pinter SF, Xu N, Lee JT.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, USA.

Pluripotency of embryonic stem (ES) cells is controlled by defined transcription 
factors. During differentiation, mouse ES cells undergo global epigenetic
reprogramming, as exemplified by X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) in which one
female X chromosome is silenced to achieve gene dosage parity between the sexes. 
Somatic XCI is regulated by homologous X-chromosome pairing and counting, and by 
the random choice of future active and inactive X chromosomes. XCI and cell
differentiation are tightly coupled, as blocking one process compromises the
other and dedifferentiation of somatic cells to induced pluripotent stem cells is
accompanied by X chromosome reactivation. Recent evidence suggests coupling of
Xist expression to pluripotency factors occurs, but how the two are
interconnected remains unknown. Here we show that Oct4 (also known as Pou5f1)
lies at the top of the XCI hierarchy, and regulates XCI by triggering
X-chromosome pairing and counting. Oct4 directly binds Tsix and Xite, two
regulatory noncoding RNA genes of the X-inactivation centre, and also complexes
with XCI trans-factors, Ctcf and Yy1 (ref. 17), through protein-protein
interactions. Depletion of Oct4 blocks homologous X-chromosome pairing and
results in the inactivation of both X chromosomes in female cells. Thus, we have 
identified the first trans-factor that regulates counting, and ascribed new
functions to Oct4 during X-chromosome reprogramming.

PMCID: PMC3057664
PMID: 19536159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2009 Sep;33(9):1615-27. doi:
10.1111/j.1530-0277.2009.00993.x. Epub 2009 Jun 10.

Effect of alcohol consumption on CpG methylation in the differentially methylated
regions of H19 and IG-DMR in male gametes: implications for fetal alcohol
spectrum disorders.

Ouko LA(1), Shantikumar K, Knezovich J, Haycock P, Schnugh DJ, Ramsay M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, National Health Laboratory Service and School of
Pathology, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: Exposure to alcohol in utero is the main attributable cause of fetal 
alcohol spectrum disorders (FASD) which in its most severe form is characterized 
by irreversible behavioral and cognitive disability. Paternal preconception
drinking is not considered to be a significant risk factor, even though animal
studies have demonstrated that chronic paternal alcohol consumption has a
detrimental effect on the physical and mental development of offspring even in
the absence of in utero alcohol exposure. It has been documented that alcohol can
reduce the levels and activity of DNA methyltransferases resulting in DNA
hypomethylation and that reduced methyltransferase activity can cause activation 
of normally silenced genes. The aim of this study was to establish a link between
alcohol use in men and hypomethylation of paternally imprinted loci in sperm DNA 
in genomic regions critical for embryonic development, thus providing a mechanism
for paternal effects in the aetiology of FASD.
METHODS: Sperm DNA from male volunteers was bisulfite treated and the methylation
patterns of 2 differentially methylated regions (DMRs), H19 and IG-DMR, analyzed 
following sequencing of individual clones. The methylation patterns were
correlated with the alcohol consumption levels of the volunteer males.
RESULTS: There was a pattern of increased demethylation with alcohol consumption 
at the 2 imprinted loci with a significant difference observed at the IG-DMR
between the nondrinking and heavy alcohol consuming groups. Greater
inter-individual variation in average methylation was observed at the H19 DMR and
individual clones were more extensively demethylated than those of the IG-DMR.
CpG site #4 in the IG-DMR was preferentially demethylated among all individuals
and along with the H19 DMR CpG site #7 located within the CTCF binding site 6
showed significant demethylation in the alcohol consuming groups compared with
the control group.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates a correlation between chronic alcohol use and
demethylation of normally hypermethylated imprinted regions in sperm DNA. We
hypothesize that, should these epigenetic changes in imprinted genes be
transmitted through fertilization, they would alter the critical gene expression 
dosages required for normal prenatal development resulting in offspring with
features of FASD.

PMID: 19519716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Int J Oncol. 2009 Jul;35(1):87-96.

Aberrant epigenetic modifications in the CTCF binding domain of the IGF2/H19 gene
in prostate cancer compared with benign prostate hyperplasia.

Paradowska A(1), Fenic I, Konrad L, Sturm K, Wagenlehner F, Weidner W, Steger K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Pediatric Urology, Justus-Liebig University, 35385
Giessen, Germany. agnieszka.paradowska@chiru.med.uni-giessen.de

Expression of the imprinted genes insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2) and H19
depends on the methylation pattern of their common imprinting control region
(ICR) located on chromosome 11p15. As the somatic imprinting pattern may be lost 
during tumorigenesis due to epigenetic alterations, in the present study, we
analyzed the DNA methylation and histone modifications in the differentially
methylated region (DMR) of IGF2/H19 in benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and
prostate carcinoma (PCa). Sodium bisulfite sequencing was performed on frozen
tissue collected after radical prostatectomy. Thirty tumors and 17 non-cancerous 
tissue samples were analyzed. Histological diagnosis was, in addition, confirmed 
by amplification of the epithelial tumor marker alpha-methylacyl coenzyme-A
racemase. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay (ChIP) was carried out on
sonificated chromatin from fresh tissue samples from 10 PCa, 10 BPH using
antibodies against trimethyl histone H3K9, dimethyl histone H3K9, trimethyl H3K27
and acetyl H3K9. The methylation pattern of 17 CpGs within 227 bp of the H19
fragment was characterized from each DNA sample. All (BPH) samples demonstrated
>80% methylation of CpGs. In contrast, we found 41% of CpGs methylated in 9 out
of 30 PCa specimens. We observed statistically significant differences in the
methylation state between PCa and BPH groups, especially in the DMR of H19
(p<0.0001) and in the ICR (p=0.0034), which corresponds to CTCF binding domain.
ChIP assay revealed that dimethyl H3K9 is associated with the ICR of IGF2/H19 in 
BPH, but not in PCa (p<0.0001). Our data demonstrate that DNA methylation and
histone methylation analysis of the ICR within the DMR of IGF2/H19 provides
important insights into early steps of carcinogenesis and, therefore, may
contribute to improving diagnosis of PCa.

PMID: 19513555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2009 Jun;41(6):464-71.

Homocysteine harasses the imprinting expression of IGF2 and H19 by demethylation 
of differentially methylated region between IGF2/H19 genes.

Li L(1), Xie J, Zhang M, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, West China School of Preclinic Medical Sciences
and Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

Homocysteine (Hcy) can induce proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells
(VSMCs), which is a key event in the genesis of the lesions of atherosclerosis.
Insulinlike growth factor 2 (IGF2) and H19 are two important regulating molecules
of cell proliferation. The role of Hcy in the proliferation of smooth muscle cell
by regulating IGF2 and H19 has not been shown or analyzed so far. This study aims
to investigate the potential impact of Hcy on gene imprinting of IGF2 and H19.
Cultured human umbilical VSMCs were treated with different concentrations of Hcy.
The DNA methylation status of VSMCs was assayed by nested methylationspecific
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The mRNA levels of H19, IGF2, and CCCTC-binding 
factor (CTCF) were detected by reverse transcription PCR, and the protein
expression of IGF2 by Western blotting. The results showed that the Hcy treatment
resulted in hypomethylation of the sixth CTCF-binding site upstream of H19 of
VSMCs. The expression of H19 was increased, whereas the IGF2 mRNA and protein
were decreased, the CTCF expression increased with the increase in Hcy
concentration. These data indicated that Hcy could induce hypomethylation of the 
sixth CTCF-binding sites upstream of H19, which is an important regulating area
for the imprinting expression of IGF2 and H19. The increased CTCF expression may 
be a potential mechanism for the demethylation modification of DNA, which
resulted from the Hcy treatment.

PMID: 19499149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Mol Cell. 2009 May 14;34(4):395-7. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.05.007.

Breaching the boundaries that safeguard against repression.

Tiwari VK(1), Baylin SB.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.

In a recent issue of Molecular Cell, Witcher and Emerson (2009) demonstrate that 
CTCF loss of function, via defective steps in poly (ADP-ribosyl)ation, may
predispose key genes in cancer cells to addition of abnormal promoter DNA
methylation and silencing.

PMCID: PMC3577062
PMID: 19481516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Apr;120(3):593-601. doi: 10.1007/s10549-009-0422-1.
Epub 2009 May 23.

CpG island methylation affects accessibility of the proximal BRCA1 promoter to
transcription factors.

Xu J(1), Huo D, Chen Y, Nwachukwu C, Collins C, Rowell J, Slamon DJ, Olopade OI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Center for Clinical Cancer Genetics, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60637-1463, USA.

To understand the mechanism of transcriptional down-regulation of BRCA1 by
promoter methylation, we screened 51 breast cancer cell lines and identified
HCC38 as another BRCA1 promoter-methylated cell line in addition to UACC3199.
There was low expression of BRCA1 mRNA and BRCA1 protein in both cell lines as
measured by quantitative RT-PCR and western blot analysis. After transient
treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-CdR) and trichostatin A (TSA),
re-expression of BRCA1 mRNA and BRCA1 protein was detected in UACC3199 cells, but
not in HCC38 cells. Another demethylating agent, zebularine, did not induce BRCA1
re-expression in either cell line. To test the hypothesis that methylation of CpG
sites may affect accessibility of the BRCA1 promoter to transcription factors and
consequently cause down-regulation of BRCA1, we analyzed the binding of four
transcription factors (CTCF, Sp1, E2F1 and E2F6) to the BRCA1 promoter using
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay (ChIP) and quantitative PCR. CTCF and E2F1
were enriched at the unmethylated BRCA1 promoter in MCF-7 cells. In contrast,
these two transcription factors were not enriched at the methylated BRCA1
promoter in UACC3199 and HCC38 cells. Following demethylating drug treatment,
E2F1 was enriched at the BRCA1 promoter in the demethylated UACC3199 cells. This 
indicates that reduced accessibility of transcription factors to the methylated
promoter is one of the mechanisms for down-regulation of BRCA1 in heavily
methylated cancer cells.

PMID: 19466541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Nature. 2009 Jul 16;460(7253):410-3. doi: 10.1038/nature08079. Epub 2009 May 20.

Cohesins form chromosomal cis-interactions at the developmentally regulated IFNG 
locus.

Hadjur S(1), Williams LM, Ryan NK, Cobb BS, Sexton T, Fraser P, Fisher AG,
Merkenschlager M.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Development Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College
London, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK.

Comment in
    Epigenomics. 2009 Dec;1(2):232.

Cohesin-mediated sister chromatid cohesion is essential for chromosome
segregation and post-replicative DNA repair. In addition, evidence from model
organisms and from human genetics suggests that cohesin is involved in the
control of gene expression. This non-canonical role has recently been
rationalized by the findings that mammalian cohesin complexes are recruited to a 
subset of DNase I hypersensitive sites and to conserved noncoding sequences by
the DNA-binding protein CTCF. CTCF functions at insulators (which control
interactions between enhancers and promoters) and at boundary elements (which
demarcate regions of distinct chromatin structure), and cohesin contributes to
its enhancer-blocking activity. The underlying mechanisms remain unknown, and the
full spectrum of cohesin functions remains to be determined. Here we show that
cohesin forms the topological and mechanistic basis for cell-type-specific
long-range chromosomal interactions in cis at the developmentally regulated
cytokine locus IFNG. Hence, the ability of cohesin to constrain chromosome
topology is used not only for the purpose of sister chromatid cohesion, but also 
to dynamically define the spatial conformation of specific loci. This new aspect 
of cohesin function is probably important for normal development and disease.

PMCID: PMC2869028
PMID: 19458616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jul;29(14):4002-13. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00189-09. Epub 2009 May 
18.

Chromatin structure is implicated in "late" elongation checkpoints on the U2
snRNA and beta-actin genes.

Egloff S(1), Al-Rawaf H, O'Reilly D, Murphy S.

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, 
Oxford OX1 3RE, United Kingdom.

The negative elongation factor NELF is a key component of an early elongation
checkpoint generally located within 100 bp of the transcription start site of
protein-coding genes. Negotiation of this checkpoint and conversion to productive
elongation require phosphorylation of the carboxy-terminal domain of RNA
polymerase II (pol II), NELF, and DRB sensitivity-inducing factor (DSIF) by
positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb). P-TEFb is dispensable for
transcription of the noncoding U2 snRNA genes, suggesting that a NELF-dependent
checkpoint is absent. However, we find that NELF at the end of the 800-bp U2 gene
transcription unit and RNA interference-mediated knockdown of NELF causes a
termination defect. NELF is also associated 800 bp downstream of the
transcription start site of the beta-actin gene, where a "late" P-TEFb-dependent 
checkpoint occurs. Interestingly, both genes have an extended nucleosome-depleted
region up to the NELF-dependent control point. In both cases, transcription
through this region is P-TEFb independent, implicating chromatin in the formation
of the terminator/checkpoint. Furthermore, CTCF colocalizes with NELF on the U2
and beta-actin genes, raising the possibility that it helps the positioning
and/or function of the NELF-dependent control point on these genes.

PMCID: PMC2704739
PMID: 19451231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Mol Cell. 2009 May 15;34(3):271-84. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.04.001.

Epigenetic silencing of the p16(INK4a) tumor suppressor is associated with loss
of CTCF binding and a chromatin boundary.

Witcher M(1), Emerson BM.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The p16(INK4a) tumor suppressor gene is a frequent target of epigenetic
inactivation in human cancers, which is an early event in breast carcinogenesis. 
We describe the existence of a chromatin boundary upstream of the p16 gene that
is lost when this gene is aberrantly silenced. We show that the multifunctional
protein CTCF associates in the vicinity of this boundary and absence of binding
strongly coincides with p16 silencing in multiple types of cancer cells. CTCF
binding also correlates with RASSF1A and CDH1 gene activation, and CTCF
interaction is absent when these genes are methylated and silenced.
Interestingly, defective poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation of CTCF and dissociation from the
molecular chaperone Nucleolin occur in p16-silenced cells, abrogating its proper 
function. Thus, destabilization of specific chromosomal boundaries through
aberrant crosstalk between CTCF, poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation, and DNA methylation may 
be a general mechanism to inactivate tumor suppressor genes and initiate
tumorigenesis in numerous forms of human cancers.

PMCID: PMC2723750
PMID: 19450526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Bioinformatics. 2009 Jul 15;25(14):1715-21. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp312.
Epub 2009 May 14.

Hierarchical hidden Markov model with application to joint analysis of ChIP-chip 
and ChIP-seq data.

Choi H(1), Nesvizhskii AI, Ghosh D, Qin ZS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

MOTIVATION: Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments followed by array
hybridization, or ChIP-chip, is a powerful approach for identifying transcription
factor binding sites (TFBS) and has been widely used. Recently, massively
parallel sequencing coupled with ChIP experiments (ChIP-seq) has been
increasingly used as an alternative to ChIP-chip, offering cost-effective
genome-wide coverage and resolution up to a single base pair. For many
well-studied TFs, both ChIP-seq and ChIP-chip experiments have been applied and
their data are publicly available. Previous analyses have revealed substantial
technology-specific binding signals despite strong correlation between the two
sets of results. Therefore, it is of interest to see whether the two data sources
can be combined to enhance the detection of TFBS.
RESULTS: In this work, hierarchical hidden Markov model (HHMM) is proposed for
combining data from ChIP-seq and ChIP-chip. In HHMM, inference results from
individual HMMs in ChIP-seq and ChIP-chip experiments are summarized by a higher 
level HMM. Simulation studies show the advantage of HHMM when data from both
technologies co-exist. Analysis of two well-studied TFs, NRSF and CCCTC-binding
factor (CTCF), also suggests that HHMM yields improved TFBS identification in
comparison to analyses using individual data sources or a simple merger of the
two.
AVAILABILITY: Source code for the software ChIPmeta is freely available for
download at http://www.umich.edu/~hwchoi/HHMMsoftware.zip, implemented in C and
supported on linux.

PMCID: PMC2732365
PMID: 19447789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Genes Dev. 2009 Jun 1;23(11):1338-50. doi: 10.1101/gad.1798209. Epub 2009 May 14.

Three subclasses of a Drosophila insulator show distinct and cell type-specific
genomic distributions.

Bushey AM(1), Ramos E, Corces VG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Insulators are protein-bound DNA elements that are thought to play a role in
chromatin organization and the regulation of gene expression by mediating intra- 
and interchromosomal interactions. Suppressor of Hair-wing [Su(Hw)] and
Drosophila CTCF (dCTCF) insulators are found at distinct loci throughout the
Drosophila melanogaster genome and function by recruiting an additional protein, 
Centrosomal Protein 190 (CP190). We performed chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) and microarray analysis (ChIP-chip) experiments with whole-genome tiling
arrays to compare Su(Hw), dCTCF, boundary element-associated factor (BEAF), and
CP190 localization on DNA in two different cell lines and found evidence that
BEAF is a third subclass of CP190-containing insulators. The DNA-binding proteins
Su(Hw), dCTCF, and BEAF show unique distribution patterns with respect to the
location and expression level of genes, suggesting diverse roles for these three 
subclasses of insulators in genome organization. Notably, cell line-specific
localization sites for all three DNA-binding proteins as well as CP190 indicate
multiple levels at which insulators can be regulated to affect gene expression.
These findings suggest a model in which insulator subclasses may have distinct
functions that together organize the genome in a cell type-specific manner,
resulting in differential regulation of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2701583
PMID: 19443682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Cell Sci. 2009 May 1;122(Pt 9):1275-84. doi: 10.1242/jcs.039990.

CTCF and its protein partners: divide and rule?

Zlatanova J(1), Caiafa P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY 82071,
USA. jordanka@uwyo.edu

CTCF is a ubiquitous transcription factor that is involved in numerous, seemingly
unrelated functions. These functions include, but are not limited to, positive or
negative regulation of transcription, enhancer-blocking activities at
developmentally regulated gene clusters and at imprinted loci, and X-chromosome
inactivation. Here, we review recent data acquired with state-of-the-art
technologies that illuminate possible mechanisms behind the diversity of CTCF
functions. CTCF interacts with numerous protein partners, including cohesin,
nucleophosmin, PARP1, Yy1 and RNA polymerase II. We propose that CTCF interacts
with one or two different partners according to the biological context, applying 
the Roman principle of governance, 'divide and rule' (divide et impera).

PMID: 19386894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jul;29(13):3556-68. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01748-08. Epub 2009 Apr 
20.

Genome-wide mapping of boundary element-associated factor (BEAF) binding sites in
Drosophila melanogaster links BEAF to transcription.

Jiang N(1), Emberly E, Cuvier O, Hart CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA
70803, USA.

Insulator elements play a role in gene regulation that is potentially linked to
nuclear organization. Boundary element-associated factors (BEAFs) 32A and 32B
associate with hundreds of sites on Drosophila polytene chromosomes. We
hybridized DNA isolated by chromatin immunoprecipitation to genome tiling
microarrays to construct a genome-wide map of BEAF binding locations. A distinct 
difference in the association of 32A and 32B with chromatin was noted. We
identified 1,820 BEAF peaks and found that more than 85% were less than 300 bp
from transcription start sites. Half are between head-to-head gene pairs.
BEAF-associated genes are transcriptionally active as judged by the presence of
RNA polymerase II, dimethylated histone H3 K4, and the alternative histone H3.3. 
Forty percent of these genes are also associated with the polymerase negative
elongation factor NELF. Like NELF-associated genes, most BEAF-associated genes
are highly expressed. Using quantitative reverse transcription-PCR, we found that
the expression levels of most BEAF-associated genes decrease in embryos and
cultured cells lacking BEAF. These results provide an unexpected link between
BEAF and transcription, suggesting that BEAF plays a role in maintaining most
associated promoter regions in an environment that facilitates high transcription
levels.

PMCID: PMC2698748
PMID: 19380483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Virol. 2009 Jun;83(12):6199-210. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00052-09. Epub 2009 Apr 15.

Cell cycle control of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus latency
transcription by CTCF-cohesin interactions.

Kang H(1), Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) latency is characterized by the
highly regulated transcription of a few viral genes essential for genome
maintenance and host cell survival. A major latency control region has been
identified upstream of the divergent promoters for the multicistronic transcripts
encoding LANA (ORF73), vCyclin (ORF72), and vFLIP (ORF71) and for the
complementary strand transcript encoding K14 and vGPCR (ORF74). Previous studies 
have shown that this major latency control region is occupied by the cellular
chromatin boundary factor CTCF and chromosome structural maintenance proteins
SMC1, SMC3, and RAD21, which comprise the cohesin complex. Deletion of the
CTCF-cohesin binding site caused an inhibition of cell growth and viral genome
instability. We now show that the KSHV genes regulated by CTCF-cohesin are under 
cell cycle control and that mutation of the CTCF binding sites abolished cell
cycle-regulated transcription. Cohesin subunits assembled at the CTCF binding
sites and bound CTCF proteins in a cell cycle-dependent manner. Subcellular
distribution of CTCF and colocalization with cohesins also varied across the cell
cycle. Ectopic expression of Rad21 repressed CTCF-regulated transcription of KSHV
lytic genes, and a Rad21-CTCF chimeric protein converted CTCF into an efficient
transcriptional repressor of KSHV genes normally activated in the G(2) phase. We 
conclude that cohesins interact with CTCF in mid-S phase and repress
CTCF-regulated genes in a cell cycle-dependent manner. We propose that the
CTCF-cohesin complex plays a critical role in regulating the cell cycle control
of viral gene expression during latency and that failure to maintain cell cycle
control of latent transcripts inhibits host cell proliferation and survival.

PMCID: PMC2687369
PMID: 19369356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Fertil Steril. 2010 Jul;94(2):585-94. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2009.02.051. Epub
2009 Apr 1.

Methylation defects of imprinted genes in human testicular spermatozoa.

Marques CJ(1), Francisco T, Sousa S, Carvalho F, Barros A, Sousa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto,
Portugal.

OBJECTIVE: To study the methylation imprinting marks of two oppositely imprinted 
genes, H19 and MEST/PEG1, in human testicular spermatozoa from azoospermic
patients with different etiologies. Testicular spermatozoa are often used in
intracytoplasmic sperm injection for treatment of male factor infertility, but
the imprinting status of these cells is currently unknown.
DESIGN: Experimental prospective study.
SETTING: University research laboratory and private in vitro fertilization (IVF) 
clinic.
PATIENT(S): A total of 24 men, five with anejaculation, five with secondary
obstructive azoospermia, five with primary obstructive azoospermia, and nine with
secretory azoospermia due to hypospermatogenesis.
INTERVENTION(S): Spermatozoa were isolated by micromanipulation from testicular
biopsies.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): DNA methylation patterns were analyzed using bisulfite
genomic sequencing with cloning analysis.
RESULT(S): We found H19 complete methylation was statistically significantly
reduced in secretory azoospermic patients with hypospermatogenesis, with one
patient presenting complete unmethylation. Hypomethylation also affected the
CTCF-binding site 6, involved in regulation of IGF2 expression. Regarding the
MEST gene, all patients presented complete unmethylation although this was
statistically significantly reduced in the anejaculation group.
CONCLUSION(S): Testicular spermatozoa from men with abnormal spermatogenesis
carry methylation defects in the H19 imprinted gene which also affect the
CTCF-binding site, further supporting an association between the occurrence of
imprinting errors and disruptive spermatogenesis.

Copyright 2010 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19338988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. EMBO J. 2009 May 6;28(9):1234-45. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.81. Epub 2009 Mar 26.

Architectural roles of multiple chromatin insulators at the human apolipoprotein 
gene cluster.

Mishiro T(1), Ishihara K, Hino S, Tsutsumi S, Aburatani H, Shirahige K, Kinoshita
Y, Nakao M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regeneration Medicine, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

Long-range regulatory elements and higher-order chromatin structure coordinate
the expression of multiple genes in cluster, and CTCF/cohesin-mediated chromatin 
insulator may be a key in this regulation. The human apolipoprotein (APO)
A1/C3/A4/A5 gene region, whose alterations increase the risk of dyslipidemia and 
atherosclerosis, is partitioned at least by three CTCF-enriched sites and three
cohesin protein RAD21-enriched sites (two overlap with the CTCF sites), resulting
in the formation of two transcribed chromatin loops by interactions between
insulators. The C3 enhancer and APOC3/A4/A5 promoters reside in the same loop,
where the APOC3/A4 promoters are pointed towards the C3 enhancer, whereas the
APOA1 promoter is present in the different loop. The depletion of either CTCF or 
RAD21 disrupts the chromatin loop structure, together with significant changes in
the APO expression and the localization of transcription factor hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha and transcriptionally active form of RNA polymerase
II at the APO promoters. Thus, CTCF/cohesin-mediated insulators maintain the
chromatin loop formation and the localization of transcriptional apparatus at the
promoters, suggesting an essential role of chromatin insulation in controlling
the expression of clustered genes.

PMCID: PMC2683055
PMID: 19322193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Chromosome Res. 2009;17(2):201-14. doi: 10.1007/s10577-008-9017-7. Epub 2009 Mar 
24.

How cohesin and CTCF cooperate in regulating gene expression.

Wendt KS(1), Peters JM.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 7, A-1030 Vienna,
Austria.

Cohesin is a DNA-binding protein complex that is essential for sister chromatid
cohesion and facilitates the repair of damaged DNA. In addition, cohesin has
important roles in regulating gene expression, but the molecular mechanisms of
this function are poorly understood. Recent experiments have revealed that
cohesin binds to the same sites in mammalian genomes as the zinc finger
transcription factor CTCF. At a few loci CTCF has been shown to function as an
enhancer-blocking transcriptional insulator, and recent observations indicate
that this function depends on cohesin. Here we review what is known about the
roles of cohesin and CTCF in regulating gene expression in mammalian cells, and
we discuss how cohesin might mediate the insulator function of CTCF.

PMID: 19308701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Nature. 2009 May 7;459(7243):108-12. doi: 10.1038/nature07829. Epub 2009 Mar 18.

Histone modifications at human enhancers reflect global cell-type-specific gene
expression.

Heintzman ND(1), Hon GC, Hawkins RD, Kheradpour P, Stark A, Harp LF, Ye Z, Lee
LK, Stuart RK, Ching CW, Ching KA, Antosiewicz-Bourget JE, Liu H, Zhang X, Green 
RD, Lobanenkov VV, Stewart R, Thomson JA, Crawford GE, Kellis M, Ren B.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, UCSD School of Medicine, 9500 Gilman
Drive, La Jolla, California 92093-0653, USA.

Comment in
    Epigenomics. 2009 Oct;1(1):22.

The human body is composed of diverse cell types with distinct functions.
Although it is known that lineage specification depends on cell-specific gene
expression, which in turn is driven by promoters, enhancers, insulators and other
cis-regulatory DNA sequences for each gene, the relative roles of these
regulatory elements in this process are not clear. We have previously developed a
chromatin-immunoprecipitation-based microarray method (ChIP-chip) to locate
promoters, enhancers and insulators in the human genome. Here we use the same
approach to identify these elements in multiple cell types and investigate their 
roles in cell-type-specific gene expression. We observed that the chromatin state
at promoters and CTCF-binding at insulators is largely invariant across diverse
cell types. In contrast, enhancers are marked with highly cell-type-specific
histone modification patterns, strongly correlate to cell-type-specific gene
expression programs on a global scale, and are functionally active in a
cell-type-specific manner. Our results define over 55,000 potential
transcriptional enhancers in the human genome, significantly expanding the
current catalogue of human enhancers and highlighting the role of these elements 
in cell-type-specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2910248
PMID: 19295514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2009 Jan;40(1):1-5.

[Cloning, expression, purification and identification of multi-potent
transcription factor CTCF recombinant and its segments].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang L(1), Qin Y, Sun ZL, Wu J, Yang WL, Zhang JZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, West China School of
Preclinical and Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To clone ctc f cDNA, N, Zn and C fragments separately into expresstion
vector, purify and identify the expressed proteins.
METHODS: Using the recombinant plasmid pGEM7Zf (-)-ctc f as template for PCR,
pGEX-4T-2-ctc f, pGEX-4T-2-ctc f-N, pGEX-4T-2- ctc f-Zn and pGEX-4T-2- ctc f-C
recombinants were constructed successfully. After transformed into E. coli BL21
cells, the recombinants were confirmed by enzyme digestion and sequence analysis.
After optimizing the IPTG inducing condition, the purified GST fusion proteins
with affinity chromatography were conformed by Far-Western blotting.
RESULTS: The recombinant plasmids pGEX-4T-2-ctc f, pGEX-4T-2- ctc f-N,
pGEX-4T-2-ctc f-Zn and pGEX-4T-2-ctc f-C were confirmed by restriction enzyme
assay and sequencing. All GST fusion proteins, CTCF, CTCF-N, CTCF-Zn and CTCF-C
were successfully expressed at the optimal parameters and purified with affinity 
chromatography, and specifically recognized by anti-GST antibody.
CONCLUSION: Ctc f, ctc f-n, ctc f-Zn and ctc f-c gene recombinants were
constructed successfully and their corresponding fusion proteins were
successfully purified with affinity chromatography and identified.

PMID: 19292032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Mar 13;380(3):650-4. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.01.162. Epub 2009 Jan 31.

Lithium chloride protects retinal neurocytes from nutrient deprivation by
promoting DNA non-homologous end-joining.

Zhuang J(1), Li F, Liu X, Liu Z, Lin J, Ge Y, Kaminski JM, Summers JB, Wang Z, Ge
J, Yu K.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, #54 S Xianlie Road, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510060, China.

Lithium chloride is a therapeutic agent for treatment of bipolar affective
disorders. Increasing numbers of studies have indicated that lithium has
neuroprotective effects. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the actions
of lithium have not been fully elucidated. This study aimed to investigate
whether lithium chloride produces neuroprotective function by improving DNA
repair pathway in retinal neurocyte. In vitro, the primary cultured retinal
neurocytes (85.7% are MAP-2 positive cells) were treated with lithium chloride,
then cultured with serum-free media to simulate the nutrient deprived state
resulting from ischemic insult. The neurite outgrowth of the cultured cells
increased significantly in a dose-dependent manner when exposed to different
levels of lithium chloride. Genomic DNA electrophoresis demonstrated greater DNA 
integrity of retinal neurocytes when treated with lithium chloride as compared to
the control. Moreover, mRNA and protein levels of Ligase IV (involved in DNA
non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) pathway) in retinal neurocytes increased with
lithium chloride. The end joining activity assay was performed to determine the
role of lithium on NHEJ in the presence of extract from retinal neurocytes. The
rejoining levels in retinal neurocytes treated with lithium were significantly
increased as compared to the control. Furthermore, XRCC4, the Ligase IV partner, 
and the transcriptional factor, CREB and CTCF, were up-regulated in retinal cells
after treating with 1.0mM lithium chloride. Therefore, our data suggest that
lithium chloride protects the retinal neural cells from nutrient deprivation in
vitro, which may be similar to the mechanism of cell death in glaucoma. The
improvement in DNA repair pathway involving in Ligase IV might have an important 
role in lithium neuroprotection. This study provides new insights into the neural
protective mechanisms of lithium chloride.

PMID: 19285016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Gen Virol. 2009 May;90(Pt 5):1183-9. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.007344-0. Epub 2009 Mar
4.

Binding of CCCTC-binding factor in vivo to the region located between Rep* and
the C promoter of Epstein-Barr virus is unaffected by CpG methylation and does
not correlate with Cp activity.

Salamon D(1), Banati F, Koroknai A, Ravasz M, Szenthe K, Bathori Z, Bakos A,
Niller HH, Wolf H, Minarovits J.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiological Research Group, National Center for Epidemiology, Pihenö u. 1,
H-1529 Budapest, Hungary. saladili@yahoo.com

In this study, the binding of the insulator protein CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)
to the region located between Rep* and the C promoter (Cp) of Epstein-Barr virus 
(EBV) was analysed using chromatin immunoprecipitation and in vivo footprinting. 
CTCF binding was found to be independent of Cp usage in cell lines corresponding 
to the major EBV latency types. Bisulfite sequencing and an electrophoretic
mobility-shift assay (using methylated and unmethylated probes) revealed that
CTCF binding was insufficient to induce local CpG demethylation in certain cell
lines and was unaffected by CpG methylation in the region between Rep* and Cp. In
addition, CTCF binding to the latency promoter, Qp, did not correlate with Qp
activity.

PMID: 19264589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. PLoS Genet. 2009 Feb;5(2):e1000394. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000394. Epub 2009 
Feb 27.

The D4Z4 macrosatellite repeat acts as a CTCF and A-type lamins-dependent
insulator in facio-scapulo-humeral dystrophy.

Ottaviani A(1), Rival-Gervier S, Boussouar A, Foerster AM, Rondier D, Sacconi S, 
Desnuelle C, Gilson E, Magdinier F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire de la Cellule, Ecole Normale Supérieure de
Lyon, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UMR 5239, UCBL1, IFR128, Lyon,
France.

Both genetic and epigenetic alterations contribute to Facio-Scapulo-Humeral
Dystrophy (FSHD), which is linked to the shortening of the array of D4Z4 repeats 
at the 4q35 locus. The consequence of this rearrangement remains enigmatic, but
deletion of this 3.3-kb macrosatellite element might affect the expression of the
FSHD-associated gene(s) through position effect mechanisms. We investigated this 
hypothesis by creating a large collection of constructs carrying 1 to >11 D4Z4
repeats integrated into the human genome, either at random sites or proximal to a
telomere, mimicking thereby the organization of the 4q35 locus. We show that D4Z4
acts as an insulator that interferes with enhancer-promoter communication and
protects transgenes from position effect. This last property depends on both CTCF
and A-type Lamins. We further demonstrate that both anti-silencing activity of
D4Z4 and CTCF binding are lost upon multimerization of the repeat in cells from
FSHD patients compared to control myoblasts from healthy individuals, suggesting 
that FSHD corresponds to a gain-of-function of CTCF at the residual D4Z4 repeats.
We propose that contraction of the D4Z4 array contributes to FSHD
physio-pathology by acting as a CTCF-dependent insulator in patients.

PMCID: PMC2639723
PMID: 19247430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. PLoS One. 2009;4(2):e4479. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004479. Epub 2009 Feb 20.

A histone map of human chromosome 20q13.12.

Akan P(1), Sahlén M, Deloukas P.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridge, United Kingdom. pa2@sanger.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: We present a systematic search for regulatory elements in a 3.5 Mb
region on human chromosome 20q13.12, a region associated with a number of medical
conditions such as type II diabetes and obesity.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We profiled six histone modifications alongside
RNA polymerase II (PolII) and CTCF in two cell lines, HeLa S3 and NTERA-2 clone
D1 (NT2/D1), by chromatin immunoprecipitation using an in-house spotted DNA
array, constructed with 1.8 kb overlapping plasmid clones. In both cells, more
than 90% of transcription start sites (TSSs) of expressed genes showed
enrichments with PolII, di-methylated lysine 4 of histone H3 (H3K4me2),
tri-methylated lysine 4 of histone H3 (H3K4me3) or acetylated H3 (H3Ac), whereas 
mono-methylated lysine 4 of histone H3 (H3K4me1) signals did not correlate with
expression. No TSSs were enriched with tri-methylated lysine 27 of histone H3
(H3K27me3) in HeLa S3, while eight TSSs (4 expressed) showed enrichments in
NT2/D1. We have also located several CTCF binding sites that are potential
insulator elements.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In summary, we annotated a number of putative
regulatory elements in 20q13.12 and went on to verify experimentally a subset of 
them using dual luciferase reporter assays. Correlating this data to sequence
variation can aid identification of disease causing variants.

PMCID: PMC2639704
PMID: 19229332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. EMBO J. 2009 Apr 8;28(7):877-88. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.34. Epub 2009 Feb 19.

Active promoters and insulators are marked by the centrosomal protein 190.

Bartkuhn M(1), Straub T, Herold M, Herrmann M, Rathke C, Saumweber H, Gilfillan
GD, Becker PB, Renkawitz R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
marek.bartkuhn@gen.bio.uni-giessen.de

For the compact Drosophila genome, several factors mediating insulator function, 
such as su(Hw) and dCTCF, have been identified. Recent analyses showed that both 
these insulator-binding factors are functionally dependent on the same cofactor, 
CP190. Here we analysed genome-wide binding of CP190 and dCTCF. CP190 binding was
detected at CTCF, su(Hw) and GAF sites and unexpectedly at the transcriptional
start sites of actively transcribed genes. Both insulator and transcription start
site CP190-binding elements are strictly marked by a depletion of histone H3 and,
therefore, a loss of nucleosome occupancy. In addition, CP190/dCTCF double
occupancy was seen at the borders of many H3K27me3 'islands'. As before, these
sites were also depleted of H3. Loss of either dCTCF or CP190 causes an increase 
of H3 and H3K27 trimethylation at these sites. Thus, for both types of
cis-regulatory elements, domain borders and promoters, the chromatin structure is
dependent on CP190.

PMCID: PMC2670862
PMID: 19229299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Dev Biol. 2009 Apr 15;328(2):518-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.12.039. Epub 2009 
Jan 8.

Genome wide ChIP-chip analyses reveal important roles for CTCF in Drosophila
genome organization.

Smith ST(1), Wickramasinghe P, Olson A, Loukinov D, Lin L, Deng J, Xiong Y, Rux
J, Sachidanandam R, Sun H, Lobanenkov V, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Insulators or chromatin boundary elements are defined by their ability to block
transcriptional activation by an enhancer and to prevent the spread of active or 
silenced chromatin. Recent studies have increasingly suggested that insulator
proteins play a role in large-scale genome organization. To better understand
insulator function on the global scale, we conducted a genome-wide analysis of
the binding sites for the insulator protein CTCF in Drosophila by Chromatin
Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) followed by a tiling-array analysis. The analysis
revealed CTCF binding to many known domain boundaries within the Abd-B gene of
the BX-C including previously characterized Fab-8 and MCP insulators, and the
Fab-6 region. Based on this finding, we characterized the Fab-6 insulator
element. In genome-wide analysis, we found that dCTCF-binding sites are often
situated between closely positioned gene promoters, consistent with the role of
CTCF as an insulator protein. Importantly, CTCF tends to bind gene promoters just
upstream of transcription start sites, in contrast to the predicted binding sites
of the insulator protein Su(Hw). These findings suggest that CTCF plays more
active roles in regulating gene activity and it functions differently from other 
insulator proteins in organizing the Drosophila genome.

PMID: 19210964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Oct;21(10):985-93.

Are H19 variants associated with Silver-Russell syndrome?

Schönherr N(1), Binder G, Korsch E, Kämmerer E, Wollmann HA, Eggermann T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital RWTH Aachen, Germany.
nschoenherr@ukaachen.de

Opposite (epi)mutations affecting the imprinted region 11p15 are associated with 
Silver-Russell (SRS) and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS). Apart from other
disturbances more than 35% of patients with SRS show hypomethylation at the
imprinting control region 1 (ICR1) in 11p15. ICR1 is paternally methylated and
regulates the expression of the paternally expressed growth factor IGF2 and the
maternally expressed gene H19. The exact function of the non-coding RNA H19 is
still unknown. However, the finding that this gene is highly conserved in mammals
indicates profound functional relevance. Due to the supposed function of H19 in
the regulation of the imprinted region 11p15 we searched for mutations in the
transcribed sequence and the CTCF binding sites of H19 in 44 patients with SRS.
In two cases different 3 base-pair (bp) deletions in exon 1 could be identified. 
A third patient carried a 39 bp duplication affecting exon 2 and intron 2. These 
three variants were not detected in 100 controls and 42 patients with isolated
growth retardation. One of the patients carrying a mutation also showed
hypomethylation at the ICR1 in 11p15. Splicing studies in HEK cells transfected
with constructs carrying the three different variants revealed a deviation from
the normal H19 splicing pattern in two of these individuals. However, analysis of
lymphocytes of one of these two patients did not verify an altered expression
pattern of H19. Nevertheless, our results indicate a relevant role of H19 in the 
aetiology of SRS: functional effects of these variants on chromatin restructuring
of the ICR1, or altered function of H19 as a posttranslational modifying factor
(microRNA/antisense RNA) are conceivable.

PMID: 19209620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Apr;37(6):2003-13. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp077. Epub 2009 Feb
10.

Evolutionary Conserved Motif Finder (ECMFinder) for genome-wide identification of
clustered YY1- and CTCF-binding sites.

Kang K(1), Chung JH, Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA
70803, USA.

We have developed a new bioinformatics approach called ECMFinder (Evolutionary
Conserved Motif Finder). This program searches for a given DNA motif within the
entire genome of one species and uses the gene association information of a
potential transcription factor-binding site (TFBS) to screen the homologous
regions of a second and third species. If multiple species have this potential
TFBS in homologous positions, this program recognizes the identified TFBS as an
evolutionary conserved motif (ECM). This program outputs a list of ECMs, which
can be uploaded as a Custom Track in the UCSC genome browser and can be
visualized along with other available data. The feasibility of this approach was 
tested by searching the genomes of three mammals (human, mouse and cow) with the 
DNA-binding motifs of YY1 and CTCF. This program successfully identified many
clustered YY1- and CTCF-binding sites that are conserved among these species but 
were previously undetected. In particular, this program identified CTCF-binding
sites that are located close to the Dlk1, Magel2 and Cdkn1c imprinted genes.
Individual ChIP experiments confirmed the in vivo binding of the YY1 and CTCF
proteins to most of these newly discovered binding sites, demonstrating the
feasibility and usefulness of ECMFinder.

PMCID: PMC2665242
PMID: 19208640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Apr 15;18(8):1424-38. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp049. Epub 2009 Jan 
27.

Paternal deletion of Meg1/Grb10 DMR causes maternalization of the Meg1/Grb10
cluster in mouse proximal Chromosome 11 leading to severe pre- and postnatal
growth retardation.

Shiura H(1), Nakamura K, Hikichi T, Hino T, Oda K, Suzuki-Migishima R, Kohda T,
Kaneko-ishino T, Ishino F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epigenetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical and
Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Mice with maternal duplication of proximal Chromosome 11 (MatDp(prox11)), where
Meg1/Grb10 is located, exhibit pre- and postnatal growth retardation. To
elucidate the responsible imprinted gene for the growth abnormality, we examined 
the precise structure and regulatory mechanism of this imprinted region and
generated novel model mice mimicking the pattern of imprinted gene expression
observed in the MatDp(prox11) by deleting differentially methylated region of
Meg1/Grb10 (Meg1-DMR). It was found that Cobl and Ddc, the neighboring genes of
Meg1/Grb10, also comprise the imprinted region. We also found that the
mouse-specific repeat sequence consisting of several CTCF-binding motifs in the
Meg1-DMR functions as a silencer, suggesting that the Meg1/Grb10 imprinted region
adopted a different regulatory mechanism from the H19/Igf2 region. Paternal
deletion of the Meg1-DMR (+/DeltaDMR) caused both upregulation of the maternally 
expressed Meg1/Grb10 Type I in the whole body and Cobl in the yolk sac and loss
of paternally expressed Meg1/Grb10 Type II and Ddc in the neonatal brain and
heart, respectively, demonstrating maternalization of the entire Meg1/Grb10
imprinted region. We confirmed that the +/DeltaDMR mice exhibited the same growth
abnormalities as the MatDp(prox11) mice. Fetal and neonatal growth was very
sensitive to the expression level of Meg1/Grb10 Type I, indicating that the
2-fold increment of the Meg1/Grb10 Type I is one of the major causes of the
growth retardation observed in the MatDp(prox11) and +/DeltaDMR mice. This
suggests that the corresponding human GRB10 Type I plays an important role in the
etiology of Silver-Russell syndrome caused by partial trisomy of 7p11-p13.

PMID: 19174477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Cell Physiol. 2009 May;219(2):265-70. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21691.

CCCTC-binding factor meets poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1.

Caiafa P(1), Zlatanova J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biotechnology and Haematology, II Faculty of Medicine
and Surgery, University La Sapienza, Pasteur Institute-Fondazione Cenci
Bolognetti, Rome, Italy. caiafa@bce.uniroma1.it

CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a ubiquitous Zn-finger-containing protein with
numerous recognized functions, including, but not limited to, gene activation and
repression, enhancer-blocking, X-chromosome inactivation, and gene imprinting. It
is believed that the protein performs such a variety of functions by interacting 
with an array of very diverse proteins. In addition, CTCF undergoes several
post-translational modifications, including poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation. The PARylated
form of CTCF has recently been implicated in two important functions: gene
imprinting and control of ribosomal gene transcription. Here, we summarize and
critically discuss the available data on the interplay between CTCF and
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation in these two processes. We consider the newly described
phenomena in the broader context of PARP's activities, including the crucial role
of protein PARylation in the regulation of the genome methylation pattern.

PMID: 19170077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Apr;29(7):1682-93. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01411-08. Epub 2009 Jan
21.

A conserved insulator that recruits CTCF and cohesin exists between the closely
related but divergently regulated interleukin-3 and granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor genes.

Bowers SR(1), Mirabella F, Calero-Nieto FJ, Valeaux S, Hadjur S, Baxter EW,
Merkenschlager M, Cockerill PN.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Haematology, Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of
Leeds, St. James's University Hospital, Leeds LS9 7TF, United Kingdom.

The human interleukin-3 (IL-3) and granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating-factor (GM-CSF, or CSF2) gene cluster arose by duplication of 
an ancestral gene. Although just 10 kb apart and responsive to the same signals, 
the IL-3 and GM-CSF genes are nevertheless regulated independently by separate,
tissue-specific enhancers. To understand the differential regulation of the IL-3 
and GM-CSF genes we have investigated a cluster of three ubiquitous DNase
I-hypersensitive sites (DHSs) located between the two genes. We found that each
site contains a conserved CTCF consensus sequence, binds CTCF, and recruits the
cohesin subunit Rad21 in vivo. The positioning of these sites relative to the
IL-3 and GM-CSF genes and their respective enhancers is conserved between human
and mouse, suggesting a functional role in the organization of the locus. We
found that these sites effectively block functional interactions between the
GM-CSF enhancer and either the IL-3 or the GM-CSF promoter in reporter gene
assays. These data argue that the regulation of the IL-3 and the GM-CSF promoters
depends on the positions of their enhancers relative to the conserved
CTCF/cohesin-binding sites. We suggest that one important role of these sites is 
to enable the independent regulation of the IL-3 and GM-CSF genes.

PMCID: PMC2655614
PMID: 19158269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2009 Aug;12(7):885-94. doi:
10.1017/S1461145708009887. Epub 2009 Jan 21.

Association between golli-MBP and schizophrenia in the Jewish Ashkenazi
population: are regulatory regions involved?

Baruch K(1), Silberberg G, Aviv A, Shamir E, Bening-Abu-Shach U, Baruch Y,
Darvasi A, Navon R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel
Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

Multiple studies have reported oligodendrocyte and myelin abnormalities, as well 
as dysregulation of their related genes, in brains of schizophrenia patients. One
of these genes is the myelin-basic-protein (MBP) gene, which encodes two families
of proteins: classic-MBPs and golli-MBPs. While the classic-MBPs are
predominantly located in the myelin sheaths of the nervous system, the golli
proteins are more widely expressed and are found in both the immune and the
nervous systems. In the present study we performed a case-control association
analysis of golli-MBP in two separate Jewish Ashkenazi cohorts (cohort I: 120
patients, 236 controls; cohort II: 379 patients, 380 controls). In addition we
performed an expression analysis of golli-MBP mRNA in post-mortem dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex samples of schizophrenia patients, and matched controls. In the
first cohort we observed association between six (out of 26 genotyped) single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and the disease (p<0.05). Of these, three are
from one linkage disequilibrium (LD) block which contains a CTCF binding region. 
Haplotype analysis revealed significant 'risk'/'protective' haplotypes (strongest
p=0.005, each) for schizophrenia. The three SNPs (rs12458282, rs2008323,
rs721286) were then genotyped in the second cohort. The combined results showed
strong effects, both in the single marker and in haplotype analyses (strongest OR
1.77, p=0.0005; OR 1.61, p=0.00001, respectively). Sequencing the CTCF binding
region revealed three SNPs in complete LD with the associated haplotypes, located
in close proximity to the CTCF binding site. Expression analysis found no
significant differences in golli-MBP mRNA levels. These findings suggest that
golli-MBP is a possible susceptibility gene for schizophrenia.

PMID: 19154657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Genome Res. 2009 Apr;19(4):533-44. doi: 10.1101/gr.086496.108. Epub 2009 Jan 13.

Human gamma-satellite DNA maintains open chromatin structure and protects a
transgene from epigenetic silencing.

Kim JH(1), Ebersole T, Kouprina N, Noskov VN, Ohzeki J, Masumoto H, Mravinac B,
Sullivan BA, Pavlicek A, Dovat S, Pack SD, Kwon YW, Flanagan PT, Loukinov D,
Lobanenkov V, Larionov V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

The role of repetitive DNA sequences in pericentromeric regions with respect to
kinetochore/heterochromatin structure and function is poorly understood. Here, we
use a mouse erythroleukemia cell (MEL) system for studying how repetitive DNA
assumes or is assembled into different chromatin structures. We show that human
gamma-satellite DNA arrays allow a transcriptionally permissive chromatin
conformation in an adjacent transgene and efficiently protect it from epigenetic 
silencing. These arrays contain CTCF and Ikaros binding sites. In MEL cells, this
gamma-satellite DNA activity depends on binding of Ikaros proteins involved in
differentiation along the hematopoietic pathway. Given our discovery of
gamma-satellite DNA in pericentromeric regions of most human chromosomes and a
dynamic chromatin state of gamma-satellite arrays in their natural location, we
suggest that gamma-satellite DNA represents a unique region of the functional
centromere with a possible role in preventing heterochromatin spreading beyond
the pericentromeric region.

PMCID: PMC2665773
PMID: 19141594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2009 May;66(10):1647-60. doi: 10.1007/s00018-009-8647-z.

CCCTC-binding factor: to loop or to bridge.

Zlatanova J(1), Caiafa P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY 82071,
USA. jordanka@uwyo.edu

Eukaryotic genomes have complex spatial organization in the nucleus. The factors 
and the mechanisms involved in this organization remain an enigma. Among the many
proteins implicated in such a role, the ubiquitous Zn-finger protein CTCF stands 
out. Here we summarize the evidence placing CTCF in the enviable position of a
master organizer of the genome. CTCF can form loops in cis, and can bridge
sequences located on different chromosomes in trans. The thousands of CTCF
binding sites, identified in recent genome-wide localization studies, and their
distribution along the genome further support a crucial role of CTCF as a
chromatin organizer.

PMID: 19137260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Autism Res. 2008 Jun;1(3):169-78. doi: 10.1002/aur.24.

MECP2 promoter methylation and X chromosome inactivation in autism.

Nagarajan RP(1), Patzel KA, Martin M, Yasui DH, Swanberg SE, Hertz-Picciotto I,
Hansen RL, Van de Water J, Pessah IN, Jiang R, Robinson WP, LaSalle JM.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Microbiology and Immunology and Rowe Program in Human Genetics,
University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Epigenetic mechanisms have been proposed to play a role in the etiology of
autism. This hypothesis is supported by the discovery of increased MECP2 promoter
methylation associated with decreased MeCP2 protein expression in autism male
brain. To further understand the influence of female X chromosome inactivation
(XCI) and neighboring methylation patterns on aberrant MECP2 promoter methylation
in autism, multiple methylation analyses were peformed on brain and blood samples
from individuals with autism. Bisulfite sequencing analyses of a region 0.6 kb
upstream of MECP2 in brain DNA samples revealed an abrupt transition from a
highly methylated region in both sexes to a region unmethylated in males and
subject to XCI in females. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated
that the CCTC-binding factor (CTCF) bound to this transition region in neuronal
cells, consistent with a chromatin boundary at the methylation transition. Male
autism brain DNA samples displayed a slight increase in methylation in this
transition region, suggesting a possible aberrant spreading of methylation into
the MECP2 promoter in autism males across this boundary element. In addition,
autistic female brain DNA samples showed evidence for aberrant MECP2 promoter
methylation as an increase in the number of bisulfite sequenced clones with
undefined XCI status for MECP2 but not androgen receptor (AR). To further
investigate the specificity of MECP2 methylation alterations in autism, blood DNA
samples from females and mothers of males with autism were also examined for XCI 
skewing at AR, but no significant increase in XCI skewing was observed compared
to controls. These results suggest that the aberrant MECP2 methylation in autism 
brain DNA samples is due to locus-specific rather than global X chromosome
methylation changes.

PMCID: PMC2614877
PMID: 19132145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Mar;37(4):1086-94. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn1056. Epub 2009
Jan 7.

An insulator element 3' to the CFTR gene binds CTCF and reveals an active
chromatin hub in primary cells.

Blackledge NP(1), Ott CJ, Gillen AE, Harris A.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Children's Memorial Research Center,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

Regulation of expression of the CFTR gene is poorly understood. Elements within
the basal promoter of the gene do not fully explain CFTR expression patterns,
suggesting that cis-regulatory elements are located elsewhere, either within the 
locus or in adjacent chromatin. We previously mapped DNase I hypersensitive sites
(DHS) in 400 kb spanning the CFTR locus including a cluster of sites close to the
3'-end of the gene. Here we focus on a DHS at +6.8 kb from the CFTR translation
end-point to evaluate its potential role in regulating expression of the gene.
This DHS, which encompasses a consensus CTCF-binding site, was evident in primary
human epididymis cells that express abundant CFTR mRNA. We show by DNase I
footprinting and electophoretic mobility shift assays that the cis-regulatory
element within this DHS binds CTCF in vitro. We further demonstrate that the
element functions as an enhancer blocker in a well-established in vivo assay, and
by using chromatin immunoprecipitation that it recruits CTCF in vivo. Moreover,
we reveal that in primary epididymis cells, the +6.8 kb DHS interacts closely
with the CFTR promoter, suggesting that the CFTR locus exists in a looped
conformation, characteristic of an active chromatin hub.

PMCID: PMC2651798
PMID: 19129223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Immunol. 2009 Jan 15;182(2):999-1010.

Critical role for the transcription regulator CCCTC-binding factor in the control
of Th2 cytokine expression.

Ribeiro de Almeida C(1), Heath H, Krpic S, Dingjan GM, van Hamburg JP, Bergen I, 
van de Nobelen S, Sleutels F, Grosveld F, Galjart N, Hendriks RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Differentiation of naive CD4+ cells into Th2 cells is accompanied by chromatin
remodeling at the Th2 cytokine locus allowing the expression of the IL-4, IL-5,
and IL-13 genes. In this report, we investigated the role in Th2 differentiation 
of the transcription regulator CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF). Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis revealed multiple CTCF binding sites in the Th2
cytokine locus. Conditional deletion of the Ctcf gene in double-positive
thymocytes allowed development of peripheral T cells, but their activation and
proliferation upon anti-CD3/anti-CD28 stimulation in vitro was severely impaired.
Nevertheless, when TCR signaling was circumvented with phorbol ester and
ionomycin, we observed proliferation of CTCF-deficient T cells, enabling the
analysis of Th2 differentiation in vitro. We found that in CTCF-deficient Th2
polarization cultures, transcription of IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 was strongly
reduced. By contrast, CTCF deficiency had a moderate effect on IFN-gamma
production in Th1 cultures and IL-17 production in Th17 cultures was unaffected. 
Consistent with a Th2 cytokine defect, CTCF-deficient mice had very low levels of
IgG1 and IgE in their serum, but IgG2c was close to normal. In CTCF-deficient Th2
cultures, cells were polarized toward the Th2 lineage, as substantiated by
induction of the key transcriptional regulators GATA3 and special AT-rich binding
protein 1 (SATB1) and down-regulation of T-bet. Also, STAT4 expression was low,
indicating that in the absence of CTCF, GATA3 still operated as a negative
regulator of STAT4. Taken together, these findings show that CTCF is essential
for GATA3- and SATB1-dependent regulation of Th2 cytokine gene expression.

PMID: 19124743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Mol Biol. 2009 Mar 6;386(4):929-37. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.12.022. Epub 2008
Dec 14.

Interaction in vivo between the two matrix attachment regions flanking a single
chromatin loop.

Eivazova ER(1), Gavrilov A, Pirozhkova I, Petrov A, Iarovaia OV, Razin SV,
Lipinski M, Vassetzky YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
TN37232, USA.

In interphase nuclei as in metaphase chromosomes, the genome is organized into
topologically closed loop domains. Here, we have mapped the ends of the loop
domain that contains the Ifng (interferon-gamma) gene in primary and cultured
murine T-lymphocytes. To determine whether the ends of the loop are located in
close proximity to each other in the nuclear space, the 3C (chromosome
conformation capture) technique, which detects protein-mediated DNA-DNA
interactions, was utilized. A strong interaction was demonstrated between the two
ends of the loop, which were close enough to become cross-linked in vivo in the
presence of paraformaldehyde. Chromatin immunoprecipitation combined with the 3C 
technique demonstrated that topoisomerase IIalpha and MeCP2, but not
topoisomerase IIbeta, heterochromatin-associated protein HP1 or CTCF, were
involved in this interaction. The present findings have important implications in
terms of mechanisms of illegitimate recombination that can result in chromosomal 
translocations and deletions.

PMID: 19118562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Immunol. 2009 Jan 1;182(1):44-8.

Cutting edge: developmental stage-specific recruitment of cohesin to CTCF sites
throughout immunoglobulin loci during B lymphocyte development.

Degner SC(1), Wong TP, Jankevicius G, Feeney AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbial Science, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Contraction of the large Igh and Igkappa loci brings all V genes, spanning >2.5
Mb in each locus, in proximity to DJ(H) or J(kappa) genes. CCCTC-binding factor
(CTCF) is a transcription factor that regulates gene expression by long-range
chromosomal looping. We therefore hypothesized that CTCF may be crucial for the
contraction of the Ig loci, but no CTCF sites have been described in any V loci. 
Using ChIP-chip, we demonstrated many CTCF sites in the V(H) and V(kappa)
regions. However, CTCF enrichment in the Igh locus, but not the Igkappa locus,
was largely unchanged throughout differentiation, suggesting that CTCF binding
alone cannot be responsible for stage-specific looping. Because cohesin can
colocalize with CTCF, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation for the cohesin 
subunit Rad21 and found lineage and stage-specific Rad21 recruitment to CTCF in
all Ig loci. The differential binding of cohesin to CTCF sites may promote
multiple loop formation and thus effective V(D)J recombination.

PMCID: PMC2625297
PMID: 19109133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Feb;37(3):793-803. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn985. Epub 2008 Dec
15.

The Igf2/H19 imprinting control region exhibits sequence-specific and
cell-type-dependent DNA methylation-mediated repression.

Chen Y(1), Dhupelia A, Schoenherr CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

Methylation of CpGs is generally thought to repress transcription without
significant influence from the sequence surrounding the methylated dinucleotides.
Using the mouse Igf2/H19 imprinting control region (ICR), Igf2r differentially
methylated region 2 (DMR2) and bacterial sequences, we addressed how
methylation-dependent repression (MDR) from a distance varies with CpG number,
density and surrounding sequence. In stably transfected F9 cells, the methylated 
ICR repressed expression from a CpG-free reporter plasmid more than 1000-fold
compared with its unmethylated control. A segment of pBluescript, with a CpG
number equal to the ICR's but with a higher density, repressed expression only
70-fold when methylated. A bacteriophage lambda fragment and the Igf2r DMR2
showed minimal MDR activity, despite having CpG numbers and densities similar to 
or greater than the ICR. By rearranging or deleting CpGs, we identified CpGs
associated with three CTCF sites in the ICR that are necessary and sufficient for
sequence-specific MDR. In contrast to F9 cells, the methylated ICR and pBS
fragments exhibited only 3-fold reporter repression in Hela cells and none in
Cos7. Our results show that the strength of MDR from a distance can vary a
1000-fold between different cell types and depends on the sequence surrounding
the methylated CpGs, but does not necessarily increase with CpG number or
density.

PMCID: PMC2647309
PMID: 19074953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Dec 23;105(51):20398-403. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0808506106. Epub 2008 Dec 12.

CTCF-dependent enhancer-blocking by alternative chromatin loop formation.

Hou C(1), Zhao H, Tanimoto K, Dean A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The mechanism underlying enhancer-blocking by insulators is unclear. We explored 
the activity of human beta-globin HS5, the orthologue of the CTCF-dependent
chicken HS4 insulator. An extra copy of HS5 placed between the beta-globin locus 
control region (LCR) and downstream genes on a transgene fulfills the classic
predictions for an enhancer-blocker. Ectopic HS5 does not perturb the LCR but
blocks gene activation by interfering with RNA pol II, activator and coactivator 
recruitment, and epigenetic modification at the downstream beta-globin gene.
Underlying these effects, ectopic HS5 disrupts chromatin loop formation between
beta-globin and the LCR, and instead forms a new loop with endogenous HS5 that
topologically isolates the LCR. Both enhancer-blocking and insulator-loop
formation depend on an intact CTCF site in ectopic HS5 and are sensitive to
knock-down of the CTCF protein by siRNA. Thus, intrinsic looping activity of CTCF
sites can nullify LCR function.

PMCID: PMC2629272
PMID: 19074263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Nat Genet. 2009 Jan;41(1):47-55. doi: 10.1038/ng.269. Epub 2008 Dec 7.

Loci influencing lipid levels and coronary heart disease risk in 16 European
population cohorts.

Aulchenko YS(1), Ripatti S, Lindqvist I, Boomsma D, Heid IM, Pramstaller PP,
Penninx BW, Janssens AC, Wilson JF, Spector T, Martin NG, Pedersen NL, Kyvik KO, 
Kaprio J, Hofman A, Freimer NB, Jarvelin MR, Gyllensten U, Campbell H, Rudan I,
Johansson A, Marroni F, Hayward C, Vitart V, Jonasson I, Pattaro C, Wright A,
Hastie N, Pichler I, Hicks AA, Falchi M, Willemsen G, Hottenga JJ, de Geus EJ,
Montgomery GW, Whitfield J, Magnusson P, Saharinen J, Perola M, Silander K,
Isaacs A, Sijbrands EJ, Uitterlinden AG, Witteman JC, Oostra BA, Elliott P,
Ruokonen A, Sabatti C, Gieger C, Meitinger T, Kronenberg F, Döring A, Wichmann
HE, Smit JH, McCarthy MI, van Duijn CM, Peltonen L; ENGAGE Consortium.

Collaborators: Aulchenko YS, Ripatti S, Lindqvist I, Boomsma D, Heid IM,
Pramstaller PP, Penninx BW, Janssens AC, Wilson JF, Spector T, Martin NG,
Pedersen NL, Kyvik KO, Kaprio J, Hofman A, Freimer NB, Jarvelin MR, Gyllensten U,
Campbell H, Rudan I, Johansson A, Marroni F, Hayward C, Vitart V, Jonasson I,
Pattaro C, Wright A, Hastie N, Pichler I, Hicks AA, Falchi M, Willemsen G,
Hottenga JJ, de Geus EJ, Montgomery GW, Whitfield J, Magnusson P, Saharinen J,
Perola M, Silander K, Isaacs A, Sijbrands EJ, Uitterlinden AG, Witteman JC,
Oostra BA, Elliott P, Ruokonen A, Sabatti C, Gieger C, Meitinger T, Kronenberg F,
Döring A, Wichmann HE, Smit JH, McCarthy MI, van Duijn CM, Peltonen L.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2009 Jan;41(1):5-6.

Recent genome-wide association (GWA) studies of lipids have been conducted in
samples ascertained for other phenotypes, particularly diabetes. Here we report
the first GWA analysis of loci affecting total cholesterol (TC), low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol and
triglycerides sampled randomly from 16 population-based cohorts and genotyped
using mainly the Illumina HumanHap300-Duo platform. Our study included a total of
17,797-22,562 persons, aged 18-104 years and from geographic regions spanning
from the Nordic countries to Southern Europe. We established 22 loci associated
with serum lipid levels at a genome-wide significance level (P < 5 x 10(-8)),
including 16 loci that were identified by previous GWA studies. The six newly
identified loci in our cohort samples are ABCG5 (TC, P = 1.5 x 10(-11); LDL, P = 
2.6 x 10(-10)), TMEM57 (TC, P = 5.4 x 10(-10)), CTCF-PRMT8 region (HDL, P = 8.3 x
10(-16)), DNAH11 (LDL, P = 6.1 x 10(-9)), FADS3-FADS2 (TC, P = 1.5 x 10(-10);
LDL, P = 4.4 x 10(-13)) and MADD-FOLH1 region (HDL, P = 6 x 10(-11)). For three
loci, effect sizes differed significantly by sex. Genetic risk scores based on
lipid loci explain up to 4.8% of variation in lipids and were also associated
with increased intima media thickness (P = 0.001) and coronary heart disease
incidence (P = 0.04). The genetic risk score improves the screening of high-risk 
groups of dyslipidemia over classical risk factors.

PMCID: PMC2687074
PMID: 19060911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Genome Res. 2009 Jan;19(1):24-32. doi: 10.1101/gr.082800.108. Epub 2008 Dec 3.

Global analysis of the insulator binding protein CTCF in chromatin barrier
regions reveals demarcation of active and repressive domains.

Cuddapah S(1), Jothi R, Schones DE, Roh TY, Cui K, Zhao K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Insulators are DNA elements that prevent inappropriate interactions between the
neighboring regions of the genome. They can be functionally classified as either 
enhancer blockers or domain barriers. CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor) is the only
known major insulator-binding protein in the vertebrates and has been shown to
bind many enhancer-blocking elements. However, it is not clear whether it plays a
role in chromatin domain barriers between active and repressive domains. Here, we
used ChIP-seq to map the genome-wide binding sites of CTCF in three cell types
and identified significant binding of CTCF to the boundaries of repressive
chromatin domains marked by H3K27me3. Although we find an extensive overlapping
of CTCF-binding sites across the three cell types, its association with the
domain boundaries is cell-type-specific. We further show that the nucleosomes
flanking CTCF-binding sites are well positioned. Interestingly, we found a
complementary pattern between the repressive H3K27me3 and the active H2AK5ac
regions, which are separated by CTCF. Our data indicate that CTCF may play
important roles in the barrier activity of insulators, and this study provides a 
resource for further investigation of the CTCF function in organizing chromatin
in the human genome.

PMCID: PMC2612964
PMID: 19056695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Feb;29(3):714-25. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00825-08. Epub 2008 Nov
24.

The CTCF insulator protein is posttranslationally modified by SUMO.

MacPherson MJ(1), Beatty LG, Zhou W, Du M, Sadowski PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, 1 King's College Circle, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

The CTCF protein is a highly conserved zinc finger protein that is implicated in 
many aspects of gene regulation and nuclear organization. Its functions include
the ability to act as a repressor of genes, including the c-myc oncogene. In this
paper, we show that the CTCF protein can be posttranslationally modified by the
small ubiquitin-like protein SUMO. CTCF is SUMOylated both in vivo and in vitro, 
and we identify two major sites of SUMOylation in the protein. The
posttranslational modification of CTCF by the SUMO proteins does not affect its
ability to bind to DNA in vitro. SUMOylation of CTCF contributes to the
repressive function of CTCF on the c-myc P2 promoter. We also found that CTCF and
the repressive Polycomb protein, Pc2, are colocalized to nuclear Polycomb bodies.
The Pc2 protein may act as a SUMO E3 ligase for CTCF, strongly enhancing its
modification by SUMO 2 and 3. These studies expand the repertoire of
posttranslational modifications of CTCF and suggest roles for such modifications 
in its regulation of epigenetic states.

PMCID: PMC2630690
PMID: 19029252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. PLoS Genet. 2008 Nov;4(11):e1000257. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000257. Epub 2008
Nov 14.

CTCF cis-regulates trinucleotide repeat instability in an epigenetic manner: a
novel basis for mutational hot spot determination.

Libby RT(1), Hagerman KA, Pineda VV, Lau R, Cho DH, Baccam SL, Axford MM, Cleary 
JD, Moore JM, Sopher BL, Tapscott SJ, Filippova GN, Pearson CE, La Spada AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington Medical Center,
Seattle, WA, USA.

At least 25 inherited disorders in humans result from microsatellite repeat
expansion. Dramatic variation in repeat instability occurs at different disease
loci and between different tissues; however, cis-elements and trans-factors
regulating the instability process remain undefined. Genomic fragments from the
human spinocerebellar ataxia type 7 (SCA7) locus, containing a highly unstable
CAG tract, were previously introduced into mice to localize cis-acting
"instability elements," and revealed that genomic context is required for repeat 
instability. The critical instability-inducing region contained binding sites for
CTCF -- a regulatory factor implicated in genomic imprinting, chromatin
remodeling, and DNA conformation change. To evaluate the role of CTCF in repeat
instability, we derived transgenic mice carrying SCA7 genomic fragments with CTCF
binding-site mutations. We found that CTCF binding-site mutation promotes triplet
repeat instability both in the germ line and in somatic tissues, and that CpG
methylation of CTCF binding sites can further destabilize triplet repeat
expansions. As CTCF binding sites are associated with a number of highly unstable
repeat loci, our findings suggest a novel basis for demarcation and regulation of
mutational hot spots and implicate CTCF in the modulation of genetic repeat
instability.

PMCID: PMC2573955
PMID: 19008940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Dec;36(22):7019-28. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn781. Epub 2008
Nov 5.

Orientation-dependent interaction between Drosophila insulators is a property of 
this class of regulatory elements.

Kyrchanova O(1), Chetverina D, Maksimenko O, Kullyev A, Georgiev P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of the Control of Genetic Processes, Institute of Gene Biology,
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia.

Insulators are defined as a class of regulatory elements that delimit independent
transcriptional domains within eukaryotic genomes. According to previous data, an
interaction (pairing) between some Drosophila insulators can support distant
activation of a promoter by an enhancer. Here, we have demonstrated that pairs of
well-studied insulators such as scs-scs, scs'-scs', 1A2-1A2 and Wari-Wari support
distant activation of the white promoter by the yeast GAL4 activator in an
orientation-dependent manner. The same is true for the efficiency of the enhancer
that stimulates white expression in the eyes. In all insulator pairs tested,
stimulation of the white gene was stronger when insulators were inserted between 
the eye enhancer or GAL4 and the white promoter in opposite orientations relative
to each other. As shown previously, Zw5, Su(Hw) and dCTCF proteins are required
for the functioning of different insulators that do not interact with each other.
Here, strong functional interactions have been revealed between DNA fragments
containing binding sites for either Zw5 or Su(Hw) or dCTCF protein but not
between heterologous binding sites [Zw5-Su(Hw), dCTCF-Su(Hw), or dCTCF-Zw5].
These results suggest that insulator proteins can support selective interactions 
between distant regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC2602758
PMID: 18987002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Cancer Res. 2008 Nov 1;68(21):9041-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2632.

CCCTC-binding factor confines the distal action of estrogen receptor.

Chan CS(1), Song JS.

Author information: 
(1)The Simons Center for Systems Biology, Institute for Advanced Study,
Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA.

Distal enhancers have recently emerged as a common mode of gene regulation for
several transcription factors, including estrogen and androgen receptors, the two
key regulators of breast and prostate cancer major subtypes. Despite the rapid
success in genome-wide annotation of estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) binding
sites in cell lines, the precise mechanism governing the gene-to-enhancer
association is still unknown and no quantitative model that can predict the
estrogen responsiveness of genes has been hitherto proposed. This article
presents an integrative genomics approach to construct a predictive model that
can explain more than 70% of estrogen-induced expression profiles. The proposed
method combines a recent map of the insulator protein CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)
with previous ER location studies and expression profiling in the presence of the
translation inhibitor cycloheximide, providing evidence that CTCF partitions the 
human genome into distinct ER-regulatory blocks. It is shown that
estrogen-responsive genes with a decreased transcription level (down-regulated
genes) have a markedly different relative distribution of ER binding sites
compared with those with an increased transcription level (up-regulated genes).
Finally, Bayesian belief networks are constructed to quantify the effects of
ER-binding distance from genes as well as the insulating effects of CTCF on the
estrogen responsiveness of genes. This work thus represents a stride toward
understanding and predicting the distal activities of steroid hormone nuclear
receptors.

PMID: 18974150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. EMBO J. 2008 Nov 5;27(21):2839-50. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.214. Epub 2008 Oct 16.

CTCF regulates cell cycle progression of alphabeta T cells in the thymus.

Heath H(1), Ribeiro de Almeida C, Sleutels F, Dingjan G, van de Nobelen S,
Jonkers I, Ling KW, Gribnau J, Renkawitz R, Grosveld F, Hendriks RW, Galjart N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

The 11-zinc finger protein CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a highly conserved
protein, involved in imprinting, long-range chromatin interactions and
transcription. To investigate its function in vivo, we generated mice with a
conditional Ctcf knockout allele. Consistent with a previous report, we find that
ubiquitous ablation of the Ctcf gene results in early embryonic lethality.
Tissue-specific inactivation of CTCF in thymocytes specifically hampers the
differentiation of alphabeta T cells and causes accumulation of late
double-negative and immature single-positive cells in the thymus of mice. These
cells are normally large and actively cycling, and contain elevated amounts of
CTCF. In Ctcf knockout animals, however, these cells are small and blocked in the
cell cycle due to increased expression of the cyclin-CDK inhibitors p21 and p27. 
Taken together, our results show that CTCF is required in a dose-dependent manner
and is involved in cell cycle progression of alphabeta T cells in the thymus. We 
propose that CTCF positively regulates cell growth in rapidly dividing thymocytes
so that appropriate number of cells are generated before positive and negative
selection in the thymus.

PMCID: PMC2580790
PMID: 18923423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Dev Cell. 2008 Oct;15(4):489-90. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2008.09.013.

Modulation of CTCF insulator function by transcription of a noncoding RNA.

Ong CT(1), Corces VG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, 1510 Clifton Rd NE, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA.

CTCF plays diverse roles in the regulation of eukaryotic genes. A new study by
Lefevre et al. in a recent issue of Molecular Cell reveals a novel mechanism in
which noncoding RNA transcription and nucleosome repositioning evicts CTCF from a
regulatory element to facilitate induction of a nearby gene.

PMCID: PMC3040117
PMID: 18854131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Mol Cell. 2008 Oct 10;32(1):129-39. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.07.023.

The LPS-induced transcriptional upregulation of the chicken lysozyme locus
involves CTCF eviction and noncoding RNA transcription.

Lefevre P(1), Witham J, Lacroix CE, Cockerill PN, Bonifer C.

Author information: 
(1)Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Leeds, Wellcome Trust
Brenner Building, St. James's University Hospital, Leeds LS9 7TF, UK.
medple@leeds.ac.uk

Transcription of the lysozyme gene is rapidly induced by proinflammatory stimuli 
such as treatment with bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Here we show that this
induction involves both the relief of repression mediated by the
enhancer-blocking protein CTCF that binds to a negative regulatory element at
-2.4 kb, and the activation of two flanking enhancer elements. The downstream
enhancer has promoter activity, and LPS stimulation initiates the transient
synthesis of a noncoding RNA (LINoCR) transcribed through the -2.4 kb element.
Expression of LINoCR is correlated with IKKalpha recruitment, histone H3
phosphoacetylation in the transcribed region, the repositioning of a nucleosome
over the CTCF binding site, and, eventually, CTCF eviction. Each of these events 
requires transcription elongation. Our data reveal a transcription-dependent
mechanism of chromatin remodeling that switches a cis-regulatory region from a
repressive to an active conformation.

PMCID: PMC2581490
PMID: 18851839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Genome Res. 2008 Nov;18(11):1806-13. doi: 10.1101/gr.067587.108. Epub 2008 Oct
10.

Overlapping euchromatin/heterochromatin- associated marks are enriched in
imprinted gene regions and predict allele-specific modification.

Wen B(1), Wu H, Bjornsson H, Green RD, Irizarry R, Feinberg AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Center for Epigenetics, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Most genome-level analysis treats the two parental alleles equivalently, yet
diploid genomes contain two parental genomes that are often epigenetically
distinct. While single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) can be used to distinguish
these genomes, it would be useful to develop a generalized strategy for
identifying candidate genes or regions showing allele-specific differences,
independent of SNPs. We have explored this problem by looking for overlapping
marks in the genome related to both euchromatin (histone H3 dimethyl lysine-4
[H3K4Me2]) and heterochromatin (DNA methylation [DNAm]). "Double hits" were
defined by the intersection of H3K4Me2 and DNAm. For the top 5% of marks, defined
by a sliding window, imprinted gene regions were enriched for double hits
5.4-fold. When the location information of CTCF binding sites were integrated,
the "triple hits" were enriched 76-fold for known imprinted genes in the regions 
studied. The double hits in imprinted genes were found to occur usually at the
site of alternative or antisense transcripts. In addition, four of four imprinted
genes tested showing double hits also showed allele-specific methylation. We
suggest that overlapping euchromatin/heterochromatin marks are common and are
enriched for epigenetically distinct parental chromosome regions. Furthermore, we
developed a novel approach to identifying allele-specific marks that is SNP
independent, by fractionating using H3K4Me2 antibodies followed by DNA
methylation analysis.

PMCID: PMC2577870
PMID: 18849526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. PLoS Genet. 2008 Aug 29;4(8):e1000169. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000169.

The evolution of epigenetic regulators CTCF and BORIS/CTCFL in amniotes.

Hore TA(1), Deakin JE, Marshall Graves JA.

Author information: 
(1)ARC Centre for Kangaroo Genomics, Research School of Biological Sciences, The 
Australian National University, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory,
Australia. timothy.hore@anu.edu.au

CTCF is an essential, ubiquitously expressed DNA-binding protein responsible for 
insulator function, nuclear architecture, and transcriptional control within
vertebrates. The gene CTCF was proposed to have duplicated in early mammals,
giving rise to a paralogue called "brother of regulator of imprinted sites"
(BORIS or CTCFL) with DNA binding capabilities similar to CTCF, but
testis-specific expression in humans and mice. CTCF and BORIS have opposite
regulatory effects on human cancer-testis genes, the anti-apoptotic BAG1 gene,
the insulin-like growth factor 2/H19 imprint control region (IGF2/H19 ICR), and
show mutually exclusive expression in humans and mice, suggesting that they are
antagonistic epigenetic regulators. We discovered orthologues of BORIS in at
least two reptilian species and found traces of its sequence in the chicken
genome, implying that the duplication giving rise to BORIS occurred much earlier 
than previously thought. We analysed the expression of CTCF and BORIS in a range 
of amniotes by conventional and quantitative PCR. BORIS, as well as CTCF, was
found widely expressed in monotremes (platypus) and reptiles (bearded dragon),
suggesting redundancy or cooperation between these genes in a common amniote
ancestor. However, we discovered that BORIS expression was gonad-specific in
marsupials (tammar wallaby) and eutherians (cattle), implying that a functional
change occurred in BORIS during the early evolution of therian mammals. Since
therians show imprinting of IGF2 but other vertebrate taxa do not, we speculate
that CTCF and BORIS evolved specialised functions along with the evolution of
imprinting at this and other loci, coinciding with the restriction of BORIS
expression to the germline and potential antagonism with CTCF.

PMCID: PMC2515639
PMID: 18769711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Nov;1783(11):2161-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.07.011. Epub 2008 Jul 28.

Long range chromatin interactions involved in gene regulation.

Bartkuhn M(1), Renkawitz R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Heinrich-Buff-Ring
58-62, 35392 Giessen, Germany.

Long-distance chromatin interaction has been proposed and demonstrated for
enhancer elements separated from the gene by hundreds or thousands of base pairs.
This paved the way for the detection of additional enhancer properties, such as
the regulation of interaction, and the contacting of genes in trans on other
chromosomes. The outspread arrangement of regulatory elements and transcription
units requires insulators to prevent the functional interference of enhancer
elements with inappropriate promoters. Apparently, insulators mediate
differential chromatin folding to allow or to prevent enhancers from contacting
specific promoters. The factor CTCF is often involved in bridging separated
chromatin regions. In addition to interchromosomal contacts, intrachromosomal
interactions have been demonstrated for genes with a similar regulation, such as 
active genes, estrogen induced genes and imprinted genes. With more sophisticated
and sensitive methods combined with deep sequencing and array technology, a huge 
number of long range interactions can expected to be characterized in the near
future.

PMID: 18706938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Cancer Res. 2008 Aug 15;68(16):6797-802. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1714.

Aging and cancer-related loss of insulin-like growth factor 2 imprinting in the
mouse and human prostate.

Fu VX(1), Dobosy JR, Desotelle JA, Almassi N, Ewald JA, Srinivasan R, Berres M,
Svaren J, Weindruch R, Jarrard DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public
Health, USA.

Loss of imprinting (LOI) is an epigenetic alteration involving loss of parental
origin-specific expression at normally imprinted genes. A LOI for Igf2, a
paracrine growth factor, is important in cancer progression. Epigenetic
modifications may be altered by environmental factors. However, is not known
whether changes in imprinting occur with aging in prostate and other tissues
susceptible to cancer development. We found a LOI for Igf2 occurs specifically in
the mouse prostate associated with increased Igf2 expression during aging. In
older animals, expression of the chromatin insulator protein CTCF and its binding
to the Igf2-H19 imprint control region was reduced. Forced down-regulation of
CTCF leads to Igf2 LOI. We further show that Igf2 LOI occurs with aging in
histologically normal human prostate tissues and that this epigenetic alteration 
was more extensive in men with associated cancer. This finding may contribute to 
a postulated field of cancer susceptibility that occurs with aging. Moreover,
Igf2 LOI may serve as a marker for the presence of prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC4237281
PMID: 18701505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Sep;36(16):5221-31. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn488. Epub 2008
Aug 6.

Genome-wide identification of in vivo protein-DNA binding sites from ChIP-Seq
data.

Jothi R(1), Cuddapah S, Barski A, Cui K, Zhao K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20894, USA.

ChIP-Seq, which combines chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with ultra
high-throughput massively parallel sequencing, is increasingly being used for
mapping protein-DNA interactions in-vivo on a genome scale. Typically, short
sequence reads from ChIP-Seq are mapped to a reference genome for further
analysis. Although genomic regions enriched with mapped reads could be inferred
as approximate binding regions, short read lengths (approximately 25-50 nt) pose 
challenges for determining the exact binding sites within these regions. Here, we
present SISSRs (Site Identification from Short Sequence Reads), a novel algorithm
for precise identification of binding sites from short reads generated from
ChIP-Seq experiments. The sensitivity and specificity of SISSRs are demonstrated 
by applying it on ChIP-Seq data for three widely studied and well-characterized
human transcription factors: CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor), NRSF
(neuron-restrictive silencer factor) and STAT1 (signal transducer and activator
of transcription protein 1). We identified 26 814, 5813 and 73 956 binding sites 
for CTCF, NRSF and STAT1 proteins, respectively, which is 32, 299 and 78% more
than that inferred previously for the respective proteins. Motif analysis
revealed that an overwhelming majority of the identified binding sites contained 
the previously established consensus binding sequence for the respective
proteins, thus attesting for SISSRs' accuracy. SISSRs' sensitivity and precision 
facilitated further analyses of ChIP-Seq data revealing interesting insights,
which we believe will serve as guidance for designing ChIP-Seq experiments to map
in vivo protein-DNA interactions. We also show that tag densities at the binding 
sites are a good indicator of protein-DNA binding affinity, which could be used
to distinguish and characterize strong and weak binding sites. Using tag density 
as an indicator of DNA-binding affinity, we have identified core residues within 
the NRSF and CTCF binding sites that are critical for a stronger DNA binding.

PMCID: PMC2532738
PMID: 18684996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Genome Res. 2008 Nov;18(11):1752-62. doi: 10.1101/gr.080663.108. Epub 2008 Aug 5.

Evolution of the mammalian transcription factor binding repertoire via
transposable elements.

Bourque G(1), Leong B, Vega VB, Chen X, Lee YL, Srinivasan KG, Chew JL, Ruan Y,
Wei CL, Ng HH, Liu ET.

Author information: 
(1)Computational and Mathematical Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore,
Singapore 138672, Singapore. bourque@gis.a-star.edu.sg

Identification of lineage-specific innovations in genomic control elements is
critical for understanding transcriptional regulatory networks and phenotypic
heterogeneity. We analyzed, from an evolutionary perspective, the binding regions
of seven mammalian transcription factors (ESR1, TP53, MYC, RELA, POU5F1, SOX2,
and CTCF) identified on a genome-wide scale by different chromatin
immunoprecipitation approaches and found that only a minority of sites appear to 
be conserved at the sequence level. Instead, we uncovered a pervasive association
with genomic repeats by showing that a large fraction of the bona fide binding
sites for five of the seven transcription factors (ESR1, TP53, POU5F1, SOX2, and 
CTCF) are embedded in distinctive families of transposable elements. Using the
age of the repeats, we established that these repeat-associated binding sites
(RABS) have been associated with significant regulatory expansions throughout the
mammalian phylogeny. We validated the functional significance of these RABS by
showing that they are over-represented in proximity of regulated genes and that
the binding motifs within these repeats have undergone evolutionary selection.
Our results demonstrate that transcriptional regulatory networks are highly
dynamic in eukaryotic genomes and that transposable elements play an important
role in expanding the repertoire of binding sites.

PMCID: PMC2577865
PMID: 18682548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Biol Chem. 2008 Oct 10;283(41):27677-87. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803657200. Epub 2008
Aug 5.

Insulation of the ubiquitous Rxrb promoter from the cartilage-specific adjacent
gene, Col11a2.

Murai J(1), Ikegami D, Okamoto M, Yoshikawa H, Tsumaki N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bone and Cartilage Biology, Osaka University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The retinoid X receptor beta gene (Rxrb) is located just upstream of the
alpha2(XI) collagen chain gene (Col11a2) in a head-to-tail manner. However, the
domain structures of these genes are unknown. Col11a2 is specifically expressed
in cartilage. In the present study, we found Rxrb expression in various tissues
with low expression in the cartilage. Col11a2 1st intron enhancer directed
cartilage specific expression when linked to the heterologous promoter in
transgenic mice. These results suggest the presence of enhancer-blocking elements
that insulate Rxrb promoter from the Col11a2 enhancer. So far, most of insulators
examined in vertebrates contain a binding site for CTCF. We found two possible
CTCF-binding sites: one (11P) in the intergenic region between Rxrb and Col11a2
by electrophoretic mobility shift assays, and the other in the 4th intron of RXRB
by data base search. To examine the function of these elements, we prepared
bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) transgene constructs containing a 142-kb
genomic DNA insert with RXRB and COL11A2 sequences in the middle. Mutation of 11P
significantly decreased the RXRB promoter activity in muscular cells and
significantly increased expression levels of RXRB in chondrosarcoma cells. In
transgenic mouse assays, the wild-type BAC transgene partly recapitulated
endogenous Rxrb expression patterns. A 507-bp deletion mutation including 11P
enhanced the cartilage-specific activity of the RXRB promoter in BAC transgenic
mice. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that CTCF was associated with
RX4, but not with 11P. Our results showed that the intergenic sequence including 
11P insulates Rxrb promoter from Col11a2 enhancer, possibly associating with
unknown factors that recognize a motif similar to CTCF.

PMID: 18682388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Oct;28(20):6473-82. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00204-08. Epub 2008 Jul 
28.

CTCF regulates allelic expression of Igf2 by orchestrating a promoter-polycomb
repressive complex 2 intrachromosomal loop.

Li T(1), Hu JF, Qiu X, Ling J, Chen H, Wang S, Hou A, Vu TH, Hoffman AR.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Service, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, California 94304,
USA.

CTCF is a zinc finger DNA-binding protein that regulates the epigenetic states of
numerous target genes. Using allelic regulation of mouse insulin-like growth
factor II (Igf2) as a model, we demonstrate that CTCF binds to the unmethylated
maternal allele of the imprinting control region (ICR) in the Igf2/H19 imprinting
domain and forms a long-range intrachromosomal loop to interact with the three
clustered Igf2 promoters. Polycomb repressive complex 2 is recruited through the 
interaction of CTCF with Suz12, leading to allele-specific methylation at lysine 
27 of histone H3 (H3-K27) and to suppression of the maternal Igf2 promoters.
Targeted mutation or deletion of the maternal ICR abolishes this chromatin loop, 
decreases allelic H3-K27 methylation, and causes loss of Igf2 imprinting. RNA
interference knockdown of Suz12 also leads to reactivation of the maternal Igf2
allele and biallelic Igf2 expression. CTCF and Suz12 are coprecipitated from
nuclear extracts with antibodies specific for either protein, and they interact
with each other in a two-hybrid system. These findings offer insight into general
epigenetic mechanisms by which CTCF governs gene expression by orchestrating
chromatin loop structures and by serving as a DNA-binding protein scaffold to
recruit and bind polycomb repressive complexes.

PMCID: PMC2577414
PMID: 18662993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. PLoS Genet. 2008 Jul 25;4(7):e1000138. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000138.

The insulator binding protein CTCF positions 20 nucleosomes around its binding
sites across the human genome.

Fu Y(1), Sinha M, Peterson CL, Weng Z.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Program, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Chromatin structure plays an important role in modulating the accessibility of
genomic DNA to regulatory proteins in eukaryotic cells. We performed an
integrative analysis on dozens of recent datasets generated by deep-sequencing
and high-density tiling arrays, and we discovered an array of well-positioned
nucleosomes flanking sites occupied by the insulator binding protein CTCF across 
the human genome. These nucleosomes are highly enriched for the histone variant
H2A.Z and 11 histone modifications. The distances between the center positions of
the neighboring nucleosomes are largely invariant, and we estimate them to be 185
bp on average. Surprisingly, subsets of nucleosomes that are enriched in
different histone modifications vary greatly in the lengths of DNA protected from
micrococcal nuclease cleavage (106-164 bp). The nucleosomes enriched in those
histone modifications previously implicated to be correlated with active
transcription tend to contain less protected DNA, indicating that these
modifications are correlated with greater DNA accessibility. Another striking
result obtained from our analysis is that nucleosomes flanking CTCF sites are
much better positioned than those downstream of transcription start sites, the
only genomic feature previously known to position nucleosomes genome-wide. This
nucleosome-positioning phenomenon is not observed for other transcriptional
factors for which we had genome-wide binding data. We suggest that binding of
CTCF provides an anchor point for positioning nucleosomes, and chromatin
remodeling is an important component of CTCF function.

PMCID: PMC2453330
PMID: 18654629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Cancer Res. 2008 Aug 1;68(15):6453-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0636. Epub
2008 Jul 22.

Common MMP-7 polymorphisms and breast cancer susceptibility: a multistage study
of association and functionality.

Beeghly-Fadiel A(1), Long JR, Gao YT, Li C, Qu S, Cai Q, Zheng Y, Ruan ZX, Levy
SE, Deming SL, Snoddy JR, Shu XO, Lu W, Zheng W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt Epidemiology Center, Vanderbilt-Ingram
Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee
37203-1738, USA.

Matrix metalloproteinase-7 (MMP-7) is a small secreted proteolytic enzyme with
broad substrate specificity against ECM and non-ECM components. Known to be vital
for tumor invasion and metastasis, accumulating evidence also implicates MMP-7 in
cancer development. Using data from the Shanghai Breast Cancer Study, we
conducted a two-stage study to evaluate the association of MMP-7 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with breast cancer risk. Additionally, associated
SNPs were characterized by laboratory assays. In stage 1, 11 SNPs were genotyped 
among 1,079 incident cases and 1,082 community controls using an Affymetrix
Genotyping System. Promising SNPs were selected for stage 2 evaluation and
genotyped by TaqMan allelic discrimination assays in an independent set of 1,911 
cases and 1,811 controls. Three SNPs were selected for stage 2 validation
(rs880197, rs10895304, and rs12184413); one had highly consistent results between
the two stages of the study. In combined analysis, homozygosity for the variant T
allele for rs12184413 was associated with an odds ratio (OR) of 0.7 [95%
confidence interval (95% CI), 0.6-0.9] compared with the common C allele. This
effect was slightly more pronounced in postmenopausal women (OR, 0.6; 95% CI,
0.4-0.8) than in premenopausal women (OR, 0.8; 95% CI, 0.6-1.1). This SNP is
located 3' of the MMP-7 gene, in an area enriched with CTCF binding sites. In
silico analysis suggested a regulatory role for this region, and our in vitro
assays showed an allelic difference in nuclear protein binding capacity. Results 
from our study suggest that common MMP-7 genetic polymorphisms may contribute to 
breast cancer susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC2718434
PMID: 18648013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2008 Sep;295(3):F642-53. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00384.2007. Epub 2008 Jul 16.

Dysregulated human renin expression in transgenic mice carrying truncated genomic
constructs: evidence supporting the presence of insulators at the renin locus.

Zhou X(1), Weatherford ET, Liu X, Born E, Keen HL, Sigmund CD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Graduate Program, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College 
of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

We previously generated transgenic mice carrying a large P1 artificial chromosome
(PAC160) encompassing a 160-kb segment containing the human renin gene, two
upstream genes, and one downstream gene. We also previously generated mutant
PAC160 constructs lacking the distal enhancer and concluded it is required to
maintain baseline expression of human renin, but is not required for
tissue-specific, cell-specific, and regulated expression of renin in vivo. We now
report two additional transgenic lines carrying random truncations of PAC160
upstream of the renin gene. Southern and PCR mapping studies indicate that the
truncation break points in the two lines are located approximately 10.4 and 2.5
kb upstream of the renin gene causing a deletion of all DNA upstream of the
break. We tested the hypothesis that large-scale deletion of DNA upstream of the 
human renin gene including the enhancer would cause dysregulation of human renin 
expression. Phenotypically, these truncations cause a severe dysregulation of
human renin expression, but remarkably, a preservation of the normal
tissue-specific expression of the human ethanolamine kinase 2 (ETNK2) gene which 
lies immediately downstream of renin. Several functional binding sites for CTCF, 
a mammalian insulator protein, were identified in and around the renin and ETNK2 
loci by gel shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation. We conclude that there are
sequences in and around the renin and ETNK2 loci which act as boundaries between 
neighboring genes which insulate them from each other. The study illustrates the 
value of taking a much wider genomic perspective when studying mechanisms
regulating gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2536869
PMID: 18632798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Cancer Res. 2008 Jul 15;68(14):5546-51. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1005.

CTCFL/BORIS is a methylation-independent DNA-binding protein that preferentially 
binds to the paternal H19 differentially methylated region.

Nguyen P(1), Cui H, Bisht KS, Sun L, Patel K, Lee RS, Kugoh H, Oshimura M,
Feinberg AP, Gius D.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The CTCF paralog BORIS (brother of the regulator of imprinted sites) is an
insulator DNA-binding protein thought to play a role in chromatin organization
and gene expression. Under normal physiologic conditions, BORIS is predominantly 
expressed during embryonic male germ cell development; however, it is also
expressed in tumors and tumor cell lines and, as such, has been classified as a
cancer-germline or cancer-testis gene. It has been suggested that BORIS may be a 
pro-proliferative factor, whereas CTCF favors antiproliferation. BORIS and CTCF
share similar zinc finger DNA-binding domains and seem to bind to identical
target sequences. Thus, one critical question is the mechanism governing the
DNA-binding specificity of these two proteins when both are present in tumor
cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) in HCT116 cells and their
hypermethylated variant showed that BORIS binds to methylated DNA sequences,
whereas CTCF binds to unmethylated DNA. Electromobility shift assays, using both 
whole-cell extracts and in vitro translated CTCF and BORIS protein, and
methylation-specific ChIP PCR showed that BORIS is a methylation-independent
DNA-binding protein. Finally, experiments in murine hybrid cells containing
either the maternal or paternal human chromosome 11 showed that BORIS
preferentially binds to the methylated paternal H19 differentially methylated
region, suggesting a mechanism in which the affinity of CTCF for the unmethylated
maternal allele directs the DNA binding of BORIS toward the paternal allele.

PMCID: PMC2731476
PMID: 18632606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Exp Med. 2008 Aug 4;205(8):1843-58. doi: 10.1084/jem.20072102. Epub 2008 Jul
14.

Transvection mediated by the translocated cyclin D1 locus in mantle cell
lymphoma.

Liu H(1), Huang J, Wang J, Jiang S, Bailey AS, Goldman DC, Welcker M, Bedell V,
Slovak ML, Clurman B, Thayer M, Fleming WH, Epner E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Hematologic Malignancies, Oregon Cancer Institute, Portland, OR
97239, USA.

In mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) and some cases of multiple myeloma (MM), cyclin D1 
expression is deregulated by chromosome translocations involving the
immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) locus. To evaluate the mechanisms responsible,
gene targeting was used to study long-distance gene regulation. Remarkably, these
targeted cell lines lost the translocated chromosome (t(11;14)). In these MCL and
MM cells, the nonrearranged cyclin D1 (CCND1) locus reverts from CpG
hypomethylated to hypermethylated. Reintroduction of the translocated chromosome 
induced a loss of methylation at the unrearranged CCND1 locus, providing evidence
of a transallelic regulatory effect. In these cell lines and primary MCL patient 
samples, the CCND1 loci are packaged in chromatin-containing CCCTC binding factor
(CTCF) and nucleophosmin (NPM) at the nucleolus. We show that CTCF and NPM are
bound at the IgH 3' regulatory elements only in the t(11;14) MCL cell lines.
Furthermore, NPM short hairpin RNA produces a specific growth arrest in these
cells. Our data demonstrate transvection in human cancer and suggest a functional
role for CTCF and NPM.

PMCID: PMC2525596
PMID: 18625744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Bioessays. 2008 Aug;30(8):715-8. doi: 10.1002/bies.20787.

Cohesin and CTCF: cooperating to control chromosome conformation?

Gause M(1), Schaaf CA, Dorsett D.

Author information: 
(1)Edward A. Doisy Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saint Louis 
University School of Medicine, Missouri 63104, USA. gauzemg@slu.edu

The cohesin complex is best known for its role in sister chromatid cohesion. Over
the past few years, it has become apparent that cohesin also regulates gene
expression, but the mechanisms by which it does so are unknown. Recently, three
groups mapped numerous cohesin-binding sites in mammalian chromosomes and found
substantial overlap with the CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF).1-3 CTCF is an insulator
protein that blocks enhancer-promoter interactions, and the investigators found
that cohesin also contributes to this activity. Thus, these studies demonstrate
at least one mechanism by which cohesin can control gene expression.

(c) 2008 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 18623068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Development. 2008 Aug;135(16):2729-38. doi: 10.1242/dev.024539. Epub 2008 Jul 9.

Maternal depletion of CTCF reveals multiple functions during oocyte and
preimplantation embryo development.

Wan LB(1), Pan H, Hannenhalli S, Cheng Y, Ma J, Fedoriw A, Lobanenkov V, Latham
KE, Schultz RM, Bartolomei MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

CTCF is a multifunctional nuclear factor involved in epigenetic regulation.
Despite recent advances that include the systematic discovery of CTCF-binding
sites throughout the mammalian genome, the in vivo roles of CTCF in adult tissues
and during embryonic development are largely unknown. Using transgenic RNAi, we
depleted maternal stores of CTCF from growing mouse oocytes, and identified
hundreds of misregulated genes. Moreover, our analysis suggests that CTCF
predominantly activates or derepresses transcription in oocytes. CTCF depletion
causes meiotic defects in the egg, and mitotic defects in the embryo that are
accompanied by defects in zygotic gene expression, and culminate in apoptosis.
Maternal pronuclear transfer and CTCF mRNA microinjection experiments indicate
that CTCF is a mammalian maternal effect gene, and that persistent
transcriptional defects rather than persistent chromosomal defects perturb early 
embryonic development. This is the first study detailing a global and essential
role for CTCF in mouse oocytes and preimplantation embryos.

PMCID: PMC2596970
PMID: 18614575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Mol Med (Berl). 2008 Sep;86(9):1057-66. doi: 10.1007/s00109-008-0369-4. Epub
2008 Jul 5.

Loss of imprinting of IGF2 and H19, loss of heterozygosity of IGF2R and CTCF, and
Helicobacter pylori infection in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

Grbesa I(1), Marinkovic M, Ivkic M, Kruslin B, Novak-Kujundzic R, Pegan B,
Bogdanovic O, Bedekovic V, Gall-Troselj K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Division of Molecular Medicine, Rudjer
Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia. igrbesa@irb.hr

Imprinting analyses of IGF2 and H19, loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analyses of
IGF2R and CTCF and Helicobacter pylori detection, were performed on 35 human
laryngeal squamous cell carcinomas (LSCC). Forty-six percent of the tumors were
heterozygous for IGF2, and 54% were informative for the H19. Biallelic expression
of IGF2 was observed in 33% (5 out of 15) of the tumors and in 27% (4 out of 15) 
of adjacent non-tumorous laryngeal tissues. H19 loss of imprinting (LOI) was
observed in 24% (4 out of 17) of the tumors. For IGF2R and CTCF, 71% (25 out of
35) and 50% (17/34), respectively, of the samples were heterozygous, and LOH was 
detected in 12% (3 out of 25) and 6% (1 out of 17), respectively, of the tumors. 
H. pylori was found in 26% (9/35) of these tumors. Among them, four were
informative for the imprinting analysis. The presence of H. pylori had no effect 
on IGF2/H19 imprinting. Only the H. pylori detection was further broadened with
an additional 47 laryngeal tumors, resulting in a total final positivity of close
to 16% (13 out of 82). This study represents the largest comprehensive IGF2/H19
imprinting study done to date on well-defined samples of human laryngeal
carcinomas and corresponding non-tumorous tissue. For the first time, the
analyses of IGF2/H19 imprinting have been broadened with LOH analyses of IGF2R
and CTCF, with both of these genes acting as modulators of IGF2 and H19 activity.
Although there were indications that H. pylori may be present in LSCC, we are the
first to show its presence in LSCC by two direct techniques: Giemsa staining and 
nested-PCR.

PMID: 18604514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Nat Genet. 2008 Aug;40(8):971-6. doi: 10.1038/ng.168. Epub 2008 Jun 29.

Conservation of the H19 noncoding RNA and H19-IGF2 imprinting mechanism in
therians.

Smits G(1), Mungall AJ, Griffiths-Jones S, Smith P, Beury D, Matthews L, Rogers
J, Pask AJ, Shaw G, VandeBerg JL, McCarrey JR; SAVOIR Consortium, Renfree MB,
Reik W, Dunham I.

Author information: 
(1)The Babraham Institute, Laboratory of Developmental Genetics and Imprinting,
Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2008 Aug;40(8):932-3.

Comparisons between eutherians and marsupials suggest limited conservation of the
molecular mechanisms that control genomic imprinting in mammals. We have studied 
the evolution of the imprinted IGF2-H19 locus in therians. Although marsupial
orthologs of protein-coding exons were easily identified, the use of
evolutionarily conserved regions and low-stringency Bl2seq comparisons was
required to delineate a candidate H19 noncoding RNA sequence. The therian H19
orthologs show miR-675 and exon structure conservation, suggesting functional
selection on both features. Transcription start site sequences and poly(A)
signals are also conserved. As in eutherians, marsupial H19 is maternally
expressed and paternal methylation upstream of the gene originates in the male
germline, encompasses a CTCF insulator, and spreads somatically into the H19
gene. The conservation in all therians of the mechanism controlling imprinting of
the IGF2-H19 locus suggests a sequential model of imprinting evolution.

PMID: 18587395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Cell. 2008 Jun 13;133(6):1106-17. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.04.043.

Integration of external signaling pathways with the core transcriptional network 
in embryonic stem cells.

Chen X(1), Xu H, Yuan P, Fang F, Huss M, Vega VB, Wong E, Orlov YL, Zhang W,
Jiang J, Loh YH, Yeo HC, Yeo ZX, Narang V, Govindarajan KR, Leong B, Shahab A,
Ruan Y, Bourque G, Sung WK, Clarke ND, Wei CL, Ng HH.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Laboratory, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore 138672.

Transcription factors (TFs) and their specific interactions with targets are
crucial for specifying gene-expression programs. To gain insights into the
transcriptional regulatory networks in embryonic stem (ES) cells, we use
chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with ultra-high-throughput DNA sequencing
(ChIP-seq) to map the locations of 13 sequence-specific TFs (Nanog, Oct4, STAT3, 
Smad1, Sox2, Zfx, c-Myc, n-Myc, Klf4, Esrrb, Tcfcp2l1, E2f1, and CTCF) and 2
transcription regulators (p300 and Suz12). These factors are known to play
different roles in ES-cell biology as components of the LIF and BMP signaling
pathways, self-renewal regulators, and key reprogramming factors. Our study
provides insights into the integration of the signaling pathways into the
ES-cell-specific transcription circuitries. Intriguingly, we find specific
genomic regions extensively targeted by different TFs. Collectively, the
comprehensive mapping of TF-binding sites identifies important features of the
transcriptional regulatory networks that define ES-cell identity.

PMID: 18555785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jun 17;105(24):8309-14. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0801273105. Epub 2008 Jun 11.

CTCF physically links cohesin to chromatin.

Rubio ED(1), Reiss DJ, Welcsh PL, Disteche CM, Filippova GN, Baliga NS, Aebersold
R, Ranish JA, Krumm A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle WA 98195, USA.

Cohesin is required to prevent premature dissociation of sister chromatids after 
DNA replication. Although its role in chromatid cohesion is well established, the
functional significance of cohesin's association with interphase chromatin is not
clear. Using a quantitative proteomics approach, we show that the STAG1
(Scc3/SA1) subunit of cohesin interacts with the CCTC-binding factor CTCF bound
to the c-myc insulator element. Both allele-specific binding of CTCF and Scc3/SA1
at the imprinted IGF2/H19 gene locus and our analyses of human DM1 alleles
containing base substitutions at CTCF-binding motifs indicate that cohesin
recruitment to chromosomal sites depends on the presence of CTCF. A large-scale
genomic survey using ChIP-Chip demonstrates that Scc3/SA1 binding strongly
correlates with the CTCF-binding site distribution in chromosomal arms. However, 
some chromosomal sites interact exclusively with CTCF, whereas others interact
with Scc3/SA1 only. Furthermore, immunofluorescence microscopy and ChIP-Chip
experiments demonstrate that CTCF associates with both centromeres and
chromosomal arms during metaphase. These results link cohesin to gene regulatory 
functions and suggest an essential role for CTCF during sister chromatid
cohesion. These results have implications for the functional role of cohesin
subunits in the pathogenesis of Cornelia de Lange syndrome and Roberts syndromes.

PMCID: PMC2448833
PMID: 18550811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Biol Chem. 2008 Aug 8;283(32):21873-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M801170200. Epub 2008 
Jun 5.

CCCTC-binding factor activates PARP-1 affecting DNA methylation machinery.

Guastafierro T(1), Cecchinelli B, Zampieri M, Reale A, Riggio G, Sthandier O,
Zupi G, Calabrese L, Caiafa P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biotechnology and Haematology, University La Sapienza, 
Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00161 Rome, Italy.

Our previous data have shown that in L929 mouse fibroblasts the control of
methylation pattern depends in part on poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation and that ADP-ribose
polymers (PARs), both present on poly(ADP-ribosyl)ated PARP-1 and/or
protein-free, have an inhibitory effect on Dnmt1 activity. Here we show that
transient ectopic overexpression of CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) induces PAR
accumulation, PARP-1, and CTCF poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation in the same mouse
fibroblasts. The persistence in time of a high PAR level affects the DNA
methylation machinery; the DNA methyltransferase activity is inhibited with
consequences for the methylation state of genome, which becomes diffusely
hypomethylated affecting centromeric minor satellite and B1 DNA repeats. In vitro
data show that CTCF is able to activate PARP-1 automodification even in the
absence of nicked DNA. Our new finding that CTCF is able per se to activate
PARP-1 automodification in vitro is of great interest as so far a burst of
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ated PARP-1 has generally been found following introduction of
DNA strand breaks. CTCF is unable to inhibit DNMT1 activity, whereas
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ated PARP-1 plays this inhibitory role. These data suggest that 
CTCF is involved in the cross-talk between poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation and DNA
methylation and underscore the importance of a rapid reversal of PARP activity,
as DNA methylation pattern is responsible for an important epigenetic code.

PMCID: PMC2494936
PMID: 18539602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Nature. 2008 Jun 12;453(7197):948-51. doi: 10.1038/nature06947. Epub 2008 May 7.

Domain organization of human chromosomes revealed by mapping of nuclear lamina
interactions.

Guelen L(1), Pagie L, Brasset E, Meuleman W, Faza MB, Talhout W, Eussen BH, de
Klein A, Wessels L, de Laat W, van Steensel B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2013 Aug 8;500(7461):242.

The architecture of human chromosomes in interphase nuclei is still largely
unknown. Microscopy studies have indicated that specific regions of chromosomes
are located in close proximity to the nuclear lamina (NL). This has led to the
idea that certain genomic elements may be attached to the NL, which may
contribute to the spatial organization of chromosomes inside the nucleus.
However, sequences in the human genome that interact with the NL in vivo have not
been identified. Here we construct a high-resolution map of the interaction sites
of the entire genome with NL components in human fibroblasts. This map shows that
genome-lamina interactions occur through more than 1,300 sharply defined large
domains 0.1-10 megabases in size. These lamina-associated domains (LADs) are
typified by low gene-expression levels, indicating that LADs represent a
repressive chromatin environment. The borders of LADs are demarcated by the
insulator protein CTCF, by promoters that are oriented away from LADs, or by CpG 
islands, suggesting possible mechanisms of LAD confinement. Taken together, these
results demonstrate that the human genome is divided into large, discrete domains
that are units of chromosome organization within the nucleus.

PMID: 18463634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. PLoS One. 2008 May 7;3(5):e2134. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002134.

5'HS5 of the human beta-globin locus control region is dispensable for the
formation of the beta-globin active chromatin hub.

Chan PK(1), Wai A, Philipsen S, Tan-Un KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Kadoorie Biological Science Building, The University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR), China.

Hypersensitive site 5 (5'HS5) of the beta-globin Locus Control Region functions
as a developmental stage-specific border in erythroid cells. Here, we have
analyzed the role of 5'HS5 in the three dimensional organization of the beta-gene
locus using the Chromatin Conformation Capture (3C) technique. The results show
that when 5'HS5 is deleted from the locus, both remote and internal regulatory
elements are still able to interact with each other in a three-dimensional
configuration termed the Active Chromatin Hub. Thus, the absence of 5'HS5 does
not have an appreciable effect on the three dimensional organization of the
beta-globin locus. This rules out models in which 5'HS5 nucleates interactions
with remote and/or internal regulatory elements. We also determined the binding
of CTCF, the only defined insulator protein in mammalian cells, to 5'HS5 by using
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays. We detect low levels of CTCF binding
to 5'HS5 in primitive erythroid cells, in which it functions as a border element.
Surprisingly, we also observe binding levels of CTCF to 5'HS5 in definitive
erythroid cells. Thus, binding of CTCF to 5'HS5 per se does not render it a
functional border element. This is consistent with the previous data suggesting
that CTCF has dual functionality.

PMCID: PMC2358975
PMID: 18461170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Epigenetics. 2008 May-Jun;3(3):115-8.

Multiple YY1 and CTCF binding sites in imprinting control regions.

Kim J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences; Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge,
Louisiana, USA. jkim@lsu.edu

Known imprinting control regions (ICRs) contain unusual tandem arrays of
DNA-binding sites for transcription factors, including YY1 for the Peg3, Gnas,
and Xist/Tsix domains and CTCF for the H19/Igf2 domain. These multiple
DNA-binding sites are known to be the only functionally shared and evolutionarily
selected feature among these ICRs. However, it is not well understood why the
imprinting control regions tend to maintain a high density of a particular
transcription factor-binding site. We hypothesize that the multiplicity
associated with the YY1 and CTCF binding sites may be designed for attracting and
maintaining the relatively high levels of YY1 and CTCF proteins or for covering
the relatively large genomic sizes of the associated ICRs. This idea remains to
be tested in the near future, but it is one of the most likely explanations for
all those unusual features that are associated with the functionally critical
regions (ICRs) of genomic imprinting.

PMID: 18458536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Genome Res. 2008 Aug;18(8):1259-69. doi: 10.1101/gr.075713.107. Epub 2008 May 2.

DXZ4 chromatin adopts an opposing conformation to that of the surrounding
chromosome and acquires a novel inactive X-specific role involving CTCF and
antisense transcripts.

Chadwick BP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Duke University Medical Center Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, and
Department of Cell Biology, Durham, NC 27710, USA. brian.chadwick@duke.edu
<brian.chadwick@duke.edu>

Macrosatellite DNA is composed of large repeat units, arranged in tandem over
hundreds of kilobases. The macrosatellite repeat DXZ4, localized at Xq23-24,
consists of 50-100 copies of a CpG-rich 3-kb monomer. Here I report that on the
active X chromosome (Xa), DXZ4 is organized into constitutive heterochromatin
characterized by a highly organized pattern of H3K9me3. DXZ4 is expressed from
both strands and generates an antisense transcript that is processed into small
RNAs that directly correlate with H3K9me3 nucleosomes. In contrast, on the
inactive X chromosome (Xi) a proportion of DXZ4 is packaged into euchromatin
characterized by H3K4me2 and H3K9Ac. The Xi copy of DXZ4 is bound by the
chromatin insulator, CTCF, within a sequence that unidirectionally blocks
enhancer-promoter communication. Immediately adjacent to the CTCF-binding site is
a bidirectional promoter that, like the sequence flanking the CTCF-binding
region, is completely devoid of CpG methylation on the Xi. As on the Xa, both
strands are expressed, but longer antisense transcripts can be detected in
addition to the processed small RNAs. The euchromatic organization of DXZ4 on the
otherwise heterochromatic Xi, its binding of CTCF, and its function as a
unidirectional insulator suggest that this macrosatellite has acquired a novel
function unique to the process of X chromosome inactivation.

PMCID: PMC2493436
PMID: 18456864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jun;28(12):4188-95. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00229-08. Epub 2008 Apr 
21.

Functional interaction between the Fab-7 and Fab-8 boundaries and the upstream
promoter region in the Drosophila Abd-B gene.

Kyrchanova O(1), Toshchakov S, Podstreshnaya Y, Parshikov A, Georgiev P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of the Control of Genetic Processes, Institute of Gene Biology,
Russian Academy of Sciences, 34/5 Vavilov St., Moscow 119334, Russia.

Boundary elements have been found in the regulatory region of the Drosophila
melanogaster Abdominal-B (Abd-B) gene, which is subdivided into a series of iab
domains. The best-studied Fab-7 and Fab-8 boundaries flank the iab-7 enhancer and
isolate it from the four promoters regulating Abd-B expression. Recently binding 
sites for the Drosophila homolog of the vertebrate insulator protein CTCF (dCTCF)
were identified in the Fab-8 boundary and upstream of Abd-B promoter A, with no
binding of CTCF to the Fab-7 boundary being detected either in vivo or in vitro. 
Taking into account the inability of the yeast GAL4 activator to stimulate the
white promoter when its binding sites are separated by a 5-kb yellow gene, we
have tested the functional interactions between the Fab-7 and Fab-8 boundaries
and between these boundaries and the upstream promoter A region containing a
dCTCF binding site. It has been found that dCTCF binding sites are essential for 
pairing between two Fab-8 insulators. However, a strong functional interaction
between the Fab-7 and Fab-8 boundaries suggests that additional, as yet
unidentified proteins are involved in long-distance interactions between them. We
have also shown that Fab-7 and Fab-8 boundaries effectively interact with the
upstream region of the Abd-B promoter.

PMCID: PMC2423118
PMID: 18426914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Cancer Res. 2008 Apr 15;68(8):2726-35. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6654.

DNA methyltransferase 1 and 3B activate BAG-1 expression via recruitment of
CTCFL/BORIS and modulation of promoter histone methylation.

Sun L(1), Huang L, Nguyen P, Bisht KS, Bar-Sela G, Ho AS, Bradbury CM, Yu W, Cui 
H, Lee S, Trepel JB, Feinberg AP, Gius D.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

In a previous genomic analysis, using somatic methyltransferase (DNMT) knockout
cells, we showed that hypomethylation decreased the expression of as many genes
as were observed to increase, suggesting a previously unknown mechanism for
epigenetic regulation. To address this idea, the expression of the BAG family
genes was used as a model. These genes were used because their expression was
decreased in DNMT1(-/-), DNMT3B(-/-), and double knockout cells and increased in 
DNMT1-overexpressing and DNMT3B-overexpressing cells. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis of the BAG-1 promoter in DNMT1-overexpressing or
DNMT3B-overexpressing cells showed a permissive dimethyl-H3-K4/dimethyl-H3-K9
chromatin status associated with DNA-binding of CTCFL/BORIS, as well as increased
BAG-1 expression. In contrast, a nonpermissive dimethyl-H3-K4/dimethyl-H3-K9
chromatin status was associated with CTCF DNA-binding and decreased BAG-1
expression in the single and double DNMT knockout cells. BORIS short hairpin RNA 
knockdown decreased both promoter DNA-binding, as well as BAG-1 expression, and
changed the dimethyl-H3-K4/dimethyl-H3-K9 ratio to that characteristic of a
nonpermissive chromatin state. These results suggest that DNMT1 and DNMT3B
regulate BAG-1 expression via insulator protein DNA-binding and chromatin
dynamics by regulating histone dimethylation.

PMCID: PMC2733164
PMID: 18413740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Mycorrhiza. 2008 Apr;18(4):197-204. doi: 10.1007/s00572-008-0172-7.

Spores of the mycorrhizal fungus Glomus mosseae host yeasts that solubilize
phosphate and accumulate polyphosphates.

Alonso LM(1), Kleiner D, Ortega E.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Agricultural Sciences (INCA), Havana, Cuba.

The present paper reports the presence of bacteria and yeasts tightly associated 
with spores of an isolate of Glomus mosseae. Healthy spores were surface
disinfected by combining chloramine-T 5%, Tween-40, and cephalexin 2.5 g L(-1)
(CTCf). Macerates of these spores were incubated on agar media, microorganisms
were isolated, and two yeasts were characterized (EndoGm1, EndoGm11). Both yeasts
were able to solubilize low-soluble P sources (Ca and Fe phosphates) and
accumulate polyphosphates (polyPs). Sequence analysis of 18S ribosomal
deoxyribonucleic acid showed that the yeasts belong to the genera Rhodotorula or 
Rhodosporidium (EndoGm1) and Cryptococcus (EndoGm11). Results from inoculation
experiments showed an effect of the spore-associated yeasts on the root growth of
rice, suggesting potential tripartite interactions with mycorrhizal fungi and
plants.

PMID: 18389285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 23;370(1):109-12. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.03.040. Epub 2008 Mar 18.

Selective apoptosis of breast cancer cells by siRNA targeting of BORIS.

Dougherty CJ(1), Ichim TE, Liu L, Reznik G, Min WP, Ghochikyan A, Agadjanyan MG, 
Reznik BN.

Author information: 
(1)Florida Atlantic University, Charles E. Schmidt College of Biomedical Science,
777 Glades Road, BC-71, Room 202, Boca Raton, FL 33431, USA.

Brother of the regulator of imprinted sites (BORIS) is an epigenetically acting
transcription factor which represses the tumor inhibitor functions of the tumor
suppressor protein CTCF. BORIS expression has not been documented in adult
females, making it an exciting molecular target for drug development in breast
cancer. Previously, we demonstrated that vaccination of mice with zing-finger
(ZF)-deleted non-functional BORIS results in regression of breast cancer and
generation of potent anti-tumor immune responses. RNAi induction can be used as
an alternative approach for selective tumor cell killing. Short interfering RNA
(siRNA) molecules targeting BORIS were generated and their efficacy was tested in
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer and non-malignant epithelial cell lines. Treatment with 
BORIS-specific siRNA, but not control siRNA led to a concentration-dependent
reduction in BORIS expression and proportional apoptotic death of the cancer but 
not control cells. To our knowledge this is first report demonstrating a critical
role of BORIS in maintaining tumor cell viability.

PMID: 18355444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Aug 1;104(5):1781-92. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21742.

Curcumin downregulates H19 gene transcription in tumor cells.

Novak Kujundzic R(1), Grbesa I, Ivkic M, Katdare M, Gall-Troselj K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Ruder Boskovic Institute, Bijenicka 54, 10000 
Zagreb, Croatia. rnovak@irb.hr

Curcumin (diferuloymethane), a natural compound used in traditional medicine,
exerts an antiproliferative effect on various tumor cell lines by an incompletely
understood mechanism. It has been shown that low doses of curcumin downregulate
DNA topoisomerase II alpha (TOP2A) which is upregulated in many malignances. The 
activity of TOP2A is required for RNA polymerase II transcription on chromatin
templates. Recently, it has been reported that CTCF, a multifunctional
transcription factor, recruits the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II (LS Pol
II) to its target sites genome-wide. This recruitment of LS Pol II is more
pronounced in proliferating cells than in fully differentiated cells. As
expression of imprinted genes is often altered in tumors, we investigated the
potential effect of curcumin treatment on transcription of the imprinted H19
gene, located distally from the CTCF binding site, in human tumor cell lines HCT 
116, SW 620, HeLa, Cal 27, Hep-2 and Detroit 562. Transcription of TOP2A and
concomitantly H19 was supressed in all tumor cell lines tested. Monoallelic IGF2 
expression was maintained in curcumin-treated cancer cells, indicating the
involvement of mechanism/s other than disturbance of CTCF insulator function at
the IGF2/H19 locus. Curcumin did not alter H19 gene transcription in primary cell
cultures derived from normal human tissues.

PMID: 18348204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Exp Med. 2008 Apr 14;205(4):747-50. doi: 10.1084/jem.20080066. Epub 2008 Mar
17.

The role of CTCF in regulating nuclear organization.

Williams A(1), Flavell RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Comment on
    J Exp Med. 2008 Apr 14;205(4):785-98.

The spatial organization of the genome is thought to play an important part in
the coordination of gene regulation. New techniques have been used to identify
specific long-range interactions between distal DNA sequences, revealing an
ever-increasing complexity to nuclear organization. CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)
is a versatile zinc finger protein with diverse regulatory functions. New data
now help define how CTCF mediates both long-range intrachromosomal and
interchromosomal interactions, and highlight CTCF as an important factor in
determining the three-dimensional structure of the genome.

PMCID: PMC2292214
PMID: 18347103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Exp Med. 2008 Apr 14;205(4):785-98. doi: 10.1084/jem.20071843. Epub 2008 Mar
17.

The insulator factor CTCF controls MHC class II gene expression and is required
for the formation of long-distance chromatin interactions.

Majumder P(1), Gomez JA, Chadwick BP, Boss JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2008 Apr 14;205(4):747-50.

Knockdown of the insulator factor CCCTC binding factor (CTCF), which binds XL9,
an intergenic element located between HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DQA1, was found to
diminish expression of these genes. The mechanism involved interactions between
CTCF and class II transactivator (CIITA), the master regulator of major
histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) gene expression, and the formation
of long-distance chromatin loops between XL9 and the proximal promoter regions of
these MHC-II genes. The interactions were inducible and dependent on the activity
of CIITA, regulatory factor X, and CTCF. RNA fluorescence in situ hybridizations 
show that both genes can be expressed simultaneously from the same chromosome.
Collectively, the results suggest a model whereby both HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DQA1 loci
can interact simultaneously with XL9, and describe a new regulatory mechanism for
these MHC-II genes involving the alteration of the general chromatin conformation
of the region and their regulation by CTCF.

PMCID: PMC2292219
PMID: 18347100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Adv Genet. 2008;61:207-23. doi: 10.1016/S0065-2660(07)00007-7.

Regulation of imprinting in clusters: noncoding RNAs versus insulators.

Wan LB(1), Bartolomei MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Genomic imprinting is an epigenetic mechanism of transcriptional regulation
through which expression of a subset of mammalian genes is restricted to one
parental allele. An intriguing characteristic of imprinted genes is that they
often cluster in megabase-sized chromosomal domains, indicating that
domain-specific mechanisms regulate imprinting. Detailed study of the known
imprinted domains has revealed a number of common characteristics. First, all
clusters have an imprinting control region (ICR) that is typically 1-5 kb in size
and differentially methylated, and that regulates imprinting across the entire
domain. Second, the clusters have at least one noncoding RNA (ncRNA) that is
usually expressed from the maternal allele and multiple paternally expressed
protein-coding genes. Finally, the clusters are likely regulated by one of two
mechanisms, transcription of a long ncRNA that silences expression of
protein-coding genes bidirectionally in cis and blocking of shared enhancer
elements by CCCTC binding factor (CTCF) binding insulators. More recent
experiments may even suggest that both mechanisms operate at some clusters. In
this chapter, we will describe what is known about imprinting at five
well-studied imprinted loci and highlight some of the critical experiments that
are required before a full understanding of imprinting mechanisms is achieved.

PMID: 18282507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Cell. 2008 Feb 8;132(3):422-33. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.01.011. Epub 2008 Jan
31.

Cohesins functionally associate with CTCF on mammalian chromosome arms.

Parelho V(1), Hadjur S, Spivakov M, Leleu M, Sauer S, Gregson HC, Jarmuz A,
Canzonetta C, Webster Z, Nesterova T, Cobb BS, Yokomori K, Dillon N, Aragon L,
Fisher AG, Merkenschlager M.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Development Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College
London, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK.

Cohesins mediate sister chromatid cohesion, which is essential for chromosome
segregation and postreplicative DNA repair. In addition, cohesins appear to
regulate gene expression and enhancer-promoter interactions. These noncanonical
functions remained unexplained because knowledge of cohesin-binding sites and
functional interactors in metazoans was lacking. We show that the distribution of
cohesins on mammalian chromosome arms is not driven by transcriptional activity, 
in contrast to S. cerevisiae. Instead, mammalian cohesins occupy a subset of
DNase I hypersensitive sites, many of which contain sequence motifs resembling
the consensus for CTCF, a DNA-binding protein with enhancer blocking function and
boundary-element activity. We find cohesins at most CTCF sites and show that CTCF
is required for cohesin localization to these sites. Recruitment by CTCF suggests
a rationale for noncanonical cohesin functions and, because CTCF binding is
sensitive to DNA methylation, allows cohesin positioning to integrate DNA
sequence and epigenetic state.

PMID: 18237772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Nature. 2008 Feb 14;451(7180):796-801. doi: 10.1038/nature06634. Epub 2008 Jan
30.

Cohesin mediates transcriptional insulation by CCCTC-binding factor.

Wendt KS(1), Yoshida K, Itoh T, Bando M, Koch B, Schirghuber E, Tsutsumi S, Nagae
G, Ishihara K, Mishiro T, Yahata K, Imamoto F, Aburatani H, Nakao M, Imamoto N,
Maeshima K, Shirahige K, Peters JM.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Dr. Bohr Gasse 7, 1030 Vienna,
Austria.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012 May;13(5):282.
    Nature. 2008 Feb 14;451(7180):777-8.

Cohesin complexes mediate sister-chromatid cohesion in dividing cells but may
also contribute to gene regulation in postmitotic cells. How cohesin regulates
gene expression is not known. Here we describe cohesin-binding sites in the human
genome and show that most of these are associated with the CCCTC-binding factor
(CTCF), a zinc-finger protein required for transcriptional insulation. CTCF is
dispensable for cohesin loading onto DNA, but is needed to enrich cohesin at
specific binding sites. Cohesin enables CTCF to insulate promoters from distant
enhancers and controls transcription at the H19/IGF2 (insulin-like growth factor 
2) locus. This role of cohesin seems to be independent of its role in cohesion.
We propose that cohesin functions as a transcriptional insulator, and speculate
that subtle deficiencies in this function contribute to 'cohesinopathies' such as
Cornelia de Lange syndrome.

PMID: 18235444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Dev Dyn. 2008 Mar;237(3):758-67. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21420.

Transcription factors CTCF and Pax6 are segregated to different cell types during
retinal cell differentiation.

Canto-Soler MV(1), Huang H, Romero MS, Adler R.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Ophthalmology, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287-9257, USA. m.cantos1@jhmi.edu

We have hypothesized that the transcription factor CTCF may influence retinal
cell differentiation by controlling Pax6 expression, because (1) CTCF has been
shown to repress Pax6 expression in some tissues, and (2) Pax6 blocks the
differentiation of retinal progenitor cells as photoreceptors and promotes their 
differentiation as nonphotoreceptor neurons. Our results show that, as predicted 
by this hypothesis, CTCF and Pax6 become segregated to different retinal cell
types. The factors are initially coexpressed in the undifferentiated
neuroepithelium, but already at that time they show complementary
periphery-to-fundus gradients of distribution. As the retina laminates, Pax6
becomes restricted to ganglion and amacrine cells, and CTCF to the bipolar/Muller
cell layer and the outer nuclear layer. Polymerase chain reaction analysis of
laser capture microdissection samples and dissociated cells showed that both
immature and differentiated photoreceptors are CTCF (+)/ Pax6 (-). Functional
studies are now under way to further analyze the role of CTCF in retinal cell
differentiation.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2443865
PMID: 18224715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. EMBO J. 2008 Feb 20;27(4):654-66. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.1. Epub 2008 Jan 24.

Cohesins localize with CTCF at the KSHV latency control region and at cellular
c-myc and H19/Igf2 insulators.

Stedman W(1), Kang H, Lin S, Kissil JL, Bartolomei MS, Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Program, The Wistar Institute, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Cohesins, which mediate sister chromatin cohesion, and CTCF, which functions at
chromatin boundaries, play key roles in the structural and functional
organization of chromosomes. We examined the binding of these two factors on the 
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) episome during latent infection
and found a striking colocalization within the control region of the major
latency transcript responsible for expressing LANA (ORF73), vCyclin (ORF72),
vFLIP (ORF71), and vmiRNAs. Deletion of the CTCF-binding site from the viral
genome disrupted cohesin binding, and crippled colony formation in 293 cells.
Clonal instability correlated with elevated expression of lytic cycle gene
products, notably the neighbouring promoter for K14 and vGPCR (ORF74). siRNA
depletion of RAD21 from latently infected cells caused an increase in K14 and
ORF74, and lytic inducers caused a rapid dissociation of RAD21 from the viral
genome. RAD21 and SMC1 also associate with the cellular CTCF sites at mammalian
c-myc promoter and H19/Igf2 imprinting control region. We conclude that cohesin
subunits associate with viral and cellular CTCF sites involved in complex gene
regulation and chromatin organization.

PMCID: PMC2262040
PMID: 18219272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2009 Jan;113(1):59-66. doi: 10.1007/s10549-008-9905-8.
Epub 2008 Jan 23.

Loss of expression of chromosome 16q genes DPEP1 and CTCF in lobular carcinoma in
situ of the breast.

Green AR(1), Krivinskas S, Young P, Rakha EA, Paish EC, Powe DG, Ellis IO.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, School of Molecular Medical Sciences, University of
Nottingham and Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, Queen's Medical Centre,
Nottingham, UK NG7 2UH. andrew.green@nottingham.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Loss of the chromosomal material at 16q is the most frequent genetic 
event in invasive and in situ (LCIS) lobular carcinoma of the breast. However,
the smallest region of overlap at 16q is not restricted to just the CDH1 locus
harbouring E-cadherin, suggesting that neighbouring genes might be involved in
the development and progression of these tumours. Potential novel tumour
suppressor genes (TSG) at 16q include CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), Decreased
Expression in Renal and Prostate Cancer (DERPC) and Dipeptidase 1 (DPEP1). The
aim of this study is to assess the expression of these genes in LCIS and compare 
them with normal breast, using CDH1 as a control, in order to evaluate their role
as TSGs.
METHODS: Cells from LCIS cases and normal breast lobules were microdissected and 
expression of target genes were quantified using real-time PCR. In addition,
immunohistochemistry (IHC) for E-cadherin and CTCF was performed on paraffin
processed LCIS (n=49) and normal breast cases.
RESULTS: All LCIS showed negative expression of E-cadherin. Similar to CDH1, CTCF
and DPEP1 gene expression was significantly lower in LCIS cases compared with
normal cases (P<0.05). CTCF IHC expression showed significant reduction in LCIS
compared to normal parenchymal cells. However, there was no difference in
expression of DERPC between LCIS and normal breast tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: In addition to CDH1, loss of CTCF and DPEP1 gene expression suggest 
they are possible TSG in breast cancer and may, similar to CDH1, be potentially
utilised as markers of predisposition of women diagnosed with LCIS.

PMID: 18213475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 May;93(5):1609-15. doi: 10.1210/jc.2007-1989. Epub 
2008 Jan 22.

Paraganglioma after maternal transmission of a succinate dehydrogenase gene
mutation.

Pigny P(1), Vincent A, Cardot Bauters C, Bertrand M, de Montpreville VT, Crepin
M, Porchet N, Caron P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie et Hormonologie, Centre de Biologie et Pathologie,
Centre Hospitalier Régional & Universitaire, Lille cedex, France.
p-pigny@chru-lille.fr

Comment in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 May;93(5):1573-5.

CONTEXT: Inactivating mutations of SDHD, which is mapped to 11q23 and encodes the
cybS subunit of succinate dehydrogenase, predispose to hereditary paraganglioma
(PGL) and/or pheochromocytoma. So far no disease was shown to occur in case of
maternal transmission of a SDHD mutation, suggesting the existence of genomic
imprinting. A hypothetic model, involving the loss of the maternal copy of a
tumor suppressor gene mapped to 11p15 in the tumoral tissue, has been proposed to
explain this mode of inheritance.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to investigate the possibility of maternal
transmission of SDHD-linked PGL.
DESIGN: A three-generation family carrying the SDHD W43X mutation was studied at 
the clinical, pathological, and genetical levels.
RESULTS: The germline's mutation was probably inherited from the grandfather. In 
the second generation, three carriers (two females and one male), who had the
same at risk 11q13-q23 haplotype, developed multiple cervical PGLs. In the third 
generation, one boy received the mutation from his mother and developed a glomus 
tympanicum PGL at 11 yr. He shared only the 11q23 haplotype with the other
affected members of the family. Methylation analysis of the differentially
methylated region upstream of the maternally expressed H19 gene, mapped to 11p15,
showed that the seventh CTCF binding site is hypermethylated in the germline of
the affected boy suggesting a gain of imprinting.
CONCLUSION: Our data show that maternal transmission of a SDHD-linked PGL, even
if a rare event, can occur. Therefore, we propose that children who inherited a
pathogenic mutation from their mother should be considered as at risk of PGL.

PMID: 18211978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Immunol Lett. 2008 Apr 15;117(1):35-44. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2007.11.017. Epub
2007 Dec 26.

The critical role of human transcriptional repressor CTCF mRNA up-regulation in
the induction of anti-HIV-1 responses in CD4(+) T cells.

Li Y(1), Li G, Ivanova A, Aaron S, Simm M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Virology Division, St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, Columbia
University Medical Center, New York, NY 10019, USA.

We have employed our CD4(+) T cell model named HIV-1 resistance factor (HRF(+))
to study the inducible anti-HIV-1 responses mediated through novel soluble
molecules. We found that exposure to the soluble products of HRF(+) cells
activated CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) mRNA expression in HIV-1 susceptible
primary and transformed CD4(+) T cells and overlapped with their acquisition of
transient resistance to virus. Conversely, the interference with the expression
of CTCF gene in HRF(+) cells reversed the resistant phenotype and eliminated the 
biological potential of their cell culture supernatant to induce "HRF-like"
activity in target cells. Band-shift analysis upon the nuclear fractions from
HIV-1 resistant cells showed that CTCF protein bound to HIV-1 promoter and this
binding prevented the formation of NF-kappaB/LTR complex. This evidence suggests 
that CTCF is an intracellular effector of HRF activity and that the acquisition
of resistance to HIV-1 in CD4(+) T cells is a consequence of the prior activation
of CTCF gene by the soluble entity secreted by HRF(+) cells.

PMCID: PMC2346778
PMID: 18207574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Br J Cancer. 2008 Feb 12;98(3):571-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604181. Epub 2008 Jan 
15.

BORIS, a paralogue of the transcription factor, CTCF, is aberrantly expressed in 
breast tumours.

D'Arcy V(1), Pore N, Docquier F, Abdullaev ZK, Chernukhin I, Kita GX, Rai S,
Smart M, Farrar D, Pack S, Lobanenkov V, Klenova E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Wivenhoe Park,
Colchester, Essex CO4 3SQ, UK.

Erratum in
    Br J Cancer. 2008 Feb 12;98(3):676.

BORIS (for brother of the regulator of imprinted sites), a paralogue of the
transcription factor, CTCF, is a novel member of the cancer-testis antigen
family. The aims of the present study were as follows: (1) to investigate BORIS
expression in breast cells and tumours using immunohistochemical staining,
western and real-time RT-PCR analyses and (2) assess potential correlation
between BORIS levels in tumours with clinical/pathological parameters. BORIS was 
detected in all 18 inspected breast cell lines, but not in a primary normal
breast cell culture. In 70.7% (41 of 58 cases) BORIS was observed in breast
tumours. High levels of BORIS correlated with high levels of progesterone
receptor (PR) and oestrogen receptor (ER). The link between BORIS and PR/ER was
further confirmed by the ability of BORIS to activate the promoters of the PR and
ER genes in the reporter assays. Detection of BORIS in a high proportion of
breast cancer patients implies potential practical applications of BORIS as a
molecular biomarker of breast cancer. This may be important for diagnosis of the 
condition and for the therapeutic use of BORIS. The ability of BORIS to activate 
promoters of the RP and ER genes points towards possible involvement of BORIS in 
the establishment, progression and maintenance of breast tumours.

PMCID: PMC2243163
PMID: 18195709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Hum Genet. 2008;53(3):247-53. doi: 10.1007/s10038-008-0245-7. Epub 2008 Jan 12.

Evolutionary rate heterogeneity of Alu repeats upstream of the APOA5 gene: do
they regulate APOA5 expression?

Ruiz-Narváez EA(1), Campos H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, 665 Huntington
Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA. eruiz@hsph.harvard.edu

The APOA5 gene, located in the APOA1/C3/A4/A5 gene cluster, is a key regulator of
triglyceride metabolism. ApoAV plasma concentration is much lower as compared to 
other apolipoproteins such as apoCIII and apoAI. This is due in part to the fact 
that the APOC3-enhancer, which up-regulates transcription of the APOA1, APOC3,
and APOA4 genes, does not increase expression of the APOA5 gene. We postulated
that intervening Alu repeats in the APOA5-APOA4 intergenic region gene might be
blocking action of the APOC3-enhancer over the APOA5-promoter. To search for
evidence of functional significance of the intervening Alu sequences, we
estimated nucleotide substitution rates of 21 pairs of Alu elements in the
APOA5-APOA4 intergenic region by comparing published sequences of human and
chimpanzee. Also, we scanned the intergenic region for the presence of binding
sites of the insulator protein CTCF. Seven out of the nine found CTCF binding
sites were located in the first half of the intergenic region. Five out of those 
seven CTCF binding sites were placed inside Alu elements. Based on their
substitution rates, we found two clearly defined groups of Alu sequences: a
slow-evolving group (mean 0.98 +/- 0.18) and a fast-evolving group (mean 2.74 +/-
0.54). Alu repeats with lower substitution rate tended to be located up to 14-kb 
upstream of the APOA5 gene, to belong to the oldest J-family and to have an
opposite orientation to the APOA5 gene. Some Alu sequences may have functional
relevance on the regulation of the APOA5-gene expression.

PMID: 18193158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Mol Hum Reprod. 2008 Feb;14(2):67-74. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gam093. Epub 2008 Jan
4.

Abnormal methylation of imprinted genes in human sperm is associated with
oligozoospermia.

Marques CJ(1), Costa P, Vaz B, Carvalho F, Fernandes S, Barros A, Sousa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Porto 4200-319, Portugal.

Genomic imprinting marks in the male germ line are already established in the
adult germinal stem cell population. We studied the methylation patterns of H19
and MEST imprinted genes in sperm of control and oligozoospermic patients, by
bisulphite genomic sequencing. We here report that 7 out of 15 (46.7%) patients
with a sperm count below 10 x 10(6)/ml display defective methylation of H19
and/or MEST imprinted genes. In these cases, hypomethylation was observed in
5.54% (1.2-8.3%) and complete unmethylation in 2.95% (0-5.9%) of H19 clones.
Similarly, for the CTCF-binding site 6, hypomethylation occurred in 4.8%
(1.2-8.9%) and complete unmethylation in 3.7% (0-6.9%) of the clones. Conversely,
hypermethylation occurred in 8.3% (3.8-12.2%) and complete methylation in 6.1%
(3.8-7.6%) of MEST clones. Of the seven patients presenting imprinting errors,
two had both H19 hypomethylation and MEST hypermethylation, whereas five
displayed only one imprinted gene affected. The frequency of patients with MEST
hypermethylation was highest in the severe oligozoospermia group (2/5 patients), 
whereas H19 hypomethylation was more frequent in the moderate oligozoospermia
(2/5 patients). In all cases, global sperm genome methylation analysis (LINE1
transposon) suggested that defects were specific for imprinted genes. These
findings could contribute to an explanation of the cause of Silver-Russell
syndrome in children born with H19 hypomethylation after assisted reproductive
technologies (ART). Additionally, unmethylation of the CTCF-binding site could
lead to inactivation of the paternal IGF2 gene, and be linked to decreased embryo
quality and birth weight, often associated with ART.

PMID: 18178607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Eur J Hum Genet. 2008 Mar;16(3):328-34. Epub 2008 Jan 9.

IGF2/H19 hypomethylation in Silver-Russell syndrome and isolated hemihypoplasia.

Zeschnigk M(1), Albrecht B, Buiting K, Kanber D, Eggermann T, Binder G, Gromoll
J, Prott EC, Seland S, Horsthemke B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany.
Michael.Zeschnigk@uni-due.de

Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous
syndrome characterized by severe pre and postnatal growth retardation, body
asymmetry and a typical facial phenotype with a triangular face and relative
macrocephaly. In 30% of patients, the differentially methylated IGF2/H19
imprinting center region (ICR1) on chromosome 11p15 was found to be
hypomethylated, as determined by Southern blot analysis of an HpaII restriction
site close to the third CTCF-binding site (CTS3) within ICR1. Using bisulfite
treatment and a real-time PCR-based methylation assay (QAMA), we analyzed the
third and sixth CTCF-binding sites (CTS3, CTS6) in 5 patients with CTS3
hypomethylation, in 14 patients who were suspected to have SRS but were normal by
Southern blot analysis, and in 1 patient with body asymmetry without any other
features of SRS or Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS). In all 5 patients with CTS3
hypomethylation, in 5 of 14 patients who were judged to be normal at CTS3 by
Southern blot analysis and in the patient with isolated body asymmetry, we found 
CTS3 and CTS6 hypomethylation by QAMA. Using methylation-specific multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA), we obtained similar results at 
four additional ICR1 sites in the CTS6 region. These results show that ICR1
hypomethylation occurs more often in SRS patients than as previously thought as
well as in isolated hemihypoplasia. Furthermore, we show that methylation
analysis by QAMA and MLPA is more sensitive in detecting ICR1 hypomethylation
than Southern blot analysis of CTS3.

PMID: 18159214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Reproduction. 2008 Jan;135(1):29-40.

Monoallelic expression of nine imprinted genes in the sheep embryo occurs after
the blastocyst stage.

Thurston A(1), Taylor J, Gardner J, Sinclair KD, Young LE.

Author information: 
(1)Wolfson Centre for Stem Cells, Tissue Engineering and Modelling, Centre for
Biomolecular Sciences, University of Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham NG2 
2RD, UK.

The preimplantation embryos of a range of mammals can be susceptible to
disruptions in genomic imprinting mechanisms, resulting in loss of imprinting.
Such disruptions can have developmental consequences involving foetal and
placental growth such as Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome in humans and large
offspring syndrome in sheep. Our objective was to investigate the dynamics of
establishing monoallelic expression of individual sheep imprinted genes
post-fertilisation. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR was used to amplify cDNA from the
sheep blastocyst, day 21 foetus and day 21 chorioallantois, to compare expression
levels between biparental and parthenogenetic embryos in order to indicate
allelic expression status. In common with other mammals, IGF2, PEG1 and PEG3 were
paternally expressed in the day 21 conceptus, while H19, IGF2R, GRB10 and p57KIP 
were maternally expressed. Interestingly, GNAS was maternally expressed in the
foetus, but paternally expressed in the chorioallantois at day 21. Overall, the
imprinting of ovine GRB10 and IGF2R was comparable with mouse but not with human.
Contrary to the trophoblast-restricted maternal expression in both mouse and
human, SASH2 (sheep homologue of Mash2/HASH2) was expressed in the ovine foetus
and was biallelically expressed in the chorioallantois. Differential methylation 
of the H19 CTCF III upstream region and IGF2R DMR2 in the chorioallantois
revealed predominantly paternal and maternal methylation respectively, indicating
conservation of these imprinting regulatory regions. In blastocysts, IGF2R, GRB10
and SASH2 were expressed biallelically, while the other genes were not detected. 
Thus, for the majority of ovine imprinted genes examined, monoallelic expression 
does not occur until after the blastocyst stage.

PMID: 18159081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Cancer Immun. 2007 Dec 21;7:21.

DNA methylation-dependent regulation of BORIS/CTCFL expression in ovarian cancer.

Woloszynska-Read A(1), James SR, Link PA, Yu J, Odunsi K, Karpf AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.

Brother of the Regulator of Imprinted Sites (BORIS/CTCFL) is an autosomal cancer 
germline (CG) or cancer-testis antigen gene and paralog of CTCF that has been
proposed to function as an oncogene in human cancer via dysregulation of the
cancer epigenome. Here we show that genetic disruption of DNA methylation in
human cancer cells induces BORIS expression, coincident with DNA hypomethylation 
and an altered histone H3 modification pattern at the BORIS promoter. Rapid
amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) mapping revealed that the transcriptional start
site of BORIS in human testis, DNMT deficient human cancer cells, and human
epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) tissues, is similar and lies within the 5' CpG
island. The BORIS promoter is repressed by CpG methylation in a dose-dependent
fashion, indicating a direct role for DNA methylation in BORIS transcriptional
regulation. In human ovarian cancer cell lines, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment 
activates BORIS expression and reduces BORIS promoter DNA methylation. We
quantitatively measured BORIS mRNA expression and promoter DNA methylation in
normal ovary (NO; n = 10) and epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC; n = 77) and found
that, compared to NO, EOC tumors show increased BORIS expression and decreased
BORIS methylation. Importantly, BORIS promoter DNA methylation shows a
significant inverse correlation with BORIS mRNA expression in EOC (Kendall's Tau 
= -0.235, P = 0.007, n = 63). These data establish promoter DNA hypomethylation
as a mechanism leading to BORIS expression in human ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC2935752
PMID: 18095639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Oncogene. 2008 May 22;27(23):3345-59. Epub 2007 Dec 17.

Array painting reveals a high frequency of balanced translocations in breast
cancer cell lines that break in cancer-relevant genes.

Howarth KD(1), Blood KA, Ng BL, Beavis JC, Chua Y, Cooke SL, Raby S, Ichimura K, 
Collins VP, Carter NP, Edwards PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hutchison-MRC Research Centre, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Chromosome translocations in the common epithelial cancers are abundant, yet
little is known about them. They have been thought to be almost all unbalanced
and therefore dismissed as mostly mediating tumour suppressor loss. We present a 
comprehensive analysis by array painting of the chromosome translocations of
breast cancer cell lines HCC1806, HCC1187 and ZR-75-30. In array painting,
chromosomes are isolated by flow cytometry, amplified and hybridized to DNA
microarrays. A total of 200 breakpoints were identified and all were mapped to 1 
Mb resolution on bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) arrays, then 40 selected
breakpoints, including all balanced breakpoints, were further mapped on
tiling-path BAC arrays or to around 2 kb resolution using oligonucleotide arrays.
Many more of the translocations were balanced at 1 Mb resolution than expected,
either reciprocal (eight in total) or balanced for at least one participating
chromosome (19 paired breakpoints). Second, many of the breakpoints were at genes
that are plausible targets of oncogenic translocation, including balanced breaks 
at CTCF, EP300/p300 and FOXP4. Two gene fusions were demonstrated, TAX1BP1-AHCY
and RIF1-PKD1L1. Our results support the idea that chromosome rearrangements may 
play an important role in common epithelial cancers such as breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2423006
PMID: 18084325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Mol Cell. 2007 Dec 14;28(5):761-72.

Coordinated control of dCTCF and gypsy chromatin insulators in Drosophila.

Gerasimova TI(1), Lei EP, Bushey AM, Corces VG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, 3400 North Charles Street,
Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.

CTCF plays a central role in vertebrate insulators and forms part of the Fab-8
insulator in Drosophila. dCTCF is present at hundreds of sites in the Drosophila 
genome, where it is located at the boundaries between bands and interbands in
polytene chromosomes. dCTCF colocalizes with CP190, which is required for proper 
binding of dCTCF to chromatin, but not with the other gypsy insulator proteins
Su(Hw) or Mod(mdg4)2.2. Mutations in the CP190 gene affect Fab-8 insulator
activity, suggesting that CP190 is an essential component of both gypsy and dCTCF
insulators. dCTCF is present at specific nuclear locations, forming large
insulator bodies that overlap with those formed by Su(Hw), Mod(mdg4)2.2, and
CP190. The results suggest that Su(Hw) and dCTCF may be the DNA-binding
components of two different subsets of insulators that share CP190 and cooperate 
in the formation of insulator bodies to regulate the organization of the
chromatin fiber in the nucleus.

PMCID: PMC2579779
PMID: 18082602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. EMBO J. 2008 Jan 9;27(1):168-78. Epub 2007 Dec 13.

Two distinct mechanisms of silencing by the KvDMR1 imprinting control region.

Shin JY(1), Fitzpatrick GV, Higgins MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Genetics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY
14263, USA.

Imprinting control regions (ICRs) are known to repress genes by utilizing one of 
two mechanisms, CTCF-mediated insulation or the transcription of non-coding RNAs 
(ncRNAs). The KvDMR1 ICR contains both the promoter for the Kcnq1ot1 ncRNA and
two CTCF-binding sites located within sequences exhibiting repressive activity in
enhancer-blocking assays. Deletion of KvDMR1 results in ubiquitous biallelic
expression of eight maternal-specific genes in distal chromosome 7. Here we
report that while truncation of the Kcnq1ot1 transcript results in the loss of
imprinted expression of these genes in the placenta, it does not affect imprinted
expression of Cdkn1c in a subset of embryonic tissues despite universal loss of
paternal-specific methylation at Cdkn1c. Consistent with tissue-specific loss of 
imprinted expression, growth deficiency of these mutant mice was less severe than
that observed previously in mice with deletion of KvDMR1. This study demonstrates
that the KvDMR1 locus can silence Cdkn1c by a mechanism independent of Kcnq1ot1
transcription, perhaps by CTCF-associated repression, making it the first example
of an ICR capable of silencing the same gene by two distinct mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC2206141
PMID: 18079696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Feb;28(3):1124-35. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

CTCF is the master organizer of domain-wide allele-specific chromatin at the
H19/Igf2 imprinted region.

Han L(1), Lee DH, Szabó PE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope,
1450 East Duarte Rd., Duarte, CA 91010-3011, USA.

A paternally methylated imprinting control region (ICR) directs allele-specific
expression of the imprinted H19 and Igf2 genes. CTCF protein binding in the ICR
is required in the maternal chromosome for insulating Igf2 from the shared
enhancers, initiation of the H19 promoter transcription, maintaining DNA
hypomethylation, and chromosome loop formation. Using novel quantitative
allele-specific chromatin immunoprecipitation-single-nucleotide primer extension 
assays, we measured the chromatin composition along the H19/Igf2 imprinted domain
in cells with engineered mutations at the four ICR-CTCF binding sites. Abolishing
CTCF binding in the ICR reduced normally maternal allele-specific H3K9
acetylation and H3K4 methylation at the H19 ICR and promoter/gene body and
maternal allele-specific H3K27 trimethylation at the Igf2 P2 promoter and Igf2
differentially methylated regions (DMRs). Paternal H3K27 trimethylation and
macroH2A1 became biallelic in the mutant cells at the H19 promoter while paternal
H3K9 acetylation and H3K4 methylation became biallelic at the Igf2 DMRs. We
provide evidence that CTCF is the single major organizer of allele-specific
chromatin composition in this domain. This finding has important implications:
(i) for mechanisms of insulation since CTCF regulates chromatin at a distance,
involving repression by H3K27 trimethylation at the Igf2 locus independently of
repression by DNA hypermethylation; and (ii) for mechanisms of genomic imprinting
since point mutations of CTCF binding sites cause domain-wide "paternalization"
of the maternal allele's chromatin composition.

PMCID: PMC2223393
PMID: 18039862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Cell Prolif. 2007 Dec;40(6):795-808.

Functional role of CCCTC binding factor in insulin-stimulated cell proliferation.

Gao J(1), Li T, Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California Los Angeles, Torrance, CA 90502, USA.

OBJECTIVES: CCCTC binding factor (CTCF) is a nuclear protein containing an
11-zinc-finger DNA-binding domain. CTCF plays important roles in the regulation
of epigenetics and gene transcription. As a multifunctional protein, CTCF is also
involved in the regulation of cell proliferation and of apoptosis. However,
mechanisms underlining the regulatory function of CTCF in mediating growth
factor- and cytokine-stimulated cell fate are largely unknown.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The effect of CTCF on insulin-induced ML-1 cell
proliferation was investigated by studying insulin-stimulated extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (Erk) and Akt signalling pathways, and the alterations of
CTCF activity in these cells.
RESULTS: The present study demonstrates that insulin-induced human haematopoietic
myeloblastic ML-1 cell proliferation requires increased CTCF expression.
Inhibition of Erk and Akt pathways with specific blockers or by dominantly
negative expression of Erk and Akt mutants markedly suppressed expression of CTCF
and resulted in retardation of cell proliferation. Furthermore, insulin-induced
ML-1 cell proliferation was significantly enhanced by overexpression of cDNA
encoding full-length CTCF. In contrast, ML-1 cell proliferation was inhibited by 
knocking down CTCF mRNA using specific small interference RNA.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that CTCF is indeed a protein with
multifunctional activity that plays a significant role in modulating signalling
pathways to mediate insulin-induced ML-1 cell proliferation.

PMID: 18021171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Jan;36(Database issue):D83-7. Epub 2007 Nov 2.

CTCFBSDB: a CTCF-binding site database for characterization of vertebrate genomic
insulators.

Bao L(1), Zhou M, Cui Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Sciences, Center of Genomics and Bioinformatics,
University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 858 Madison Avenue, Memphis, TN
38163, USA.

Recent studies on transcriptional control of gene expression have pinpointed the 
importance of long-range interactions and three-dimensional organization of
chromatins within the nucleus. Distal regulatory elements such as enhancers may
activate transcription over long distances; hence, their action must be
restricted within appropriate boundaries to prevent illegitimate activation of
non-target genes. Insulators are DNA elements with enhancer-blocking and/or
chromatin-bordering functions. In vertebrates, the versatile transcription
regulator CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is the only identified trans-acting factor 
that confers enhancer-blocking insulator activity. CTCF-binding sites were found 
to be commonly distributed along the vertebrate genomes. We have constructed a
CTCF-binding site database (CTCFBSDB) to characterize experimentally identified
and computationally predicted CTCF-binding sties. Biological knowledge and data
from multiple resources have been integrated into the database, including
sequence data, genetic polymorphisms, function annotations, histone methylation
profiles, gene expression profiles and comparative genomic information. A
web-based user interface was implemented for data retrieval, analysis and
visualization. In silico prediction of CTCF-binding motifs is provided to
facilitate the identification of candidate insulators in the query sequences
submitted by users. The database can be accessed at http://insulatordb.utmem.edu/

PMCID: PMC2238977
PMID: 17981843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(21):7372-88. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

Expression of the CTCF-paralogous cancer-testis gene, brother of the regulator of
imprinted sites (BORIS), is regulated by three alternative promoters modulated by
CpG methylation and by CTCF and p53 transcription factors.

Renaud S(1), Pugacheva EM, Delgado MD, Braunschweig R, Abdullaev Z, Loukinov D,
Benhattar J, Lobanenkov V.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Pathology, Laboratory of Immunopathology, NIAID, NIH,
Rockville, MD 20815, USA.

BORIS, like other members of the 'cancer/testis antigen' family, is normally
expressed in testicular germ cells and repressed in somatic cells, but is
aberrantly activated in cancers. To understand regulatory mechanisms governing
human BORIS expression, we characterized its 5'-flanking region. Using 5' RACE,
we identified three promoters, designated A, B and C, corresponding to
transcription start sites at -1447, -899 and -658 bp upstream of the first ATG.
Alternative promoter usage generated at least five alternatively spliced BORIS
mRNAs with different half-lives determined by varying 5'-UTRs. In normal testis, 
BORIS is transcribed from all three promoters, but 84% of the 30 cancer cell
lines tested used only promoter(s) A and/or C while the others utilized primarily
promoters B and C. The differences in promoter usage between normal and cancer
cells suggested that they were subject to differential regulation. We found that 
DNA methylation and functional p53 contributes to the negative regulation of each
promoter. Moreover, reduction of CTCF in normally BORIS-negative human
fibroblasts resulted in derepression of BORIS promoters. These results provide a 
mechanistic basis for understanding cancer-related associations between
haploinsufficiency of CTCF and BORIS derepression, and between the lack of
functional p53 and aberrant activation of BORIS.

PMCID: PMC2175345
PMID: 17962299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Nat Genet. 2007 Nov;39(11):1390-6. Epub 2007 Oct 21.

Evidence that homologous X-chromosome pairing requires transcription and Ctcf
protein.

Xu N(1), Donohoe ME, Silva SS, Lee JT.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts
General Hospital Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School Boston,
Massachusetts 02114, USA.

X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) ensures the equality of X-chromosome dosages in
male and female mammals by silencing one X in the female. To achieve the mutually
exclusive designation of active X (Xa) and inactive X (Xi), the process
necessitates that two Xs communicate in trans through homologous pairing. Pairing
depends on a 15-kb region within the genes Tsix and Xite. Here, we dissect
molecular requirements and find that pairing can be recapitulated by 1- to 2-kb
subfragments of Tsix or Xite with little sequence similarity. However, a common
denominator among them is the presence of the protein Ctcf, a chromatin insulator
that we find to be essential for pairing. By contrast, the Ctcf-interacting
partner, Yy1 (ref. 8), is not required. Pairing also depends on transcription.
Transcriptional inhibition prevents new pair formation but does not perturb
existing pairs. The kinetics suggest a pairing half-life of <1 h. We propose that
pairing requires Ctcf binding and co-transcriptional activity of Tsix and Xite.

PMID: 17952071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2008;80:337-60.

Genetics and epigenetics of the multifunctional protein CTCF.

Filippova GN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center Seattle,
Washington 98109, USA.

Recent advances in studying long-range chromatin interactions have shifted focus 
from the transcriptional regulation by nearby regulatory elements to recognition 
of the role of higher-order chromatin organization within the nucleus. These
advances have also suggested that CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), a known chromatin 
insulator protein, may play a central role in mediating long-range chromatin
interactions, directing DNA segments into transcription factories and/or
facilitating interactions with other DNA regions. Several models that describe
possible mechanisms for multiple functions of CTCF in establishment and
maintenance of epigenetic programs are now emerging. Epigenetics plays an
important role in normal development and disease including cancer. CTCF
involvement in multiple aspects of epigenetic regulation, including regulation of
genomic imprinting and X-chromosome inactivation, has been well established. More
recently, CTCF was found to play a role in regulation of noncoding transcription 
and establishing local chromatin structure at the repetitive elements in
mammalian genomes, suggesting a new epigenetic basis for several
repeat-associated genetic disorders. Emerging evidence also points to the role of
CTCF deregulation in the epigenetic imbalance in cancer. These studies provide
some of the important missing links in our understanding of epigenetic control of
both development and cancer.

PMID: 17950379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Mol Biol. 2007 Nov 30;374(3):580-90. Epub 2007 Sep 22.

cHS4 insulator-mediated alleviation of promoter interference during cell-based
expression of tandemly associated transgenes.

Yahata K(1), Maeshima K, Sone T, Ando T, Okabe M, Imamoto N, Imamoto F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, 3-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Expression of multiple transgenes in cells or whole organisms is a powerful tool 
for basic research of various biological functions and potentially for clinical
applications such as gene therapy. As a model system for this purpose, multi-cDNA
expression clones were constructed harboring two tandemly situated fluorescent
protein cDNAs as reporter genes on a single plasmid. When 293 cells were
transfected transiently, the downstream gene displayed significantly lower
expression when compared with the upstream cDNA. Such transcriptional
interference was markedly alleviated by inserting an insulator cassette of cHS4
elements derived from the chicken beta-globin locus at a site between two
neighboring cDNAs. The introduction of cHS4 resulted in a drastic increase of the
expression level of the downstream cDNA, ensuring comparable expression levels of
the tandem transgenes. Using a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we
demonstrated that CTCF and USF1 that recruit histone-modifying complexes are
bound to the cHS4 region. Depletion of CTCF or USF1 by siRNA resulted in relief
of the diminished effect. Our data thus indicate that CTCF and histone modifiers 
recruited by USF1 cooperatively mediate the suppression of transcriptional
interference between apposed genes, presumably by facilitating active chromatin
conformation over the transgenes.

PMID: 17945255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Biol Chem. 2007 Dec 14;282(50):36143-54. Epub 2007 Oct 11.

A novel CpG-free vertebrate insulator silences the testis-specific SP-10 gene in 
somatic tissues: role for TDP-43 in insulator function.

Abhyankar MM(1), Urekar C, Reddi PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

Regulation of cell type-specific gene transcription is central to cellular
differentiation and development. During spermatogenesis, a number of
testis-specific genes are expressed in a precise spatiotemporal order. How these 
genes remain silent in the somatic tissues is not well understood. Our previous
studies using the round spermatid-specific mouse SP-10 gene, which codes for an
acrosomal protein, revealed that its proximal promoter acts as an insulator and
prevents expression in the somatic tissues. Here we report that the insulator
tethers the SP-10 gene to the nuclear matrix in somatic tissues, sequestering the
core promoter in the process, thus preventing transcription. In round spermatids 
where the SP-10 gene is expressed, this tethering is released. TAR DNA-binding
protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43), previously shown to interact with the SP-10
insulator, was found to be in the 2 m NaCl-insoluble nuclear matrix fraction.
TDP-43 prevented enhancer-promoter interactions when artificially recruited
between the two by Gal4 strategy. Knockdown of TDP-43 using small interfering RNA
released the enhancer-blocking effect of the SP-10 insulator in a stable cell
culture model. Mutation of TDP-43 binding sites abolished this effect. Finally, a
50-bp subfragment of the SP-10 insulator, which includes TDP-43 binding sites,
functioned as a minimal insulator in transgenic mice and silenced an otherwise
ectopically expressed transgene in somatic tissues. The SP-10 insulator lacks CpG
dinucleotides or CTCF binding sites. Thus, the present study characterized a
novel vertebrate insulator in a physiological context and showed for the first
time how a testis-specific gene is silenced in the somatic tissues by an
insulator.

PMID: 17932037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2007 Oct;17(5):400-7. Epub 2007 Oct 24.

We gather together: insulators and genome organization.

Wallace JA(1), Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892-0540, United States.

When placed between an enhancer and promoter, certain DNA sequence elements
inhibit enhancer-stimulated gene expression. The best characterized of these
enhancer-blocking insulators, gypsy in Drosophila and the CTCF-binding element in
vertebrates and flies, stabilize contacts between distant genomic regulatory
sites leading to the formation of loop domains. Current results show that CTCF
mediates long-range contacts in the mouse beta-globin locus and at the
Igf2/H19-imprinted locus. Recently described active chromatin hubs and
transcription factories also involve long-range interactions; it is likely that
CTCF interferes with their formation when acting as an insulator. The properties 
of CTCF, and its newly described genomic distribution, suggest that it may play
an important role in large-scale nuclear architecture, perhaps mediated by the
co-factors with which it interacts in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2215060
PMID: 17913488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Oct 2;104(40):15741-6. Epub 2007 Sep 21.

Chromatin fine structure of the c-MYC insulator element/DNase I-hypersensitive
site I is not preserved during mitosis.

Komura J(1), Ikehata H, Ono T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Miyagi 980-8575, Japan. junkom@mail.tains.tohoku.ac.jp

During mitosis in higher eukaryotic cells, transcription is silenced and
transcription complexes are absent from promoters in the condensed chromosomes;
however, epigenetic information concerning the pattern of expressed and silent
genes must be preserved. Recently, it has been reported that CTCF, a major
protein in vertebrate insulator elements, remains associated with mitotic
chromatin. If the structure of insulators is preserved during mitosis, then it is
possible that insulators can function as components or elements of the mechanism 
involved in the transfer of epigenetic information through the mitotic phase and 
can help guide the reconstitution of domain structure and nuclear organization
after the completion of this phase. We have studied the chromatin structure of
the insulator upstream of the c-MYC gene in mitotic HeLa cells. The region of the
insulator corresponds to the DNase I hypersensitive site I, but Southern blot
analysis revealed that hypersensitivity was lost during mitosis. High resolution 
in vivo footprinting analysis using dimethyl sulfate, UV light, psoralen, and
DNase I also demonstrated the disappearance of the sequence-specific direct
binding of CTCF and the absence of detectable structures during mitosis. Thus, it
appears that the nucleoprotein complex involving this insulator element must be
reassembled de novo with each new cell generation.

PMCID: PMC2000435
PMID: 17890321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 16;282(46):33336-45. Epub 2007 Sep 7.

Critical DNA binding interactions of the insulator protein CTCF: a small number
of zinc fingers mediate strong binding, and a single finger-DNA interaction
controls binding at imprinted loci.

Renda M(1), Baglivo I, Burgess-Beusse B, Esposito S, Fattorusso R, Felsenfeld G, 
Pedone PV.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Ambientali, Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli
via Vivaldi 43, 81100 Caserta, Italy.

The DNA-binding protein CTCF (CCCTC binding factor) mediates enhancer blocking
insulation at sites throughout the genome and plays an important role in
regulating allele-specific expression at the Igf2/H19 locus and at other
imprinted loci. Evidence is also accumulating that CTCF is involved in large
scale organization of genomic chromatin. Although CTCF has 11 zinc fingers, we
show here that only 4 of these are essential to strong binding and that they
recognize a core 12-bp DNA sequence common to most CTCF sites. By deleting
individual fingers and mutating individual sites, we determined the orientation
of binding. Furthermore, we were able to identify the specific finger and its
point of DNA interaction that are responsible for the loss of CTCF binding when
CpG residues are methylated in the imprinted Igf2/H19 locus. This single
interaction appears to be critical for allele-specific binding and insulation by 
CTCF.

PMID: 17827499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Mol Biol. 2007 Oct 19;373(2):233-9. Epub 2007 Aug 14.

Drosophila CTCF is required for Fab-8 enhancer blocking activity in S2 cells.

Ciavatta D(1), Rogers S, Magnuson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599, USA.

CTCF is a conserved transcriptional regulator with binding sites in DNA
insulators identified in vertebrates and invertebrates. The Drosophila
Abdominal-B locus contains CTCF binding sites in the Fab-8 DNA insulator.
Previous reports have shown that Fab-8 has enhancer blocking activity in
Drosophila transgenic assays. We now confirm the enhancer blocking capability of 
the Fab-8 insulator in stably transfected Drosophila S2 cells and show this
activity depends on the Fab-8 CTCF binding sites. Furthermore, knockdown of
Drosophila CTCF by RNAi in our stable cell lines demonstrates that CTCF itself is
critical for Fab-8 enhancer blocking.

PMCID: PMC2694738
PMID: 17825318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. EMBO J. 2007 Oct 3;26(19):4203-14. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

The Drosophila insulator proteins CTCF and CP190 link enhancer blocking to body
patterning.

Mohan M(1), Bartkuhn M, Herold M, Philippen A, Heinl N, Bardenhagen I, Leers J,
White RA, Renkawitz-Pohl R, Saumweber H, Renkawitz R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Heinrich-Buff-Ring, 
Giessen, Germany.

Insulator sequences guide the function of distantly located enhancer elements to 
the appropriate target genes by blocking inappropriate interactions. In
Drosophila, five different insulator binding proteins have been identified, Zw5, 
BEAF-32, GAGA factor, Su(Hw) and dCTCF. Only dCTCF has a known conserved
counterpart in vertebrates. Here we find that the structurally related factors
dCTCF and Su(Hw) have distinct binding targets. In contrast, the Su(Hw)
interacting factor CP190 largely overlapped with dCTCF binding sites and
interacts with dCTCF. Binding of dCTCF to targets requires CP190 in many cases,
whereas others are independent of CP190. Analysis of the bithorax complex
revealed that six of the borders between the parasegment specific regulatory
domains are bound by dCTCF and by CP190 in vivo. dCTCF null mutations affect
expression of Abdominal-B, cause pharate lethality and a homeotic phenotype. A
short pulse of dCTCF expression during larval development rescues the dCTCF loss 
of function phenotype. Overall, we demonstrate the importance of dCTCF in fly
development and in the regulation of abdominal segmentation.

PMCID: PMC2230845
PMID: 17805343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. PLoS Genet. 2007 Aug;3(8):e136. Epub 2007 Jul 2.

Identification and characterization of cell type-specific and ubiquitous
chromatin regulatory structures in the human genome.

Xi H(1), Shulha HP, Lin JM, Vales TR, Fu Y, Bodine DM, McKay RD, Chenoweth JG,
Tesar PJ, Furey TS, Ren B, Weng Z, Crawford GE.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Program, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, United
States of America.

The identification of regulatory elements from different cell types is necessary 
for understanding the mechanisms controlling cell type-specific and housekeeping 
gene expression. Mapping DNaseI hypersensitive (HS) sites is an accurate method
for identifying the location of functional regulatory elements. We used a high
throughput method called DNase-chip to identify 3,904 DNaseI HS sites from six
cell types across 1% of the human genome. A significant number (22%) of DNaseI HS
sites from each cell type are ubiquitously present among all cell types studied. 
Surprisingly, nearly all of these ubiquitous DNaseI HS sites correspond to either
promoters or insulator elements: 86% of them are located near annotated
transcription start sites and 10% are bound by CTCF, a protein with known
enhancer-blocking insulator activity. We also identified a large number of DNaseI
HS sites that are cell type specific (only present in one cell type); these
regions are enriched for enhancer elements and correlate with cell type-specific 
gene expression as well as cell type-specific histone modifications. Finally, we 
found that approximately 8% of the genome overlaps a DNaseI HS site in at least
one the six cell lines studied, indicating that a significant percentage of the
genome is potentially functional.

PMCID: PMC1950163
PMID: 17708682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Biochem J. 2007 Dec 1;408(2):267-75.

CTCF mediates insulator function at the CFTR locus.

Blackledge NP(1), Carter EJ, Evans JR, Lawson V, Rowntree RK, Harris A.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Molecular Genetics, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
Oxford University, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.

Regulatory elements that lie outside the basal promoter of a gene may be revealed
by local changes in chromatin structure and histone modifications. The promoter
of the CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator) gene is not
responsible for its complex pattern of expression. To identify important
regulatory elements for CFTR we have previously mapped DHS (DNase
I-hypersensitive sites) across 400 kb spanning the locus. Of particular interest 
were two DHS that flank the CFTR gene, upstream at -20.9 kb with respect to the
translational start site, and downstream at +15.6 kb. In the present study we
show that these two DHS possess enhancer-blocking activity and bind proteins that
are characteristic of known insulator elements. The DHS core at -20.9 kb binds
CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor) both in vitro and in vivo; however, the +15.6 kb core
appears to bind other factors. Histone-modification analysis across the CFTR
locus highlights structural differences between the -20.9 kb and +15.6 kb DHS,
further suggesting that these two insulator elements may operate by distinct
mechanisms. We propose that these two DHS mark the boundaries of the CFTR gene
functional unit and establish a chromatin domain within which the complex profile
of CFTR expression is maintained.

PMCID: PMC2267356
PMID: 17696881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2007 Oct;46(10):929-35.

Duplication of the paternal IGF2 allele in trisomy 11 and elevated expression
levels of IGF2 mRNA in congenital mesoblastic nephroma of the cellular or mixed
type.

Watanabe N(1), Haruta M, Soejima H, Fukushi D, Yokomori K, Nakadate H, Okita H,
Hata JI, Fukuzawa M, Kaneko Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Diagnosis, Research Institute for Clinical Oncology,
Saitama Cancer Center, Ina, Saitama, and Department of Pediatrics, Juntendo
University, Nerima Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

In a metaphase comparative genomic hybridization and fluorescence in situ
hybridization study of 13 congenital mesoblastic nephroma (CMN) tumors, trisomy
11 was found in seven cellular or mixed type tumors, disomy 11 with other
chromosome changes in two cellular type tumors, and no chromosome changes in four
classical type tumors. Reverse-transcription (RT)-PCR analysis detected the
ETV6-NTRK3 fusion transcript in all eight cellular or mixed type tumors examined,
but not in four classical type tumors. All seven tumors with trisomy 11 showed
duplication of the paternal IGF2 allele, and six cellular or classical type
tumors with disomy 11 showed one paternal and one maternal allele of IGF2,
analyzing the methylation status of the sixth CTCF site of the H19-differentially
methylated region. Allelic expression study using the ApaI/AvaII polymorphism
site at exon 9 of IGF2 showed retention of imprinting in all seven tumors
examined. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis showed higher expression levels 
of IGF2 mRNA in three of three cellular type tumors with trisomy 11, in one
cellular type tumor with disomy 11, and in three of four classical tumors than in
fetal kidneys or normal kidney tissues. Thus, duplicated paternal IGF2 resulted
in elevated IGF2 mRNA levels, and may provide CMN or its precursor cells with a
proliferative advantage. The mechanism explaining that some cellular or classical
type tumors with disomy 11 also showed elevated IGF2 mRNA levels remains
unresolved. IGF2 clearly plays an important role in the tumorigenic process of
CMN, although it is difficult to assess its exact role.

Copyright (c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17639583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Immunol. 2007 Jul 15;179(2):1088-95.

CTCF-independent, but not CTCF-dependent, elements significantly contribute to
TCR-alpha locus control region activity.

Gomos-Klein J(1), Harrow F, Alarcón J, Ortiz BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, City University of New York, Hunter
College, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The mouse TCRalpha/TCRdelta/Dad1 gene locus bears a locus control region (LCR)
that drives high-level, position-independent, thymic transgene expression in
chromatin. It achieves this through DNA sequences that enhance transcription and 
protect transgene expression from integration site-dependent position effects.
The former activity maps to a classical enhancer region (Ealpha). In contrast,
the elements supporting the latter capacity that suppresses position effects are 
incompletely understood. Such elements likely play important roles in their
native locus and may resemble insulator/boundary sequences. Insulators support
enhancer blocking and/or chromatin barrier activity. Most vertebrate
enhancer-blocking insulators are dependent on the CTCF transcription factor and
its cognate DNA binding site. However, studies have also revealed
CTCF-independent enhancer blocking and barrier insulator activity in the
vertebrate genome. The TCRalpha LCR contains a CTCF-dependent and multiple
CTCF-independent enhancer-blocking regions whose roles in LCR activity are
unknown. Using randomly integrated reporter transgenes in mice, we find that the 
CTCF region plays a very minor role in LCR function. In contrast, we report the
in vivo function of two additional downstream elements located in the region of
the LCR that supports CTCF-independent enhancer-blocking activity in cell
culture. Internal deletion of either of these elements significantly impairs LCR 
activity. These results reveal that the position-effect suppression region of the
TCRalpha LCR harbors an array of CTCF-independent, positive-acting gene
regulatory elements, some of which share characteristics with barrier-type
insulators. These elements may help manage the separate regulatory programs of
the TCRalpha and Dad1 genes.

PMID: 17617601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. PLoS Genet. 2007 Jul;3(7):e112.

CTCF genomic binding sites in Drosophila and the organisation of the bithorax
complex.

Holohan EE(1), Kwong C, Adryan B, Bartkuhn M, Herold M, Renkawitz R, Russell S,
White R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Insulator or enhancer-blocking elements are proposed to play an important role in
the regulation of transcription by preventing inappropriate enhancer/promoter
interaction. The zinc-finger protein CTCF is well studied in vertebrates as an
enhancer blocking factor, but Drosophila CTCF has only been characterised
recently. To date only one endogenous binding location for CTCF has been
identified in the Drosophila genome, the Fab-8 insulator in the Abdominal-B locus
in the Bithorax complex (BX-C). We carried out chromatin immunopurification
coupled with genomic microarray analysis to identify CTCF binding sites within
representative regions of the Drosophila genome, including the 3-Mb Adh region,
the BX-C, and the Antennapedia complex. Location of in vivo CTCF binding within
these regions enabled us to construct a robust CTCF binding-site consensus
sequence. CTCF binding sites identified in the BX-C map precisely to the known
insulator elements Mcp, Fab-6, and Fab-8. Other CTCF binding sites correlate with
boundaries of regulatory domains allowing us to locate three additional
presumptive insulator elements; "Fab-2," "Fab-3," and "Fab-4." With the exception
of Fab-7, our data indicate that CTCF is directly associated with all known or
predicted insulators in the BX-C, suggesting that the functioning of these
insulators involves a common CTCF-dependent mechanism. Comparison of the
locations of the CTCF sites with characterised Polycomb target sites and histone 
modification provides support for the domain model of BX-C regulation.

PMCID: PMC1904468
PMID: 17616980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Exp Cell Res. 2007 Aug 15;313(14):3057-65. Epub 2007 May 24.

Functional role of CCCTC binding factor (CTCF) in stress-induced apoptosis.

Li T(1), Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, HMC, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California-Los Angeles, Torrance, CA 90502, USA.

CTCF, a nuclear transcriptional factor, is a multifunctional protein and involves
regulation of growth factor- and cytokine-induced cell
proliferation/differentiation. In the present study, we investigated the role of 
CTCF in protecting stress-induced apoptosis in various human cell types. We found
that UV irradiation and hyper-osmotic stress induced human corneal epithelial
(HCE) and hematopoietic myeloid cell apoptosis detected by significantly
increased caspase 3 activity and decreased cell viability. The stress-induced
apoptotic response in these cells requires down-regulation of CTCF at both mRNA
and protein levels, suggesting that CTCF may play an important role in downstream
events of stress-induced signaling pathways. Inhibition of NFkappaB activity
prevented stress-induced down-regulation of CTCF and increased cell viability
against stress-induced apoptosis. The anti-apoptotic effect of CTCF was further
studied by manipulating CTCF activities in HCE and hematopoietic cells. Transient
transfection of cDNAs encoding full-length human CTCF markedly suppressed
stress-induced apoptosis in these cells. In contrast, knocking down of CTCF mRNA 
using siRNA specific to CTCF significantly promoted stress-induced apoptosis.
Thus, our results reveal that CTCF is a down stream target of stress-induced
signaling cascades and it plays a significant anti-apoptotic role in regulation
of stress-induced cellular responses in HCE and hematopoietic myeloid cells.

PMCID: PMC2706011
PMID: 17583694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Cell. 2007 May 18;129(4):823-37.

High-resolution profiling of histone methylations in the human genome.

Barski A(1), Cuddapah S, Cui K, Roh TY, Schones DE, Wang Z, Wei G, Chepelev I,
Zhao K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2007 Nov 30;131(5):831-2; author reply 832-3.

Histone modifications are implicated in influencing gene expression. We have
generated high-resolution maps for the genome-wide distribution of 20 histone
lysine and arginine methylations as well as histone variant H2A.Z, RNA polymerase
II, and the insulator binding protein CTCF across the human genome using the
Solexa 1G sequencing technology. Typical patterns of histone methylations
exhibited at promoters, insulators, enhancers, and transcribed regions are
identified. The monomethylations of H3K27, H3K9, H4K20, H3K79, and H2BK5 are all 
linked to gene activation, whereas trimethylations of H3K27, H3K9, and H3K79 are 
linked to repression. H2A.Z associates with functional regulatory elements, and
CTCF marks boundaries of histone methylation domains. Chromosome banding patterns
are correlated with unique patterns of histone modifications. Chromosome
breakpoints detected in T cell cancers frequently reside in chromatin regions
associated with H3K4 methylations. Our data provide new insights into the
function of histone methylation and chromatin organization in genome function.

PMID: 17512414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Jun;1773(6):924-33. Epub 2007 Mar 28.

Unusual compartmentalization of CTCF and other transcription factors in the
course of terminal erythroid differentiation.

Kantidze OL(1), Iarovaia OV, Philonenko ES, Yakutenko II, Razin SV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Structural and Functional Organization of Chromosomes, Institute
of Gene Biology RAS, 34/5 Vavilov Street, 119334 Moscow, Russia.

It is demonstrated that in chicken embryonic and mature erythrocyte nuclei the
distribution of a versatile transcription factor CTCF differs drastically from
its distribution in nuclei of proliferating erythroid and non-erythroid cells. In
the latter case CTCF was distributed throughout the whole nucleus volume, being
concentrated in many small compartments (punctuate nuclear staining). In
contrast, in embryonic and mature erythrocytes CTCF was concentrated in a limited
number of large compartments. These large CTCF-containing compartments were not
observed in other cells. Occasionally, but not in all cells, some of these
compartments were localized close to nucleoli but did not colocalize with them.
In mature erythrocytes a clear exclusion of CTCF-containing compartments from the
chromatin domain was observed. This exclusion correlated with a tight association
of CTCF with the nuclear matrix. Concentration in relatively large compartments
and exclusion from the chromatin domain in nuclei of mature erythrocytes were
also observed for RNA polymerase II and several transcription factors. The data
are discussed in the context of a hypothesis postulating that relocalization of
different components of the transcriptional machinery from the chromatin domain
into the interchromatin compartment is an important step of the terminal
inactivation of chicken erythrocyte nuclei.

PMID: 17467075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. J Cell Sci. 2007 May 1;120(Pt 9):1689-700.

Transition from a nucleosome-based to a protamine-based chromatin configuration
during spermiogenesis in Drosophila.

Rathke C(1), Baarends WM, Jayaramaiah-Raja S, Bartkuhn M, Renkawitz R,
Renkawitz-Pohl R.

Author information: 
(1)Philipps-Universität Marburg, Fachbereich Biologie, Entwicklungsbiologie,
35043 Marburg, Germany.

In higher organisms, the chromatin of sperm is organised in a highly condensed
protamine-based structure. In pre-meiotic stages and shortly after meiosis,
histones carry multiple modifications. Here, we focus on post-meiotic stages and 
show that also after meiosis, histone H3 shows a high overall methylation of K9
and K27 and we hypothesise that these modifications ensure maintenance of
transcriptional silencing in the haploid genome. Furthermore, we show that
histones are lost during the early canoe stage and that just before this stage,
hyper-acetylation of histone H4 and mono-ubiquitylation of histone H2A occurs. We
believe that these histone modifications within the histone-based chromatin
architecture may lead to better access of enzymes and chromatin remodellers. This
notion is supported by the presence of the architectural protein CTCF, numerous
DNA breaks, SUMO, UbcD6 and high content of ubiquitin, as well as testes-specific
nuclear proteasomes at this time. Moreover, we report the first transition
protein-like chromosomal protein, Tpl(94D), to be found in Drosophila. We propose
that Tpl(94D)--an HMG box protein--and the numerous DNA breaks facilitate
chromatin unwinding as a prelude to protamine and Mst77F deposition. Finally, we 
show that histone modifications and removal are independent of protamine
synthesis.

PMID: 17452629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Apr 24;104(17):7145-50. Epub 2007 Apr 18.

Systematic discovery of regulatory motifs in conserved regions of the human
genome, including thousands of CTCF insulator sites.

Xie X(1), Mikkelsen TS, Gnirke A, Lindblad-Toh K, Kellis M, Lander ES.

Author information: 
(1)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and 
Harvard Medical School, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Conserved noncoding elements (CNEs) constitute the majority of sequences under
purifying selection in the human genome, yet their function remains largely
unknown. Experimental evidence suggests that many of these elements play
regulatory roles, but little is known about regulatory motifs contained within
them. Here we describe a systematic approach to discover and characterize
regulatory motifs within mammalian CNEs by searching for long motifs (12-22 nt)
with significant enrichment in CNEs and studying their biochemical and genomic
properties. Our analysis identifies 233 long motifs (LMs), matching a total of
approximately 60,000 conserved instances across the human genome. These motifs
include 16 previously known regulatory elements, such as the histone 3'-UTR motif
and the neuron-restrictive silencer element, as well as striking examples of
novel functional elements. The most highly enriched motif (LM1) corresponds to
the X-box motif known from yeast and nematode. We show that it is bound by the
RFX1 protein and identify thousands of conserved motif instances, suggesting a
broad role for the RFX family in gene regulation. A second group of motifs (LM2*)
does not match any previously known motif. We demonstrate by biochemical and
computational methods that it defines a binding site for the CTCF protein, which 
is involved in insulator function to limit the spread of gene activation. We
identify nearly 15,000 conserved sites that likely serve as insulators, and we
show that nearby genes separated by predicted CTCF sites show markedly reduced
correlation in gene expression. These sites may thus partition the human genome
into domains of expression.

PMCID: PMC1852749
PMID: 17442748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Virol. 2007 Jun;81(12):6389-401. Epub 2007 Apr 4.

Chromatin profiling of Epstein-Barr virus latency control region.

Day L(1), Chau CM, Nebozhyn M, Rennekamp AJ, Showe M, Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce St., Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) escapes host immunity by the reversible and epigenetic
silencing of immunogenic viral genes. We previously presented evidence that a
dynamic chromatin domain, which we have referred to as the latency control region
(LCR), contributes to the reversible repression of EBNA2 and LMP1 gene
transcription. We now explore the protein-DNA interaction profiles for a few
known regulatory factors and histone modifications that regulate LCR structure
and activity. A chromatin immunoprecipitation assay combined with real-time PCR
analysis was used to analyze protein-DNA interactions at approximately 500-bp
intervals across the first 60,000 bp of the EBV genome. We compared the binding
patterns of EBNA1 with those of the origin recognition complex protein ORC2, the 
chromatin boundary factor CTCF, the linker histone H1, and several histone
modifications. We analyzed three EBV-positive cell lines (MutuI, Raji, and
LCL3459) with distinct transcription patterns reflecting different latency types.
Our findings suggest that histone modification patterns within the LCR are
complex but reflect differences in each latency type. The most striking finding
was the identification of CTCF sites immediately upstream of the Qp, Cp, and EBER
transcription initiation regions in all three cell types. In transient assays,
CTCF facilitated EBNA1-dependent transcription activation of Cp, suggesting that 
CTCF coordinates interactions between different chromatin domains. We also found 
that histone H3 methyl K4 clustered with CTCF and EBNA1 at sites of active
transcription or DNA replication initiation. Our findings support a model where
CTCF delineates multiple domains within the LCR and regulates interactions
between these domains that correlate with changes in gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1900095
PMID: 17409162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. PLoS One. 2007 Apr 4;2(4):e359.

Evolutionary diversification of SPANX-N sperm protein gene structure and
expression.

Kouprina N(1), Noskov VN, Pavlicek A, Collins NK, Schoppee Bortz PD, Ottolenghi
C, Loukinov D, Goldsmith P, Risinger JI, Kim JH, Westbrook VA, Solomon G,
Sounders H, Herr JC, Jurka J, Lobanenkov V, Schlessinger D, Larionov V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, National Cancer Institute (NCI),
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
kouprinn@mail.nih.gov

The sperm protein associated with nucleus in the X chromosome (SPANX) genes
cluster at Xq27 in two subfamilies, SPANX-A/D and SPANX-N. SPANX-A/D is specific 
for hominoids and is fairly well characterized. The SPANX-N gave rise to
SPANX-A/D in the hominoid lineage approximately 7 MYA. Given the proposed role of
SPANX genes in spermatogenesis, we have extended studies to SPANX-N gene
evolution, variation, regulation of expression, and intra-sperm localization. By 
immunofluorescence analysis, SPANX-N proteins are localized in post-meiotic
spermatids exclusively, like SPANX-A/D. But in contrast to SPANX-A/D, SPANX-N are
found in all ejaculated spermatozoa rather than only in a subpopulation, are
localized in the acrosome rather than in the nuclear envelope, and are expressed 
at a low level in several nongametogenic adult tissues as well as many cancers.
Presence of a binding site for CTCF and its testis-specific paralogue BORIS in
the SPANX promoters suggests, by analogy to MAGE-A1 and NY-ESO-1, that their
activation in spermatogenesis is mediated by the programmed replacement of CTCF
by BORIS. Based on the relative density of CpG, the more extended expression of
SPANX-N compared to SPANX-A/D in nongametogenic tissues is likely attributed to
differences in promoter methylation. Our findings suggest that the recent
duplication of SPANX genes in hominoids was accompanied by different localization
of SPANX-N proteins in post-meiotic sperm and additional expression in several
nongonadal tissues. This suggests a corresponding functional diversification of
SPANX gene families in hominoids. SPANX proteins thus provide unique targets to
investigate their roles in the function of spermatozoa, selected malignancies,
and for SPANX-N, in other tissues as well.

PMCID: PMC1831492
PMID: 17406683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Mol Carcinog. 2007 Sep;46(9):747-57.

Hepatocellular carcinomas of the albumin SV40 T-antigen transgenic rat display
fetal-like re-expression of lgf2 and deregulation of H19.

Czarny MJ(1), Babcock K, Baus RM, Manoharan H, Pitot HC.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, School of Medicine and Public Health, 
University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Previous studies in our laboratory have shown that one of the earliest events
during hepatocarcinogenesis in the albumin SV40 T antigen (Alb SV40 T Ag)
transgenic rat is the duplication of chromosome 1q3.7-4.3, a region which
contains the imprinted and coordinately regulated genes Igf2 and H19. We have
also shown that this duplication is associated with the biallelic expression of
the normally monoallelically-expressed H19. These results, however, are seemingly
at odds with studies in the mouse that have shown a conservation of fetal
regulatory patterns of these two genes in hepatic neoplasms. We therefore aimed
in this study to determine the allelic origin of Igf2 expression in
hepatocellular carcinomas of the Alb SV40 T Ag transgenic rat. Sprague-Dawley Alb
SV40 T Ag transgenic rats and Brown Norway rats were reciprocally mated and the
expression of Igf2 in hepatocellular carcinomas of the resulting F(1)
transgene-positive female rats was analyzed by Northern blotting and RT-PCR. We
determined that Igf2 was expressed exclusively from the paternal allele, which
prompted the study (by the same methods) of the allelic origin of H19 in the same
hepatocellular carcinomas in order to determine if the two genes remained
coordinately regulated. Our results demonstrate fetal-like re-expression of Igf2 
and deregulation of H19 in singular hepatocellular carcinomas of the rat. These
results imply that another regulatory mechanism other than the generally accepted
ICR/CTCF mechanism may play a role in the control of Igf2 and H19 expression.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17393425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Cell. 2007 Mar 23;128(6):1231-45.

Analysis of the vertebrate insulator protein CTCF-binding sites in the human
genome.

Kim TH(1), Abdullaev ZK, Smith AD, Ching KA, Loukinov DI, Green RD, Zhang MQ,
Lobanenkov VV, Ren B.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, University of California, San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA
92093-0653, USA. taehoon.kim@yale.edu

Insulator elements affect gene expression by preventing the spread of
heterochromatin and restricting transcriptional enhancers from activation of
unrelated promoters. In vertebrates, insulator's function requires association
with the CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), a protein that recognizes long and diverse 
nucleotide sequences. While insulators are critical in gene regulation, only a
few have been reported. Here, we describe 13,804 CTCF-binding sites in potential 
insulators of the human genome, discovered experimentally in primary human
fibroblasts. Most of these sequences are located far from the transcriptional
start sites, with their distribution strongly correlated with genes. The majority
of them fit to a consensus motif highly conserved and suitable for predicting
possible insulators driven by CTCF in other vertebrate genomes. In addition, CTCF
localization is largely invariant across different cell types. Our results
provide a resource for investigating insulator function and possible other
general and evolutionarily conserved activities of CTCF sites.

PMCID: PMC2572726
PMID: 17382889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Immunol Lett. 2007 Apr 15;109(2):165-74. Epub 2007 Mar 8.

Regulation of dendritic cell differentiation and subset distribution by the zinc 
finger protein CTCF.

Koesters C(1), Unger B, Bilic I, Schmidt U, Bluml S, Lichtenberger B, Schreiber
M, Stockl J, Ellmeier W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Medical University of Vienna, Lazarettgasse 19,
A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

The molecular mechanisms that regulate DC differentiation and subset distribution
are largely unknown. In this study we report the identification of the C(2)H(2)
zinc finger transcription factors (TF) CTCF as a regulator of DC differentiation.
CTCF was expressed in human and murine DC and its expression was downregulated
during the differentiation of human monocyte-derived DC. Enforced expression of
CTCF during the differentiation of murine BM-derived DC (BMDC) caused increased
apoptosis and reduced proliferation leading to a dramatically reduced number of
CTCF transduced DC. The CTCF expressing BMDC that developed had a more immature
phenotype than control cells, and showed defects in maturation upon TLR
stimulation. Furthermore, in vivo expression of CTCF led to an increase in the
percentage of plasmacytoid DC (pDC) within the DC lineage. Our data provide new
insight into molecular mechanisms regulating DC differentiation and subset
development and identify CTCF as a factor involved in the regulation of these
important processes.

PMID: 17368809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Cancer Res. 2007 Mar 15;67(6):2577-85.

Epigenetic regulation of the human retinoblastoma tumor suppressor gene promoter 
by CTCF.

De La Rosa-Velázquez IA(1), Rincón-Arano H, Benítez-Bribiesca L, Recillas-Targa
F.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Departamento de Genética Molecular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F., México.

Epigenetic misregulation is a more common feature in human cancer than previously
anticipated. In the present investigation, we identified CCCTC-binding factor
(CTCF), the multivalent 11-zinc-finger nuclear factor, as a regulator that favors
a particular local chromatin conformation of the human retinoblastoma gene
promoter. We show that its binding contributes to Rb gene promoter epigenetic
stability. Ablation of the CTCF binding site from the human Rb gene promoter
induced a rapid epigenetic silencing of reporter gene expression in an integrated
genome context. CTCF DNA binding is methylation sensitive, and the methylated
Rb-CTCF site is recognized by the Kaiso methyl-CpG-binding protein. This is the
first evidence suggesting that CTCF protects the Rb gene promoter, a classic CpG 
island, against DNA methylation, and when such control region is abnormally
methylated Kaiso, and probably its associated repressor complex, induce
epigenetic silencing of the promoter. Our results identify CTCF as a novel
epigenetic regulator of the human retinoblastoma gene promoter.

PMID: 17363576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Neurosci. 2007 Mar 14;27(11):2793-801.

Differential regulation of the serotonin transporter gene by lithium is mediated 
by transcription factors, CCCTC binding protein and Y-box binding protein 1,
through the polymorphic intron 2 variable number tandem repeat.

Roberts J(1), Scott AC, Howard MR, Breen G, Bubb VJ, Klenova E, Quinn JP.

Author information: 
(1)Physiology Laboratory, School of Biomedical Science, University of Liverpool, 
Liverpool L69 3BX, United Kingdom.

The serotoninergic pathways are possible targets for the action of lithium, a
therapeutic agent for treatment of bipolar affective disorders. This study aimed 
to investigate the molecular mechanisms regulating human serotonin transporter
gene (SLC6A4) expression by lithium and, specifically, the role of the variable
number tandem repeat (VNTR) polymorphic region in intron 2, which is potentially 
a predisposing genetic factor for bipolar affective disorders. We demonstrated
that addition of lithium to human JAr cells led to changes in the levels of
SLC6A4 mRNA and protein. Additional investigations revealed that the intron 2
VNTR domain was a potential target for mediation of a transcriptional response to
lithium. Properties of two transcription factors, CCCTC binding protein (CTCF)
and Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1), previously shown to be involved in the
regulation of SLC6A4 VNTR, were found to be modulated by LiCl. Thus, levels of
CTCF and YB-1 mRNA and protein were altered in vivo in response to LiCl.
Furthermore, CTCF and YB-1 showed differential binding to the polymorphic alleles
of the VNTR on exposure to LiCl. Our data suggest a model in which differential
binding of CTCF and YB-1 to the allelic variants of the intron 2 VNTR can be
regulated by lithium and in part result in differential and even aberrant
expression of SLC6A4. Our study of the regulation of the SLC6A4 VNTR by lithium
may improve the understanding of psychiatric disorders and enable the development
of novel therapies for conditions such as bipolar affective disorder to target
only the at-risk allele.

PMID: 17360901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 May;27(9):3499-510. Epub 2007 Mar 5.

Analysis of the H19ICR insulator.

Yoon YS(1), Jeong S, Rong Q, Park KY, Chung JH, Pfeifer K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA.

Transcriptional insulators are specialized cis-acting elements that protect
promoters from inappropriate activation by distal enhancers. The H19 imprinting
control region (ICR) functions as a CTCF-dependent, methylation-sensitive
transcriptional insulator. We analyzed several insertional mutations and
demonstrate that the ICR can function as a methylation-regulated maternal
chromosome-specific insulator in novel chromosomal contexts. We used chromosome
conformation capture and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays to investigate the 
configuration of cis-acting elements at these several insertion sites. By
comparing maternal and paternal organizations on wild-type and mutant
chromosomes, we hoped to identify mechanisms for ICR insulator function. We found
that promoter and enhancer elements invariably associate to form DNA loop domains
at transcriptionally active loci. Conversely, active insulators always prevent
these promoter-enhancer interactions. Instead, the ICR insulator forms novel loop
domains by associating with the blocked promoters and enhancers. We propose that 
these associations are fundamental to insulator function.

PMCID: PMC1899958
PMID: 17339341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Cell Cycle. 2007 Feb 15;6(4):450-4. Epub 2007 Feb 12.

CTCF regulates asynchronous replication of the imprinted H19/Igf2 domain.

Bergström R(1), Whitehead J, Kurukuti S, Ohlsson R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Genetics, Evolutionary Biology Centre, Uppsala
University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Asynchronous replication during S phase is a universal characteristic of
genomically imprinted genes. Replication timing in imprinted domains is
determined epigenetically, as it is parent of origin specific, and is seen in the
absence of sequence divergence between the two alleles. At the imprinted H19/Igf2
domain, the methylated paternal allele replicates early while the CTCF-bound
maternal allele replicates late during S phase. CTCF regulates the
allele-specific epigenetic characteristics of this domain, including methylation,
transcription and chromosome conformation. Here we show that maternal, but not
paternal inheritance of a mutated H19 imprinting control region, lacking
functional CTCF binding sites, underlies a late to early switch in replication
timing of the maternal H19/Igf2 domain.

PMID: 17329968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Virol. 2007 May;81(10):5192-201. Epub 2007 Jan 31.

CTCF-dependent chromatin boundary element between the latency-associated
transcript and ICP0 promoters in the herpes simplex virus type 1 genome.

Chen Q(1), Lin L, Smith S, Huang J, Berger SL, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Cells latently infected with herpes simplex virus (HSV) contain nucleosomal DNA
similar to that of host cell chromatin. Recent studies have demonstrated that
histones in the latency-associated transcript (LAT) promoter and intron regions
contain histone modifications permissive for transcription. However, those
histones associated with the lytic-specific ICP0 gene, which lies only 5 kb away,
contain modifications typical of silenced chromatin. How this active chromatin is
kept separate from the repressed chromatin in the nearby ICP0 region remains
crucial to the understanding of the HSV lytic cycle. In this study, we show that 
the LAT intron region contains an insulator. Specifically, we show that an 800-bp
region from the LAT intron can block enhancers in both tissue culture cells and
Drosophila melanogaster embryos. Importantly, the 800-bp HSV insulator protects a
LAT transgene from positional effects in Drosophila eye tissue. The 800-bp region
contains nine copies of 16-bp repeats. In vitro electrophoretic mobility shift
assay revealed that CTCF interacts with the CTCCC sequence within the repeats. In
vivo chromatin immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated that CTCF interacts with
these repeats in latently infected trigeminal ganglion neurons. The deletion of
these repeats impaired insulator activity in human K562 cells and Drosophila
embryos. Finally, double-spaced RNA knockdown of CTCF disrupts enhancer-blocking 
activity of the LAT insulator in transfected Drosophila S3 cells. These results
strongly support the hypothesis that the 800-bp DNA in the LAT intron region
works as a chromatin boundary during latency to separate active chromatin
associated with the LAT promoter region from repressed chromatin in the ICP0
gene.

PMCID: PMC1900208
PMID: 17267480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(4):1245-56. Epub 2007 Jan 31.

Dual role of DNA methylation inside and outside of CTCF-binding regions in the
transcriptional regulation of the telomerase hTERT gene.

Renaud S(1), Loukinov D, Abdullaev Z, Guilleret I, Bosman FT, Lobanenkov V,
Benhattar J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, 1011
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Expression of hTERT is the major limiting factor for telomerase activity. We
previously showed that methylation of the hTERT promoter is necessary for its
transcription and that CTCF can repress hTERT transcription by binding to the
first exon. In this study, we used electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA)
and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) to show that CTCF does not bind the
methylated first exon of hTERT. Treatment of telomerase-positive cells with
5-azadC led to a strong demethylation of hTERT 5'-regulatory region, reactivation
of CTCF binding and downregulation of hTERT. Although complete hTERT promoter
methylation was associated with full transcriptional repression, detailed mapping
showed that, in telomerase-positive cells, not all the CpG sites were methylated,
especially in the promoter region. Using a methylation cassette assay, selective 
demethylation of 110 bp within the core promoter significantly increased hTERT
transcriptional activity. This study underlines the dual role of DNA methylation 
in hTERT transcriptional regulation. In our model, hTERT methylation prevents
binding of the CTCF repressor, but partial hypomethylation of the core promoter
is necessary for hTERT expression.

PMCID: PMC1851636
PMID: 17267411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Oncogene. 2007 Jun 28;26(30):4394-403. Epub 2007 Jan 29.

Dynamic transcriptional regulatory complexes including BORIS, CTCF and Sp1
modulate NY-ESO-1 expression in lung cancer cells.

Kang Y(1), Hong JA, Chen GA, Nguyen DM, Schrump DS.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Oncology Section, Surgery Branch, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892-1201, USA.

Previously, we reported that the paralogous zinc-finger proteins--CTCF and
brother of the regulator of imprinted sites (BORIS), directly contribute to
transcriptional regulation of NY-ESO-1 in lung cancer cells. To further examine
mechanisms that mediate expression of this cancer-testis gene, we performed
software-guided analysis of the NY-ESO-1 promoter region, which revealed several 
potential Sp1-binding motifs. Sequential 5-aza-2'deoxycytidine/depsipeptide FK228
treatment markedly induced BORIS expression and enhanced nuclear translocation of
Sp1 in lung cancer cells. Transient transfection assays using promoter-reporter
constructs, as well as gel-shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments
revealed that NY-ESO-1 promoter activity coincided with occupancy of the proximal
Sp1-binding site in lung cancer cells. Mutations within the Sp1 recognition
sequence specifically eliminated binding of Sp1 to this motif in vitro, and
markedly diminished NY-ESO-1 promoter activity in vivo. siRNA-mediated inhibition
of Sp1 expression decreased NY-ESO-1 promoter activity, whereas knock down of
CTCF expression augmented NY-ESO-1 transcription in lung cancer cells.
Co-immunoprecipitation experiments indicated that Sp1 physically interacts with
BORIS but not with CTCF in vivo. Collectively, these findings suggest that BORIS 
recruits Sp1 to mediate de-repression of NY-ESO-1 during pulmonary
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 17260018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Apr;27(7):2636-47. Epub 2007 Jan 22.

Allele-specific binding of CTCF to the multipartite imprinting control region
KvDMR1.

Fitzpatrick GV(1), Pugacheva EM, Shin JY, Abdullaev Z, Yang Y, Khatod K,
Lobanenkov VV, Higgins MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Genetics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Elm and Carlton 
Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.

Paternal deletion of the imprinting control region (ICR) KvDMR1 results in loss
of expression of the Kcnq1ot1 noncoding RNA and derepression of flanking
paternally silenced genes. Truncation of Kcnq1ot1 also results in the loss of
imprinted expression of these genes in most cases, demonstrating a role for the
RNA or its transcription in gene silencing. However, enhancer-blocking studies
indicate that KvDMR1 also contains chromatin insulator or silencer activity. In
this report we demonstrate by electrophoretic mobility shift assays and chromatin
immunoprecipitation the existence of two CTCF binding sites within KvDMR1 that
are occupied in vivo only on the unmethylated paternally derived allele.
Methylation interference and mutagenesis allowed the precise mapping of
protein-DNA contact sites for CTCF within KvDMR1. Using a luciferase reporter
assay, we mapped the putative transcriptional promoter for Kcnq1ot1 upstream and 
to a site functionally separable from enhancer-blocking activity and CTCF binding
sites. Luciferase reporter assays also suggest the presence of an additional
cis-acting element in KvDMR1 upstream of the putative promoter that can function 
as an enhancer. These results suggest that the KvDMR1 ICR consists of multiple,
independent cis-acting modules. Dissection of KvDMR1 into its functional
components should help elucidate the mechanism of its function in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1899897
PMID: 17242189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Mol Cell. 2007 Jan 12;25(1):43-56.

Identification of a Ctcf cofactor, Yy1, for the X chromosome binary switch.

Donohoe ME(1), Zhang LF, Xu N, Shi Y, Lee JT.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, USA.

In mammals, inactivation of one X chromosome in the female equalizes gene dosages
between XX females and XY males. Two noncoding loci, Tsix and Xite, together
regulate X chromosome fate by controlling homologous chromosome pairing,
counting, and mutually exclusive choice. Following choice, the asymmetry of Xite 
and Tsix expression drives divergent chromosome fates, but how this pattern
becomes established is currently unknown. Although no proven trans-acting factors
have been identified, a likely candidate is Ctcf, a chromatin insulator with
essential function in autosomal imprinting. Here, we search for trans-factors and
identify Yy1 as a required cofactor for Ctcf. Paired Ctcf-Yy1 elements are highly
clustered within the counting/choice and imprinting domain of Tsix. A deficiency 
of Yy1 leads to aberrant Tsix and Xist expression, resulting in a deficit of male
and female embryos. Yy1 and Ctcf associate through specific protein-protein
interactions and together transactivate Tsix. We propose that the Ctcf-Yy1-Tsix
complex functions as a key component of the X chromosome binary switch.

PMID: 17218270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Feb 1;16(3):343-54. Epub 2007 Jan 8.

A CTCF-binding silencer regulates the imprinted genes AWT1 and WT1-AS and
exhibits sequential epigenetic defects during Wilms' tumourigenesis.

Hancock AL(1), Brown KW, Moorwood K, Moon H, Holmgren C, Mardikar SH, Dallosso
AR, Klenova E, Loukinov D, Ohlsson R, Lobanenkov VV, Malik K.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Leukaemia in Childhood, Sargent Research Unit, Department of
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, School of Medical Sciences, University of
Bristol, University Walk, Bristol, UK.

We have shown previously that AWT1 and WT1-AS are functionally imprinted in human
kidney. In the adult kidney, expression of both transcripts is restricted to the 
paternal allele, with the silent maternal allele retaining methylation at the WT1
antisense regulatory region (WT1 ARR). Here, we report characterization of the
WT1 ARR differentially methylated region and show that it contains a
transcriptional silencer element acting on both the AWT1 and WT1-AS promoters.
DNA methylation of the silencer results in increased transcriptional repression, 
and the silencer is also shown to be an in vitro and in vivo target site for the 
imprinting regulator protein CTCF. Binding of CTCF is methylation-sensitive and
limited to the unmethylated silencer. Potentiation of the silencer activity is
demonstrated after CTCF protein is knocked down, suggesting a novel
silencer-blocking activity for CTCF. We also report assessment of WT1 ARR
methylation in developmental and tumour tissues, including the first analysis of 
Wilms' tumour precursor lesions, nephrogenic rests. Nephrogenic rests show
increases in methylation levels relative to foetal kidney and reductions relative
to the adult kidney, together with biallelic expression of AWT1 and WT1-AS.
Notably, the methylation status of CpG residues within the CTCF target site
appears to distinguish monoallelic and biallelic expression states. Our data
suggest that failure of methylation spreading at the WT1 ARR early in renal
development, followed by imprint erasure, occurs during Wilms' tumourigenesis. We
propose a model wherein imprinting defects at chromosome 11p13 may contribute to 
Wilms' tumourigenesis.

PMID: 17210670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Mar;27(5):1631-48. Epub 2007 Jan 8.

CTCF interacts with and recruits the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II to CTCF
target sites genome-wide.

Chernukhin I(1), Shamsuddin S, Kang SY, Bergström R, Kwon YW, Yu W, Whitehead J, 
Mukhopadhyay R, Docquier F, Farrar D, Morrison I, Vigneron M, Wu SY, Chiang CM,
Loukinov D, Lobanenkov V, Ohlsson R, Klenova E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Central Campus, University of Essex,
Wivenhoe Park, Colchester, Essex CO4 3SQ, United Kingdom.

CTCF is a transcription factor with highly versatile functions ranging from gene 
activation and repression to the regulation of insulator function and imprinting.
Although many of these functions rely on CTCF-DNA interactions, it is an emerging
realization that CTCF-dependent molecular processes involve CTCF interactions
with other proteins. In this study, we report the association of a subpopulation 
of CTCF with the RNA polymerase II (Pol II) protein complex. We identified the
largest subunit of Pol II (LS Pol II) as a protein significantly colocalizing
with CTCF in the nucleus and specifically interacting with CTCF in vivo and in
vitro. The role of CTCF as a link between DNA and LS Pol II has been reinforced
by the observation that the association of LS Pol II with CTCF target sites in
vivo depends on intact CTCF binding sequences. "Serial" chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis revealed that both CTCF and LS Pol II were
present at the beta-globin insulator in proliferating HD3 cells but not in
differentiated globin synthesizing HD3 cells. Further, a single wild-type CTCF
target site (N-Myc-CTCF), but not the mutant site deficient for CTCF binding, was
sufficient to activate the transcription from the promoterless reporter gene in
stably transfected cells. Finally, a ChIP-on-ChIP hybridization assay using
microarrays of a library of CTCF target sites revealed that many intergenic CTCF 
target sequences interacted with both CTCF and LS Pol II. We discuss the possible
implications of our observations with respect to plausible mechanisms of
transcriptional regulation via a CTCF-mediated direct link of LS Pol II to the
DNA.

PMCID: PMC1820452
PMID: 17210645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(2):701. Epub 2006 Dec 18.

Non-random, individual-specific methylation profiles are present at the sixth
CTCF binding site in the human H19/IGF2 imprinting control region.

Tost J, Jammes H, Dupont JM, Buffat C, Robert B, Mignot TM, Mondon F, Carbonne B,
Siméoni U, Grangé G, Kerjean A, Ferré F, Gut IG, Vaiman D.

Retraction of
    Tost J, Jammes H, Dupont JM, Buffat C, Robert B, Mignot TM, Mondon F, Carbonne B,
Siméoni U, Grangé G, Kerjean A, Ferré F, Gut IG, Vaiman D. Nucleic Acids Res.
2006;34(19):5438-48.

PMCID: PMC1802623
PMID: 17178748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Pathol. 2007 Feb;211(3):261-8.

Loss of imprinting and cancer.

Jelinic P(1), Shaw P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, University Institute of Pathology,
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Imprinting is defined as the parental allele-specific expression of a very
limited set of genes (about 50-80). This regulation depends upon an epigenetic
marking of parental alleles during gametogenesis. Monoallelic expression ensures 
that the levels of the proteins encoded by imprinted genes, important factors of 
embryonic growth, placental growth or adult metabolism, are assured. Without
precise control of their expression, developmental abnormalities result, as is
shown by a number of hereditary over-growth syndromes, including
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. The regulation of imprinted genes is largely
dependent on methylation marks, which are laid down during embryological
development of germ cells. Once in place, the methylation status of precise
chromosomal regions, Imprinting Control Regions (ICRs), is read by either of two 
mechanisms, chromatin barrier formation or untranslated RNAs, thereby ensuring
that only the maternal or paternal allele is expressed. Each imprinted gene is
classified as maternal or paternal according to the expressed allele. The
stability of the marked regions in somatic cells is maintained through each
cellular replication by a methylation enzyme complex containing Dnmt1. Although
the major reading mechanisms of imprinted status are known, chromatin boundary
formation by CTCF and untranslated RNAs, the molecules elaborating the initial
ICR methylation, are just being uncovered. Mis-regulation of imprinted gene
expression (loss of imprinting [LOI]) is seen frequently and precociously in a
large variety of human tumours, making LOI a potentially valuable tool for both
diagnosis and treatment. In fact, LOI is presently considered the most abundant
and most precocious alteration in cancer. The present review proposes a mechanism
responsible for LOI, as well as its eventual value in tumour diagnosis and
prognosis.

Copyright 2006 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 17177177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Stem Cells. 2007 Mar;25(3):581-8. Epub 2006 Dec 14.

Methylation status of imprinting centers for H19/IGF2 and SNURF/SNRPN in primate 
embryonic stem cells.

Mitalipov S(1), Clepper L, Sritanaudomchai H, Fujimoto A, Wolf D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Sciences, Oregon National Primate Research Center,
Oregon Health & Science University, 505 NW 185th Ave., Beaverton, OR 97006, USA. 
mitalipo@ohsu.edu

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) hold promise for cell and tissue replacement
approaches to treating human diseases based on their capacity to differentiate
into a wide variety of somatic cells and tissues. However, long-term in vitro
culture and manipulations of ESCs may adversely affect their epigenetic
integrity, including imprinting. We have recently reported aberrant biallelic
expression of IGF2 and H19 in several rhesus monkey ESC lines, whereas SNRPN and 
NDN were normally imprinted and expressed predominantly from the paternal allele.
The dysregulation of IGF2 and H19 that is associated with tumorigenesis in humans
may result from improper maintenance of allele-specific methylation patterns at
an imprinting center (IC) upstream of H19. To test this possibility, we performed
methylation analysis of several monkey ESC lines by genomic bisulfite sequencing.
We investigated methylation profiles of CpG islands within the IGF2/H19 IC
harboring the CTCF-6 binding site. In addition, the methylation status of the IC 
within the promoter/exon 1 of SNURF/SNRPN known as the Prader-Willi syndrome IC
was examined. Our results demonstrate abnormal hypermethylation within the
IGF2/H19 IC in all analyzed ESC lines, whereas the SNURF/SNRPN IC was
differentially methylated, consistent with monoallelic expression.

PMID: 17170068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Feb;27(4):1271-9. Epub 2006 Dec 11.

Distinctive signatures of histone methylation in transcribed coding and noncoding
human beta-globin sequences.

Kim A(1), Kiefer CM, Dean A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Pusan 609-735, South Korea. kimaeri@pusan.ac.kr

The establishment of epigenetic marks, such as methylation on histone tails, is
mechanistically linked to RNA polymerase II within active genes. To explore the
interplay between these modifications in transcribed noncoding as well as coding 
sequences, we analyzed epigenetic modification and chromatin structure at high
resolution across 300 kb of human chromosome 11, including the beta-globin locus 
which is extensively transcribed in intergenic regions. Monomethylated H3K4, K9, 
and K36 were broadly distributed, while hypermethylated forms appeared to
different extents across the region in a manner reflecting transcriptional
activity. The trimethylation of H3K4 and H3K9 correlated within the most highly
transcribed sequences. The H3K36me3 mark was more broadly detected in transcribed
coding and noncoding sequences, suggesting that K36me3 is a stable mark on
sequences transcribed at any level. Most epigenetic and chromatin structural
features did not undergo transitions at the presumed borders of the globin domain
where the insulator factor CTCF interacts, raising questions about the function
of the borders.

PMCID: PMC1800709
PMID: 17158930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Feb 1;16(3):254-64. Epub 2006 Dec 11.

Mechanisms causing imprinting defects in familial Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome
with Wilms' tumour.

Sparago A(1), Russo S, Cerrato F, Ferraiuolo S, Castorina P, Selicorni A,
Schwienbacher C, Negrini M, Ferrero GB, Silengo MC, Anichini C, Larizza L, Riccio
A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Ambientali, Seconda Università di Napoli, via Vivaldi 
43, 81100 Caserta, Italy.

The imprinted expression of the IGF2 and H19 genes is controlled by the
Imprinting Centre 1 (IC1) at chromosome 11p15.5. This is a methylation-sensitive 
chromatin insulator that works by binding the zinc-finger protein CTCF in a
parent-specific manner. Microdeletions abolishing some of the CTCF target sites
(CTSs) of IC1 have been associated with the Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS).
However, the link between these mutations and the molecular and clinical
phenotypes was debated. We have identified two novel families with IC1 deletions,
in which individuals with the clinical features of the BWS are present in
multiple generations. By analysing the methylation pattern at the IGF2-H19 locus 
together with the clinical phenotypes in the individuals with maternal and those 
with paternal transmission of five different deletions, we demonstrate that
maternal transmission of 1.4-1.8 kb deletions in the IC1 region co-segregates
with the hypermethylation of the residual CTSs and BWS phenotype with complete
penetrance, whereas normal phenotype is observed upon paternal transmission.
Although gene expression could not be assayed in all cases, the methylation
detected at the IGF2 DMR2 and H19 promoter suggests that IC1 hypermethylation is 
consistently associated with biallelic activation of IGF2 and biallelic silencing
of H19. Comparison of these deletions with a 2.2 kb one previously reported by
another group indicates that the spacing of the CTSs on the deleted allele is
critical for the gain of the abnormal methylation and penetrance of the clinical 
phenotype. Furthermore, we observe that the hypermethylation resulting from the
deletions is always mosaic, suggesting that the epigenetic defect at the IGF2-H19
locus is established post-zygotically and may cause body asymmetry and
heterogeneity of the clinical phenotype. Finally, the IC1 microdeletions are
associated with a high incidence of Wilms' tumour, making their molecular
diagnosis particularly important for genetic counselling and tumour surveillance 
at follow-up.

PMID: 17158821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2006 Dec;47(12):5218-26.

Pax6 regulation in retinal cells by CCCTC binding factor.

Li T(1), Lu Z, Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Torrance, California
90502, USA.

PURPOSE: A previous study demonstrated that CTCF (CCCTC binding factor) regulates
homeobox Pax6 gene expression in early embryonic stages and plays a dominant role
in eye development. The purpose of the present study was to explore further the
mechanism of CTCF controlling Pax6 gene expression in human retinoblastoma (Rb)
cells and in the development of chicken and mouse retinas.
METHODS: Northern and Western analyses were used to detect expressions of CTCF
and Pax6 in Rb cells. Pax6 transcription reporter and deletion mutants were used 
to study the regulatory interaction between CTCF and Pax6 in Rb cells and in the 
retina of chicken embryos. CTCF transgenic chicken embryos and mice were
established by lipofection and microinjection of linearized cytomegalovirus
(CMV)-CTCF construct into fertilized eggs and mouse oocytes, respectively.
Injected oocytes were implanted in the uterus of foster mothers through
microinjection into the ovarian duct. The expression of CTCF and Pax6 was
determined in embryo sections by immunochemistry.
RESULTS: Stimulation of Rb cells with 10% FBS resulted in an increase in CTCF
expression and a decrease in Pax6 expression. To study the regulatory mechanism, 
the Pax6 reporter and its deletion mutant activities were determined in
transfected Rb cells and chicken embryonic retinas, revealing that CTCF interacts
with the Pax6 gene in Rb cells through transcription control in the 5'-flanking
region upstream from the Pax6 P0 promoter. Overexpression of CTCF in Rb cells
suppressed Pax6 reporter activity and downregulated endogenous Pax6 expression.
In contrast, downregulation of CTCF expression by knockdown of CTCF mRNA using
specific small interfering (si)RNA markedly enhanced Pax6 expression in Rb cells.
Further study in CTCF transgenic mouse embryos verified that overexpression of
CTCF suppressed Pax6 gene expression in the retina.
CONCLUSIONS: CTCF plays an important role in regulating Pax6 expression in Rb
cells and in the developmental retina, and the regulation of Pax6 gene expression
by CTCF in the retina is through transcriptional regulation.

PMCID: PMC1925047
PMID: 17122106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. EMBO J. 2006 Nov 15;25(22):5329-38. Epub 2006 Nov 2.

Correction of aberrant imprinting of IGF2 in human tumors by nuclear
transfer-induced epigenetic reprogramming.

Chen HL(1), Li T, Qiu XW, Wu J, Ling JQ, Sun ZH, Wang W, Chen W, Hou A, Vu TH,
Hoffman AR, Hu JF.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Service, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA, USA.

Loss of genomic imprinting of insulin-like growth factor II (IGF2) is a hallmark 
of many human neoplasms. We attempted to correct this aberrant epigenotype by
transferring nuclei from human tumor cells that showed loss of IGF2 imprinting
into enucleated mouse and human fibroblasts that had maintained normal IGF2
imprinting. After nuclear transfer, the abnormal biallelic expression of IGF2 in 
tumor nuclei transiently converted to normal monoallelic imprinted expression in 
the reconstructed diploid cells. In tetraploid hybrid cells, however, normal IGF2
imprinting was permanently restored in the tumor genome. Inhibition of the
synthesis of putative trans imprinting factors with cycloheximide led to loss of 
IGF2 imprinting in normal cultured fibroblasts, suggesting that normal cells
produce proteins that act in trans to induce or maintain genomic imprinting.
These data demonstrate that an abnormal tumor epigenotype can be corrected by in 
vitro reprogramming, and suggest that loss of imprinting is associated with the
loss of activity of non-CTCF trans imprinting factor(s) that are either
inactivated or mutated in tumors.

PMCID: PMC1636609
PMID: 17082775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Eur J Cancer. 2007 Jan;43(1):210-9. Epub 2006 Oct 27.

Epigenetic inactivation of BRCA1 is associated with aberrant expression of CTCF
and DNA methyltransferase (DNMT3B) in some sporadic breast tumours.

Butcher DT(1), Rodenhiser DI.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Western Ontario and the London Regional Cancer Program,
London Health Sciences Centre, Room A4-134, 790 Commissioners Rd. East, London,
Ont., Canada N6A 4L6.

We assessed expression of the BRCA1, CTCF and DNMT3b methyltransferase genes
along with BRCA1 promoter methylation to better define the epigenetic events
involved in BRCA1 inactivation in sporadic breast cancer. These gene expression
patterns were determined in 54 sporadic breast tumours by immunohistochemistry
and the methylation status of the BRCA1 promoter was evaluated using
methylation-specific PCR. We observed significant DNMT3b expression in 80% of the
tumours and that 43% of tumours exhibited novel cytoplasmic CTCF expression.
Pairwise analyses of gene expression patterns showed that 28/32 tumours lacked
BRCA1 expression and also exhibited cytoplasmic CTCF staining, while 24/32 of
these tumours also overexpressed DNMT3b. Furthermore, 86% of the BRCA1
low-expressing tumours were methylated at the BRCA1 promoter and a subset of
these tumours displayed both cytoplasmic CTCF and increased DNMT3b expression.
Thus, tumour subsets exist that display concurrent decreased BRCA1 expression,
BRCA1 promoter methylation, cytoplasmic CTCF expression and with DNMT3b
over-expression. We suggest that these altered CTCF and DNMT3b expression
patterns represent (a) critical events responsible for the epigenetic
inactivation of BRCA1 and (b) a diagnostic signature for epigenetic inactivation 
of other tumour suppressor genes in sporadic breast tumours.

PMID: 17071074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. PLoS Biol. 2006 Oct;4(11):e355.

The testis-specific factor CTCFL cooperates with the protein methyltransferase
PRMT7 in H19 imprinting control region methylation.

Jelinic P(1), Stehle JC, Shaw P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne,
Switzerland.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2006 Nov;4(11):e398.

Expression of imprinted genes is restricted to a single parental allele as a
result of epigenetic regulation-DNA methylation and histone modifications.
Igf2/H19 is a reciprocally imprinted locus exhibiting paternal Igf2 and maternal 
H19 expression. Their expression is regulated by a paternally methylated
imprinting control region (ICR) located between the two genes. Although the de
novo DNA methyltransferases have been shown to be necessary for the establishment
of ICR methylation, the mechanism by which they are targeted to the region
remains unknown. We demonstrate that CTCFL/BORIS, a paralog of CTCF, is an
ICR-binding protein expressed during embryonic male germ cell development,
coinciding with the timing of ICR methylation. PRMT7, a protein arginine
methyltransferase with which CTCFL interacts, is also expressed during embryonic 
testis development. Symmetrical dimethyl arginine 3 of histone H4, a modification
catalyzed by PRMT7, accumulates in germ cells during this developmental period.
This modified histone is also found enriched in both H19 ICR and Gtl2
differentially methylated region (DMR) chromatin of testis by chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis. In vitro studies demonstrate that CTCFL
stimulates the histone-methyltransferase activity of PRMT7 via interactions with 
both histones and PRMT7. Finally, H19 ICR methylation is demonstrated by nuclear 
co-injection of expression vectors encoding CTCFL, PRMT7, and the de novo DNA
methyltransferases, Dnmt3a, -b and -L, in Xenopus oocytes. These results suggest 
that CTCFL and PRMT7 may play a role in male germline imprinted gene methylation.

PMCID: PMC1609128
PMID: 17048991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Genes Dev. 2006 Oct 15;20(20):2787-92.

Tsix-mediated epigenetic switch of a CTCF-flanked region of the Xist promoter
determines the Xist transcription program.

Navarro P(1), Page DR, Avner P, Rougeulle C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique Moléculaire Murine, Institut Pasteur 75724, Paris Cedex 15,
France.

Initiation of X inactivation depends on the coordinated expression of the
sense/antisense pair Xist/Tsix. We show here that a precisely defined Xist
promoter region flanked by CTCF is maintained by Tsix in a heterochromatic-like
state in undifferentiated embryonic stem (ES) cells and shifts to a
pseudoeuchromatic structure upon Tsix truncation. We further demonstrate that the
epigenetic state of the Xist 5' region prior to differentiation predicts the
efficiency of transcriptional machinery recruitment to the Xist promoter during
differentiation. Our results provide mechanistic insights into the Tsix-mediated 
epigenetic regulation of Xist resulting in Xist promoter activation and
initiation of X inactivation in differentiating ES cells.

PMCID: PMC1619945
PMID: 17043308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Mamm Genome. 2006 Oct;17(10):1042-9. Epub 2006 Oct 3.

Identification, genome mapping, and CTCF binding of potential insulators within
the FXYD5-COX7A1 locus of human chromosome 19q13.12.

Akopov SB(1), Ruda VM, Batrak VV, Vetchinova AS, Chernov IP, Nikolaev LG, Bode J,
Sverdlov ED.

Author information: 
(1)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Russian Academy of
Sciences, 117977, Moscow, Russia.

Identification of insulators is one of the most difficult problems in functional 
mapping of genomes. For this reason, up to now only a few insulators have been
described. In this article we suggest an approach that allows direct isolation of
insulators by a simple positive-negative selection based on blocking enhancer
effects by insulators. The approach allows selection of fragments capable of
blocking enhancers from mixtures of genomic fragments prepared from up to 1-Mb
genomic regions. Using this approach, a 1-Mb human genome locus was analyzed and 
eight potential insulators were selected. Five of the eight sequences were
positioned in intergenic regions and two were within introns. The genes of the
alpha-polypeptide H+/K+ exchanging ATPase (ATP4A) and amyloid beta (A4)
precursor-like protein 1 (APLP1) within the locus studied were found to be
flanked by insulators on both sides. Both genes are characterized by distinct
tissue-specific expression that differs from the tissue specificity of the
surrounding genes. The data obtained are consistent with the conception that
insulators subdivide genomic DNA into loop domains that comprise genes
characterized by similar expression profiles. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation
assay, we demonstrated also that at least six of the putative insulators revealed
in this work could bind the CTCF transcription factor in vivo. We believe that
the proposed approach could be a useful instrument for functional analysis of
genomes.

PMID: 17019650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006;34(19):5438-48. Epub 2006 Sep 29.

Non-random, individual-specific methylation profiles are present at the sixth
CTCF binding site in the human H19/IGF2 imprinting control region.

Tost J(1), Jammes H, Dupont JM, Buffat C, Robert B, Mignot TM, Mondon F, Carbonne
B, Siméoni U, Grangé G, Kerjean A, Ferré F, Gut IG, Vaiman D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Epigénétique, Centre National de Génotypage, 2 rue Gaston
Crémieux, 91000 Evry, France. tost@cng.fr

Retraction in
    Tost J, Jammes H, Dupont JM, Buffat C, Robert B, Mignot TM, Mondon F, Carbonne B,
Siméoni U, Grangé G, Kerjean A, Ferré F, Gut IG, Vaiman D. Nucleic Acids Res.
2007;35(2):701.

Expression of imprinted genes is classically associated with differential
methylation of specific CpG-rich DNA regions (DMRs). The H19/IGF2 locus is
considered a paradigm for epigenetic regulation. In mice, as in humans, the
essential H19 DMR--target of the CTCF insulator--is located between the two
genes. Here, we performed a pyrosequencing-based quantitative analysis of its CpG
methylation in normal human tissues. The quantitative analysis of the methylation
level in the H19 DMR revealed three unexpected discrete, individual-specific
methylation states. This epigenetic polymorphism was confined to the sixth CTCF
binding site while a unique median-methylated profile was found at the third CTCF
binding site as well as in the H19 promoter. Monoallelic expression of H19 and
IGF2 was maintained independently of the methylation status at the sixth CTCF
binding site and the IGF2 DMR2 displayed a median-methylated profile in all
individuals and tissues analyzed. Interestingly, the methylation profile was
genetically transmitted. Transgenerational inheritance of the H19 methylation
profile was compatible with a simple model involving one gene with three alleles.
The existence of three individual-specific epigenotypes in the H19 DMR in a
non-pathological situation means it is important to reconsider the diagnostic
value and functional importance of the sixth CTCF binding site.

PMCID: PMC1636469
PMID: 17012269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Trends Genet. 2006 Dec;22(12):637-9. Epub 2006 Sep 25.

Raising the curtains on interchromosomal interactions.

Krueger C(1), Osborne CS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics and Imprinting, The Babraham Institute,
Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge CB2 4AT, UK. christel.krueger@bbsrc.ac.uk

Comment on
    Science. 2006 Apr 14;312(5771):269-72.

The chromosome conformation capture technique is used to monitor intra- and
intermolecular chromosomal associations. By introducing an adaptation of this
technique, Ling and colleagues have identified an unexpected coassociation
between two loci on separate chromosomes in mouse nuclei, the imprinted Igf2-H19 
locus of chromosome 7 and the Wsb1-Nf1 locus of chromosome 11. Strikingly, this
interaction is CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)-dependent and strictly allele
specific. These findings extend our appreciation for genome organization and its 
influence on gene expression and imprinting.

PMID: 16997416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Cell Mol Med. 2006 Jul-Sep;10(3):554-68.

Epigenetic boundaries of tumour suppressor gene promoters: the CTCF connection
and its role in carcinogenesis.

Recillas-Targa F(1), De La Rosa-Velázquez IA, Soto-Reyes E, Benítez-Bribiesca L.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Departamento de Genética Molecular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México. frecilla@ifc.unam.mx

Genetic and epigenetic regulations are essential mechanisms that ensure proper
early and subsequent mammalian programming of diverse cellular processes. These
mechanisms affect transcriptional regulation, stem cell determination and cell
cycle control, including senescence and aging. It is not surprising that
perturbation of the exquisite balance between genetic and epigenetic regulation
can lead to diverse diseases, including cancer. Histone covalent modifications
and DNA methylation do not explain all epigenetic phenomena. We describe a
previously unsuspected epigenetic factor and propose the incorporation of the
11-zinc finger CCCTC-binding factor, known as CTCF as a novel and multifunctional
epigenetic regulator.

PMCID: PMC3933142
PMID: 16989720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 10;281(45):34288-98. Epub 2006 Sep 11.

Regulatory factor interactions and somatic silencing of the germ cell-specific
ALF gene.

Kim M(1), Li D, Cui Y, Mueller K, Chears WC, DeJong J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson, Texas 75080, USA.

Germ cell-specific genes are active in oocytes and spermatocytes but are silent
in all other cell types. To understand the basis for this seemingly simple
pattern of regulation, we characterized factors that recognize the
promoter-proximal region of the germ cell-specific TFIIA alpha/beta-like factor
(ALF) gene. Two of the protein-DNA complexes formed with liver extracts (C4 and
C5) are due to the zinc finger proteins Sp1 and Sp3, respectively, whereas
another complex (C6) is due to the transcription factor RFX1. Two additional
complexes (C1 and C3) are due to the multivalent zinc finger protein CTCF, a
factor that plays a role in gene silencing and chromatin insulation. An
investigation of CTCF binding revealed a recognition site of only 17 bp that
overlaps with the Sp1/Sp3 site. This site is predictive of other genomic CTCF
sites and can be aligned to create a functional consensus. Studies on the
activity of the ALF promoter in somatic 293 cells revealed mutations that result 
in increased reporter activity. In addition, RNAi-mediated down-regulation of
CTCF is associated with activation of the endogenous ALF gene, and both CTCF and 
Sp3 repress the promoter in transient transfection assays. Overall, the results
suggest a role for several factors, including the multivalent zinc finger
chromatin insulator protein CTCF, in mediating somatic repression of the ALF
gene. Release of such repression, perhaps in conjunction with other members of
the CTCF, RFX, and Sp1 families of transcription factors, could be an important
aspect of germ cell gene activation.

PMID: 16966320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Genes Dev. 2006 Sep 1;20(17):2349-54.

CTCF mediates long-range chromatin looping and local histone modification in the 
beta-globin locus.

Splinter E(1), Heath H, Kooren J, Palstra RJ, Klous P, Grosveld F, Galjart N, de 
Laat W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, 3000 DR
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor) binds sites around the mouse beta-globin locus that
spatially cluster in the erythroid cell nucleus. We show that both conditional
deletion of CTCF and targeted disruption of a DNA-binding site destabilize these 
long-range interactions and cause local loss of histone acetylation and gain of
histone methylation, apparently without affecting transcription at the locus. Our
data demonstrate that CTCF is directly involved in chromatin architecture and
regulates local balance between active and repressive chromatin marks. We
postulate that throughout the genome, relative position and stability of
CTCF-mediated loops determine their effect on enhancer-promoter interactions,
with gene insulation as one possible outcome.

PMCID: PMC1560409
PMID: 16951251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Mol Cell. 2006 Sep 1;23(5):733-42.

CTCF-dependent chromatin insulator is linked to epigenetic remodeling.

Ishihara K(1), Oshimura M, Nakao M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regeneration Medicine, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

Chromatin insulators are boundary elements between distinctly regulated,
neighboring chromosomal domains, and they function by blocking the effects of
nearby enhancers in a position-dependent manner. Here, we show that the SNF2-like
chromodomain helicase protein CHD8 interacts with the insulator binding protein
CTCF. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that CHD8 was present at
known CTCF target sites, such as the differentially methylated region (DMR) of
H19, the locus control region of beta-globin, and the promoter region of BRCA1
and c-myc genes. RNA interference-mediated knockdown of CHD8 significantly
abolished the H19 DMR insulator activity that depends highly on CTCF, leading to 
reactivation of imprinted IGF2 from chromosome of maternal origin. Further, the
lack of CHD8 affected CpG methylation and histone acetylation around the CTCF
binding sites, adjacent to heterochromatin, of BRCA1 and c-myc genes. These
findings provide insight into the role of CTCF-CHD8 complex in insulation and
epigenetic regulation at active insulator sites.

PMID: 16949368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Oct 1;15(19):2945-54. Epub 2006 Aug 23.

CTCF binding sites promote transcription initiation and prevent DNA methylation
on the maternal allele at the imprinted H19/Igf2 locus.

Engel N(1), Thorvaldsen JL, Bartolomei MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia 19104, USA.

Imprinting at the H19/Igf2 locus depends on a differentially methylated domain
(DMD) acting as a maternal-specific, methylation-sensitive insulator and a
paternal-specific locus of hypermethylation. Four repeats in the DMD bind CTCF on
the maternal allele and have been proposed to recruit methylation on the paternal
allele. We deleted the four repeats and assayed the effects of the mutation at
the endogenous locus. The H19DMD-DeltaR allele can successfully acquire
methylation during spermatogenesis and silence paternal H19, indicating that
these paternal-specific functions are independent of the CTCF binding sites.
Maternal inheritance of the mutations leads to biallelic Igf2 expression,
consistent with the loss of a functional insulator. Additionally, we uncovered
two previously undescribed roles for the CTCF binding sites. On the mutant
allele, H19 RNA is barely detectable in 6.5 d.p.c. embryos and 9.5 d.p.c.
placenta, for the first time identifying the repeats as the elements responsible 
for initiating H19 transcription. Furthermore, methylation is abruptly acquired
on the mutant maternal allele after implantation, a time when the embryo is
undergoing genome-wide de novo methylation. Together, these experiments show that
in addition to being essential for a functional insulator, the CTCF repeats
facilitate initiation of H19 expression in the early embryo and are required to
maintain the hypomethylated state of the entire DMD.

PMID: 16928784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Proteomics. 2006 Sep;6(17):4800-7.

Identification of a tyrosine-phosphorylated CCCTC-binding nuclear factor in
capacitated mouse spermatozoa.

Tang JB(1), Chen YH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemical Sciences, College of Life Science, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

The molecular basis of mammalian sperm capacitation, either in vivo in the female
reproductive tract, or in vitro, is poorly understood. It is well known that
sperm capacitation is associated with an increase in tyrosine phosphorylation of 
a subset of proteins. We resolved the phosphoproteins in the cell lysate of mouse
sperm after capacitation by 2-DE. One tyrosine-phosphorylated 130-kDa spot was
trypsin-digested, and six oligopeptide sequences were established from the MS
data. These were confirmed in a CCCTC-binding nuclear factor (CTCF), a widely
expressed and highly conserved protein. Further, both an anti-phosphotyrosine
antibody and an anti-CTCF antibody showed immunoreactivity to a 130-kDa component
in the immunoprecipitates obtained after incubation of the cell lysate from the
capacitated sperm using another anti-CTCF antibody. The data support the presence
of a tyrosine-phosphorylated CTCF in the capacitated sperm. Immunolocalization of
the CTCF revealed fluorescent staining in the acrosome region in both capacitated
and incapacitated sperm. The electrophoretic mobility shift assay, using a CTCF
target sequence 5'-GGCGGCGCCGCTAGGGGTCTCTCT-3' found in the promoter of the
amyloid beta-protein precursor, manifested that, relative to CTCF in the
incapacitated sperm, the tyrosine-phosphorylated protein in the capacitated sperm
had stronger affinity to the CTCF target sequence.

PMID: 16878297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Biol Chem. 2006 Oct 13;281(41):30573-80. Epub 2006 Jul 29.

Enhancer blocking by chicken beta-globin 5'-HS4: role of enhancer strength and
insulator nucleosome depletion.

Zhao H(1), Kim A, Song SH, Dean A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The 5'-HS4 chicken beta-globin insulator functions as a positional enhancer
blocker on chromatinized episomes in human cells, blocking the HS2 enhancer of
the human beta-globin locus control region from activating a downstream
epsilon-globin gene. 5'-HS4 interrupted formation of a domain of histone H3 and
H4 acetylation encompassing the 6-kb minilocus and inhibited transfer of RNA
polymerase from the enhancer to the gene promoter. We found that the enhancer
blocking phenotype was amplified when the insulated locus contained a weakened
HS2 enhancer in which clustered point mutations eliminated interaction of the
transcription factor GATA-1. The GATA-1 mutation compromised recruitment of
histone acetyltransferases and RNA polymerase II to HS2. Enhancer blocking
correlated with a significant depletion of nucleosomes in the core region of the 
insulator as revealed by micrococcal nuclease and DNase I digestion studies.
Nucleosome depletion at 5'-HS4 was dependent on interaction of the insulator
protein CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) and was required for enhancer blocking. These
findings provide evidence that a domain of active chromatin is formed by
spreading from an enhancer to a target gene and can be blocked by a
nucleosome-free gap in an insulator.

PMID: 16877759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Jul 11;103(28):10684-9. Epub 2006 Jun 30.

CTCF binding at the H19 imprinting control region mediates maternally inherited
higher-order chromatin conformation to restrict enhancer access to Igf2.

Kurukuti S(1), Tiwari VK, Tavoosidana G, Pugacheva E, Murrell A, Zhao Z,
Lobanenkov V, Reik W, Ohlsson R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Genetics, Uppsala University, Norbyvägen 18A,
S-752 36 Uppsala, Sweden.

It is thought that the H19 imprinting control region (ICR) directs the silencing 
of the maternally inherited Igf2 allele through a CTCF-dependent chromatin
insulator. The ICR has been shown to interact physically with a silencer region
in Igf2, differentially methylated region (DMR)1, but the role of CTCF in this
chromatin loop and whether it restricts the physical access of distal enhancers
to Igf2 is not known. We performed systematic chromosome conformation capture
analyses in the Igf2/H19 region over >160 kb, identifying sequences that interact
physically with the distal enhancers and the ICR. We found that, on the paternal 
chromosome, enhancers interact with the Igf2 promoters but that, on the maternal 
allele, this is prevented by CTCF binding within the H19 ICR. CTCF binding in the
maternal ICR regulates its interaction with matrix attachment region (MAR)3 and
DMR1 at Igf2, thus forming a tight loop around the maternal Igf2 locus, which may
contribute to its silencing. Mutation of CTCF binding sites in the H19 ICR leads 
to loss of CTCF binding and de novo methylation of a CTCF target site within Igf2
DMR1, showing that CTCF can coordinate regional epigenetic marks. This systematic
chromosome conformation capture analysis of an imprinting cluster reveals that
CTCF has a critical role in the epigenetic regulation of higher-order chromatin
structure and gene silencing over considerable distances in the genome.

PMCID: PMC1484419
PMID: 16815976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2006 May;26(5):606-9.

[Effects of microRNA miR-181a on gene expression profiles of K562 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou JY(1), Ma WL, Fei J, Ding DP, Shi R, Jiang L, Zheng WL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Engineering, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou
510515, China. zhoujueyu@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of microRNA on the gene expression profile
of human leukemia K562 cells using microarray technique.
METHODS: miR-181a RNA duplexes were designed and synthesized according to the
mature sequence of miR-181a. Forty-eight hours after transfection of in vitro
cultured K562 cells using Oligofectamine, gene expression profiles of the cells
were studied and analyzed using Agilent Human 1A Oligo microarray.
RESULTS: Totalling 228 differentially expressed genes were identified from the
20,173 screened genes, including 59 up-regulated ones (consisting of
metabolism-associated genes, tumor suppressor genes, signal
transduction-associated genes, immunity and defense-associated genes etc), and
169 down-regulated ones (consisting of oncogenes, DNA-binding and transcription
genes, metabolism-associated genes, signal transduction-associated genes, cell
cycle and development-associated genes etc.) in the transfected K562 cells as
compared with the control K562 cells. Changes in expressions of CTCF, ZAP70,
SEMA4C and RALA were confirmed by semi-quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-181a transfection for 48 h induces gene expression profile
changes in K562 cells, indicating the functionality of the miR-181a. These
differentially expressed genes are related to the functions of the microRNA, and 
may also be the basis of the regulation model of posttranscriptional gene
silencing. These findings provide an evidence for further study of the
machineries and functions of the microRNA in mammalian cells.

PMID: 16762861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Aug 1;98(5):1037-43.

Antitumor efficacy of DNA vaccination to the epigenetically acting tumor
promoting transcription factor BORIS and CD80 molecular adjuvant.

Loukinov D(1), Ghochikyan A, Mkrtichyan M, Ichim TE, Lobanenkov VV, Cribbs DH,
Agadjanyan MG.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Cancer testis (CT) antigens are promising candidates for tumor vaccines due to
their immunogenicity and tissue-restricted expression. Recently, we identified a 
novel cancer testis gene, BORIS, whose expression is restricted to male testis
after puberty and is strictly absent in non-malignant female tissue. BORIS
encodes a DNA-binding protein that shares 11 zing finger (ZF) with transcription 
factor CTCF and differs at the N- and C-termini. CTCF has been implicated in
epigenetic regulation of imprinting, X chromosome inactivation, repression, and
activation of cancer testis antigens. BORIS expression has been documented in
cancers of diverse histological origin, including, but not limited to breast,
prostate, ovary, gastric, liver, endometrial, glia, colon, and esophagus.
Interestingly, BORIS induces demethylation and subsequent expression of many
cancer-testis genes, including MAGE-A1 and NY-ESO-1, indicating that it is
expressed very early in malignancy and might be an attractive candidate for
immunotherapy. In this study we tested BORIS as a vaccine in a very aggressive,
highly metastatic, and poorly immunogenic murine model of mammary carcinoma.
Immunizations with a DNA encoding the mutant form of murine BORIS antigen
(pmBORIS lacking DNA-binding function) significantly prolonged survival, and
inhibited tumor growth in BALB/c mice inoculated with 4T1 cells. Priming with
pmBORIS mixed with molecular adjuvant and boosting with adenoviral vector
expressing mBORIS was generally more effective, suggesting that the vaccination
protocol could be further optimized. This is the first report demonstrating the
feasibility of vaccination with a cancer associated epigenetic regulator for the 
induction of tumor inhibition.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16741971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J Virol. 2006 Jun;80(12):5723-32.

Regulation of Epstein-Barr virus latency type by the chromatin boundary factor
CTCF.

Chau CM(1), Zhang XY, McMahon SB, Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Epstein Barr virus (EBV) can establish distinct latency types with different
growth-transforming properties. Type I latency and type III latency can be
distinguished by the expression of EBNA2, which has been shown to be regulated,
in part, by the EBNA1-dependent enhancer activity of the origin of replication
(OriP). Here, we report that CTCF, a chromatin boundary factor with
well-established enhancer-blocking activity, binds to EBV sequences between the
OriP and the RBP-Jkappa response elements of the C promoter (Cp) and regulates
transcription levels of EBNA2 mRNA. Using DNA affinity, electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay, DNase I footprinting, and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), we
found that CTCF binds both in vitro and in vivo to the EBV genome between OriP
and Cp, with an approximately 50-bp footprint at EBV coordinates 10515 to 10560. 
Deletion of this CTCF binding site in a recombinant EBV bacterial artificial
chromosome (BAC) increased EBNA2 transcription by 3.5-fold compared to a
wild-type EBV BAC. DNA affinity and ChIP showed more CTCF binding at this site in
type I latency cell lines (MutuI and KemI) than in type III latency cell lines
(LCL3456 and Raji). CTCF protein and mRNA expression levels were higher in type I
than type III cell lines. Short interfering RNA depletion of CTCF in type I MutuI
cells stimulated EBNA2 mRNA levels, while overexpression of CTCF in type III Raji
cells inhibited EBNA2 mRNA levels. These results indicate that increased CTCF can
repress EBNA2 transcription. We also show that c-MYC, as well as EBNA2, can
stimulate CTCF mRNA levels, suggesting that CTCF levels may contribute to B-cell 
differentiation as well as EBV latency type determination.

PMCID: PMC1472585
PMID: 16731911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2006 Jun;47(6):2422-9.

Effect of CTCF-binding motif on regulation of PAX6 transcription.

Wu D(1), Li T, Lu Z, Dai W, Xu M, Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)Health Science Center, Shanghai Institute of Biological Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, People's Republic of China.

Erratum in
    Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2006 Sep;47(9):3721.

PURPOSE: Previous studies indicate that the CCCTC binding transcription factor
(CTCF) regulates homeobox PAX6 gene transcription in corneal epithelial cells. In
the present study, the effect was investigated of CTCF activity on PAX6
transcription through interaction with five essential motifs located in an 80-bp 
region upstream from the PAX6 P0 promoter.
METHODS: An electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) was used to determine the
interaction between CTCF and DNA binding motifs. DNA mutagenesis was applied in
identification of DNA motif functions. Immunohistochemistry and Western blot
analyses were performed to detect the stress-induced effect on CTCF activity.
RESULTS: The five identified CTCF-binding motifs were mutated one by one or in
different combinations. Interactions of CTCF with these mutated motifs were
determined by EMSA and DNA-binding competitions. All five CCCTC motifs were
functional for the CTCF binding and DNA-binding activity of CTCF was
proportionally decreased after increases in mutations of motif numbers. In
addition, ultraviolet (UV) irradiation and epidermal growth factor (EGF) induced 
suppression and activation of CTCF expression, respectively. Effects of UV and
EGF induction were due to alterations in CTCF expression and activity resulting
in changes in CTCF DNA binding activity to the PAX6 promoter region detected by
EMSA.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that CTCF regulates PAX6 expression in
response to stress-induced conditions and that the molecular base of CTCF
controlling PAX6 expression is through five functional and specific motifs in the
region upstream from the PAX6 P0 promoter in corneal epithelial cells.

PMID: 16723452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Anal Biochem. 2006 Jul 1;354(1):85-93. Epub 2006 May 2.

Two-dimensional electrophoretic mobility shift assay: identification and mapping 
of transcription factor CTCF target sequences within an FXYD5-COX7A1 region of
human chromosome 19.

Vetchinova AS(1), Akopov SB, Chernov IP, Nikolaev LG, Sverdlov ED.

Author information: 
(1)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Moscow 117997, Russia.

An approach for fast identification and mapping of transcription factor binding
sites within long genomic sequences is proposed. Using this approach, 10
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) binding sites were identified within a 1-Mb
FXYD5-COX7A1 human chromosome 19 region. In vivo binding of CTCF to these sites
was verified by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. CTCF binding sites were
mapped within gene introns and intergenic regions, and some of them contained
Alu-like repeated elements.

PMID: 16701069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jul 7;281(27):18435-43. Epub 2006 May 4.

The human major histocompatibility complex class II HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DQA1 genes
are separated by a CTCF-binding enhancer-blocking element.

Majumder P(1), Gomez JA, Boss JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

The human major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) region encodes a
cluster of polymorphic heterodimeric glycoproteins HLA-DR, -DQ, and -DP that
functions in antigen presentation. Separated by approximately 44 kb of DNA, the
HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DQA1 encode MHC-II proteins that function in separate MHC-II
heterodimers and are diametrically transcribed. A region of high acetylation
located in the intergenic sequences between HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DQA1 was discovered 
and termed XL9. The peak of acetylation coincided with sequences that bound the
insulator protein CCCTC-binding factor as determined by chromatin
immunoprecipitations and in vitro DNA binding studies. XL9 was also found to be
associated with the nuclear matrix. The activity of the XL9 region was examined
and found to be a potent enhancer-blocking element. These results suggest that
the XL9 region may have evolved to separate the transcriptional units of the
HLA-DR and HLA-DQ genes.

PMID: 16675454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Gene. 2006 Jun 21;375:26-36. Epub 2006 May 2.

Cloning and characterization of zebrafish CTCF: Developmental expression
patterns, regulation of the promoter region, and evolutionary aspects of gene
organization.

Pugacheva EM(1), Kwon YW, Hukriede NA, Pack S, Flanagan PT, Ahn JC, Park JA, Choi
KS, Kim KW, Loukinov D, Dawid IB, Lobanenkov VV.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Section, Laboratory of Immunopathology, National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 
20852, USA. epugacheva@niaid.nih.gov

CTCF is a nuclear phosphoprotein capable of using different subsets of its 11 Zn 
fingers (ZF) for sequence-specific binding to many dissimilar DNA CTCF-target
sites. Such sites were identified in the genomic DNA of various multicellular
organisms, in which the CTCF gene was cloned, including insects, birds, rodents, 
and primates. CTCF/DNA-complexes formed in vivo with different 50-bp-long
sequences mediate diverse functions such as positive and negative regulation of
promoters, and organization of all known enhancer-blocking elements ("chromatin
insulators") including constitutive and epigenetically regulated elements.
Abnormal functions of certain CTCF sites are implicated in cancer and in
epigenetic syndromes such as BWS and skewed X-inactivation. We describe here the 
cloning and characterization of the CTCF cDNA and promoter region from zebrafish,
a valuable vertebrate model organism. The full-length zebrafish CTCF cDNA clone
is 4244 bp in length with an open reading frame (ORF) of 2391 bp that encodes 797
amino acids. The zebrafish CTCF amino acid sequence shows high identity (up to
98% in the zinc finger region) with human CTCF, and perfect conservation of
exon-intron organization. Southern blot analyses indicated that the zebrafish
genome contains a single copy of the CTCF gene. In situ hybridization revealed
the presence of zebrafish CTCF transcripts in all early stages of embryogenesis. 
Transfection assays with luciferase reporter-constructs identified a core
promoter region within 146 bp immediately upstream of the transcriptional start
site of zebrafish CTCF that is located at a highly conserved YY1/Initiator
element.

PMID: 16647825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Blood. 2006 Aug 15;108(4):1395-401. Epub 2006 Apr 27.

Flanking HS-62.5 and 3' HS1, and regions upstream of the LCR, are not required
for beta-globin transcription.

Bender MA(1), Byron R, Ragoczy T, Telling A, Bulger M, Groudine M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Research, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, WA 98109, USA. mbender@fhcrc.org

The locus control region (LCR) was thought to be necessary and sufficient for
establishing and maintaining an open beta-globin locus chromatin domain in the
repressive environment of the developing erythrocyte. However, deletion of the
LCR from the endogenous locus had no significant effect on chromatin structure
and did not silence transcription. Thus, the cis-regulatory elements that confer 
the open domain remain unidentified. The conserved DNaseI hypersensitivity sites 
(HSs) HS-62.5 and 3'HS1 that flank the locus, and the region upstream of the LCR 
have been implicated in globin gene regulation. The flanking HSs bind CCCTC
binding factor (CTCF) and are thought to interact with the LCR to form a
"chromatin hub" involved in beta-globin gene activation. Hispanic thalassemia, a 
deletion of the LCR and 27 kb upstream, leads to heterochromatinization and
silencing of the locus. Thus, the region upstream of the LCR deleted in Hispanic 
thalassemia (upstream Hispanic region [UHR]) may be required for expression. To
determine the importance of the UHR and flanking HSs for beta-globin expression, 
we generated and analyzed mice with targeted deletions of these elements. We
demonstrate deletion of these regions alone, and in combination, do not affect
transcription, bringing into question current models for the regulation of the
beta-globin locus.

PMCID: PMC1895883
PMID: 16645164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Science. 2006 Apr 14;312(5771):269-72.

CTCF mediates interchromosomal colocalization between Igf2/H19 and Wsb1/Nf1.

Ling JQ(1), Li T, Hu JF, Vu TH, Chen HL, Qiu XW, Cherry AM, Hoffman AR.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Service, Department of Veterans Affairs, Palo Alto Health Care System,
and Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

Comment in
    Trends Genet. 2006 Dec;22(12):637-9.
    Science. 2006 Apr 14;312(5771):207-8.

Gene transcription may be regulated by remote enhancer or insulator regions
through chromosome looping. Using a modification of chromosome conformation
capture (3C) and fluorescence in situ hybridization, we found that one allele of 
the insulin-like growth factor 2 (Igf2)/H19 imprinting control region (ICR) on
chromosome 7 colocalized with one allele of Wsb1/Nf1 on chromosome 11. Omission
of CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) or deletion of the maternal ICR abrogated this
association and altered Wsb1/Nf1 gene expression. These findings demonstrate that
CTCF mediates an interchromosomal association, perhaps by directing distant DNA
segments to a common transcription factory, and the data provide a model for
long-range allele-specific associations between gene regions on different
chromosomes that suggest a framework for DNA recombination and RNA
trans-splicing.

PMID: 16614224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Cell Sci. 2006 May 1;119(Pt 9):1746-59. Epub 2006 Apr 4.

Targeting of CTCF to the nucleolus inhibits nucleolar transcription through a
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation-dependent mechanism.

Torrano V(1), Navascués J, Docquier F, Zhang R, Burke LJ, Chernukhin I, Farrar D,
León J, Berciano MT, Renkawitz R, Klenova E, Lafarga M, Delgado MD.

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Biología Molecular del Cáncer, Departamento de Biologia Molecular,
Universidad de Cantabria, 39011-Santander, Spain.

Multiple functions have been reported for the transcription factor and candidate 
tumour suppressor, CTCF. Among others, they include regulation of cell growth,
differentiation and apoptosis, enhancer-blocking activity and control of
imprinted genes. CTCF is usually localized in the nucleus and its subcellular
distribution during the cell cycle is dynamic; CTCF was found associated with
mitotic chromosomes and the midbody, suggesting different roles for CTCF at
different stages of the cell cycle. Here we report the nucleolar localization of 
CTCF in several experimental model systems. Translocation of CTCF from
nucleoplasm to the nucleolus was observed after differentiation of K562 myeloid
cells and induction of apoptosis in MCF7 breast cancer cells. CTCF was also found
in the nucleoli in terminally differentiated rat trigeminal ganglion neurons.
Thus our data show that nucleolar localization of CTCF is associated with growth 
arrest. Interestingly, the 180 kDa poly(ADP-ribosyl)ated isoform of CTCF was
predominantly found in the nucleoli fractions. By transfecting different CTCF
deletion constructs into cell lines of different origin we demonstrate that the
central zinc-finger domain of CTCF is the region responsible for nucleolar
targeting. Analysis of subnucleolar localization of CTCF revealed that it is
distributed homogeneously in both dense fibrillar and granular components of the 
nucleolus, but is not associated with fibrillar centres. RNA polymerase I
transcription and protein synthesis were required to sustain nucleolar
localization of CTCF. Notably, the labelling of active transcription sites by in 
situ run-on assays demonstrated that CTCF inhibits nucleolar transcription
through a poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation-dependent mechanism.

PMID: 16595548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2006;113(1-4):238-46.

Mutagenesis in mice of nuclear hormone receptor binding sites in the Igf2/H19
imprinting control region.

Szabó PE(1), Han L, Hyo-Jung J, Mann JR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte,
CA 91010-3011, USA. pSzabó@coh.org

The H19/Igf2 imprinting control region (ICR) is a DNA methylation-dependent
chromatin insulator in somatic cells. The hypomethylated maternally inherited ICR
binds the insulator protein CTCF at four sites, and blocks activity of the
proximal Igf2 promoter by insulating it from the shared distal enhancers. The
hypermethylated paternally inherited ICR lacks CTCF binding and insulator
activity, but induces methylation-silencing of the paternal H19 promoter. The
paternal-specific methylation of the ICR is established in the male germ cells,
while the ICR emerges from the female germ line in an unmethylated form. Despite 
several attempts to find cis-regulatory elements, it is still unknown what
determines these male and female germ cell-specific epigenetic modifications. We 
recently proposed that five in vivo footprints spanning fifteen half nuclear
hormone receptor (NHR) binding sites within the ICR might be involved, and here
we report on the effects of mutagenizing all of these half sites in mice. No
effect was obtained--in the female and male germ lines the mutant ICR remained
hypomethylated and hypermethylated, respectively. The ICR imprinting mechanism
remains undefined.

2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16575186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2006;113(1-4):230-7.

The 3' portion of the mouse H19 Imprinting-Control Region is required for proper 
tissue-specific expression of the Igf2 gene.

Hagège H(1), Nasser R, Weber M, Milligan L, Aptel N, Jacquet C, Drewell RA,
Dandolo L, Surani MA, Cathala G, Forné T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier, Montpellier, France.

Genomic imprinting at the H19/Igf2 locus is governed by a cis-acting
Imprinting-Control Region (ICR), located 2 kb upstream of the H19 gene. This
region possesses an insulator function which is activated on the unmethylated
maternal allele through the binding of the CTCF factor. It has been previously
reported that paternal transmission of the H19(SilK) deletion, which removes the 
3' portion of H19 ICR, leads to the loss of H19 imprinting. Here we show that, in
the liver, this reactivation of the paternal H19 gene is concomitant to a
dramatic decrease in Igf2 mRNA levels. This deletion alters higher-order
chromatin architecture, Igf2 promoter usage and tissue-specific expression.
Therefore, when methylated, the 3' portion of the H19 ICR is a bi-functional
regulatory element involved not only in H19 imprinting but also in 'formatting'
the higher-order chromatin structure for proper tissue-specific expression of
both H19 and Igf2 genes.

2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16575185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2006;113(1-4):188-93.

The H19 gene: regulation and function of a non-coding RNA.

Gabory A(1), Ripoche MA, Yoshimizu T, Dandolo L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Institut Cochin, INSERM U567, CNRS UMR
8104, University Paris V Descartes, Paris, France.

The H19 gene encodes a 2.3-kb non-coding mRNA which is strongly expressed during 
embryogenesis. This gene belongs to an imprinted cluster, conserved on mouse
chromosome 7 and human chromosome 11p15. H19 is maternally expressed and the
neighbouring Igf2 gene is transcribed from the paternal allele. These two genes
are co-expressed in endoderm- and mesoderm-derived tissues during embryonic
development, which suggests a common mechanism of regulation. The regulatory
elements (imprinted control region, CTCF insulation, different enhancer
sequences, promoters of the two genes, matrix attachment regions) confer a
differential chromatin architecture to the two parental alleles leading to
reciprocal expression. The role of the H19 gene is unclear but different aspects 
have been proposed. H19 influences growth by way of a cis control on Igf2
expression. Although H19(-/-) mice are viable, a role for this gene during
development has been suggested by viable H19(-/-) parthenogenetic mice. Finally
it has been described as a putative tumour suppressor gene. H19 has been studied 
by numerous laboratories over the last fifteen years, nevertheless the function
of this non-coding RNA remains to be elucidated.

2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16575179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2006;113(1-4):153-8.

Establishment and maintenance of H19 imprinting in the germline and
preimplantation embryo.

Reese KJ(1), Bartolomei MS.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Cell and Developmental Biology,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The mouse H19 and Igf2 genes are oppositely imprinted and share enhancers that
reside 3' to the genes. The imprinted expression of these genes is coordinated by
a 2-kb regulatory element, the differentially methylated domain (DMD), positioned
between the two genes. The methylation status of this region determines the
ability of the insulator factor CTCF to bind to its sites in the DMD. Deletions
and mutations of the DMD that affect imprinting in the soma have little effect on
the methylation pattern of H19 in the germline, suggesting that additional
sequences and factors contribute to the earliest stages of imprinting regulation 
at this locus. Less is known about these initial steps, which include the marking
of the parental alleles, the onset of allele-specific expression patterns and
maintenance of the imprints in the preimplantation embryo. Here, we will focus on
these early steps, summarizing what is known and what questions remain to be
addressed.

2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16575175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2006;113(1-4):81-9.

How imprinting centres work.

Lewis A(1), Reik W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics and Imprinting, The Babraham Institute,
Cambridge, UK. annabelle.lewis@bbsrc.ac.uk

Imprinted genes tend to be clustered in the genome. Most of these clusters have
been found to be under the control of discrete DNA elements called imprinting
centres (ICs) which are normally differentially methylated in the germline. ICs
can regulate imprinted expression and epigenetic marks at many genes in the
region, even those which lie several megabases away. Some of the molecular and
cellular mechanisms by which ICs control other genes and regulatory regions in
the cluster are becoming clear. One involves the insulation of genes on one side 
of the IC from enhancers on the other, mediated by the insulator protein CTCF and
higher-order chromatin interactions. Another mechanism may involve non-coding
RNAs that originate from the IC, targeting histone modifications to the
surrounding genes. Given that several imprinting clusters contain CTCF dependent 
insulators and/or non-coding RNAs, it is likely that one or both of these two
mechanisms regulate imprinting at many loci. Both mechanisms involve a variety of
epigenetic marks including DNA methylation and histone modifications but the
hierarchy of and interactions between these modifications are not yet understood.
The challenge now is to establish a chain of developmental events beginning with 
differential methylation of an IC in the germline and ending with imprinting of
many genes, often in a lineage dependent manner.

2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16575166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2006 Jun;45(6):592-601.

Association of 11q loss, trisomy 12, and possible 16q loss with loss of
imprinting of insulin-like growth factor-II in Wilms tumor.

Watanabe N(1), Nakadate H, Haruta M, Sugawara W, Sasaki F, Tsunematsu Y, Kikuta
A, Fukuzawa M, Okita H, Hata J, Soejima H, Kaneko Y.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Clinical Oncology, Saitama Cancer Center, Ina, Saitama,
Japan.

We evaluated the WT1 and IGF2 status and performed chromosome and/or comparative 
genomic hybridization analysis in 43 tumor samples from patients with Wilms
tumor. On this basis, we classified them into 4 groups: WT1 abnormality, loss of 
heterozygosity (LOH) of IGF2, loss of imprinting (LOI) of IGF2, and retention of 
imprinting (ROI) of IGF2, which were seen in 12%, 30%, 16%, and 42% of the
tumors, respectively. Patients in the LOI group were older than those in other
groups (P < 0.01), and tumors in the WT1 group had fewer cytogenetic changes than
did those in the other groups (P < 0.01). It was found that 11q- and +12 were
more frequent in the LOI group than in the WT1+LOH+ROI group (P < 0.01 and P <
0.01). There was no difference in the incidence of 16q- between the LOI group and
the other groups; however, when we excluded 16 tumors with LOH on 11p15, 16q-
tended to be more frequent in the LOI group than in the WT1+ROI group (P = 0.06).
The association of 11q- or +12 with LOI of IGF2 found in the present study
suggests that many tumors with no WT1 abnormalities need overexpression of IGF2
together with biallelic inactivation of the tumor-suppressor gene on 11q and/or
overexpression of growth-promoting genes on chromosome 12. The 11q gene may code 
for one of the proteins that constitute a CTCF insulator complex, and its
mutation, deletion, or haploinsufficiency may cause insulator abnormalities that 
might lead to LOI of IGF2.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16518847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Mar;26(6):2109-17.

Differential methylation of Xite and CTCF sites in Tsix mirrors the pattern of
X-inactivation choice in mice.

Boumil RM(1), Ogawa Y, Sun BK, Huynh KD, Lee JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Simches 6.624, 185 Cambridge St., Boston, MA
02114, USA.

During mammalian dosage compensation, one of two X-chromosomes in female cells is
inactivated. The choice of which X is silenced can be imprinted or stochastic.
Although genetic loci influencing the choice decision have been identified, the
primary marks for imprinting and random selection remain undefined. Here, we
examined the role of DNA methylation, a mechanism known to regulate imprinting in
autosomal loci, and sought to determine whether differential methylation on the
two Xs might predict their fates. To identify differentially methylated domains
(DMDs) at the X-inactivation center, we used bisulfite sequencing and
methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme analyses. We found DMDs in Tsix and
Xite, two genes previously shown to influence choice. Interestingly, the DMDs in 
Tsix lie within CTCF binding sites. Allelic methylation differences occur in
gametes and are erased in embryonic stem cells carrying two active Xs. Because
the pattern of DNA methylation mirrors events of X-inactivation, we propose that 
differential methylation of DMDs in Tsix and Xite constitute a primary mark for
epigenetic regulation. The discovery of DMDs in CTCF sites draws further
parallels between X-inactivation and autosomal imprinting.

PMCID: PMC1430288
PMID: 16507990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Mar;26(5):1589-97.

A CTCF-dependent silencer located in the differentially methylated area may
regulate expression of a housekeeping gene overlapping a tissue-specific gene
domain.

Klochkov D(1), Rincón-Arano H, Ioudinkova ES, Valadez-Graham V, Gavrilov A,
Recillas-Targa F, Razin SV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Structural-Functional Organization of Chromosomes, Institute of 
Gene Biology of the Russian Academy of Sciences, 34/5 Vavilov Street, 117334
Moscow, Russia.

The tissue-specific chicken alpha-globin gene domain represents one of the
paradigms, in terms of its constitutively open chromatin conformation and the
location of several regulatory elements within the neighboring housekeeping gene.
Here, we show that an 0.2-kb DNA fragment located approximately 4 kb upstream to 
the chicken alpha-globin gene cluster contains a binding site for the
multifunctional protein factor CTCF and possesses silencer activity which depends
on CTCF binding, as demonstrated by site-directed mutagenesis of the CTCF
recognition sequence. CTCF was found to be associated with this recognition site 
in erythroid cells but not in lymphoid cells where the site is methylated. A
functional promoter directing the transcription of the apparently housekeeping
ggPRX gene was found 120 bp from the CTCF-dependent silencer. The data are
discussed in terms of the hypothesis that the CTCF-dependent silencer stabilizes 
the level of ggPRX gene transcription in erythroid cells where the promoter of
this gene may be influenced by positive cis-regulatory signals activating
alpha-globin gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC1430243
PMID: 16478981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Virol. 2006 Mar;80(5):2358-68.

A chromatin insulator-like element in the herpes simplex virus type 1
latency-associated transcript region binds CCCTC-binding factor and displays
enhancer-blocking and silencing activities.

Amelio AL(1), McAnany PK, Bloom DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, 32610-0266, USA.

A previous study demonstrated that the latency-associated transcript (LAT)
promoter and the LAT enhancer/reactivation critical region (rcr) are enriched in 
acetyl histone H3 (K9, K14) during herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) latency,
whereas all lytic genes analyzed (ICP0, UL54, ICP4, and DNA polymerase) are not
(N. J. Kubat, R. K. Tran, P. McAnany, and D. C. Bloom, J. Virol. 78:1139-1149,
2004). This suggests that the HSV-1 latent genome is organized into histone H3
(K9, K14) hyperacetylated and hypoacetylated regions corresponding to
transcriptionally permissive and transcriptionally repressed chromatin domains,
respectively. Such an organization implies that chromatin insulators, similar to 
those of cellular chromosomes, may separate distinct transcriptional domains of
the HSV-1 latent genome. In the present study, we sought to identify cis elements
that could partition the HSV-1 genome into distinct chromatin domains. Sequence
analysis coupled with chromatin immunoprecipitation and luciferase reporter
assays revealed that (i) the long and short repeats and the unique-short region
of the HSV-1 genome contain clustered CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor) motifs, (ii)
CTCF motif clusters similar to those in HSV-1 are conserved in other
alphaherpesviruses, (iii) CTCF binds to these motifs on latent HSV-1 genomes in
vivo, and (iv) a 1.5-kb region containing the CTCF motif cluster in the LAT
region possesses insulator activities, specifically, enhancer blocking and
silencing. The finding that CTCF, a cellular protein associated with chromatin
insulators, binds to motifs on the latent genome and insulates the LAT enhancer
suggests that CTCF may facilitate the formation of distinct chromatin boundaries 
during herpesvirus latency.

PMCID: PMC1395413
PMID: 16474142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Feb;26(4):1245-58.

Developmental profile of H19 differentially methylated domain (DMD) deletion
alleles reveals multiple roles of the DMD in regulating allelic expression and
DNA methylation at the imprinted H19/Igf2 locus.

Thorvaldsen JL(1), Fedoriw AM, Nguyen S, Bartolomei MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The differentially methylated domain (DMD) of the mouse H19 gene is a
methylation-sensitive insulator that blocks access of the Igf2 gene to shared
enhancers on the maternal allele and inactivates H19 expression on the methylated
paternal allele. By analyzing H19 DMD deletion alleles H19DeltaDMD and
H19Delta3.8kb-5'H19 in pre- and postimplantation embryos, we show that the DMD
exhibits positive transcriptional activity and is required for H19 expression in 
blastocysts and full activation of H19 during subsequent development. We also
show that the DMD is required to establish Igf2 imprinting by blocking access to 
shared enhancers when Igf2 monoallelic expression is initiated in
postimplantation embryos and that the single remaining CTCF site of the
H19DeltaDMD allele is unable to provide this function. Furthermore, our data
demonstrate that sequence outside of the DMD can attract some
paternal-allele-specific CpG methylation 5' of H19 in preimplantation embryos,
although this methylation is not maintained during postimplantation in the
absence of the DMD. Finally, we report a conditional allele floxing the 1.6-kb
sequence deleted from the H19DeltaDMD allele and demonstrate that the DMD is
required to maintain repression of the maternal Igf2 allele and the full activity
of the paternal Igf2 allele in neonatal liver.

PMCID: PMC1367202
PMID: 16449639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Oncogene. 2006 Jun 1;25(23):3225-36. Epub 2006 Jan 23.

Erasure of methylation imprint at the promoter and CTCF-binding site upstream of 
H19 in human testicular germ cell tumors of adolescents indicate their fetal germ
cell origin.

Kawakami T(1), Zhang C, Okada Y, Okamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu, Shiga,
Japan.

Genome-wide epigenetic modification plays a crucial role in regulating genome
functions at critical stages of development. In particular, DNA methylation is
known to be reprogrammed on a genome-wide level in germ cells and in
preimplantation embryos, although it is relatively stable in somatic cells. In
this reprogramming process, the genome becomes demethylated, and methylated de
novo during later stages of development. Reprogramming of DNA methylation in male
germ cells has not been fully investigated. Testicular germ cell tumors (TGCTs)
possess a pluripotential nature and display protean histology from germ cells to 
embryonal and somatic cell differentiation. These properties make TGCT a unique
model for studying germ cell development and gametogenesis in respect of DNA
reprogramming. In order to obtain an insight into the epigenetic dynamics of
TGCTs, we conducted a comprehensive analysis of differential methylated regions
(DMRs) on H19 and IGF2 in TGCTs compared with testicular malignant lymphomas. In 
the present study, we show that methylation imprint at the promoter and
CTCF-binding site upstream of H19 was completely erased in both seiminomatous and
non-seminomatous TGCTs, whereas differential methylation was observed in
testicular lymphomas. The erasure of methylation imprint was also observed in
TGCTs with malignant transformation. We found biallelic unmethylation at the
promoter and the CTCF-binding site upstream of H19 is required, but not
sufficient for the biallelic expression of H19 in TGCTs. These data suggest that 
factors other than methylation contribute to transcriptional regulation of
imprinted genes in TGCTs. The present data have shown that TGCTs carry
distinctive epigenetic profiles at the core-imprinting domain of H19/IGF2 from
other neoplasms of somatic cell origin. The data also suggest that both
seminomatous and non-seminomatous TGCTs carry methylation profiles similar to
fetal germ cells, but not adult germ cells, indicating the origin of TGCTs as
fetal germ cells.

PMID: 16434968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Mol Biol. 2006 Mar 17;357(1):18-27. Epub 2006 Jan 9.

Sea urchin arylsulfatase insulator exerts its anti-silencing effect without
interacting with the nuclear matrix.

Hino S(1), Akasaka K, Matsuoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virus Immunology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. hino@med.unc.edu

Chromatin insulators have been shown to stabilize transgene expression. Although 
insulators have been suggested to regulate the subcellular localization of
chromosomes, it is still unclear whether this property is important for their
anti-silencing activity. To investigate the underlying mechanisms governing the
anti-silencing function of insulators, we studied the association of sea urchin
arylsulfatase insulator (ArsI) with the nuclear matrix, which is a key component 
of the subnuclear localization of the genome. ArsI did not potentiate the nuclear
matrix association with the transgene, even though it showed strong
anti-silencing activity. This observation was in clear contrast to the results of
the experiment using a human interferon-beta scaffold attachment region, in which
the anti-silencing effect coincided with the enhanced matrix association.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses suggested that the absence of the matrix
binding by ArsI was due to a lack of its binding to CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), 
a protein known to be associated with matrix binding by chicken beta-globin
insulator. Furthermore, ArsI maintained the nucleosome occupancy within the
transgene at a constant level during long-term culture, although ArsI itself was 
not a nucleosome-excluding sequence. Taken together, these results suggest that
this insulator exerts its anti-silencing activity by counteracting
silencing-associated factors to maintain local chromatin environment, rather than
by remodeling the subnuclear localization of the transgene locus.

PMID: 16426632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Feb;17(2):397-404.

H19-DMR allele-specific methylation analysis reveals epigenetic heterogeneity of 
CTCF binding site 6 but not of site 5 in head-and-neck carcinomas: a pilot
case-control analysis.

De Castro Valente Esteves LI(1), De Karla Cervigne N, Do Carmo Javaroni A, Magrin
J, Kowalski LP, Rainho CA, Rogatto SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute of Biosciences, Faculty of Medicine, UNESP
-- Sao Paulo State University, Botucatu, SP 18618-000, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Aberrant methylation of seven potential binding sites of the CTCF factor in the
differentially methylated region upstream of the H19 gene (H19-DMR) has been
suggested as critical for the regulation of IGF2 and H19 imprinted genes. In this
study, we analyzed the allele-specific methylation pattern of CTCF binding sites 
5 and 6 using methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme PCR followed by RFLP
analysis in matched tumoral and lymphocyte DNA from head-and-neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) patients, as well as in lymphocyte DNA from control individuals
who were cancer-free. The monoallelic methylation pattern was maintained in CTCF 
binding site 5 in 22 heterozygous out of 91 samples analyzed. Nevertheless, a
biallelic methylation pattern was detected in CTCF binding site 6 in a subgroup
of HNSCC patients as a somatic acquired feature of tumor cells. An atypical
biallelic methylation was also observed in both tumor and lymphocyte DNA from two
patients, and at a high frequency in the control group (29 out of 64 informative 
controls). Additionally, we found that the C/T transition detected by HhaI RFLP
suppressed one dinucleotide CpG in critical CTCF binding site 6, of a mutation
showing polymorphic frequencies. Although a heterogeneous methylation pattern was
observed after DNA sequencing modified by sodium bisulfite, the biallelic
methylation pattern was confirmed in 9 out of 10 HNSCCs. These findings are
likely to be relevant in the epigenetic regulation of the DMR, especially in
pathological conditions in which the imprinting of IGF2 and H19 genes is
disrupted.

PMID: 16391843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Genomics. 2006 Mar;87(3):417-26. Epub 2005 Dec 27.

Epigenetic status of the H19 locus in human oocytes following in vitro
maturation.

Borghol N(1), Lornage J, Blachère T, Sophie Garret A, Lefèvre A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 418/INRA UA 953, Hopital Debrousse, 29 rue Soeur Bouvier, 69322 Lyon 
Cedex 05, France.

Imprinting is an epigenetic modification that is reprogrammed in the germ line
and leads to the monoallelic expression of some genes. Imprinting involves DNA
methylation. Maternal imprint is reset during oocyte growth and maturation. In
vitro maturation (IVM) of oocytes may, therefore, interfere with imprint
acquisition and/or maintenance. To evaluate if maturing human oocytes in vitro
would be hazardous at the epigenetic level, we first determined the methylation
profile of the H19 differentially methylated region (DMR). The methylation status
of the H19 DMR seems particularly vulnerable to in vitro culture conditions. We
analyzed oocytes at different stages of maturation following IVM, germinal
vesicle (GV), metaphase I (MI), and metaphase II (MII), using the bisulfite
mutagenesis technique. Our results indicated that the unmethylated specific
maternal profile for the H19 DMR was stably established at the GV stage. The
majority of MI-arrested oocytes exhibited an altered pattern of methylation, the 
CTCF-binding site being methylated in half of the DNA strands analyzed. Of the 20
MII oocytes analyzed, 15 showed the normal unmethylated maternal pattern, while 5
originating from two different patients exhibited a methylated pattern. These
findings highlight the need for extended analysis on MII-rescued oocytes to
appreciate the epigenetic safety of the IVM procedure, before it becomes a
routine and practical assisted reproductive procedure.

PMID: 16378710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2005 Nov-Dec;39(6):971-7.

[Spatial organization of the chicken alpha-globin gene domain in cells of
different].

[Article in Russian]

Iudinkova eS, Petrov AV, Vasetskii ES, Razin SV.

We have developed a technique for mapping the sites of DNA attachment to the
nuclear matrix by hybridization of nuclear matrix DNA with an oligonucleotide
array. The latter was made by immobilization of 60-mer oligonucleotides
distributed within the area under study with a 2 Kb step on nylon filter. Using
this approach we have analyzed the mode of interaction of a 100 Kb fragment of
chicken chromosome 16 including the alpha-globin gene domain with the nuclear
matrix. The 40 Kb DNA loop including all alpha-globin genes was detected in
erythroid cells. One of the borders of this loop colocalized with the previously 
mapped MAR element and CTCF-dependent enhancer-blocking element. Also, a long
transcribed area was found to be preferentially associated with the nuclear
matrix. The spatial organization of the area under study in lymphoid cells was
drastically different from this observed in erythroid cells.

PMID: 16358734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Chromosome Res. 2005;13(8):809-18. Epub 2005 Dec 8.

Allele-specific methylation of a functional CTCF binding site upstream of MEG3 in
the human imprinted domain of 14q32.

Rosa AL(1), Wu YQ, Kwabi-Addo B, Coveler KJ, Reid Sutton V, Shaffer LG.

Author information: 
(1)Health Research and Education Center, Washington State University, Spokane, WA
99210-1495, USA.

The gene MEG3 is located in the imprinted human chromosomal region on 14q32.
Imprinting of a structurally homologous region IGF2/H19 on 11p15 is mediated
through cytosine methylation-controlled binding of the protein CTCF to target
sites upstream of H19. We identified five new CTCF binding sites around the
promoter of MEG3. Using an electrophoretic mobility shift assay, we showed that
these sites bind CTCF in vitro. Using one of these sites, chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis confirmed CTCF binding in-vivo, and
differential allele-specific methylation was demonstrated in seven individuals
with either maternal or paternal uniparental disomy 14 (UPD14). The site was
unmethylated on the maternally inherited chromosomes 14 and methylated on the
paternally inherited chromosomes 14, suggesting parent-specific methylation of
sequences upstream of MEG3. We speculate that this CTCF-binding region may
provide a mechanism for the transcriptional regulation of MEG3 and DLK1.

PMID: 16331412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Dec 2;33(21):6850-60. Print 2005.

CTCF binds the proximal exonic region of hTERT and inhibits its transcription.

Renaud S(1), Loukinov D, Bosman FT, Lobanenkov V, Benhattar J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Bugnon 25,
1011 Lausanne, Switzerland.

The expression of the catalytic subunit (hTERT) represents the limiting factor
for telomerase activity. Previously, we detected a transcriptional repressor
effect of the proximal exonic region (first two exons) of the hTERT gene. To
better understand the mechanism involved and to identify a potential repressor,
we further characterized this region. The addition of the hTERT proximal exonic
region downstream of the hTERT minimal promoter strongly reduced promoter
transcriptional activity in all cells tested (tumor, normal and immortalized).
This exonic region also significantly inhibited the transcriptional activity of
the CMV and CDKN2A promoters, regardless of the cell type. Therefore, the
repressor effect of hTERT exonic region is neither cell nor promoter-dependent.
However, the distance between the promoter and the exonic region can modulate
this repressor effect, suggesting that nucleosome positioning plays a role in
transcriptional repression. We showed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay
that CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) binds to the proximal exonic region of hTERT.
Chromatin immunoprecipitaion assays confirmed the binding of CTCF to this region.
CTCF is bound to hTERT in cells in which hTERT is not expressed, but not in
telomerase-positive ones. Moreover, the transcriptional downregulation of CTCF by
RNA interference derepressed hTERT gene expression in normal telomerase-negative 
cells. Our results suggest that CTCF participates in key cellular mechanisms
underlying immortality by regulating hTERT gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1301598
PMID: 16326864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Dec;25(24):11184-90.

Rasgrf1 imprinting is regulated by a CTCF-dependent methylation-sensitive
enhancer blocker.

Yoon B(1), Herman H, Hu B, Park YJ, Lindroth A, Bell A, West AG, Chang Y,
Stablewski A, Piel JC, Loukinov DI, Lobanenkov VV, Soloway PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York 14263, USA.

Imprinted methylation of the paternal Rasgrf1 allele in mice occurs at a
differentially methylated domain (DMD) 30 kbp 5' of the promoter. A repeated
sequence 3' of the DMD regulates imprinted methylation, which is required for
imprinted expression. Here we identify the mechanism by which methylation
controls imprinting. The DMD is an enhancer blocker that binds CTCF in a
methylation-sensitive manner. CTCF bound to the unmethylated maternal allele
silences expression. CTCF binding to the paternal allele is prevented by
repeat-mediated methylation, allowing expression. Optimal in vitro
enhancer-blocking activity requires CTCF binding sites. The enhancer blocker can 
be bypassed in vivo and imprinting abolished by placing an extra enhancer
proximal to the promoter. Together, the repeats and the DMD constitute a binary
switch that regulates Rasgrf1 imprinting.

PMCID: PMC1316951
PMID: 16314537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Mol Cell. 2005 Nov 11;20(3):483-9.

Antisense transcription and heterochromatin at the DM1 CTG repeats are
constrained by CTCF.

Cho DH(1), Thienes CP, Mahoney SE, Analau E, Filippova GN, Tapscott SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98109, USA.

Prior studies of the DM1 locus have shown that the CTG repeats are a component of
a CTCF-dependent insulator element and that repeat expansion results in
conversion of the region to heterochromatin. We now show that the DM1 insulator
is maintained in a local heterochromatin context: an antisense transcript
emanating from the adjacent SIX5 regulatory region extends into the insulator
element and is converted into 21 nucleotide (nt) fragments with associated
regional histone H3 lysine 9 (H3-K9) methylation and HP1gamma recruitment that is
embedded within a region of euchromatin-associated H3 lysine 4 (H3-K4)
methylation. CTCF restricts the extent of the antisense RNA at the wild-type (wt)
DM1 locus and constrains the H3-K9 methylation to the nucleosome associated with 
the CTG repeat, whereas the expanded allele in congenital DM1 is associated with 
loss of CTCF binding, spread of heterochromatin, and regional CpG methylation.

PMID: 16285929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Breast Cancer Res. 2005;7(6):R998-1004. Epub 2005 Oct 18.

Expression analysis of candidate breast tumour suppressor genes on chromosome
16q.

van Wezel T(1), Lombaerts M, van Roon EH, Philippo K, Baelde HJ, Szuhai K,
Cornelisse CJ, Cleton-Jansen AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Albiniusdreef 2,
2333ZA Leiden, The Netherlands. t.van_wezel@lumc.nl

INTRODUCTION: Chromosome arm 16q is the second most frequent target of loss of
heterozygosity in breast cancer and is, therefore, a candidate to contain one or 
more classic tumour suppressor genes (TSGs). E-cadherin at 16q22 was identified
as a TSG in lobular breast cancer, but TSGs in ductal breast cancer remain
elusive. Several genes have been suggested as potential candidates (e.g. CBFA2T3,
CTCF and WWOX) but no inactivating mutations could be identified in these genes
and they thus fail to fit the classic two-hit model for a TSG. With the
completion of the human transcriptome, new candidate genes can be distinguished. 
Besides mutational inactivation, a TSG could, at least in a subset of the
tumours, be transcriptionally suppressed or even inactivated. Studying candidate 
genes for expression and somatic mutations could thus identify the TSGs.
METHODS: Possible candidates CBFA2T3, TERF2 and TERF2IP, FBXL8 and LRRC29 and
FANCA were studied for insertion and deletion mutations and for expression
differences using quantitative RT-PCR in a panel of tumour cell lines and primary
tumours with and without loss of 16q.
RESULTS: None of the genes showed mutations or obvious expression differences.
FANCA expression increased with tumour grade.
CONCLUSION: Apparently, the underlying genetics at chromosome 16q are complex or 
the TSGs remain to be identified. Multiple mechanisms, such as mutations,
promoter hypermethylation or haploinsufficiency, might lead to the inactivation
of a TSG.

PMCID: PMC1410740
PMID: 16280054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 30;280(52):43017-23. Epub 2005 Oct 17.

The human enhancer blocker CTC-binding factor interacts with the transcription
factor Kaiso.

Defossez PA(1), Kelly KF, Filion GJ, Pérez-Torrado R, Magdinier F, Menoni H,
Nordgaard CL, Daniel JM, Gilson E.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR5161, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, 46 allée d'Italie, 69364 Lyon 
Cedex 07, France. Defossez@Curie.fr

CTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a DNA-binding protein of vertebrates that plays
essential roles in regulating genome activity through its capacity to act as an
enhancer blocker. We performed a yeast two-hybrid screen to identify protein
partners of CTCF that could regulate its activity. Using full-length CTCF as bait
we recovered Kaiso, a POZ-zinc finger transcription factor, as a specific binding
partner. The interaction occurs through a C-terminal region of CTCF and the POZ
domain of Kaiso. CTCF and Kaiso are co-expressed in many tissues, and CTCF was
specifically co-immunoprecipitated by several Kaiso monoclonal antibodies from
nuclear lysates. Kaiso is a bimodal transcription factor that recognizes
methylated CpG dinucleotides or a conserved unmethylated sequence (TNGCAGGA, the 
Kaiso binding site). We identified one consensus unmethylated Kaiso binding site 
in close proximity to the CTCF binding site in the human 5' beta-globin
insulator. We found, in an insulation assay, that the presence of this Kaiso
binding site reduced the enhancer-blocking activity of CTCF. These data suggest
that the Kaiso-CTCF interaction negatively regulates CTCF insulator activity.

PMID: 16230345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Mol Hum Reprod. 2005 Sep;11(9):631-40. Epub 2005 Oct 11.

IVF results in de novo DNA methylation and histone methylation at an Igf2-H19
imprinting epigenetic switch.

Li T(1), Vu TH, Ulaner GA, Littman E, Ling JQ, Chen HL, Hu JF, Behr B, Giudice L,
Hoffman AR.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Service, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, CA 94304, USA.

Recent studies suggest that IVF and assisted reproduction technologies (ART) may 
result in abnormal genomic imprinting, leading to an increased frequency of
Angelman syndrome (AS) and Beckwith-Weidemann syndrome (BWS) in IVF children. To 
learn how ART might alter the epigenome, we examined morulas and blastocysts
derived from C57BL/6J X M. spretus F1 mice conceived in vivo and in vitro and
determined the allelic expression of four imprinted genes: Igf2, H19, Cdkn1c and 
Slc221L. IVF-derived mouse embryos that were cultured in human tubal fluid (HTF) 
(Quinn's advantage) media displayed a high frequency of aberrant H19 imprinting, 
whereas in vivo and IVF embryos showed normal maternal expression of Cdkn1c and
normal biallelic expression of Igf2 and Slc221L. Embryonic stem (ES) cells
derived from IVF blastocysts also showed abnormal Igf2/H19 imprinting.
Allele-specific bisulphite PCR reveals abnormal DNA methylation at a
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) site in the imprinting control region (ICR), as the
normally unmethylated maternal allele acquired a paternal methylation pattern.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays indicate an increase of lysine 4
methylation (dimethyl Lys4-H3) on the paternal chromatin and a gain in lysine 9
methylation (trimethyl Lys9-H3) on the maternal chromatin at the same
CTCF-binding site. Our results indicate that de novo DNA methylation on the
maternal allele and allele-specific acquisition of histone methylation lead to
aberrant Igf2/H19 imprinting in IVF-derived ES cells. We suggest that ART, which 
includes IVF and various culture media, might cause imprinting errors that
involve both aberrant DNA methylation and histone methylation at an epigenetic
switch of the Igf2-H19 gene region.

PMID: 16219628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Cancer Res. 2005 Sep 1;65(17):7763-74.

Reciprocal binding of CTCF and BORIS to the NY-ESO-1 promoter coincides with
derepression of this cancer-testis gene in lung cancer cells.

Hong JA(1), Kang Y, Abdullaev Z, Flanagan PT, Pack SD, Fischette MR, Adnani MT,
Loukinov DI, Vatolin S, Risinger JI, Custer M, Chen GA, Zhao M, Nguyen DM,
Barrett JC, Lobanenkov VV, Schrump DS.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Oncology Section, Surgery Branch, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892-1201, USA.

Regulatory sequences recognized by the unique pair of paralogous factors, CTCF
and BORIS, have been implicated in epigenetic regulation of imprinting and X
chromosome inactivation. Lung cancers exhibit genome-wide demethylation
associated with derepression of a specific class of genes encoding cancer-testis 
(CT) antigens such as NY-ESO-1. CT genes are normally expressed in BORIS-positive
male germ cells deficient in CTCF and meCpG contents, but are strictly silenced
in somatic cells. The present study was undertaken to ascertain if aberrant
activation of BORIS contributes to derepression of NY-ESO-1 during pulmonary
carcinogenesis. Preliminary experiments indicated that NY-ESO-1 expression
coincided with derepression of BORIS in cultured lung cancer cells. Quantitative 
reverse transcription-PCR analysis revealed robust, coincident induction of BORIS
and NY-ESO-1 expression in lung cancer cells, but not normal human bronchial
epithelial cells following 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-azadC), Depsipeptide FK228
(DP), or sequential 5-azadC/DP exposure under clinically relevant conditions.
Bisulfite sequencing, methylation-specific PCR, and chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) experiments showed that induction of BORIS coincided with direct
modulation of chromatin structure within a CpG island in the 5'-flanking
noncoding region of this gene. Cotransfection experiments using promoter-reporter
constructs confirmed that BORIS modulates NY-ESO-1 expression in lung cancer
cells. Gel shift and ChIP experiments revealed a novel CTCF/BORIS-binding site in
the NY-ESO-1 promoter, which unlike such sites in the H19-imprinting control
region and X chromosome, is insensitive to CpG methylation in vitro. In vivo
occupancy of this site by CTCF was associated with silencing of the NY-ESO-1
promoter, whereas switching from CTCF to BORIS occupancy coincided with
derepression of NY-ESO-1. Collectively, these data indicate that reciprocal
binding of CTCF and BORIS to the NY-ESO-1 promoter mediates epigenetic regulation
of this CT gene in lung cancer cells, and suggest that induction of BORIS may be 
a novel strategy to augment immunogenicity of pulmonary carcinomas.

PMID: 16140944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Cancer Res. 2005 Sep 1;65(17):7751-62.

Conditional expression of the CTCF-paralogous transcriptional factor BORIS in
normal cells results in demethylation and derepression of MAGE-A1 and
reactivation of other cancer-testis genes.

Vatolin S(1), Abdullaev Z, Pack SD, Flanagan PT, Custer M, Loukinov DI, Pugacheva
E, Hong JA, Morse H 3rd, Schrump DS, Risinger JI, Barrett JC, Lobanenkov VV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology, National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious
Disease, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Brother of the Regulator of Imprinted Sites (BORIS) is a mammalian CTCF paralog
with the same central 11Zn fingers (11ZF) that mediate specific interactions with
varying approximately 50-bp target sites. Regulated in vivo occupancy of such
sites may yield structurally and functionally distinct CTCF/DNA complexes
involved in various aspects of gene regulation, including epigenetic control of
gene imprinting and X chromosome inactivation. The latter functions are mediated 
by meCpG-sensitive 11ZF binding. Because CTCF is normally present in all somatic 
cells, whereas BORIS is active only in CTCF- and 5-methylcytosine-deficient adult
male germ cells, switching DNA occupancy from CTCF to BORIS was suggested to
regulate site specificity and timing of epigenetic reprogramming. In addition to 
11ZF-binding paternal imprinting control regions, cancer-testis gene promoters
also undergo remethylation during CTCF/BORIS switching in germ cells. Only
promoters of cancer testis genes are normally silenced in all somatic cells but
activated during spermatogenesis when demethylated in BORIS-positive germ cells
and are found aberrantly derepressed in various tumors. We show here that BORIS
is also expressed in multiple cancers and is thus itself a cancer-testis gene and
that conditional expression of BORIS in normal fibroblasts activates
cancer-testis genes selectively. We tested if replacement of CTCF by BORIS on
regulatory DNA occurs in vivo on activation of a prototype cancer-testis gene,
MAGE-A1. Transition from a hypermethylated/silenced to a hypomethylated/activated
status induced in normal cells by 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-azadC) was mimicked
by conditional input of BORIS and is associated with complete switching from CTCF
to BORIS occupancy at a single 11ZF target. This site manifested a novel type of 
CTCF/BORIS 11ZF binding insensitive to CpG methylation. Whereas 5-azadC induction
of BORIS takes only few hours, derepression of MAGE-A1 occurred 1 to 2 days
later, suggesting that BORIS mediates cancer-testis gene activation by 5-azadC.
Indeed, infection of normal fibroblasts with anti-BORIS short hairpin RNA
retroviruses before treatment with 5-azadC blocked reactivation of MAGE-A1. We
suggest that BORIS is likely tethering epigenetic machinery to a novel class of
CTCF/BORIS 11ZF target sequences that mediate induction of cancer-testis genes.

PMID: 16140943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. EMBO J. 2005 Sep 21;24(18):3291-300. Epub 2005 Aug 18.

CTCF binding and higher order chromatin structure of the H19 locus are maintained
in mitotic chromatin.

Burke LJ(1), Zhang R, Bartkuhn M, Tiwari VK, Tavoosidana G, Kurukuti S, Weth C,
Leers J, Galjart N, Ohlsson R, Renkawitz R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, Justus-Liebig-Universitaet Giessen, Giessen, Germany.

Most of the transcription factors, RNA polymerases and enhancer binding factors
are absent from condensed mitotic chromosomes. In contrast, epigenetic marks of
active and inactive genes somehow survive mitosis, since the activity status from
one cell generation to the next is maintained. For the zinc-finger protein CTCF, 
a role in interpreting and propagating epigenetic states and in separating
expression domains has been documented. To test whether such a domain structure
is preserved during mitosis, we examined whether CTCF is bound to mitotic
chromatin. Here we show that in contrast to other zinc-finger proteins, CTCF
indeed is bound to mitotic chromosomes. Mitotic binding is mediated by a portion 
of the zinc-finger DNA binding domain and involves sequence specific binding to
target sites. Furthermore, the chromatin loop organized by the CTCF-bound,
differentially methylated region at the Igf2/H19 locus can be detected in
mitosis. In contrast, the enhancer/promoter loop of the same locus is lost in
mitosis. This may provide a novel form of epigenetic memory during cell division.

PMCID: PMC1224683
PMID: 16107875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Mol Carcinog. 2005 Oct;44(2):102-10.

DNA methylation in the CTCF-binding site I and the expression pattern of the H19 
gene: does positive expression predict poor prognosis in early stage head and
neck carcinomas?

Esteves LI(1), Javaroni AC, Nishimoto IN, Magrin J, Squire JA, Kowalski LP,
Rainho CA, Rogatto SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute of Biosciences, UNESP, Sao Paulo State
University, Botucatu, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Loss of allele-specific expression by the imprinted genes IGF2 and H19 has been
correlated with a differentially methylated region (DMR) upstream to the H19
gene. The H19-DMR contains seven potential CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) binding
sites. CTCF is a chromatin insulator and a multifunctional transcription factor
whose binding to the H19-DMR is suppressed by DNA methylation. Our study included
a group of 41 head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) samples. The
imprinting status of the H19 gene was analyzed in 11 out of 35 positive cases for
H19 gene expression, and only 1 of them showed loss of imprinting. We detected a 
significant correlation (P = 0.041, Fisher's exact test) between H19 expression
and tumor recurrence. Among H19 positive cases, six were T2, in which five
developed recurrence and/or metastasis. Inversely, in the group of tumors that
showed no H19 gene expression, 5 out of 24 were T2 and only 1 presented regional 
recurrence. These data support the hypothesis that H19 expression could be used
as a prognostic marker to indicate recurrence in early stage tumors. We also
examined the methylation of the CTCF binding site 1 in a subgroup of these
samples. The H19 gene silencing and loss of imprinting were not correlated with
the methylation pattern of the CTCF binding site 1. However, the significant
correlation between H19 expression and tumor recurrence suggest that this
transcript could be a marker for the progression of HNSCC.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16015666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2005 Nov;44(3):256-64.

IGF2/H19 imprinting analysis of human germ cell tumors (GCTs) using the
methylation-sensitive single-nucleotide primer extension method reflects the
origin of GCTs in different stages of primordial germ cell development.

Sievers S(1), Alemazkour K, Zahn S, Perlman EJ, Gillis AJ, Looijenga LH, Göbel U,
Schneider DT.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Pediatric Oncology, Haematology and Immunology, Medical Center,
Heinrich-Heine-University, Moorenstrasse 5, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

Previous studies have demonstrated biallelic expression of the imprinted genes
H19 and IGF2 and loss of DNA methylation of the SNRPN gene, indicating a common
precursor cell of human germ cell tumors (GCTs), namely, the primordial germ cell
(PGC). In this study, we applied the methylation-sensitive single-nucleotide
primer extension (MS-SNuPE) technique to the analysis of the IGF2/H19 imprinting 
control region (ICR) in 55 GCTs from representative clinical and histologic
subgroups. Most GCTs showed low methylation at the IGF2/H19 ICR. All 8 ovarian
GCTs, 9 of 10 testicular seminomas, 7 of 10 testicular nonseminomas (all in
adolescents/adults), 6 of 9 testicular yolk sac tumors (YSTs), and 12 of 14
nongonadal GCTs (all in infants/children) were hypomethylated. The highest
methylation was observed in three childhood YSTs (boys) and 2 of 4 spermatocytic 
seminomas. The latter are derived from more advanced stages of germ-cell
development. The predominantly low methylation of most of the other GCTs
correlates with studies that demonstrated erasure of the methylation imprint of
the IGF2/H19 ICR during embryonal PGC migration and development. These findings
suggest that the IGF2/H19 methylation status in GCTs might reflect preservation
of the physiologic imprinting erasure in PGCs rather than a loss of imprinting in
a sense that is accepted for somatic tumors. Furthermore, this study indicates
that imprinting control mechanisms other than the proposed CTCF (CCCTC binding
factor) boundary model regulate IGF2 expression during this stage of PGC
development as well as in GCTs derived from PGC. (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16001432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. BMC Mol Biol. 2005 Jun 28;6:16.

Cloning and characterization of cDNAs encoding putative CTCFs in the mosquitoes, 
Aedes aegypti and Anopheles gambiae.

Gray CE(1), Coates CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Texas A&M University, MS 2475, College Station, TX
77843-2475, USA. c-gray@tamu.edu

BACKGROUND: One of the many ascribed functions of CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) in 
vertebrates is insulation of genes via enhancer-blocking. Insulation allows genes
to be shielded from "cross-talk" with neighboring regulatory elements. As such,
endogenous insulator sequences would be valuable elements to enable stable
transgene expression. Recently, CTCF joined Su(Hw), Zw5, BEAF32 and GAGA factor
as a protein associated with insulator activity in the fruitfly, Drosophila
melanogaster. To date, no known insulators have been described in mosquitoes.
RESULTS: We have identified and characterized putative CTCF homologs in the
medically-important mosquitoes, Aedes aegypti and Anopheles gambiae. These genes 
encode polypeptides with eleven C2H2 zinc fingers that show significant
similarity to those of vertebrate CTCFs, despite at least 500 million years of
divergence. The mosquito CTCFs are constitutively expressed and are upregulated
in early embryos and in the ovaries of blood-fed females. We have uncovered
significant bioinformatics evidence that CTCF is widespread, at least among
Drosophila species. Finally, we show that the An. gambiae CTCF binds two known
insulator sequences.
CONCLUSION: Mosquito CTCFs are likely orthologous to the widely-characterized
vertebrate CTCFs and potentially also serve an insulating function. As such, CTCF
may provide a powerful tool for improving transgene expression in these
mosquitoes through the identification of endogenous binding sites.

PMCID: PMC1174870
PMID: 15985163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Cancer Res. 2005 Jun 15;65(12):5112-22.

Heightened expression of CTCF in breast cancer cells is associated with
resistance to apoptosis.

Docquier F(1), Farrar D, D'Arcy V, Chernukhin I, Robinson AF, Loukinov D, Vatolin
S, Pack S, Mackay A, Harris RA, Dorricott H, O'Hare MJ, Lobanenkov V, Klenova E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Central Campus, University of Essex, Essex,
United Kingdon.

CTCF is a candidate tumor suppressor gene encoding a multifunctional
transcription factor. Surprisingly for a tumor suppressor, the levels of CTCF in 
breast cancer cell lines and tumors were found elevated compared with breast cell
lines with finite life span and normal breast tissues. In this study, we aimed to
investigate the possible cause for this increase in CTCF content and in
particular to test the hypothesis that up-regulation of CTCF may be linked to
resistance of breast cancer cells to apoptosis. For this purpose, apoptotic cell 
death was monitored following alterations of CTCF levels induced by transient
transfection and conditional knockdown of CTCF in various cell lines. We observed
apoptotic cell death in all breast cancer cell lines examined following CTCF
down-regulation. In addition, overexpression of CTCF partially protected cells
from apoptosis induced by overexpression of Bax or treatment with sodium
butyrate. To elucidate possible mechanisms of this phenomenon, we used a
proteomics approach and observed that levels of the proapoptotic protein, Bax,
were increased following CTCF down-regulation in MCF7 cells. Taken together,
these results suggest that in some cellular contexts CTCF shows antiapoptotic
characteristics, most likely exerting its functions through regulation of
apoptotic genes. We hypothesize that CTCF overexpression may have evolved as a
compensatory mechanism to protect breast cancer cells from apoptosis, thus
providing selective survival advantages to these cells. The observations reported
in this study may lead to development of therapies based on selective reduction
of CTCF in breast cancer cells.

PMID: 15958555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 29;280(30):28152-61. Epub 2005 Jun 6.

CTCF regulates growth and erythroid differentiation of human myeloid leukemia
cells.

Torrano V(1), Chernukhin I, Docquier F, D'Arcy V, León J, Klenova E, Delgado MD.

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Biología Molecular del Cáncer, Departamento de Biologia Molecular,
Unidad de Biomedicina-CSIC, Universidad de Cantabria, 39011 Santander, Spain.

CTCF is a transcription factor and a candidate tumor suppressor that contains a
DNA-binding domain composed of 11 zinc fingers. We reported previously that CTCF 
is differentially regulated during differentiation of human myeloid leukemia
cells. In this study we aimed to investigate the role of CTCF in myeloid cell
differentiation. A human cell line, K562, that can be chemically induced to
differentiate into various hematopoietic lineages was chosen as a model system
for this study. Several K562 cell lines with constitutive and conditional
expression of CTCF have been generated. By using these model systems we
demonstrated that: (i) ectopic expression of CTCF in K562 cells led to growth
retardation and promotion of differentiation into the erythroid lineage; (ii)
CTCF knock-down significantly inhibited differentiation of K562 cells into
erythroid lineage; (iii) differentiation of K562 into the megakaryocytic lineage 
was not significantly affected; and (iv) down-regulation of MYC has been
identified as one of the mechanisms by which CTCF promotes erythroid
differentiation. Taken together our results demonstrate that CTCF is involved in 
the control of myeloid cell growth and differentiation.

PMID: 15941718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 May;25(10):3855-63.

Functional characterization of a novel Ku70/80 pause site at the H19/Igf2
imprinting control region.

Katz DJ(1), Beer MA, Levorse JM, Tilghman SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, One Nassau Hall, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ 08544-0015, USA.

The imprinted expression of the H19 and Igf2 genes in the mouse is controlled by 
an imprinting control center (ICR) whose activity is regulated by
parent-of-origin differences in methylation. The only protein that has been
implicated in ICR function is the zinc-finger protein CTCF, which binds at
multiple sites within the maternally inherited ICR and is required to form a
chromatin boundary that inhibits Igf2 expression. To identify other proteins that
play a role in imprinting, we employed electrophoresis mobility shift assays to
identify two novel binding sites within the ICR. The DNA binding activity was
identified as the heterodimer Ku70/80, which binds nonspecifically to free DNA
ends. The sites within the ICR bind Ku70/80 in a sequence-specific manner and
with higher affinity than previously reported binding sites. The binding required
the presence of Mg(2+), implying that the sequence is a pause site for Ku70/80
translocation from a free end. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays were unable
to confirm that Ku70/80 binds to the ICR in vivo. In addition, mutation of these 
binding sites in the mouse did not result in any imprinting defects. A genome
scan revealed that the binding site is found in LINE-1 retrotransposons,
suggesting a possible role for Ku70/80 in transposition.

PMCID: PMC1087736
PMID: 15870260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Med Sci (Paris). 2005 Apr;21(4):390-5.

[Epigenetics and development: genomic imprinting].

[Article in French]

Gabory A(1), Dandolo L.

Author information: 
(1)Equipe Empreinte parentale, Département Génétique et Développement, Institut
Cochin, 24, rue du Faubourg Saint-Jacques, 75014 Paris, France.

Genomic imprinting leads to parent-of-origin-specific monoallelic expression of
about 60 known genes in the mammalian genome. It was discovered 20 years ago and 
the aim of this review is to summarize its main characteristics. The nature of
the imprint, still unknown, is characterized by differential chromatin structure 
and DNA methylation. The imprint is reset at each generation during
gametogenesis, which can be observed by demethylation in the PGCs, then
gamete-specific remethylation. The imprinted genes are usually located in
clusters and regulated by cis sequences such as imprinting centres, trans factors
such as the insulator protein CTCF and/or large non coding antisense RNAs.
Genetic and epigenetic abnormalities of the imprinted clusters can lead to human 
diseases such as Prader-Willi, Angelman or Beckwith-Wiedemann syndromes.

PMID: 15811304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2005 Jun;43(2):155-61.

Association of chromosome arm 16q loss with loss of imprinting of insulin-like
growth factor-II in Wilms tumor.

Mummert SK(1), Lobanenkov VA, Feinberg AP.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Biology, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

The most common known molecular defect in Wilms tumor (WT) of the kidney, the
most frequent solid tumor of childhood, is loss of imprinting (LOI) of the
insulin-like growth factor-II gene (IGF2), which involves activation of the
normally silent maternal allele of the gene and hypermethylation of a
differentially methylated region upstream of the H19 gene. Hypermethylation
impairs binding of the insulator protein CTCF, allowing activation of IGF2 by an 
enhancer shared between IGF2 and H19. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of 16q22.1 is 
found in 15% of WTs, and 16q22.1 harbors CTCF, raising the possibility that
reduced CTCF could lead to LOI of IGF2 in some cases. We hypothesized that there 
is an association between LOH of 16q and LOI of IGF2 in WT. In 40 WTs examined,
LOH of 16q was found in five, one of which also showed LOH of 11p15. All of the
remaining four tumors showed LOI of IGF2, compared to 13 of 32 WTs without LOH of
16q or 11p (P = 0.040). When published data not previously analyzed in this
manner were included, 6 of 6 tumors with 16q LOH (and without LOH of 11p) showed 
LOI of IGF2, compared to 24 of 52 without LOH (P = 0.015). Thus, a genetic (16q
LOH) and an epigenetic (LOI of IGF2) alteration in WT are linked, the first such 
association described. Finally, haploinsufficiency of CTCF may be the basis of
this association, given that CTCF expression in tumors with 16q LOH was 48% that 
of tumors without LOH.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15761865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Mar 15;102(11):4085-90. Epub 2005 Mar 2.

Microdeletion of target sites for insulator protein CTCF in a chromosome 11p15
imprinting center in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome and Wilms' tumor.

Prawitt D(1), Enklaar T, Gärtner-Rupprecht B, Spangenberg C, Oswald M, Lausch E, 
Schmidtke P, Reutzel D, Fees S, Lucito R, Korzon M, Brozek I, Limon J, Housman
DE, Pelletier J, Zabel B.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Mainz, Langenbeckstrasse 1, D-55101 Mainz, 
Germany. prawitt@molgen.medizin.uni-mainz.de

We have analyzed several cases of Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) with Wilms'
tumor in a familial setting, which give insight into the complex controls of
imprinting and gene expression in the chromosome 11p15 region. We describe a
2.2-kbp microdeletion in the H19/insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2)-imprinting
center eliminating three target sites of the chromatin insulator protein CTCF
that we believe here is necessary, but not sufficient, to cause BWS and Wilms'
tumor. Maternal inheritance of the deletion is associated with IGF2 loss of
imprinting and up-regulation of IGF2 mRNA. However, in at least one affected
family member a second genetic lesion (a duplication of maternal 11p15) was
identified and accompanied by a further increase in IGF2 mRNA levels 35-fold
higher than control values. Our results suggest that the combined effects of the 
H19/IGF2-imprinting center microdeletion and 11p15 chromosome duplication were
necessary for manifestation of BWS.

PMCID: PMC554791
PMID: 15743916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Apr 8;329(2):554-62.

A boundary for histone acetylation allows distinct expression patterns of the
Ad4BP/SF-1 and GCNF loci in adrenal cortex cells.

Ishihara SL(1), Morohashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Division for Sex Differentiation, National Institute for Basic Biology,
National Institutes of Natural Sciences, Higashiyama 5-1, Myoudaiji-cho, Okazaki 
444-8787, Japan.

Ad4BP/SF-1 is a nuclear receptor whose expression is restricted to tissues
involved in steroid hormone synthesis such as the adrenal cortex and gonads.
Recent sequence data analysis has shown that the Ad4BP/SF-1 gene is located only 
13kb downstream of the last exon of the neighboring GCNF gene that is expressed
in some neurons and gonadal germ cells. Despite the close proximity of the two
genes, regulatory elements from one do not interfere with the transcription of
the neighboring gene, resulting in distinct expression patterns of Ad4BP/SF-1 and
GCNF. This observation has led to the prediction that an insulator element must
exist between the two loci to establish independent transcription units. We
performed DNase I hypersensitivity assays on the adrenal cortex cell line, Y-1,
to test for the existence of an insulator. Three hypersensitive sites were
identified in the region spanning 2.1kb between the last exon of GCNF and the
first exon of Ad4BP/SF-1. The most upstream site contains a binding site for
CTCF, a known insulator protein, while the other sites are predicted to associate
with the nuclear matrix. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis using
anti-acetylated histone H3 and H4 antibodies showed a discontinuous pattern of
histone H3 and H4 acetylation upstream of these sites. Our data suggest that the 
chromatin architecture specialized by CTCF and the nuclear matrix contribute to
the distinct pattern of transcriptional regulation of these genes.

PMID: 15737622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. FEBS Lett. 2005 Feb 28;579(6):1424-34.

Regulation of the transcription factor, CTCF, by phosphorylation with protein
kinase CK2.

El-Kady A(1), Klenova E.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Unit, Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks
Road, Oxford, OX1 3QU, UK.

CTCF is a transcription factor involved in various aspects of gene regulation. We
previously reported that CTCF function is modulated by protein kinase CK2. In
this report we investigate further the role of CK2 in regulating the
transcriptional properties of CTCF. We demonstrate that coexpression of CTCF with
CK2 switches function of CTCF from repressor to activator. The
non-phosphorylatable mutant increases repression by CTCF and potentiates the
growth-suppressive ability of the protein, whereas the phospho-mimetic mutant
behaves in the opposite fashion. Mutation of the individual serines reveals that 
Serine 612 is a critical residue in regulation of CTCF by CK2.

PMID: 15733852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Apr 1;14(7):953-65. Epub 2005 Feb 24.

Familial cases of point mutations in the XIST promoter reveal a correlation
between CTCF binding and pre-emptive choices of X chromosome inactivation.

Pugacheva EM(1), Tiwari VK, Abdullaev Z, Vostrov AA, Flanagan PT, Quitschke WW,
Loukinov DI, Ohlsson R, Lobanenkov VV.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Section, Laboratory of Immunopathology, National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 5640 Fishers
Lane, Twinbrook I Rm. 1417, Rockville, MD 20852, USA.

The choice mechanisms that determine the future inactive X chromosome in somatic 
cells of female mammals involve the regulated expression of the XIST gene. A
familial C(-43)G mutation in the XIST promoter results in skewing of X chromosome
inactivation (XCI) towards the inactive X chromosome of heterozygous females,
whereas a C(-43)A mutation found primarily in the active X chromosome results in 
the opposite skewing pattern. Both mutations point to the existence of a factor
that might be responsible for the skewed patterns. Here we identify this factor
as CTCF, a conserved protein with a 11 Zn-finger (ZF) domain that can mediate
multiple sequence-specificity and interactions between DNA-bound CTCF molecules. 
We show that mouse and human Xist/XIST promoters contain one homologous
CTCF-binding sequence with the matching dG-contacts, which in the human XIST
include the -43 position within the DNase I footprint of CTCF. While the C(-43)A 
mutation abrogates CTCF binding, the C(-43)G mutation results in a dramatic
increase in CTCF-binding efficiency by altering ZF-usage mode required for
recognition of the altered dG-contacts of the mutant site. Thus, the skewing
effect of the two -43C mutations correlates with their effects on CTCF binding.
Finally, CTCF interacts with the XIST/Xist promoter only in female human and
mouse cells. The interpretation that this reflected a preferential interaction
with the promoter of the active Xist allele was confirmed in mouse fetal
placenta. These observations are in keeping with the possibility that the choice 
of X chromosome inactivation reflects stabilization of a higher order chromatin
conformation impinging on the CTCF-XIST promoter complex.

PMID: 15731119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Feb;25(4):1511-25.

Chromatin architecture near a potential 3' end of the igh locus involves modular 
regulation of histone modifications during B-Cell development and in vivo
occupancy at CTCF sites.

Garrett FE(1), Emelyanov AV, Sepulveda MA, Flanagan P, Volpi S, Li F, Loukinov D,
Eckhardt LA, Lobanenkov VV, Birshtein BK.

Author information: 
(1)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Department of Cell Biology, Bronx, NY
10461, USA.

The murine Igh locus has a 3' regulatory region (3' RR) containing four enhancers
(hs3A, hs1,2, hs3B, and hs4) at DNase I-hypersensitive sites. The 3' RR exerts
long-range effects on class switch recombination (CSR) to several isotypes
through its control of germ line transcription. By measuring levels of acetylated
histones H3 and H4 and of dimethylated H3 (K4) with chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays, we found that early in B-cell development, chromatin encompassing the
enhancers of the 3' RR began to attain stepwise modifications typical of an open 
conformation. The hs4 enhancer was associated with active chromatin initially in 
pro- and pre-B cells and then together with hs3A, hs1,2, and hs3B in B and plasma
cells. Histone modifications were similar in resting splenic B cells and in
splenic B cells induced by lipopolysaccharide to undergo CSR. From the pro-B-cell
stage onward, the approximately 11-kb region immediately downstream of hs4
displayed H3 and H4 modifications indicative of open chromatin. This region
contained newly identified DNase I-hypersensitive sites and several CTCF target
sites, some of which were occupied in vivo in a developmentally regulated manner.
The open chromatin environment of the extended 3' RR in mature B cells was
flanked by regions associated with dimethylated K9 of histone H3. Together, these
data suggest that 3' RR elements are located within a specific chromatin
subdomain that contains CTCF binding sites and developmentally regulated modules.

PMCID: PMC548023
PMID: 15684400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. EMBO Rep. 2005 Feb;6(2):165-70.

CTCF is conserved from Drosophila to humans and confers enhancer blocking of the 
Fab-8 insulator.

Moon H(1), Filippova G, Loukinov D, Pugacheva E, Chen Q, Smith ST, Munhall A,
Grewe B, Bartkuhn M, Arnold R, Burke LJ, Renkawitz-Pohl R, Ohlsson R, Zhou J,
Renkawitz R, Lobanenkov V.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Pathology, Laboratory of Immunopathology, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Rockville, Maryland 20852, USA.

Eukaryotic transcriptional regulation often involves regulatory elements
separated from the cognate genes by long distances, whereas appropriately
positioned insulator or enhancer-blocking elements shield promoters from
illegitimate enhancer action. Four proteins have been identified in Drosophila
mediating enhancer blocking-Su(Hw), Zw5, BEAF32 and GAGA factor. In vertebrates, 
the single protein CTCF, with 11 highly conserved zinc fingers, confers enhancer 
blocking in all known chromatin insulators. Here, we characterize an orthologous 
CTCF factor in Drosophila with a similar domain structure, binding site
specificity and transcriptional repression activity as in vertebrates. In
addition, we demonstrate that one of the insulators (Fab-8) in the Drosophila
Abdominal-B locus mediates enhancer blocking by dCTCF. Therefore, the
enhancer-blocking protein CTCF and, most probably, the mechanism of enhancer
blocking mediated by this remarkably versatile factor are conserved from
Drosophila to humans.

PMCID: PMC1299244
PMID: 15678159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. J Mol Biol. 2005 Feb 18;346(2):411-22. Epub 2004 Dec 22.

Transcriptional regulator CTCF controls human interleukin 1 receptor-associated
kinase 2 promoter.

Kuzmin I(1), Geil L, Gibson L, Cavinato T, Loukinov D, Lobanenkov V, Lerman MI.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Research Program, SAIC-Frederick, Inc., Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Immune responses to invading pathogens are mediated largely through a family of
transmembrane Toll-like receptors and modulated by a number of downstream
effectors. In particular, a family of four interleukin 1 receptor-associated
kinases (IRAK) regulates responsiveness to bacterial endotoxins. Pharmacological 
targeting of particular IRAK components may be beneficial for treatment of
bacterial infections. Here, we studied transcriptional regulation of the human
IRAK2 gene. Analysis of the IRAK2 promoter region reveals putative binding sites 
for several transcriptional factors, including ZIP (EGR1 and SP1), CTCF and
AP-2beta. Deletion of the ZIP or AP-2 sites did not significantly affect IRAK2
promoter activity in naive and endotoxin-treated mononuclear cells, in dormant
and activated Jurkat T-cells, in lung and kidney cells. In contrast, we found
that CTCF plays a major role in IRAK2 transcription. An electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay of the DNA fragments containing the IRAK2 CpG island, revealed a
single high-affinity binding site for the transcriptional regulator and a
chromatin insulator protein, CTCF. This assay revealed a CTCF-binding site within
the mouse Irak2 promoter. The presence of the CTCF protein in human IRAK2
promoter was confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Specific residues 
that interacted with the CTCF protein, were identified by methylation
interference assay. In all cell lines analyzed, including cells of lung, renal,
monocytic and T-cell origin, the IRAK2 luciferase reporter construct, containing 
an intact CTCF-binding site, showed strong promoter activity. However, IRAK2
promoter activity was decreased dramatically for the constructs with a mutated
CTCF-binding site.

PMID: 15670593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Dev Cell. 2005 Jan;8(1):31-42.

Boundaries between chromosomal domains of X inactivation and escape bind CTCF and
lack CpG methylation during early development.

Filippova GN(1), Cheng MK, Moore JM, Truong JP, Hu YJ, Nguyen DK, Tsuchiya KD,
Disteche CM.

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
gfilippo@fhcrc.org

Escape from X inactivation results in expression of genes embedded within
inactive chromatin, suggesting the existence of boundary elements between
domains. We report that the 5' end of Jarid1c, a mouse escape gene adjacent to an
inactivated gene, binds CTCF, displays high levels of histone H3 acetylation, and
functions as a CTCF-dependent chromatin insulator. CpG island methylation at
Jarid1c was very low during development and virtually absent at the CTCF sites,
signifying that CTCF may influence DNA methylation and chromatin modifications.
CTCF binding sites were also present at the 5' end of two other escape genes,
mouse Eif2s3x and human EIF2S3, each adjacent to an inactivated gene, but not at 
genes embedded within large escape domains. Thus, CTCF was specifically bound to 
transition regions, suggesting a role in maintaining both X inactivation and
escape domains. Furthermore, the evolution of X chromosome domains appears to be 
associated with repositioning of chromatin boundary elements.

PMID: 15669143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 1;280(13):12988-95. Epub 2005 Jan 19.

Epidermal growth factor-induced proliferation requires down-regulation of Pax6 in
corneal epithelial cells.

Li T(1), Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California-Los Angeles, Torrance, California
90502, USA.

Growth factors play important roles in regulating corneal epithelial cell
proliferation/differentiation during wound healing. It is suggested that PAX6
involves corneal epithelium lineage-specific differentiation (Liu, J. J., Kao, W.
W., and Wilson, S. E. (1999) Exp. Eye Res. 68, 295-301); however, the regulatory 
mechanism and function of Pax6 in growth factor-induced corneal epithelial
responses is still unknown. In the present study, we found that the mitogenic
effect of epidermal growth factor (EGF) in corneal epithelial cells required
suppression of PAX6 activity through cellular mechanisms involving Erk-signaling 
pathway-mediated increase in CTCF expression. EGF-induced CCCTC binding factor
(CTCF) activation subsequently inhibited Pax6 expression by interacting with a
CTCF-specific region upstream of the pax6 P0 promoter. Suppression of EGF-induced
Erk activation by specific inhibitor or by the dominant expression of a silent
Erk mutant effectively abolished the effects of EGF stimulation on regulations of
CTCF and pax6. Apparently, down-regulation of Pax6 expression induced by EGF is
required for corneal epithelial proliferation, because overexpression of pax6 in 
these cells attenuated EGF-induced proliferation. In contrast, knockdown of mRNA 
expression with pax6- or CTCF-specific small interfering RNA in corneal
epithelial cells significantly promoted or attenuated EGF-induced proliferation, 
respectively. Thus, our results revealed a new regulatory mechanism that involves
cellular signaling events and pax6 transcription regulation in growth
factor-mediated proliferation. In corneal epithelial cells, this suggests that
inhibition of pax6 expression is a prerequisite for EGF to elicit controls of
cell growth and fate.

PMID: 15659382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Cell Cycle. 2005 Jan;4(1):96-101. Epub 2005 Jan 19.

Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation and epigenetics. Is CTCF PARt of the plot?

Klenova E(1), Ohlsson R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Wivenhoe Park,
Colchester, Essex, UK. klenovae@essex.ac.uk

Despite the fact that the poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) modification of proteins has
been known for more than four decades, there is no unifying picture of the
pathways governed by this process. While the function of poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation
(PARlation) has shown to be traditionally associated with DNA repair and
genotoxic stress, there is an emerging view that PARlation is also important in
epigenetic regulation of chromatin structure and gene expression in the normal
context. This view has been exemplified by the recent demonstration that
PARlation is essential for the manifestation of the imprinted state of the Igf2
gene. In particular, the PARlation mark was shown to associate preferentially
with the maternally inherited H19 ICR allele, this association depended on
functional target sites of the chromatin insulator protein CTCF and, importantly,
CTCF itself was found to be PARlated. Given that CTCF is currently the only known
factor common for all vertebrate chromatin insulators, it is not surprising that 
the derepression of the maternal Igf2 allele by 3-aminobenzamide (an inhibitor of
PAR polymerases) could be linked to a perturbed chromatin insulator function at
the H19 ICR. This feature appears to extend to more than 150 chromatin insulators
that were isolated due to their in vivo interaction with CTCF. In this review, we
discuss in more depth these results and point out that the turnover of the
PARlation mark at DNA-bound CTCF is indicative of a novel mode of rheostat
control of expression domains possibly by regulating the stability of higher
order chromatin conformations.

PMID: 15655363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Int J Cancer. 2005 May 1;114(5):720-9.

High-resolution analysis of 16q22.1 in breast carcinoma using DNA amplifiable
probes (multiplex amplifiable probe hybridization technique) and
immunohistochemistry.

Rakha EA(1), Armour JA, Pinder SE, Paish CE, Ellis IO.

Author information: 
(1)The Breast Unit, Department of Histopathology, Nottingham City Hospital,
University of Nottingham, United Kingdom.

Loss of the chromosomal material at 16q22.1 is one of the most frequent genetic
aberrations found in both lobular and low-grade nonlobular invasive carcinoma of 
the breast, indicating the presence of a tumour suppressor gene (TSG) at this
region in these tumours. However, the TSG (s) at the 16q22.1 in the more frequent
nonlobular carcinomas is still unknown. Multiplex Amplifiable Probe Hybridisation
(MAPH) is a simple, accurate and a high-resolution technique that provides an
alternative approach to DNA copy-number measurement. The aim of our study was to 
examine the most likely candidate genes at 16q22.1 using MAPH assay combined with
protein expression analysis by immunohistochemistry. We identified deletion at
16q22.1 that involves some or all of these genes. We also noticed that the
smallest region of deletion at 16q22.1 could be delineated to a 3 Mb region
centromeric to the P-cadherin gene. Apart from the correlation between E-cadherin
protein expression and its gene copy number, no correlation was detected between 
the expression of E2F-4, CTCF, TRF2 or P-cadherin with their gene's copy number. 
In the malignant tissues, no significant loss or decrease of protein expression
of any gene other than E-cadherin was seen in association with any specific
tumour type. No expression of VE-cadherin or Ksp-cadherin was detected in the
normal and/or malignant tissues of the breast in these cases. However, there was 
a correlation between increased nuclear expression of E2F-4 and tumours with
higher histological grade (p = 0.04) and positive lymph node disease (p = 0.02), 
suggesting that it may have an oncogenic rather than a tumour suppressor role.
The malignant breast tissues also showed abnormal cytoplasmic cellular
localisation of CTCF, compared to its expression in the normal parenchymal cells.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated that MAPH is a potential technique for
assessment of genomic imbalances in malignant tissues. Although our results
support E-cadherin as the TSG in invasive lobular carcinoma, they argue against
the candidacy of E2F-4, CTCF, TRF2, P-cadherin, Ksp-cadherin and VE-cadherin as
TSGs in breast cancer.

2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15609312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Feb 15;94(3):585-96.

Deregulation of DNA methyltransferases and loss of parental methylation at the
insulin-like growth factor II (Igf2)/H19 loci in p53 knockout mice prior to tumor
development.

Park IY(1), Sohn BH, Choo JH, Joe CO, Seong JK, Lee YI, Chung JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, 373-1 Gusung-Dong, Korea Advanced Institute
of Science and Technology, Yusung-Gu, Taejon 305-701, Republic of Korea.

To ascertain whether p53 deficiency in vivo leads to the deregulation of DNA
methylation machinery prior to tumor development, we investigated the expression 
profile of DNA methyltransferases in the thymus and the liver of p53(+/+),
p53(+/-), and p53(-/-) mice at 7 weeks of age before tumor development. The
expression of DNA methyltransferases was examined in the thymus at 7 weeks of
age, since the malignant T-cell lymphoma develops most frequently in p53(-/-)
mice around 20 weeks of age. Both mRNA and protein levels of Dnmt1 and Dnmt3b
were increased in the thymus and the liver of p53-deficient mice. The expression 
of Dnmt3a was also increased in the liver but not in the thymus of p53-deficient 
mice. Dnmt3L expression was reduced in the thymus of p53(+/-) and p53(-/-) mice. 
The total 5-methylcytosine (5-MeC) in the genomic DNA of p53(+/+), p53(+/-), and 
p53(-/-) mice was quantitated by dot-blot using antibody against 5-MeC. Global
methylation was increased in the thymus and the liver of p53-deficient mice. To
correlate the deregulated expression of DNA methyltransferases with the
disturbance of the epigenetic integrity, we examined the DNA methylation of the
imprinting control region (ICR) at the insulin-like growth factor II (Igf2)/H19
loci in the thymus and the liver of p53(+/+), p53(+/-), and p53(-/-) mice. The
region containing two CCCTC binding factor (CTCF) binding sites in the 5'-ICR
tended to be hypomethylated in the thymus of p53(-/-) mice, but not in the liver.
The expression profile of Igf2 and H19 indicated that the thymus-specific changes
of Igf2 and H19 expression were coherent to the hypomethylation of the ICR in the
thymus. Our results suggest that p53 is required for the maintenance of DNA
methylation patterns in vivo.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15543560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Int J Oncol. 2004 Nov;25(5):1273-8.

Allele-specific methylation analysis on upstream promoter region of H19 by
methylation-specific PCR with confronting two-pair primers.

Sasamoto H(1), Nagasaka T, Notohara K, Ozaki K, Isozaki H, Tanaka N, Matsubara N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery and Surgical Oncology, Okayama
University Graduate School of Medicine and Dentistry, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama 
700-8558, Japan.

H19 and IGF2 genes are imprinted genes and expressed differently depending on
whether they are carried by a chromosome of maternal or paternal origin; H19 is
expressed only from the maternal allele and IGF2 only from the paternally
inherited allele. The upstream promoter region of H19 has the imprinting-control 
region (ICR) or CTCF binding sites, where the methylation status of this region
is critical to the regulation of imprinting of the H19/IGF2 locus located in
chromosome 11p15. There are various reports on imprinting disorders in this
region. In colorectal cancer aberrant biallelic methylation of CTCF binding site 
has been reported, and aberrant hypomethylation of this region in bladder cancer.
Thus, certain human neoplasms have either hyper- or hypo-methylation in the ICR. 
Hence it is still difficult to analyze allele-specific methylation disorder of
the region, or differentially methylated regions (DMR), locate upstream of H19.
Here we report a new method, which could distinguish paternal epigenetic or
maternal epigenetic pattern by a single PCR assay, to combine
methylation-specific PCR and PCR with confronting two-pair primers (MSP-CTPP).
Using this method, we investigated the region close to H19 ICR in 161 colorectal 
cancer and 65 gastric cancer cases.

PMID: 15492815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 10;279(50):52218-26. Epub 2004 Oct 7.

A loss of insulin-like growth factor-2 imprinting is modulated by CCCTC-binding
factor down-regulation at senescence in human epithelial cells.

Fu VX(1), Schwarze SR, Kenowski ML, Leblanc S, Svaren J, Jarrard DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, Wisconsin 53792, USA.

The imprinted insulin-like growth factor-2 (IGF2) gene is an auto/paracrine
growth factor expressed only from the paternal allele in adult tissues. In
tissues susceptible to aging-related cancers, including the prostate, a
relaxation of IGF2 imprinting is found, suggesting a permissive role for
epigenetic alterations in cancer development. To determine whether IGF2
imprinting is altered in cellular aging and senescence, human prostate epithelial
and urothelial cells were passaged serially in culture to senescence. Allelic
analyses using an IGF2 polymorphism demonstrated a complete conversion of the
IGF2 imprint status from monoallelic to biallelic, in which the development of
senescence was associated with a 10-fold increase in IGF2 expression. As a
mechanism, a 2-fold decrease in the binding of the enhancer-blocking element
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) within the intergenic IGF2-H19 region was found to
underlie this switch to biallelic IGF2 expression in senescent cells. This
decrease in CTCF binding was associated with reduced CTCF expression in senescent
cells. No de novo increases in methylation at the IGF2 CTCF binding site were
seen. The forced down-regulation of CTCF expression using small interfering RNA
in imprinted prostate cell lines resulted in an increase in IGF2 expression and a
relaxation of imprinting. Our data suggest a novel mechanism for IGF2 imprinting 
regulation, that is, the reduction of CTCF expression in the control of IGF2
imprinting. We also demonstrate that altered imprinting patterns contribute to
changes in gene expression in aging cells.

PMID: 15471867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Sep 15;32(16):4903-19. Print 2004.

An insulator blocks spreading of histone acetylation and interferes with RNA
polymerase II transfer between an enhancer and gene.

Zhao H(1), Dean A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, NIDDK, NIH, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

We studied the mechanism by which an insulator interrupts enhancer signaling to a
gene using stably replicated chromatin templates containing the human beta-globin
locus control region HS2 enhancer and a target globin gene. The chicken
beta-globin 5' HS4 (cHS4) insulator acted as a positional enhancer blocker,
inhibiting promoter remodeling and transcription activation only when placed
between the enhancer and gene. Enhancer blocking by cHS4 reduced histone
hyperacetylation across a zone extending from the enhancer to the gene and
inhibited recruitment of CBP and p300 to HS2. Enhancer blocking also led to
accumulation of RNA polymerase II at HS2 and within cHS4, accompanied by its
diminution at the gene promoter. The enhancer blocking effects were completely
attributable to the CTCF binding site in cHS4. These findings provide
experimental evidence for the involvement of spreading in establishment of a
broad zone of histone modification by an enhancer, as well as for blocking by an 
insulator of the transfer of RNA polymerase II from an enhancer to a promoter.

PMCID: PMC519119
PMID: 15371553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Nat Genet. 2004 Oct;36(10):1105-10. Epub 2004 Sep 7.

Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation regulates CTCF-dependent chromatin insulation.

Yu W(1), Ginjala V, Pant V, Chernukhin I, Whitehead J, Docquier F, Farrar D,
Tavoosidana G, Mukhopadhyay R, Kanduri C, Oshimura M, Feinberg AP, Lobanenkov V, 
Klenova E, Ohlsson R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development & Genetics, Evolution Biology Centre, Uppsala
University, Norbyvägen 18A, S-752 36 Uppsala, Sweden.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2004 Oct;36(10):1036-7.

Chromatin insulators demarcate expression domains by blocking the cis effects of 
enhancers or silencers in a position-dependent manner. We show that the chromatin
insulator protein CTCF carries a post-translational modification:
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that a
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation mark, which exclusively segregates with the maternal
allele of the insulator domain in the H19 imprinting control region, requires the
bases that are essential for interaction with CTCF. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation-on-chip analysis documented that the link between CTCF and
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation extended to more than 140 mouse CTCF target sites. An
insulator trap assay showed that the insulator function of most of these CTCF
target sites is sensitive to 3-aminobenzamide, an inhibitor of poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase activity. We suggest that poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation imparts chromatin
insulator properties to CTCF at both imprinted and nonimprinted loci, which has
implications for the regulation of expression domains and their demise in
pathological lesions.

PMID: 15361875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Br J Cancer. 2004 Oct 18;91(8):1591-6.

Expression of the transcription factor CTCF in invasive breast cancer: a
candidate gene located at 16q22.1.

Rakha EA(1), Pinder SE, Paish CE, Ellis IO.

Author information: 
(1)The Breast Unit, Department of Histopathology, Nottingham City Hospital NHS
Trust, Hucknall Road, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG5 1PB, UK.

CTCF is a ubiquitous 11-zinc-finger protein that plays a role in gene silencing
or activation, chromatin insulation and genomic imprinting. The CTCF gene has
been mapped to the chromosome band 16q22.1 that shows frequent loss of
heterozygosity in breast cancer. The E-cadherin gene is the known tumour
suppressor gene (TSG) at this region in lobular carcinomas; however, the target
gene in the more frequent ductal tumours is still unknown. Since CTCF targets
include TSGs and oncogenes and it has the ability to inhibit cell growth and
proliferation, it has been suggested that it may be the target gene at the
16q22.1 in ductal carcinomas. In the present study, tissue microarray technology 
was used to study the expression pattern of CTCF immunohistochemically in 344
cases of invasive breast carcinoma and its expression was correlated with
clinicopathological variables and patient outcome. Results showed that breast
tissues express CTCF in the parenchymal cells of the normal ducts and lobules but
with a variable percentage of positive cells. Staining of CTCF was detected in
the nuclei and cytoplasm of the malignant cells, but no significant loss or
decrease of expression was noticed in association with any specific tumour type. 
There was a significant correlation between expression of CTCF and histological
grades; lower expression was associated with grade 3 tumours. Cytoplasmic
expression was associated with increased tumour size and with the presence of
vascular invasion. However, no association was found between CTCF expression and 
tumour type, lymph node stage, oestrogen receptor expression or patient outcome. 
In conclusion, the current results show that CTCF, although it may play a role in
breast carcinogenesis, is unlikely to be the TSG targeted by the 16q22.1 loss in 
breast cancer and thus another gene or genes at this region remain to be
identified.

PMCID: PMC2409935
PMID: 15354217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Carcinog. 2004 Sep;41(1):1-16.

Changes in the DNA methylation profile of the rat H19 gene upstream region during
development and transgenic hepatocarcinogenesis and its role in the imprinted
transcriptional regulation of the H19 gene.

Manoharan H(1), Babcock K, Pitot HC.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, Medical School, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53706-1599, USA.

Monoallelic expression of the imprinted H19 and insulin-like growth factor-2
(Igf2) genes depends on the hypomethylation of the maternal allele and
hypermethylation of the paternal allele of the H19 upstream region. Previous
studies from our laboratory on liver carcinogenesis in the F1 hybrid of Fischer
344 (F344) and Sprague-Dawley Alb SV40 T Ag transgenic rat (SD) strains revealed 
the biallelic expression of H19 in hepatomas. We undertook a comparative study of
the DNA methylation status of the upstream region of H19 in fetal, adult, and
neoplastic liver. Bisulfite DNA sequencing analysis of a 3.745-kb DNA segment
extending from 2950 to 6695 bp of the H19 upstream region revealed marked
variations in the methylation patterns in fetal, adult, and neoplastic liver. In 
the fetal liver, equal proportions of hyper- and hypomethylated strands revealed 
the differentially methylated status of the parental alleles, but in neoplastic
liver a pronounced change in the pattern of methylation was observed with a
distinct change to hypomethylation in the short segments between 2984 and 3301
bp, 6033-6123 bp, and 6518-6548 bp. These results indicated that methylation of
all cytosines in this region may contribute to the imprinting status of the rat
H19 gene. This phenomenon of differential methylation-related epigenetic
alteration in the key cis-regulatory domains of the H19 promoter influences
switching to biallelic expression in hepatocellular carcinogenesis. Similar to
mouse and human, we showed that the zinc-finger CCTCC binding factor (CTCF) binds
to the unmethylated CTCF binding site in the upstream region to influence
monoallelic imprinted expression in fetal liver. CTCF does not appear to be rate 
limiting in fetal, normal, and neoplastic liver. 3' to the CTCF binding sites,
another DNA region exhibits methylation of CpG's in both DNA strands in adult
liver, retention of the imprint in fetal liver, and complete demethylation in
neoplastic liver. In this region is also a putative binding site for a basic
helix-loop-helix leucine-zipper transcription factor, TFEB. The differential CpG 
methylation seen in the adult that involves the TFEB binding site may explain the
lack of expression of the H19 gene in adult normal liver. Furthermore, these
findings demonstrate that the loss of imprinting of the H19 gene in hepatic
neoplasms of the SD Alb SV40 T Ag transgenic rat is directly correlated with and 
probably the result of differential methylation of CpG dinucleotides in two
distinct regions of the gene that are within 4 kb 5' of the transcription start
site. Cytogenetic analysis of hepatocytes in the transgenic animal prior to the
appearance of nodules or neoplasms indicates a role of such loss of imprinting in
the very early period of neoplastic development, possibly the transition from the
stage of promotion to that of progression.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15352122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Genome Res. 2004 Sep;14(9):1726-32.

Phylogenetic footprint analysis of IGF2 in extant mammals.

Weidman JR(1), Murphy SK, Nolan CM, Dietrich FS, Jirtle RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina
27710, USA.

Genomic imprinting results in monoallelic gene transcription that is directed by 
cis-acting regulatory elements epigenetically marked in a
parent-of-origin-dependent manner. We performed phylogenetic sequence and
epigenetic comparisons of IGF2 between the nonimprinted platypus (Ornithorhynchus
anatinus) and imprinted opossum (Didelphis virginiana), mouse (Mus musculus), and
human (Homo sapiens) to determine if their divergent imprint status would reflect
differences in the conservation of genomic elements important in the regulation
of imprinting. We report herein that IGF2 imprinting does not correlate
evolutionarily with differential intragenic methylation, nor is it associated
with motif 13, a reported IGF2-specific "imprint signature" located in the coding
region. Instead, IGF2 imprinting is strongly associated with both the lack of
short interspersed transposable elements (SINEs) and an intragenic conserved
inverted repeat that contains candidate CTCF-binding sites, a role not previously
ascribed to this particular sequence element. Our results are the first to
demonstrate that comparative footprint analysis of species from evolutionarily
distant mammalian clades, and exhibiting divergent imprint status is a powerful
bioinformatics-based approach for identifying cis-acting elements potentially
involved not only in the origins of genomic imprinting, but also in its
maintenance in humans.

PMCID: PMC515318
PMID: 15342558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2004 Nov;41(3):278-82.

Chromosome band 16q22-linked familial AML: exclusion of candidate genes, and
possible disease risk modification by NQO1 polymorphisms.

Escher R(1), Jones A, Hagos F, Carmichael C, Horwitz M, Olopade OI, Scott HS.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Bioinformatics Division, the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Analyses of chromosomal translocation and inversion breakpoints in sporadic acute
myeloid leukemias have identified many transcription factors as playing a role in
leukemogenesis. Studies of families with a Mendelian predisposition to
hematological malignancies have identified the gene coding for the transcription 
factor RUNX1 as a leukemia-predisposing gene involved in the first steps of
leukemogenesis. Using two families, another autosomal dominant familial leukemia 
locus was linked to chromosome band 16q22 where the CBFB gene maps. Although CBFB
forms a core-binding factor transcriptional complex with RUNX1, previous analyses
have excluded the CBFB gene as the leukemia-predisposing gene in these families. 
In the current study, we performed an extended molecular analysis in these
families of the four other transcription factor genes in the 16q22 critical
region as well as of two other genes with a known association with leukemia.
Several previously undescribed but nonpathogenic sequence variants were
identified. We demonstrated that the transcription factors E2F4, CTCF, NFATC3,
and NFAT5, and the genes coding for NAD(P)H:quinone oxido-reductase 1 (NQO1) and 
for E-cadherin are not responsible for the leukemia susceptibility in these
families. The presence of NQO1 polymorphisms may suggest a role for this gene in 
disease risk modification in these families.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15334552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. BMC Cell Biol. 2004 Aug 27;5:32.

Mutations in the IGF-II pathway that confer resistance to lytic reovirus
infection.

Sheng J(1), Organ EL, Hao C, Wells KS, Ruley HE, Rubin DH.

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Department of Medicine,
Division of Infectious Diseases, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
jinsong.sheng@vanderbilt.edu

BACKGROUND: Viruses are obligate intracellular parasites and rely upon the host
cell for different steps in their life cycles. The characterization of cellular
genes required for virus infection and/or cell killing will be essential for
understanding viral life cycles, and may provide cellular targets for new
antiviral therapies.
RESULTS: A gene entrapment approach was used to identify candidate cellular genes
that affect reovirus infection or virus induced cell lysis. Four of the 111 genes
disrupted in clones selected for resistance to infection by reovirus type 1
involved the insulin growth factor-2 (IGF-II) pathway, including: the
mannose-6-phosphate/IGF2 receptor (Igf2r), a protease associated with insulin
growth factor binding protein 5 (Prss11), and the CTCF transcriptional regulator 
(Ctcf). The disruption of Ctcf, which encodes a repressor of Igf2, was associated
with enhanced Igf2 gene expression. Plasmids expressing either the IGF-II
pro-hormone or IGF-II without the carboxy terminal extension (E)-peptide sequence
independently conferred high levels of cellular resistance to reovirus infection.
Forced IGF-II expression results in a block in virus disassembly. In addition,
Ctcf disruption and forced Igf2 expression both enabled cells to proliferate in
soft agar, a phenotype associated with malignant growth in vivo.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that IGF-II, and by inference other components
of the IGF-II signalling pathway, can confer resistance to lytic reovirus
infection. This report represents the first use of gene entrapment to identify
host factors affecting virus infection. Concomitant transformation observed in
some virus resistant cells illustrates a potential mechanism of carcinogenesis
associated with chronic virus infection.

PMCID: PMC517494
PMID: 15333144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Nat Genet. 2004 Sep;36(9):958-60. Epub 2004 Aug 15.

Microdeletions in the human H19 DMR result in loss of IGF2 imprinting and
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome.

Sparago A(1), Cerrato F, Vernucci M, Ferrero GB, Silengo MC, Riccio A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Ambientali, Seconda Università di Napoli, via Vivaldi 
43, 81100 Caserta, Italy.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2005 Aug;37(8):785-6; author reply 786-7.

The overgrowth- and tumor-associated Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome results from
dysregulation of imprinted genes on chromosome 11p15.5. Here we show that
inherited microdeletions in the H19 differentially methylated region (DMR) that
abolish two CTCF target sites cause this disease. Maternal transmission of the
deletions results in hypermethylation of the H19 DMR, biallelic IGF2 expression, 
H19 silencing and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, indicative of loss of function of 
the IGF2-H19 imprinting control element.

PMID: 15314640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. FEBS Lett. 2004 Aug 13;572(1-3):154-8.

A short autonomous repression motif is located within the N-terminal domain of
CTCF.

Drueppel L(1), Pfleiderer K, Schmidt A, Hillen W, Berens C.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Mikrobiologie, Institut für Mikrobiologie, Biochemie und
Genetik, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Staudtstrasse 5,
D-91058 Erlangen, Germany.

The vertebrate transcription factor CTCF is not only involved in transcriptional 
activation, insulation and genomic imprinting, but also in transcriptional
repression. Sequence motifs mediating these activities have not been identified
so far. We have mapped a short repression motif to residues 150-170 within the
N-terminal domain of CTCF. This motif is active in HeLa, HEK293 and COS-7 cell
lines where it is both sufficient and necessary for silencing either an SV40-, or
a CMV-enhancer. It also represses the basal activity of an SV40 core promoter.
Since this autonomous repression motif displays no sequence similarity to any
other regulatory protein, it represents a yet unknown co-repressor recruiting
motif.

PMID: 15304340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Nat Genet. 2004 Aug;36(8):883-8. Epub 2004 Jul 25.

Antagonism between DNA hypermethylation and enhancer-blocking activity at the H19
DMD is uncovered by CpG mutations.

Engel N(1), West AG, Felsenfeld G, Bartolomei MS.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Cell and Developmental
Biology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Imprinted expression at the H19-Igf2 locus depends on a differentially methylated
domain (DMD) that acts both as a maternal-specific, methylation-sensitive
insulator and as a paternal-specific site of hypermethylation. Four repeats in
the DMD bind CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) on the maternal allele and have been
proposed to attract methylation on the paternal allele. We introduced point
mutations into the DMD to deplete the repeats of CpGs while retaining
CTCF-binding and enhancer-blocking activity. Maternal inheritance of the
mutations left H19 expression and Igf2 imprinting intact, consistent with the
idea that the DMD acts as an insulator. Conversely, paternal inheritance of these
mutations disrupted maintenance of DMD methylation, resulting in biallelic H19
expression. Furthermore, an insulator was established on the paternally inherited
mutated allele in vivo, reducing Igf2 expression and resulting in a 40% reduction
in size of newborn offspring. Thus, the nine CpG mutations in the DMD showed that
the two parental-specific roles of the H19 DMD, methylation maintenance and
insulator assembly, are antagonistic.

PMID: 15273688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Genome Res. 2004 Aug;14(8):1594-602. Epub 2004 Jul 15.

The binding sites for the chromatin insulator protein CTCF map to DNA
methylation-free domains genome-wide.

Mukhopadhyay R(1), Yu W, Whitehead J, Xu J, Lezcano M, Pack S, Kanduri C, Kanduri
M, Ginjala V, Vostrov A, Quitschke W, Chernukhin I, Klenova E, Lobanenkov V,
Ohlsson R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development & Genetics, Evolution Biology Centre, Uppsala
University, Norbyvägen 18A, S-752 36 Uppsala, Sweden.

All known vertebrate chromatin insulators interact with the highly conserved,
multivalent 11-zinc finger nuclear factor CTCF to demarcate expression domains by
blocking enhancer or silencer signals in a position-dependent manner. Recent
observations document that the properties of CTCF include reading and propagating
the epigenetic state of the differentially methylated H19 imprinting control
region. To assess whether these findings may reflect a universal role for CTCF
targets, we identified more than 200 new CTCF target sites by generating DNA
microarrays of clones derived from chromatin-immunopurified (ChIP) DNA followed
by ChIP-on-chip hybridization analysis. Target sites include not only known loci 
involved in multiple cellular functions, such as metabolism, neurogenesis,
growth, apoptosis, and signalling, but potentially also heterochromatic
sequences. Using a novel insulator trapping assay, we also show that the majority
of these targets manifest insulator functions with a continuous distribution of
stringency. As these targets are generally DNA methylation-free as determined by 
antibodies against 5-methylcytidine and a methyl-binding protein (MBD2), a
CTCF-based network correlates with genome-wide epigenetic states.

Copyright 2004 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ISSN

PMCID: PMC509268
PMID: 15256511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Int J Cancer. 2004 Sep 20;111(5):669-78.

DNA binding sites for putative methylation boundaries in the unmethylated region 
of the BRCA1 promoter.

Butcher DT(1), Mancini-DiNardo DN, Archer TK, Rodenhiser DI.

Author information: 
(1)London Regional Cancer Centre, Child Health Research Institute, London,
Ontario, Canada.

Changes in DNA methylation patterns are frequently observed in human cancers and 
are associated with a decrease in tumor suppressor gene expression.
Hypermethylation of the BRCA1 promoter has been reported in a portion of sporadic
breast tumours that correspond to a reduction in BRCA1 transcription and
expression. Questions remain concerning the maintenance of methylation free zones
in promoter regions of tumor suppressor genes in normal tissues. Sodium bisulfite
based analysis of the BRCA1 promoter defines a methylation free zone in normal
breast tissue that starts 650 bp upstream of the transcription start site and
extends for 1.4 kb through most of the BRCA1 CpG island. We provide data
implicating 2 proteins, Sp1 and CTCF, in the maintenance of this methylation-free
zone. Both of these proteins have been shown to function as methylation
boundaries in other genes. Four Sp1 sites have been identified in the BRCA1
promoter by gel shift assays. In vivo binding of Sp1 has been confirmed at 2 of
these sites in the BRCA1 promoter and at 2 CTCF sites that flank the unmethylated
region. Our data suggest that these DNA binding sites for Sp1 and CTCF may act as
boundary elements that are important in maintaining genomic integrity by
delineating the normal methylation free BRCA1 promoter. Inactivation or
disruption of these boundaries may facilitate an epigenetic "hit", in this case
DNA methylation, leading to BRCA1 downregulation and contributing to
tumorigenesis, particularly the genesis of sporadic breast tumours.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15252835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Neurosci. 2004 Jun 30;24(26):5966-73.

YB-1 and CTCF differentially regulate the 5-HTT polymorphic intron 2 enhancer
which predisposes to a variety of neurological disorders.

Klenova E(1), Scott AC, Roberts J, Shamsuddin S, Lovejoy EA, Bergmann S, Bubb VJ,
Royer HD, Quinn JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Essex CO4 3SQ, United 
Kingdom. klenovae@essex.ac.uk

The serotonin transporter (5-HTT) gene contains a variable number tandem repeat
(VNTR) domain within intron 2 that is often associated with a number of
neurological conditions, including affective disorders. The implications of this 
polymorphism are not yet understood, however, we have previously demonstrated
that the 5-HTT VNTR is a transcriptional regulatory domain, and the allelic
variation supports differential reporter gene expression in vivo and in vitro.
The aim of this study was to identify transcription factors responsible for the
regulation of this VNTR. Using a yeast one-hybrid screen, we found the
transcription factor Y box binding protein 1 (YB-1) interacts with the 5-HTT
VNTR. Consistent with this, we demonstrate in a reporter gene assay that the
polymorphic VNTR domains differentially respond to exogenous YB-1 and that YB-1
will bind to the VNTR in vitro in a sequence-specific manner. Interestingly, the 
transcription factor CCTC-binding factor (CTCF), previously shown to interact
with YB-1, interferes with the ability of the VNTR to support YB-1-directed
reporter gene expression. In addition, CTCF blocks the binding of YB-1 to its DNA
recognition sequences in vitro, thus providing a possible mechanism of regulation
of YB-1 activation of the VNTR by CTCF. Therefore, we have identified YB-1 and
CTCF as transcription factors responsible, at least in part, for modulation of
VNTR function as a transcriptional regulatory domain. Our data suggest a novel
mechanism that explains, in part, the ability of the distinct VNTR copy numbers
to support differential reporter gene expression based on YB-1 binding sites.

PMID: 15229244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Curr Biol. 2004 Jun 8;14(11):1007-12.

CTCF elements direct allele-specific undermethylation at the imprinted H19 locus.

Rand E(1), Ben-Porath I, Keshet I, Cedar H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Hebrew University Medical School, Ein
Kerem, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

The H19 imprinted gene locus is regulated by an upstream 2 kb imprinting control 
region (ICR) that influences allele-specific expression, DNA methylation, and
replication timing. This ICR becomes de novo methylated during late
spermatogenesis in the male but emerges from oogenesis in an unmethylated form,
and this allele-specific pattern is then maintained throughout early development 
and in all tissues of the mouse. We have used a genetic approach involving
transfection into embryonic stem (ES) cells in order to decipher how the maternal
allele is protected from de novo methylation at the time of implantation. Our
studies show that CCCTC binding factor (CTCF) boundary elements within the ICR
have the ability to prevent de novo methylation on the maternal allele. Since
CTCF does not recognize its binding sequence when methylated, this reaction does 
not occur on the paternal allele, thus preserving the gamete-derived,
allele-specific pattern. These results suggest that CTCF may play a general role 
in the maintenance of differential methylation patterns in vivo.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 15182675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Jun 8;101(23):8620-4. Epub 2004 May 28.

The 5'-HS4 chicken beta-globin insulator is a CTCF-dependent nuclear
matrix-associated element.

Yusufzai TM(1), Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0540, USA.

The protein CTCF plays an essential role in the action of a widely distributed
class of vertebrate enhancer-blocking insulators, of which the first example was 
found in a DNA sequence element, HS4, at the 5' end of the chicken beta-globin
locus. HS4 contains a binding site for CTCF that is necessary and sufficient for 
insulator action. Purification of CTCF has revealed that it interacts with
proteins involved in subnuclear architecture, notably nucleophosmin, a 38-kDa
nucleolar phosphoprotein that is concentrated in nuclear matrix preparations. In 
this report we show that both CTCF and the HS4 insulator element are incorporated
in the matrix; HS4 incorporation depends on the presence of an intact
CTCF-binding site. However the DNA sequence in the neighborhood of HS4 is not
like that of canonical matrix attachment regions, and its incorporation into the 
matrix fraction is not sensitive to ribonuclease, suggesting that the insulator
is a distinct matrix-associated element.

PMCID: PMC423244
PMID: 15169959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jun;24(11):4858-68.

Parent-of-origin-specific binding of nuclear hormone receptor complexes in the
H19-Igf2 imprinting control region.

Szabó PE(1), Pfeifer GP, Mann JR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope, Duarte, CA
91010, USA. pszabo@coh.org

Parent-of-origin-specific expression of the mouse insulin-like growth factor 2
gene (Igf2) and the closely linked H19 gene located on distal chromosome 7 is
regulated by a 2.4-kb imprinting control region (ICR) located upstream of the H19
gene. In somatic cells, the maternally and paternally derived ICRs are hypo- and 
hypermethylated, respectively, with the former binding the insulator protein
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) and acting to block access of enhancers to the Igf2
promoter. Here we report on a detailed in vivo footprinting analysis-using
ligation-mediated PCR combined with in vivo dimethyl sulfate, DNase I, or UV
treatment-of ICR sequences located outside of the CTCF binding domains. In mouse 
primary embryo fibroblasts carrying only maternal or paternal copies of distal
chromosome 7, we have identified five prominent footprints specific to the
maternal ICR. Each of the five footprinted areas contains at least two nuclear
hormone receptor hexad binding sites arranged with irregular spacing. When
combined with fibroblast nuclear extracts, these sequences interact with
complexes containing retinoic X receptor alpha and estrogen receptor beta. More
significantly, the footprint sequences bind nuclear hormone receptor complexes in
male, but not female, germ cell extracts purified from fetuses at a developmental
stage corresponding to the time of establishment of differential ICR methylation.
These data are consistent with the possibility that nuclear hormone receptor
complexes participate in the establishment of differential ICR methylation
imprinting in the germ line.

PMCID: PMC416419
PMID: 15143179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jun;24(11):4791-800.

Role of CTCF binding sites in the Igf2/H19 imprinting control region.

Szabó PE(1), Tang SH, Silva FJ, Tsark WM, Mann JR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, 1450 East
Duarte Rd., Duarte, CA 91010-3011, USA. pszabo@coh.org

A approximately 2.4-kb imprinting control region (ICR) regulates somatic
monoallelic expression of the Igf2 and H19 genes. This is achieved through DNA
methylation-dependent chromatin insulator and promoter silencing activities on
the maternal and paternal chromosomes, respectively. In somatic cells, the
hypomethylated maternally inherited ICR binds the insulator protein CTCF at four 
sites and blocks activity of the proximal Igf2 promoter by insulating it from its
distal enhancers. CTCF binding is thought to play a direct role in inhibiting
methylation of the ICR in female germ cells and in somatic cells and, therefore, 
in establishing and maintaining imprinting of the Igf2/H19 region. Here, we
report on the effects of eliminating ICR CTCF binding by severely mutating all
four sites in mice. We found that in the female and male germ lines, the mutant
ICR remained hypomethylated and hypermethylated, respectively, showing that the
CTCF binding sites are dispensable for imprinting establishment.
Postfertilization, the maternal mutant ICR acquired methylation, which could be
explained by loss of methylation inhibition, which is normally provided by CTCF
binding. Adjacent regions in cis-the H19 promoter and gene-also acquired
methylation, accompanied by downregulation of H19. This could be the result of a 
silencing effect of the methylated maternal ICR.

PMCID: PMC416431
PMID: 15143173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Immunol Lett. 2004 Apr 30;93(1):79-86.

Microarray analysis of differentially expressed genes in cells resistant to
HIV-1.

Kartvelishvili A(1), Lesner A, Szponar M, Simm M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Virology Laboratory, Molecular Virology Division, Department of
Medicine, St. Luke's/Roosevelt Hospital Center, Columbia University, 432 West
58th Street, Rm. 709, New York, NY 10019, USA.

We have previously isolated two matched transformed human T cell clones: one of
which is resistant to HIV-1 replication and secretes an HIV-1 resistance
factor(s) (HRF) and the second which retains the susceptibility of the parental
cell line to HIV-1 infection. We employed cDNA arrays to investigate the spectrum
of changes in cellular gene expression that correlate with the acquisition of
HIV-1 resistance and the secretion of HRF. Using a tissue based
immunology/hematology array, we identified 29 transcripts that were
differentially expressed by HRF(+) and HRF(-) cells. HRF(+) cells showed a
selective down-regulation of 11 genes involved in transcription, several of which
are implicated in either susceptibility of cells to HIV-1 or the promotion of
HIV-1 transcription itself. In the group of the up-regulated genes, three were
linked directly to the cellular resistance to HIV-1. One of the cDNAs placed on
the array, representing the hypothetical protein KIAA0117 hybridized only with
poly A+ RNA probes derived from HRF(+) cells. The specific up-regulation of two
genes, the transcription repressor (CTCF) and hypothetical protein KIAA0117 was
confirmed by RT-PCR and Northern blot. The role of KIAA0117 transcript in the
resistance to HIV-1 replication needs to be determined.

PMID: 15134903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 25;279(26):27575-83. Epub 2004 Apr 19.

Regulation of eye development by transcription control of CCCTC binding factor
(CTCF).

Li T(1), Lu Z, Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California-Los Angeles, Torrance, California
90502-2006, USA.

CCCTC binding factor (CTCF), a transcriptional regulator, plays important roles
in epigenetics and development. In the present study, we report that
overexpression of CTCF in transgenic mice during embryonic development suppresses
Pax6 gene expression. This effect causes defects in ocular development that
result in microophthalmia. In eye-derived cells transfected with a tetracycline
turn-on CTCF system, up-regulation of CTCF expression significantly suppressed
Pax6 expression. In contrast, the knockdown of CTCF mRNA resulted in the
down-regulation of CTCF protein expression, which in turn enhanced the Pax6
expression. CTCF controls Pax6 transcription by interacting with a repressor
element located in the 5'-flanking region upstream of the Pax6 P0 promoter. This 
interaction suppressed Pax6 gene transcription by blocking the effect of an
ectoderm enhancer located 3.5 kb upstream from the P0 promoter. We also found an 
80-bp sequence in a region -1.2 kbp upstream from the P0 promoter that contained 
multiple CTCF binding sites and interacted with nuclear proteins obtained from
eye-derived cells forming electrophoretic mobility shift assay complexes with
CTCF. We conclude that a novel function of CTCF is to regulate Pax6 transcription
by binding to the repressor element, which in turn blocks the effect of the
ectoderm enhancer resulting in the inhibition of P0 promoter activity.

PMID: 15096508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Breast Cancer Res. 2004;6(3):R187-90. Epub 2004 Mar 9.

A screen for germline mutations in the gene encoding CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) 
in familial non-BRCA1/BRCA2 breast cancer.

Zhou XL(1), Werelius B, Lindblom A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

INTRODUCTION: The CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), known as a versatile transcription
factor and chromatin insulator and to be involved in X inactivation, has also
been suggested to be a tumour suppressor on 16q. We investigated 153 patients
with familial non-BRCA1/BRCA2 breast cancer for germline mutations in the CTCF
gene.
METHODS: Mutation screening of CTCF was performed by denaturing high-performance 
liquid chromatography followed by cycle sequencing.
RESULTS: We found two sequence variants, 240G-->A in the 5' untranslated region
and 1455C-->T (S388S) in exon 4, in five familial breast cancer cases. Three of
these five cases had both variants. Cases and controls showed the same prevalence
for the two variants, which were found in linkage disequilibrium in most cases
and controls.
CONCLUSION: The present study suggests that germline mutations in CTCF are not
important as a risk factor for breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC400671
PMID: 15084242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 11;279(24):25381-9. Epub 2004 Apr 13.

Both CTCF-dependent and -independent insulators are found between the mouse T
cell receptor alpha and Dad1 genes.

Magdinier F(1), Yusufzai TM, Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0504, USA.

The T cell rearrangement of the T cell receptor (TCR) genes TCRalpha and delta is
specifically regulated by a complex interplay between enhancer elements and
chromatin structure. The alpha enhancer is active in T cells and drives TCRalpha 
recombination in collaboration with a locus control region-like element located
downstream of the Calpha gene on mouse chromosome 14. Twelve kb further
down-stream lies another gene, Dad1, with a program of expression different from 
that of TCRalpha. The approximately 6-kb locus control region element lying
between them contains multiple regulatory sites with a variety of roles in
regulating the two genes. Previous evidence has indicated that among these there 
are widely distributed regions with enhancer blocking (insulating) activity. We
have shown in this report that one of these sites, not previously examined,
strongly binds the insulator protein CCTC-binding factor (CTCF) in vitro and in
vivo and can function in an enhancer blocking assay. However, other regions
within the 6-kb element that also can block enhancers clearly do not harbor CTCF 
sites and thus must reflect the presence of a previously undetected and distinct 
vertebrate insulator activity.

PMID: 15082712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Curr Biol. 2004 Apr 6;14(7):R284-6.

Genomic imprinting: CTCF protects the boundaries.

Lewis A(1), Murrell A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics and Imprinting, Developmental Genetics
Programme, The Babraham Institute, Cambridge, CB2 4AT, UK.

The DNA-binding protein CTCF, which acts as a chromatin 'insulator', regulates
imprinting of the mammalian Igf2 and H19 genes in a methylation-sensitive manner.
It has now been shown that CTCF is also required for protection against de novo
methylation of the differentially methylated domain of H19 in the female
germline.

PMID: 15062124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Apr;24(8):3497-504.

Mutation of a single CTCF target site within the H19 imprinting control region
leads to loss of Igf2 imprinting and complex patterns of de novo methylation upon
maternal inheritance.

Pant V(1), Kurukuti S, Pugacheva E, Shamsuddin S, Mariano P, Renkawitz R, Klenova
E, Lobanenkov V, Ohlsson R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Genetics, Evolution Biology Centre, Uppsala
University, S-752 36 Uppsala, Sweden.

The differentially methylated imprinting control region (ICR) region upstream of 
the H19 gene regulates allelic Igf2 expression by means of a
methylation-sensitive chromatin insulator function. We have previously shown that
maternal inheritance of mutated (three of the four) target sites for the 11-zinc 
finger protein CTCF leads to loss of Igf2 imprinting. Here we show that a
mutation in only CTCF site 4 also leads to robust activation of the maternal Igf2
allele despite a noticeably weaker interaction in vitro of site 4 DNA with CTCF
compared to other ICR sites, sites 1 and 3. Moreover, maternally inherited sites 
1 to 3 become de novo methylated in complex patterns in subpopulations of liver
and heart cells with a mutated site 4, suggesting that the methylation privilege 
status of the maternal H19 ICR allele requires an interdependence between all
four CTCF sites. In support of this conclusion, we show that CTCF molecules bind 
to each other both in vivo and in vitro, and we demonstrate strong interaction
between two CTCF-DNA complexes, preassembled in vitro with sites 3 and 4. We
propose that the CTCF sites may cooperate to jointly maintain both
methylation-free status and insulator properties of the maternal H19 ICR allele. 
Considering many other CTCF targets, we propose that site-specific interactions
between various DNA-bound CTCF molecules may provide general focal points in the 
organization of looped chromatin domains involved in gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC381662
PMID: 15060168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Feb 23;32(4):1354-62. Print 2004.

CTCF-dependent enhancer blockers at the upstream region of the chicken
alpha-globin gene domain.

Valadez-Graham V(1), Razin SV, Recillas-Targa F.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Departamento de Genética Molecular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Apartado Postal 70-242, México D.F.
04510, México.

The eukaryotic genome is partitioned into chromatin domains containing coding and
intergenic regions. Insulators have been suggested to play a role in establishing
and maintaining chromatin domains. Here we describe the identification and
characterization of two separable enhancer blocking elements located in the 5'
flanking region of the chicken alpha-globin domain, 11-16 kb upstream of the
embryonic alpha-type pi gene in a DNA fragment harboring a MAR (matrix attachment
region) element and three DNase I hypersensitive sites (HSs). The most upstream
enhancer blocking element co-localizes with the MAR element and an
erythroid-specific HS. The second enhancer blocking element roughly co-localizes 
with a constitutive HS. The third erythroid-specific HS present within the DNA
fragment studied harbors a silencing, but not an enhancer blocking, activity. The
11 zinc-finger CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), which plays an essential role in
enhancer blocking activity in many previously characterized vertebrate
insulators, is found to bind the two alpha-globin enhancer blocking elements.
Detailed analysis has demonstrated that mutation of the CTCF binding site within 
the most upstream enhancer blocking element abolishes the enhancer blocking
activity. The results are discussed with respect to special features of the
tissue-specific alpha-globin gene domain located in a permanently open chromatin 
area.

PMCID: PMC390289
PMID: 14981153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Exp Cell Res. 2004 Mar 10;294(1):86-93.

Dynamic association of the mammalian insulator protein CTCF with centrosomes and 
the midbody.

Zhang R(1), Burke LJ, Rasko JE, Lobanenkov V, Renkawitz R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, Justus-Liebig-Universitaet Giessen, 35392 Giessen,
Germany.

CTCF is a highly conserved, ubiquitously expressed DNA-binding protein that has
widespread capabilities in gene regulation. CTCF plays important roles in cell
growth regulatory processes and epigenetic functions. Ectopic expression of CTCF 
results in severe cell growth inhibition at multiple points within the cell
cycle, indicating that CTCF levels must be stringently monitored. We have
investigated the subcellular localization of CTCF in detail. Interestingly, we
observe that CTCF shows a dynamic cell cycle-dependent distribution.
Immunofluorescent staining reveals that in interphase CTCF is a nuclear protein, 
which is mainly excluded from the nucleolus. Strikingly, CTCF is associated with 
the centrosome during mitosis, especially from metaphase to anaphase. At
telophase, CTCF dissociates from the centrosome and localizes to the midbody and 
the reformed nuclei. The association of CTCF with centrosomes and the midbody is 
further confirmed by biochemical fractionation. Moreover, subcellular fractions
of CTCF show cell cycle and organelle-specific posttranslational modifications,
suggesting different roles for CTCF at different stages of the cell cycle.

PMID: 14980504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mol Cell. 2004 Jan 30;13(2):291-8.

CTCF tethers an insulator to subnuclear sites, suggesting shared insulator
mechanisms across species.

Yusufzai TM(1), Tagami H, Nakatani Y, Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Insulators can block an enhancer of one gene from activating a promoter on
another nearby gene. Almost all described vertebrate insulators require binding
of the regulatory protein CTCF for their activity. We show that CTCF copurifies
with the nucleolar protein nucleophosmin and both are present at insulator sites 
in vivo. Furthermore, exogenous insulator sequences are tethered to the nucleolus
in a CTCF-dependent manner. These interactions, quite different from those of the
gypsy insulator element in Drosophila, may generate similar loop structures,
suggesting a common theme and model for enhancer-blocking insulator action.

PMID: 14759373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Science. 2004 Jan 9;303(5655):238-40.

Transgenic RNAi reveals essential function for CTCF in H19 gene imprinting.

Fedoriw AM(1), Stein P, Svoboda P, Schultz RM, Bartolomei MS.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA.

The imprinted regulation of H19 and Insulin-like growth factor 2 expression
involves binding of the vertebrate insulator protein, CCCTC binding factor
(CTCF), to the maternally hypomethylated differentially methylated domain (DMD). 
How this hypomethylated state is maintained during oogenesis and the role of
CTCF, if any, in this process are not understood. With the use of a transgenic
RNA interference (RNAi)-based approach to generate oocytes with reduced amounts
of CTCF protein, we found increased methylation of the H19 DMD and decreased
developmental competence of CTCF-deficient oocytes. Our results suggest that CTCF
protects the H19 DMD from de novo methylation during oocyte growth and is
required for normal preimplantation development.

PMID: 14716017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mech Dev. 2003 Dec;120(12):1433-42.

Conservation of IGF2-H19 and IGF2R imprinting in sheep: effects of somatic cell
nuclear transfer.

Young LE(1), Schnieke AE, McCreath KJ, Wieckowski S, Konfortova G, Fernandes K,
Ptak G, Kind AJ, Wilmut I, Loi P, Feil R.

Author information: 
(1)School of Human Development, University of Nottingham, Queens Medical Centre, 
Nottingham, UK.

In different mammalian species, in vitro culture and manipulation can lead to
aberrant fetal and peri-natal development. It has been postulated that these
diverse abnormalities are caused by epigenetic alterations and that these could
affect genes that are regulated by genomic imprinting. To explore this hypothesis
relative to somatic cell nuclear transfer in sheep, we investigated whether the
ovine H19-IGF2 and IGF2R loci are imprinted and analysed their DNA methylation
status in cloned lambs. A comparison between parthenogenetic and control concepti
established that imprinting at these two growth-related loci is evolutionarily
conserved in sheep. As in humans and mice, IGF2R and H19 comprise differentially 
methylated regions (DMRs) that are methylated on one of the two parental alleles 
predominantly. In tongue tissue from 12 out of 13 cloned lambs analysed, the DMR 
in the second intron of IGF2R had strongly reduced levels of DNA methylation. The
DMR located upstream of the ovine H19 gene was found to be similarly organised as
in humans and mice, with multiple CTCF binding sites. At this DMR, however,
aberrant methylation was observed in only one of the cloned lambs. Although the
underlying mechanisms remain to be determined, our data indicate that somatic
cell nuclear transfer procedures can lead to epigenetic deregulation at imprinted
loci.

PMID: 14654216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Dec;23(24):9338-48.

The c-myc insulator element and matrix attachment regions define the c-myc
chromosomal domain.

Gombert WM(1), Farris SD, Rubio ED, Morey-Rosler KM, Schubach WH, Krumm A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA 98104, USA.

Insulator elements and matrix attachment regions are essential for the
organization of genetic information within the nucleus. By comparing the pattern 
of histone modifications at the mouse and human c-myc alleles, we identified an
evolutionarily conserved boundary at which the c-myc transcription unit is
separated from the flanking condensed chromatin enriched in lysine 9-methylated
histone H3. This region harbors the c-myc insulator element (MINE), which
contains at least two physically separable, functional activities:
enhancer-blocking activity and barrier activity. The enhancer-blocking activity
is mediated by CTCF. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrate that CTCF
is constitutively bound at the insulator and at the promoter region independent
of the transcriptional status of c-myc. This result supports an architectural
role of CTCF rather than a regulatory role in transcription. An additional
higher-order nuclear organization of the c-myc locus is provided by matrix
attachment regions (MARs) that define a domain larger than 160 kb. The MARs of
the c-myc domain do not act to prevent the association of flanking regions with
lysine 9-methylated histones, suggesting that they do not function as barrier
elements.

PMCID: PMC309672
PMID: 14645543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Dec;23(24):8946-52.

Human beta-globin locus control region HS5 contains CTCF- and developmental
stage-dependent enhancer-blocking activity in erythroid cells.

Tanimoto K(1), Sugiura A, Omori A, Felsenfeld G, Engel JD, Fukamizu A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba,
Tennoudai 1-1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8577, Japan. keiji@tara.tsukuba.ac.jp

The human beta-globin locus contains five developmentally regulated beta-type
globin genes. All five genes depend on the locus control region (LCR), located at
the 5' end of the locus, for abundant globin gene transcription. The LCR is
composed of five DNase I-hypersensitive sites (HSs), at least a subset of which
appear to cooperate to form a holocomplex in activating genes within the locus.
We previously tested the requirement for proper LCR polarity by inverting it in
human beta-globin yeast artificial chromosome transgenic mice and observed
reduced expression of all the beta-type globin genes regardless of developmental 
stage. This phenotype clearly demonstrated an orientation-dependent activity of
the LCR, although the mechanistic basis for the observed activity was obscure.
Here, we describe genetic evidence demonstrating that human HS5 includes
enhancer-blocking (insulator) activity that is both CTCF and developmental stage 
dependent. Curiously, we also observed an attenuating activity in HS5 that was
specific to the epsilon-globin gene at the primitive stage and was independent of
the HS5 CTCF binding site. These observations demonstrate that the phenotype
observed in the LCR-inverted locus was in part attributable to placing the HS5
insulator between the LCR HS enhancers (HS1 to HS4) and the promoter of the
beta-globin gene.

PMCID: PMC309639
PMID: 14645507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Cell Biochem. 2003 Dec 1;90(5):1038-55.

Epigenetic regulation of Igf2/H19 imprinting at CTCF insulator binding sites.

Yang Y(1), Hu JF, Ulaner GA, Li T, Yao X, Vu TH, Hoffman AR.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Service, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, and Division of
Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California
94304, USA.

The mouse insulin-like growth factor II (Igf2) and H19 genes are located adjacent
to each other on chromosome 7q11-13 and are reciprocally imprinted. It is
believed that the allelic expression of these two genes is regulated by the
binding of CTCF insulators to four parent-specific DNA methylation sites in an
imprinting control center (ICR) located between these two genes. Although
monoallelically expressed in peripheral tissues, Igf2 is biallelically
transcribed in the CNS. In this study, we examined the allelic DNA methylation
and CTCF binding in the Igf2/H19 imprinting center in CNS, hypothesizing that the
aberrant CTCF binding as one of the mechanisms leads to biallelic expression of
Igf2 in CNS. Using hybrid F1 mice (M. spretus males x C57BL/6 females), we showed
that in CNS, CTCF binding sites in the ICR were methylated exclusively on the
paternal allele, and CTCF bound only to the unmethylated maternal allele, showing
no differences from the imprinted peripheral tissues. Among three other
epigenetic modifications examined, histone H3 lysine 9 methylation correlated
well with Igf2 allelic expression in CNS. These results suggest that CTCF binding
to the ICR alone is not sufficient to insulate the Igf2 maternal promoter and to 
regulate the allelic expression of the gene in the CNS, thus challenging the
aberrant CTCF binding as a common mechanism for lack of Igf2 imprinting in CNS.
Further studies should be focused on the identification of factors that are
involved in histone methylation and CTCF-associated factors that may be needed to
coordinate Igf2 imprinting.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14624463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2003 Aug;80(3):347-52.

CTCF gene mutations in invasive ductal breast cancer.

Aulmann S(1), Bläker H, Penzel R, Rieker RJ, Otto HF, Sinn HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Heidelberg, Germany.
sebastian_aulmann@med.uni-heidelberg.de

The CTCF gene encodes for a transcriptional repressor of the c-myc oncogene and
has previously been mapped to one of the smallest regions of overlapping
interstitial deletions on chromosome 16q22.1 in invasive breast cancer. This
chromosomal region is frequently deleted in both invasive lobular and ductal
breast carcinomas. However, no target genes have been identified in invasive
ductal breast cancer. We examined CTCF protein expression in 18 invasive ductal
breast carcinomas using immunohistochemistry. Additionally, loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) at chromosome 16q22.1 was determined and the complete cDNA
sequence of CTCF was screened for mutations. Immunohistochemically, 17 tumours
showed a moderate to strong nuclear staining for CTCF, one case was completely
negative. Sequencing analysis revealed a tumour-specific truncating 14 bp
insertion with silencing of the wild type allele in this case. In one further
case we found a missense mutation that was shown not to be tumour-specific.
Concordant with the antiproliferative effects of the CTCF protein in vivo, CTCF
may be involved in tumour initiation or proliferation in individual cases of
invasive ductal breast carcinoma.

PMID: 14503807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Endocrinology. 2003 Oct;144(10):4420-6. Epub 2003 Jul 10.

CTCF binding at the insulin-like growth factor-II (IGF2)/H19 imprinting control
region is insufficient to regulate IGF2/H19 expression in human tissues.

Ulaner GA(1), Yang Y, Hu JF, Li T, Vu TH, Hoffman AR.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Service, Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto,
California 94304, USA.

The adjacent IGF2 and H19 genes are imprinted in most normal mouse and human
tissues, but imprinting is often lost in tumors. Mouse models suggest that
parental-allele specific CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) binding at the IGF2/H19
imprinting control region (ICR) regulates the expression of these two genes.
Using chromatin immunoprecipitation and PCR, we show that in several normal and
neoplastic human tissues, CTCF consistently binds unmethylated ICR elements, but 
CTCF binding does not result in predictable gene expression. In the fetal brain, 
CTCF binding is monoallelic and specific for the unmethylated ICR, yet IGF2/H19
expression is biallelic. In osteosarcoma tumors, aberrant methylation of the
IGF2/H19 ICR results in equally aberrant CTCF binding, yet expression of these
genes does not correlate with CTCF binding. This is the first description of
chromatin immunoprecipitation for CTCF binding at the human IGF2/H19 ICR, and the
results demonstrate that CTCF binding at the IGF2/H19 ICR is insufficient to
regulate the expression of IGF2/H19 in many human tissues.

PMID: 12960026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Sep 15;31(18):5317-23.

Retrovirus silencer blocking by the cHS4 insulator is CTCF independent.

Yao S(1), Osborne CS, Bharadwaj RR, Pasceri P, Sukonnik T, Pannell D,
Recillas-Targa F, West AG, Ellis J.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University
Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Silencing of retrovirus vectors poses a significant obstacle to genetic
manipulation of stem cells and their use in gene therapy. We describe a mammalian
silencer blocking assay using insulator elements positioned between retrovirus
silencer elements and an LCRbeta-globin reporter transgene. In transgenic mice,
we show that retrovirus silencers are blocked by the cHS4 insulator. Silencer
blocking is independent of the CTCF binding site and is most effective when
flanking the internal reporter transgene. These data distinguish silencer
blocking activity by cHS4 from its enhancer blocking activity. Retrovirus vectors
can be created at high titer with one but not two internal dimer cHS4 cores. cHS4
in the LTRs has no effect on expression in transduced F9 cells, suggesting that
position effect blocking is not sufficient to escape silencing. The Drosophila
insulators gypsy and Scs fail to block silencing in transgenic mice, but gypsy
stimulates vector expression 2-fold when located in the LTRs of an infectious
retrovirus. The silencer blocking assay complements existing insulator assays in 
mammalian cells, provides new insight into mechanisms of insulation and is a
valuable tool to identify additional silencer blocking insulators that cooperate 
with cHS4 to improve stem cell retrovirus vector design.

PMCID: PMC203325
PMID: 12954767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Sep 1;12(17):2167-78. Epub 2003 Jul 15.

Chromatin of the Barr body: histone and non-histone proteins associated with or
excluded from the inactive X chromosome.

Chadwick BP(1), Willard HF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Duke University, Box 3382, Durham,
NC 27710, USA.

The Barr body has long been recognized as the cytological manifestation of the
inactive X chromosome (Xi) in interphase nuclei. Despite being known for over 50 
years, relatively few components of the Barr body have been identified. In this
study, we have screened over 30 histone variants, modified histones and
non-histone proteins for their association with or exclusion from the Barr body. 
We demonstrate that, similar to the histone variant macroH2A, heterochromatin
protein-1 (HP1), histone H1 and the high mobility group protein HMG-I/Y are
elevated at the territory of the Xi in interphase in human cell lines, but only
when the Xi chromatin is heteropycnotic, implicating each as a component of the
Barr body. Surprisingly, however, virtually all other candidate proteins involved
in establishing heterochromatin and gene silencing are notably absent from the
Barr body despite being localized generally elsewhere throughout the nucleus,
indicating that the Barr body represents a discrete subnuclear compartment that
is not freely accessible to most chromatin proteins. A similar dichotomous
pattern of association or exclusion describes the spatial relationship of a
number of specific histone methylation patterns in relation to the Barr body.
Notably, though, several methylated forms of histone H3 that are deficient in Xi 
chromatin generally are present at a region near the macrosatellite repeat DXZ4, 
as are the chromatin proteins CTCF and SAP30, indicating a distinctive chromatin 
state in this region of the Xi. Taken together, our data imply that the Xi adopts
a distinct chromatin configuration in interphase nuclei and are consistent with a
mechanism by which HP1, through histone H3 lysine-9 methylation, recognizes and
assists in maintaining heterochromatin and gene silencing at the human Xi.

PMID: 12915472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Biochem Cell Biol. 2003 Jun;81(3):161-7.

The many roles of the transcriptional regulator CTCF.

Dunn KL(1), Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.

The nuclear factor CTCF was first identified as one of the factors binding to the
regulatory regions of the c-myc gene. Further study of this protein revealed
roles in transcriptional repression, insulator function, and imprinting genetic
information. Recent studies have provided new insight into the mechanism through 
which this factor acts at various levels of gene regulation.

PMID: 12897849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Exp Cell Res. 2003 Aug 1;288(1):218-23.

The insulator binding protein CTCF associates with the nuclear matrix.

Dunn KL(1), Zhao H, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba
R3E 0V9, Canada.

Nuclear DNA is organized into chromatin loop domains. At the base of these loops,
matrix-associated regions (MARs) of the DNA interact with nuclear matrix
proteins. MARs act as structural boundaries within chromatin, and MAR binding
proteins may recruit multiprotein complexes that remodel chromatin. The potential
tumor suppressor protein CTCF binds to vertebrate insulators and is required for 
insulator activity. We demonstrate that CTCF is associated with the nuclear
matrix and can be cross-linked to DNA by cisplatin, an agent that preferentially 
cross-links nuclear matrix proteins to DNA in situ. These results suggest that
CTCF anchors chromatin to the nuclear matrix, suggesting that there is a
functional connection between insulators and the nuclear matrix. We also show
that the chromatin-modifying enzymes HDAC1 and HDAC2, which are intrinsic nuclear
matrix components and thought to function as corepressors of CTCF, are incapable 
of associating with CTCF. Hence, the insulator activity of CTCF apparently
involves an HDAC-independent association with the nuclear matrix. We propose that
CTCF may demarcate nuclear matrix-dependent points of transition in chromatin,
thereby forming topologically independent chromatin loops that may support gene
silencing.

PMID: 12878173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Aug 1;12(15):1927-39.

Insulator and silencer sequences in the imprinted region of human chromosome
11p15.5.

Du M(1), Beatty LG, Zhou W, Lew J, Schoenherr C, Weksberg R, Sadowski PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada M5S 1A8.

The imprinting of the genes on human chromosome 11p15.5 is thought to be
controlled by two imprinting control regions located in two differentially
methylated CpG islands upstream of the H19 gene (H19 DMR) and in intron 10 of the
KCNQ1 gene (KvDMR). We have examined sequences in the human 11p15.5 genomic
imprinted region for the presence of insulators and silencers using a position-
and enhancer-dependent stable transfection assay. We have confirmed the existence
of insulators in H19 DMR and discovered two novel insulators in the IGF2 gene. We
have also found two novel silencer sequences; one is located in KvDMR, a region
that is thought to contain the promoter for the KCNQ1OT1 transcript, and another 
is in the CDKN1C gene. We have demonstrated binding of CTCF protein in vitro to
all the insulator and silencer sequences that we have detected. We discuss the
differences in the regulation of imprinting controlled by the two imprinting
control regions in chromosome 11p.

PMID: 12874112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Aug;23(15):5234-44.

A complex chromatin landscape revealed by patterns of nuclease sensitivity and
histone modification within the mouse beta-globin locus.

Bulger M(1), Schübeler D, Bender MA, Hamilton J, Farrell CM, Hardison RC,
Groudine M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA 98109, USA.

In order to create an extended map of chromatin features within a mammalian
multigene locus, we have determined the extent of nuclease sensitivity and the
pattern of histone modifications associated with the mouse beta-globin genes in
adult erythroid tissue. We show that the nuclease-sensitive domain encompasses
the beta-globin genes along with several flanking olfactory receptor genes that
are inactive in erythroid cells. We describe enhancer-blocking or boundary
elements on either side of the locus that are bound in vivo by the transcription 
factor CTCF, but we found that they do not coincide with transitions in nuclease 
sensitivity flanking the locus or with patterns of histone modifications within
it. In addition, histone hyperacetylation and dimethylation of histone H3 K4 are 
not uniform features of the nuclease-sensitive mouse beta-globin domain but
rather define distinct subdomains within it. Our results reveal a complex
chromatin landscape for the active beta-globin locus and illustrate the
complexity of broad structural changes that accompany gene activation.

PMCID: PMC165715
PMID: 12861010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. ScientificWorldJournal. 2001 Jun 5;1:218-24.

Igf2/H19 imprinting control region (ICR): an insulator or a position-dependent
silencer?

Banerjee S(1), Smallwood A, Lamond S, Campbell S, Nargund G.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Reproductive Medicine, Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, St. 
George's Hospital Medical School, Cranmer Terrace, University of London, London
SW17 ORE, UK. sbanerje@sghms.ac.uk

The imprinting control region (ICR) located far upstream of the H19 gene, in
conjunction with enhancers, modulates the transcription of Igf2 and H19 genes in 
an allele-specific manner. On paternal inheritance, the methylated ICR silences
the H19 gene and indirectly facilitates transcription from the distant Igf2
promoter, whereas on the maternal chromosome the unmethylated ICR, together with 
enhancers, activates transcription of the H19 gene and thereby contributes to the
repression of Igf2. This repression of maternal Igf2 has recently been postulated
to be due to a chromatin boundary or insulator function of the unmethylated ICR. 
Central to the insulator model is the site-specific binding of a ubiquitous
nuclear factor CTCF which exhibits remarkable flexibility in functioning as
transcriptional activator or silencer. We suggest that the ICR positioned close
to the enhancers in an episomal context might function as a transcriptional
silencer by virtue of interaction of CTCF with its modifiers such as SIN3A and
histone deacetylases. Furthermore, a localised folded chromatin structure
resulting from juxtaposition of two disparate regulatory sequences (enhancer ICR)
could be the mechanistic basis of ICR-mediated position-dependent (ICR-promoter) 
transcriptional repression in transgenic Drosophila.

PMID: 12806090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. EMBO J. 2003 Apr 1;22(7):1579-87.

Thyroid hormone-regulated enhancer blocking: cooperation of CTCF and thyroid
hormone receptor.

Lutz M(1), Burke LJ, LeFevre P, Myers FA, Thorne AW, Crane-Robinson C, Bonifer C,
Filippova GN, Lobanenkov V, Renkawitz R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, Justus-Liebig-Universitaet Giessen, Heinrich-Buff-Ring
58-62, D-35392 Giessen, Germany.

The highly conserved, ubiquitously expressed, zinc finger protein CTCF is
involved in enhancer blocking, a mechanism crucial for shielding genes from
illegitimate enhancer effects. Interestingly, CTCF-binding sites are often
flanked by thyroid hormone response elements (TREs), as at the chicken lysozyme
upstream silencer. Here we identify a similar composite site positioned upstream 
of the human c-myc gene. For both elements, we demonstrate that thyroid hormone
abrogates enhancer blocking. Relief of enhancer blocking occurs even though CTCF 
remains bound to the lysozyme chromatin. Furthermore, chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis of the lysozyme upstream region revealed that
histone H4 is acetylated at the CTCF-binding site. Loss of enhancer blocking by
the addition of T3 led to increased histone acetylation, not only at the CTCF
site, but also at the enhancer and the promoter. Thus, when TREs are adjacent to 
CTCF-binding sites, thyroid hormone can regulate enhancer blocking, thereby
providing a new property for what was previously thought to be constitutive
enhancer shielding by CTCF.

PMCID: PMC152892
PMID: 12660164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2002 Dec;83(1-5):49-57.

The thyroid hormone receptor and the insulator protein CTCF: two different
factors with overlapping functions.

Burke LJ(1), Zhang R, Lutz M, Renkawitz R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, Justus-Liebig-Universitaet Giessen, Heinrich-Buff-Ring
58-62, D-35392 Giessen, Germany. leslie.burke@gen.bio.uni-giessen.de

Thyroid hormones and thyroid hormone receptors (TRs) confer a fundamental
regulation of critical genes involved in metabolism, differentiation, and
development. A similar role is attributed to the highly conserved zinc-finger
factor CTCF. Furthermore, a potential role in tumour suppression has been
attributed to CTCF. In addition to promoter regulation, CTCF has also been shown 
to be involved in chromatin insulation or enhancer blocking. In several cases,
binding sites for TR and for CTCF have been found next to each other.
Functionally, these sites mediate synergistic repression or induction dependent
on the type of binding site and on the presence or absence of thyroid hormone.
Here we discuss functional similarities between TR and CTCF and their roles
within these composite elements.

PMID: 12650701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Curr Biol. 2003 Mar 18;13(6):R242-54.

Molecular links between X-inactivation and autosomal imprinting: X-inactivation
as a driving force for the evolution of imprinting?

Lee JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02114, USA. lee@frodo.mgh.harvard.edu

In classical Mendelian inheritance, each parent donates a set of chromosomes to
its offspring so that maternally and paternally encoded information is expressed 
equally. The phenomena of X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) and autosomal
imprinting in mammals violate this dogma of genetic equality. In XCI, one of the 
two female X chromosomes is silenced to equalize X-linked gene dosage between XX 
and XY individuals. In genomic imprinting, parental marks determine which of the 
embryo's two autosomal alleles will be expressed. Although XCI and imprinting
appear distinct, molecular evidence now shows that they share a surprising number
of features. Among them are cis-acting control centers, long-distance regulation 
and differential DNA methylation. Perhaps one of the most intriguing similarities
between XCI and imprinting has been their association with noncoding and
antisense RNAs. Very recent data also suggest the common involvement of histone
modifications and chromatin-associated factors such as CTCF. Collectively, the
evidence suggests that XCI and genomic imprinting may have a common origin. Here,
I hypothesize that the need for X-linked dosage compensation was a major driving 
force in the evolution of genomic imprinting in mammals. I propose that
imprinting was first fixed on the X chromosome for XCI and subsequently acquired 
by autosomes.

PMID: 12646153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Genes Dev. 2003 Mar 1;17(5):586-90.

The nucleotides responsible for the direct physical contact between the chromatin
insulator protein CTCF and the H19 imprinting control region manifest parent of
origin-specific long-distance insulation and methylation-free domains.

Pant V(1), Mariano P, Kanduri C, Mattsson A, Lobanenkov V, Heuchel R, Ohlsson R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development & Genetics, Evolution Biology Centre, Uppsala
University, S-752 36 Uppsala, Sweden.

The repression of the maternally inherited Igf2 allele has been proposed to
depend on a methylation-sensitive chromatin insulator organized by the 11 zinc
finger protein CTCF at the H19 imprinting control region (ICR). Here we document 
that point mutations of the nucleotides in physical contact with CTCF within the 
endogenous H19 ICR lead to loss of CTCF binding and Igf2 imprinting only when
passaged through the female germline. This effect is accompanied by a significant
loss of methylation protection of the maternally derived H19 ICR. Because CTCF
interacts with other imprinting control regions, it emerges as a central factor
responsible for interpreting and propagating gamete-derived epigenetic marks and 
for organizing epigenetically controlled expression domains.

PMCID: PMC196004
PMID: 12629040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Mar 1;31(5):1398-406.

Imprinting regulation of the murine Meg1/Grb10 and human GRB10 genes; roles of
brain-specific promoters and mouse-specific CTCF-binding sites.

Hikichi T(1), Kohda T, Kaneko-Ishino T, Ishino F.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Research Center, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta-cho,
Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

The imprinted mouse gene Meg1/Grb10 is expres sed from maternal alleles in almost
all tissues and organs, except in the brain, where it is expressed biallelically,
and the paternal allele is expressed preferentially in adulthood. In contrast,
the human GRB10 gene shows equal biallelic expression in almost all tissues and
organs, while it is almost always expressed paternally in the fetal brain. To
elucidate the molecular mechanisms of the complex imprinting patterns among the
different tissues and organs of humans and mice, we analyzed in detail both the
genomic structures and tissue-specific expression profiles of these species.
Experiments using 5'-RACE and RT-PCR demonstrated the existence in both humans
and mice of novel brain- specific promoters, in which only the paternal allele
was active. The promoters were located in the primary differentially methylated
regions. Interest ingly, CTCF-binding sites were found only in the mouse promoter
region where CTCF showed DNA methylation-sensitive binding activity. Thus, the
insulator function of CTCF might cause reciprocal maternal expression of the
Meg1/Grb10 gene from another upstream promoter in the mouse, whereas the human
upstream promoter is active in both parental alleles due to the lack of the
corresponding insulator sequence in this region.

PMCID: PMC149825
PMID: 12595547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Mar 1;12(5):535-49.

Loss of imprinting of IGF2 and H19 in osteosarcoma is accompanied by reciprocal
methylation changes of a CTCF-binding site.

Ulaner GA(1), Vu TH, Li T, Hu JF, Yao XM, Yang Y, Gorlick R, Meyers P, Healey J, 
Ladanyi M, Hoffman AR.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Service, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

The adjacent insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2) and H19 genes are imprinted in
most normal human tissues, but imprinting is often lost in tumors. The mechanisms
involved in maintenance of imprinting (MOI) and loss of imprinting (LOI) are
unresolved. We show here that osteosarcoma (OS) tumors with IGF2/H19 MOI exhibit 
allele-specific differential methylation of a CTCF-binding site upstream of H19. 
LOI of IGF2 or H19 in OS occurs in a mutually exclusive manner, and occurs with
monoallelic expression of the other gene. Bisulfite sequencing reveals IGF2 LOI
occurs with biallelic CpG methylation of the CTCF-binding site, while H19 LOI
occurs with biallelic hypomethylation of this site. Our data demonstrate that
IGF2 LOI and H19 LOI are accompanied by reciprocal methylation changes at a
critical CTCF-binding site. We propose a model in which incomplete gain or loss
of methylation at this CTCF-binding site during tumorigenesis explains the
complex and often conflicting expression patterns of IGF2 and H19 in tumors.

PMID: 12588801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Carcinogenesis. 2003 Jan;24(1):121-32.

Perturbations of the Ink4a/Arf gene locus in aflatoxin B1-induced mouse lung
tumors.

Tam AS(1), Devereux TR, Patel AC, Foley JF, Maronpot RR, Massey TE.

Author information: 
(1)Queen's University, Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Kingston,
Ontario K7L 3N6, Canada.

Lung tumors from AC3F1 mice treated with aflatoxin B(1) (AFB(1)), were examined
for loss of alleles, point mutations and hypermethylation of CpG sites within the
promoters of the two genes in the Ink4a/Arf gene locus. Loss of microsatellite
alleles in the Ink4a/Arf region occurred in 22 of 74 (30%) AFB(1)-induced lung
tumors. Fifty-one of 61 (83%) tumors had at least partial methylation of CpG
sites within the p16Ink4a promoter-exon 1alpha region. At least partial
methylation of CpG sites was observed in 43 of 49 (88%) tumors analyzed for
p19Arf promoter hypermethylation, with methylation of identified transcription
factor binding sites or consensus sequences occurring in 21 tumors (DMP1/Ets in
two tumors, CTCF in four tumors, E2F in three tumors, Sp1 in 16 tumors). Two
tumors contained point mutations in the p19Arf promoter. Nuclear staining for
p19(Arf) was decreased by 80-100% in 41 of 71 (58%) tumors. The concordance
between p19Arf molecular perturbations and altered protein expression was 63%.
However, upon comparing p19Arf promoter perturbations (i.e. methylation of
functional transcription factor binding sites and point mutations) and altered
p19(Arf) expression, the concordance was 86%, suggesting a mechanism for changes 
in protein expression in some tumors. There was an absence of a mutually
exclusive relationship between disruption of p53 and p19(Arf), since the
concordance was 62%. Similarly, no evidence was found of inverse relationships
between perturbation of p16Ink4a and p19(Arf) (43% concordance) or p16Ink4(a) and
p53 (37% concordance), suggesting that inactivation of these genes occurs
independently and provides evidence that, although these genes may participate in
cooperative cellular pathways, they also have functions in independent pathways
that are important in mouse lung tumorigenesis.

PMID: 12538357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Cell. 2003 Jan;11(1):237-48.

Structural and dynamic functions establish chromatin domains.

Ishii K(1), Laemmli UK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, NCCR Frontiers of Genetics, University of Geneva, 
30, Quai Ernest-Ansermet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.
ulrich.laemmli@molbio.unige.ch

Drosophila and mammalian proteins protect genes from heterochromatic repression
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by two different mechanisms. Factors termed genuine
boundary activities (BAs) establish a structural, unidirectional bulwark against 
heterochromatin. In contrast, factors termed desilencing activities (DAs) act by 
the formation of a bidirectional, euchromatic island that blocks spreading of
heterochromatin. The Drosophila boundary protein BEAF and, unexpectedly, the
mammalian factor Sp1 exhibited a robust BA in yeast. In contrast, mammalian CTCF,
Drosophila GAGA factor, yeast Gcn5p, and many mammalian transcription factors,
although inactive as upregulators of nonsilenced genes, work as DAs. DAs but not 
BAs protect telomere-linked genes from silencing, presumably due to looping of
telomeres and ensuing multidirectional silencing. The data demonstrate that
"genetic autonomy" of chromatin domains is established by both passive and active
mechanisms.

PMID: 12535536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Mol Biol. 2003 Jan 31;325(5):873-87.

Nucleosome positioning signals in the DNA sequence of the human and mouse H19
imprinting control regions.

Davey C(1), Fraser R, Smolle M, Simmen MW, Allan J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Edinburgh, Darwin
Building, King's Buildings, West Mains Road, Scotland EH9 3JR, Edinburgh, UK.

We have investigated the sequences of the mouse and human H19 imprinting control 
regions (ICRs) to see whether they contain nucleosome positioning information
pertinent to their function as a methylation-regulated chromatin boundary.
Positioning signals were identified by an in vitro approach that employs
reconstituted chromatin to comprehensively describe the contribution of the DNA
to the most basic, underlying level of chromatin structure. Signals in the DNA
sequence of both ICRs directed nucleosomes to flank and encompass the short
conserved sequences that constitute the binding sites for the zinc finger protein
CTCF, an essential mediator of insulator activity. The repeat structure of the
human ICR presented a conserved array of strong positioning signals that would
preferentially flank these CTCF binding sites with positioned nucleosomes, a
chromatin structure that would tend to maintain their accessibility. Conversely, 
all four CTCF binding sites in the mouse sequence were located close to the
centre of positioning signals that were stronger than those in their flanks;
these binding sites might therefore be expected to be more readily incorporated
into positioned nucleosomes. We found that CpG methylation did not effect
widespread repositioning of nucleosomes on either ICR, indicating that allelic
methylation patterns were unlikely to establish allele-specific chromatin
structures for H19 by operating directly upon the underlying DNA-histone
interactions; instead, epigenetic modulation of ICR chromatin structure is likely
to be mediated principally at higher levels of control. DNA methylation did,
however, both promote and inhibit nucleosome positioning at several sites in both
ICRs and substantially negated one of the strongest nucleosome positioning
signals in the human sequence, observations that underline the fact that this
epigenetic modification can, nevertheless, directly and decisively modulate core 
histone-DNA interactions within the nucleosome.

PMID: 12527297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jan 21;100(2):633-8. Epub 2003 Jan 10.

CTCF functions as a critical regulator of cell-cycle arrest and death after
ligation of the B cell receptor on immature B cells.

Qi CF(1), Martensson A, Mattioli M, Dalla-Favera R, Lobanenkov VV, Morse HC 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The WEHI 231 B cell lymphoma is used as a model of self-tolerance by clonal
deletion because B cell receptor (BCR) ligation results in apoptosis. Two
critical events precede cell death: an early rise and fall in expression of MYC
and cell-cycle arrest associated with enhanced expression of p21, p27, and p53.
CTCF is a transcription factor identified as a repressor of MYC recently shown to
cause cell growth inhibition. The present studies demonstrate that BCR ligation
of WEHI 231 as well as of normal immature B cells greatly increased expression of
CTCF in association with down-regulation of MYC followed by growth arrest and
cell death. Conditional expression of CTCF in WEHI 231 mimicked BCR ligation with
activated cells showing repressed expression of MYC, enhanced expression of p27, 
p21, p53, and p19(ARF), and inhibition of cell growth and induction of apoptosis.
In keeping with a central role for CTCF in control of B cell death, conditional
expression of a CTCF antisense construct in WEHI 231 resulted in inhibition of
p27, p21, p53, and p19(ARF) in association with enhanced expression of MYC.
Activation of the endogenous CTCF locus by BCR ligation was also mimicked by
three other routes to apoptotic death in WEHI 231: inhibition of the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase or mTORFRAP signaling cascades and treatment with
transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta. Rapid activation of CTCF by BCR ligation
or treatment with TGF-beta was suppressed by ligation of CD40. These results
demonstrate that CTCF is a common determinant to different pathways of death
signaling in immature B cells.

PMCID: PMC141048
PMID: 12524457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Ann Hum Genet. 2002 Nov;66(Pt 5-6):331-42.

Multifunctional zinc finger proteins in development and disease.

Ladomery M(1), Dellaire G.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Applied Sciences, University of the West of England, Coldharbour
Lane, Bristol BS16 1QY, UK.

Post-transcriptional processes contribute significantly towards the generation of
proteomic diversity. An increasing number of mutations have been described that
affect genes encoding components of the post-transcriptional machinery. In
particular, multifunctional proteins that link transcription with
post-transcriptional processes have been implicated in several human diseases
including cancer. A predominant feature of these proteins is the zinc finger, an 
ancient structural motif that mediates protein ratio protein interactions and is 
capable of interacting with both DNA and RNA. Zinc finger proteins are the most
abundant class of proteins in the human proteome, yet the majority remain
uncharacterised. Here we describe multifunctional zinc finger proteins linked to 
human development and disease. The examples discussed are WT1, ZNF74, EWS, TLS,
TAFII68, YY1, CTCF and the GLI proteins. The study of these and other zinc finger
proteins provides insights into the functional versatility of the zinc finger
motif and suggests that both alternative splicing and sub-cellular
compartmentalisation may modulate their multifunctionality.

PMID: 12485467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 21;278(8):6222-8. Epub 2002 Dec 9.

Loss of Igf2 imprinting in monoclonal mouse hepatic tumor cells is not associated
with abnormal methylation patterns for the H19, Igf2, and Kvlqt1 differentially
methylated regions.

Ishizaki T(1), Yoshie M, Yaginuma Y, Tanaka T, Ogawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Asahikawa Medical College, 2-1-1-1 East, Midorigaoka,
Asahikawa 078-8510, Japan.

IGFII, the peptide encoded by the Igf2 gene, is a broad spectrum mitogen with
important roles in prenatal growth as well as cancer progression. Igf2 is
transcribed from the paternally inherited allele, whereas the linked H19 is
transcribed from the maternal allele. Igf2 imprinting is thought to be maintained
by differentially methylated regions (DMRs) located at multiple sites such as
upstream of H19 and Igf2 and within Kvlqt1 loci. Biallelic expression (loss of
imprinting (LOI)) of Igf2 is frequently observed in cancers, and a subset of
Wilms' and intestinal tumors have been shown to exhibit abnormal methylation at
H19DMR associated with loss of maternal H19 expression, but it is not known
whether such changes are common in other neoplasms. Because cancers consist of
diverse cell populations with and without Igf2 LOI, we established four
independent monoclonal cell lines with Igf2 LOI from mouse hepatic tumors. We
here demonstrate retention of normal differential methylation at H19, Igf2, or
Kvlqt1 DMR by all of the cell lines. Furthermore, H19 was found to be expressed
exclusively from the maternal allele, and levels of CTCF, a multifunctional
nuclear factor that has an important role in the Igf2 imprinting, were comparable
with those in normal hepatic tissues with no mutational changes detected. These
data indicate that Igf2 LOI in tumor cells is not necessarily linked to abnormal 
methylation at H19, Igf2, or Kvlqt1 loci.

PMID: 12475990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Dec 1;30(23):5136-41.

The vertebrate protein CTCF functions as an insulator in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae.

Defossez PA(1), Gilson E.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 5665, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, 46 Allée d'Italie, 69364 Lyon
Cedex 07, France. pierre-antoine.defossez@ens-lyon.fr

Insulators are elements that shelter genes from the effects of silencers or
enhancers. CTCF is the only vertebrate protein that has a recognized role in
transcriptional insulation, but how it exerts its effect is unknown. In an
attempt to better understand how CTCF functions, we have used an insulation assay
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We show that CTCF acts as an insulator in yeast,
where it can efficiently block the spreading of repressive telomeric chromatin.
We identify two domains of the protein that are responsible for this activity: a 
short and very potent N-terminal domain, as well as the C-terminus of the
protein.

PMCID: PMC137948
PMID: 12466537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Nat Genet. 2003 Jan;33(1):66-9. Epub 2002 Dec 2.

CTCF maintains differential methylation at the Igf2/H19 locus.

Schoenherr CJ(1), Levorse JM, Tilghman SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Structural Biology, University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

Genomic imprinting relies on establishing and maintaining the parental-specific
methylation of DNA elements that control the differential expression of maternal 
and paternal alleles. Although the essential DNA methyltransferases have been
discovered, proteins that regulate the sequence-specific establishment and
maintenance of allelic methylation have not been identified. One candidate
regulator of methylation, the zinc-finger protein CTCF, binds to the imprinting
control region (ICR) of the genes Igf2 (encoding insulin-like growth factor 2)
and H19 (fetal liver mRNA; refs. 1,2). The unmethylated maternal ICR is a
chromatin boundary that prevents distant enhancers from activating Igf2 (refs.
3-6). In vitro experiments have suggested that CTCF mediates boundary activity of
the maternal ICR, and that methylation of the paternal ICR abolishes this
activity by preventing CTCF binding. Using mice with point mutations in all four 
CTCF sites in the ICR, we show that maternally transmitted mutant ICRs in
neonatal mice acquire a substantial but heterogeneous degree of methylation.
Mutant ICRs in oocytes and blastocysts are not methylated, however, indicating
that binding of CTCF is not required to establish the unmethylated ICR during
oogenesis. We also show that the mutant ICR lacks enhancer-blocking activity, as 
the expression of Igf2 is activated on mutant maternal chromosomes. Conversely,
maternal H19 expression is reduced, suggesting a positive role for CTCF in the
transcription of that gene. This study constitutes the first in vivo
demonstration of the multiple functions of CTCF in an ICR.

PMID: 12461525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2002 Oct;35(2):156-63.

Chromosome arm 16q in Wilms tumors: unbalanced chromosomal translocations, loss
of heterozygosity, and assessment of the CTCF gene.

Yeh A(1), Wei M, Golub SB, Yamashiro DJ, Murty VV, Tycko B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York, New York, USA.

Chromosome arm 16q is a common site of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in Wilms
tumors (WTs). The mechanism and consequences of 16q LOH are not known, but the
CTCF gene, in band 16q22, is a candidate target gene. CTCF protein binds to DNA
upstream of the H19 gene on chromosome band 11p15, and maintains normal
imprinting of H19 and IGF2. Thus, its loss might predispose to de novo
methylation of the maternal allele of H19 and loss of imprinting (LOI) of IGF2 in
WTs. We mapped Chr16 LOH in WTs and correlated this with unbalanced chromosomal
translocations and histopathology. We also analyzed the CTCF gene for its mRNA
and protein expression and DNA sequence, and we investigated correlations with
methylation of H19(mat). In our series, unbalanced t(1;16) chromosomal
translocations were a major pathway for Chr16 loss of heterozygosity, and this
LOH was correlated significantly with tumor anaplasia. CTCF mapped in the minimal
region of Chr16 LOH. However, we found no correlation between Chr16 LOH, or loss 
of CTCF mRNA or protein, and methylation of H19(mat). Some WTs contained reduced 
amounts of CTCF protein, but among these were cases with and without H19(mat)
methylation. Rare WTs with simultaneous 16q LOH and H19(mat) methylation lacked
CTCF mutations. These data argue against the CTCF gene as a target of Chr16 LOH
in WTs, but leave open the possibility that post-transcriptional loss of CTCF
protein may account for some instances of LOI.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12203779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Semin Cancer Biol. 2002 Oct;12(5):399-414.

The novel BORIS + CTCF gene family is uniquely involved in the epigenetics of
normal biology and cancer.

Klenova EM(1), Morse HC 3rd, Ohlsson R, Lobanenkov VV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Wivenhoe Park,
Colchester CQ4 3SQ, UK.

CTCF is a ubiquitous 11 zinc finger (ZF) protein with highly versatile functions:
in addition to transcriptional silencing or activating in a context-dependent
fashion, it organizes epigenetically controlled chromatin insulators that
regulate imprinted genes in soma. Recently, we have identified a CTCF paralogue, 
termed BORIS for Brother of the Regulator of Imprinted Sites, that is expressed
only in the testis. BORIS has the same exons encoding the 11 ZF domain as
mammalian CTCF genes, and hence interacts with similar cis elements, but encodes 
amino and carboxy termini distinct from those in CTCF. Normally, CTCF and BORIS
are expressed in a mutually exclusive pattern that correlates with re-setting of 
methylation marks during male germ cell differentiation. The antagonistic
features of these two gene siblings are underscored by showing that while CTCF
overexpression blocks cell proliferation, expression of BORIS in normally
BORIS-negative cells promotes cell growth which can lead to transformation. The
suggestion that BORIS directs epigenetic reprogramming at CTCF target sites
impinges on the observations that human BORIS is not only abnormally activated in
a wide range of human cancers, but also maps to the cancer-associated
amplification region at 20q13. The sibling rivalry occasioned by aberrant
expression of BORIS in cancer may interfere with normal functions of CTCF
including growth suppression, and contribute to epigenetic dysregulation which is
a common feature in human cancer.

PMID: 12191639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Dec 10;99 Suppl 4:16433-7. Epub 2002 Aug 1.

The insulation of genes from external enhancers and silencing chromatin.

Burgess-Beusse B(1), Farrell C, Gaszner M, Litt M, Mutskov V, Recillas-Targa F,
Simpson M, West A, Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0540, USA.

Insulators are DNA sequence elements that can serve in some cases as barriers to 
protect a gene against the encroachment of adjacent inactive condensed chromatin.
Some insulators also can act as blocking elements to protect against the
activating influence of distal enhancers associated with other genes. Although
most of the insulators identified so far derive from Drosophila, they also are
found in vertebrates. An insulator at the 5' end of the chicken beta-globin locus
marks a boundary between an open chromatin domain and a region of constitutively 
condensed chromatin. Detailed analysis of this element shows that it possesses
both enhancer blocking activity and the ability to screen reporter genes against 
position effects. Enhancer blocking is associated with binding of the protein
CTCF; sites that bind CTCF are found at other critical points in the genome.
Protection against position effects involves other properties that appear to be
associated with control of histone acetylation and methylation. Insulators thus
are complex elements that can help to preserve the independent function of genes 
embedded in a genome in which they are surrounded by regulatory signals they must
ignore.

PMCID: PMC139905
PMID: 12154228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Jul 19;295(3):713-23.

Transforming growth factor-beta-induced transcription of the Alzheimer
beta-amyloid precursor protein gene involves interaction between the CTCF-complex
and Smads.

Burton T(1), Liang B, Dibrov A, Amara F.

Author information: 
(1)The Dr. John Foerster Centre for Health Research on Aging. St. Boniface
General Hospital Research Centre, 351 Taché Avenue, Winnipeg, MB, Canada R3E 0W3.

Transforming growth factor-beta-1 (TGF-beta), a key regulator of the brain
responses to injury and inflammation, has been implicated in upregulating the
expression of the Alzheimer amyloid precursor protein (APP) and Alzheimer's
disease (AD) pathogenesis. However, little is known about the mechanisms
underlying the effects of TGF-beta on APP expression. Analysis of APP promoter
activity upstream of the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene in
normal human astrocytes (NHAs), revealed that the APP promoter binding beta
(APBbeta) site (-93/-82) is responsive to TGF-beta. This site interacts with the 
zinc finger nuclear factor CTCF, involved in APP transcriptional activity. As
determined by gel shift assay, there was no significant difference in the
CTCF-APBbeta complex binding activity in the presence or absence of TGF-beta
treatment of NHAs. To further investigate the contributions of the CTCF-complex
and Smad proteins to the TGF-beta induced APP promoter activity, we examined the 
distribution of these factors and their DNA binding activity. Interestingly, upon
TGF-beta treatment both Smads 3 and 4 were translocated to the nuclei in contrast
to Smad 2, which was cytoplasmic. However, CTCF was predominantly localized in
the nuclei irrespective of TGF-beta treatment. Gel super shift assay coupled with
Western blot analysis showed that Smads 3 and 4 specifically associated with the 
CTCF-APBbeta complex. In addition, AD brain sections showed increased expression 
and nuclear localization of Smad 4, which correlated with higher levels of APP
and TGF-beta. However, over expression of Smad 4 on its own was not sufficient to
affect APP expression. These results demonstrate that TGF-beta activation of Smad
protein complexes promotes transcription of the APP gene. Increased synthesis of 
APP may in part determine Abeta production and deposition in affected AD brain.

(c) 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 12099698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Jul 1;11(14):1627-36.

An evolutionarily conserved putative insulator element near the 3' boundary of
the imprinted Igf2/H19 domain.

Ishihara K(1), Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Integrated Genetics, National
Institute of Genetics, Graduate University for Advanced Studies, 1111 Yata,
Mishima, Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan.

Igf2 and H19 are closely linked imprinted genes lying at the centromeric end of a
1 Mb imprinted domain on mouse chromosome 7. L23mrp and other genes located 3'
(more centromeric) to H19 are not imprinted and do not interact with the
enhancers shared by Igf2 and H19. It is therefore suggested that the intergenic
region between H19 and L23mrp contains a boundary or an insulator element. We
have identified a binding site for CTCF, a nuclear factor that mediates insulator
activity in vertebrates, in the intergenic region. This site is conserved between
human and mouse, associated with a major DNase I-hypersensitive site, and bound
by CTCF in vivo. Functional assays using reporter constructs demonstrated that
this element functions as an insulator in transfected cells. The findings suggest
that this CTCF site contributes to the 3' boundary of this imprinted domain.
Together with the findings on the differentially methylated CTCF sites 5' to H19,
CTCF-dependent insulators may not only regulate but also delimit the imprinted
domain.

PMID: 12075007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Methods. 2002 Mar;26(3):254-9.

Immunoprecipitation techniques for the analysis of transcription factor
complexes.

Klenova E(1), Chernukhin I, Inoue T, Shamsuddin S, Norton J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Gene Regulation Laboratory, University of
Essex, Wivenhoe Park, Colchester, Essex CO4 3SQ, UK.

Interactions among transcription factors can be detected and analyzed by a
variety of in vitro and in vivo approaches. In many studies, the existence of
putative interactions among transcription factor partners is initially
established from yeast two-hybrid screening and in vitro protein association
analysis. The ability to detect candidate interacting proteins in
coimmunoprecipitates from cell lysates provides an important criterion for
establishing the authenticity of such protein interactions in vivo. This article 
describes methodology developed for detecting interactions between the
helix-loop-helix protein, Id3, and the paired homeodomain protein, Pax5, and
interactions involving the zinc finger transcription factor, CTCF. The importance
of empirically establishing optimum conditions for cell lysis, selection of
appropriate antibodies, conditions for immunoprecipitation, and detection of
interacting partners are discussed.

PMID: 12054881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Oncogene. 2002 May 13;21(21):3414-21.

The proto-oncogene c-myc in hematopoietic development and leukemogenesis.

Hoffman B(1), Amanullah A, Shafarenko M, Liebermann DA.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Department of
Biochemistry, Temple University School of Medicine, 3307 North Broad Street,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, PA 19140, USA. hoffman@unix.temple.edu

The proto-oncogene c-myc has been shown to play a pivotal role in cell cycle
regulation, metabolism, apoptosis, differentiation, cell adhesion, and
tumorigenesis, and participates in regulating hematopoietic homeostasis. It is a 
transcription regulator that is part of an extensive network of interacting
factors. Most probably, different biological responses are elicited by different 
overlapping subsets of c-Myc target genes, both induced and suppressed. Results
obtained from studies employing mouse models are consistent with the need for at 
least one, and possibly two, mutations in addition to deregulated c-myc for
malignant tumor formation. Repression of c-myc is required for terminal
differentiation of many cell types, including hematopoietic cells. It has been
shown that deregulated expression of c-myc in both M1 myeloid leukemic cells and 
normal myeloid cells derived from murine bone marrow, not only blocked terminal
differentiation and its associated growth arrest, but also induced apoptosis,
which is dependent on the Fas/CD95 pathway. There is evidence to suggest that the
CD95/Fas death receptor pathway is an integral part of the apoptotic response
associated with the end of the normal terminal myeloid differentiation program,
and that deregulated c-myc expression can activate this signaling pathway
prematurely. The ability of egr-1 to promote terminal myeloid differentiation
when co-expressed with c-myc, and of c-fos to partially abrogate the block
imparted by deregulated c-myc on myeloid differentiation, make these two genes
candidate tumor suppressors. Several different transcription factors have been
implicated in the down-regulation of c-myc expression during differentiation,
including C/EBPalpha, CTCF, BLIMP-1, and RFX1. Alterations in the expression
and/or function of these transcription factors, or of the c-Myc and Max
interacting proteins, such as MM-1 and Mxi1, can influence the neoplastic
process. Understanding how c-Myc controls cellular phenotypes, including the
leukemic phenotype, should provide novel tools for designing drugs to promote
differentiation and/or apoptosis of leukemic cells.

PMID: 12032779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 2;277(31):27960-7. Epub 2002 May 23.

A dyad oct-binding sequence functions as a maintenance sequence for the
unmethylated state within the H19/Igf2-imprinted control region.

Hori N(1), Nakano H, Takeuchi T, Kato H, Hamaguchi S, Oshimura M, Sato K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, School of Life Science, Faculty of Medicine, 
Tottori University, Tottori 683-0853, Japan. horinao@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp

DNA methylation of an imprinted control region (ICR) directs the allele-specific 
and reciprocal expression of the mouse H19 and the insulin-like growth factor 2
(Igf2) genes, mediated by controlling enhancer access. The ICR shows enhancer
blocking activity through CTCF binding to an unmethylated sequence. The
unmethylated state of the maternal ICR is maintained throughout development after
establishment in the germ line; however, little is known of the molecular
mechanisms that regulate DNA methylation. Hence, in this study we show that a
dyad Oct-binding sequence (DOS) in the ICR mediates the demethylation of
low-density methylation but not hypermethylation and is required to maintain the 
unmethylated state against the tendency for de novo methylation within the ICR in
the embryonic carcinoma cell line P19. Furthermore, we also reveal that the
unmethylated state of at least one CTCF-binding site within the ICR is under the 
control of DOS. Our results suggest that the ICR, as a CTCF-dependent insulator, 
requires DOS as well as CTCF-binding sites and that DOS maintains the maternal
specific unmethylated state of the ICR at postimplantation stages.

PMID: 12029086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 May 14;99(10):6883-8.

Position-effect protection and enhancer blocking by the chicken beta-globin
insulator are separable activities.

Recillas-Targa F(1), Pikaart MJ, Burgess-Beusse B, Bell AC, Litt MD, West AG,
Gaszner M, Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0540, USA.

The 1.2-kb DNA sequence element (5'HS4) at the 5' end of the chicken beta-globin 
locus has the two defining properties of an insulator: it prevents an "external" 
enhancer from acting on a promoter when placed between them ("enhancer blocking")
and acts as a barrier to chromosomal position effect (CPE) when it surrounds a
stably integrated reporter. We previously reported that a single CTCF-binding
site in 5'HS4 is necessary and sufficient for enhancer blocking. We show here
that a 250-bp "core" element from within 5'HS4 is sufficient to confer protection
against silencing of transgenes caused by CPE. Further dissection of the core
reveals that 5'HS4 is a compound element in which it is possible to separate
enhancer blocking and barrier activities. We demonstrate that full protection
against CPE is conferred by mutant 5'HS4 sequences from which the CTCF-binding
site has been deleted. In contrast, mutations of four other protein binding sites
within 5'HS4 result in varying reductions in the ability to protect against CPE. 
We find that binding sites for CTCF are neither necessary nor sufficient for
protection against CPE. Comparison of the properties of 5'HS4 with those of other
CTCF-binding enhancer-blocking elements suggests that CPE protection is
associated with maintenance of a high level of histone acetylation near the
insulator, conferred by insulator binding-proteins other than CTCF.

PMCID: PMC124498
PMID: 12011446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 May 14;99(10):6806-11.

BORIS, a novel male germ-line-specific protein associated with epigenetic
reprogramming events, shares the same 11-zinc-finger domain with CTCF, the
insulator protein involved in reading imprinting marks in the soma.

Loukinov DI(1), Pugacheva E, Vatolin S, Pack SD, Moon H, Chernukhin I, Mannan P, 
Larsson E, Kanduri C, Vostrov AA, Cui H, Niemitz EL, Rasko JE, Docquier FM,
Kistler M, Breen JJ, Zhuang Z, Quitschke WW, Renkawitz R, Klenova EM, Feinberg
AP, Ohlsson R, Morse HC 3rd, Lobanenkov VV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0760, USA.

CTCF, a conserved, ubiquitous, and highly versatile 11-zinc-finger factor
involved in various aspects of gene regulation, forms methylation-sensitive
insulators that regulate X chromosome inactivation and expression of imprinted
genes. We document here the existence of a paralogous gene with the same exons
encoding the 11-zinc-finger domain as mammalian CTCF genes and thus the same
DNA-binding potential, but with distinct amino and carboxy termini. We named this
gene BORIS for Brother of the Regulator of Imprinted Sites. BORIS is present only
in the testis, and expressed in a mutually exclusive manner with CTCF during male
germ cell development. We show here that erasure of methylation marks during male
germ-line development is associated with dramatic up-regulation of BORIS and
down-regulation of CTCF expression. Because BORIS bears the same DNA-binding
domain that CTCF employs for recognition of methylation marks in soma, BORIS is a
candidate protein for the elusive epigenetic reprogramming factor acting in the
male germ line.

PMCID: PMC124484
PMID: 12011441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jun;22(11):3820-31.

Conserved CTCF insulator elements flank the mouse and human beta-globin loci.

Farrell CM(1), West AG, Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

A binding site for the transcription factor CTCF is responsible for
enhancer-blocking activity in a variety of vertebrate insulators, including the
insulators at the 5' and 3' chromatin boundaries of the chicken beta-globin
locus. To date, no functional domain boundaries have been defined at mammalian
beta-globin loci, which are embedded within arrays of functional olfactory
receptor genes. In an attempt to define boundary elements that could separate
these gene clusters, CTCF-binding sites were searched for at the most distal
DNase I-hypersensitive sites (HSs) of the mouse and human beta-globin loci.
Conserved CTCF sites were found at 5'HS5 and 3'HS1 of both loci. All of these
sites could bind to CTCF in vitro. The sites also functioned as insulators in
enhancer-blocking assays at levels correlating with CTCF-binding affinity,
although enhancer-blocking activity was weak with the mouse 5'HS5 site. These
results show that with respect to enhancer-blocking elements, the architecture of
the mouse and human beta-globin loci is similar to that found previously for the 
chicken beta-globin locus. Unlike the chicken locus, the mouse and human
beta-globin loci do not have nearby transitions in chromatin structure but the
data suggest that 3'HS1 and 5'HS5 may function as insulators that prevent
inappropriate interactions between beta-globin regulatory elements and those of
neighboring domains or subdomains, many of which possess strong enhancers.

PMCID: PMC133827
PMID: 11997516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mol Ther. 2002 May;5(5 Pt 1):589-98.

Topological constraints governing the use of the chicken HS4 chromatin insulator 
in oncoretrovirus vectors.

Yannaki E(1), Tubb J, Aker M, Stamatoyannopoulos G, Emery DW.

Author information: 
(1)Gene and Cell Therapy Center, Hematology Department and Bone Marrow
Transplantation Unit, George Papanikolaou General Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.

The expression of integrated oncoretrovirus vectors is subject to the inhibitory 
effects of surrounding chromatin. A previous report from our laboratory indicated
that such position effects can be overcome by flanking a reporter vector with the
cHS4 chromatin insulator. To characterize this activity more thoroughly, we
switched the promoter-gene combinations in the reporter vector and analyzed
expression of these vectors flanked with the cHS4 fragment in both orientations
following bone marrow transduction and transplantation in mice. The results
indicate that the cHS4 fragment can function in both orientations and can
insulate both the virus long-terminal-repeat (LTR) promoter and an internal
phosphoglycerate kinase (Pgk) promoter. However, insulation of the LTR promoter
diminished when the orientation of the cHS4 fragment placed the CTCF-binding core
element immediately proximal to the U3 region, suggesting a minimal distance
requirement. Moreover, placement of the cHS4 fragment in the U3 region of the 3' 
LTR dramatically decreased the level of expression from an internal Pgk promoter,
presumably by blocking interaction with the 3' LTR enhancer. Finally, sorting
studies suggest that the severity of position effects or autonomous promoter
silencing increases as transduced progenitors differentiate into mature progeny. 
These findings have direct implications for the use of chromatin insulators such 
as cHS4 in oncoretrovirus vectors.

PMID: 11991750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 May;22(10):3339-44.

Multiple nucleosome positioning sites regulate the CTCF-mediated insulator
function of the H19 imprinting control region.

Kanduri M(1), Kanduri C, Mariano P, Vostrov AA, Quitschke W, Lobanenkov V,
Ohlsson R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development & Genetics, Evolution Biology Centre, Uppsala
University, S-752 36 Uppsala, Sweden.

The 5' region of the H19 gene harbors a methylation-sensitive chromatin insulator
within an imprinting control region (ICR). Insertional mutagenesis in combination
with episomal assays identified nucleosome positioning sequences (NPSs) that set 
the stage for the remarkably precise distribution of the four target sites for
the chromatin insulator protein CTCF to nucleosome linker sequences in the H19
ICR. Changing positions of the NPSs resulted in loss of both CTCF target site
occupancy and insulator function, suggesting that the NPSs optimize the fidelity 
of the insulator function. We propose that the NPSs ensure the fidelity of the
repressed status of the maternal Igf2 allele during development by constitutively
maintaining availability of the CTCF target sites.

PMCID: PMC133793
PMID: 11971967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Apr;22(8):2450-62.

Analysis of sequence upstream of the endogenous H19 gene reveals elements both
essential and dispensable for imprinting.

Thorvaldsen JL(1), Mann MR, Nwoko O, Duran KL, Bartolomei MS.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Cell and Developmental
Biology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Imprinting of the linked and oppositely expressed mouse H19 and Igf2 genes
requires a 2-kb differentially methylated domain (DMD) that is located 2 kb
upstream of H19. This element is postulated to function as a
methylation-sensitive insulator. Here we test whether an additional sequence 5'
of H19 is required for H19 and Igf2 imprinting. Because repetitive elements have 
been suggested to be important for genomic imprinting, the requirement of a
G-rich repetitive element that is located immediately 3' to the DMD was first
tested in two targeted deletions: a 2.9-kb deletion (Delta D MD Delta G) that
removes the DMD and G-rich repeat and a 1.3-kb deletion (Delta G) removing only
the latter. There are also four 21-bp GC-rich repetitive elements within the DMD 
that bind the insulator-associated CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor) protein and are
implicated in mediating methylation-sensitive insulator activity. As three of the
four repeats of the 2-kb DMD were deleted in the initial 1.6-kb Delta DMD allele,
we analyzed a 3.8-kb targeted allele (Delta 3.8kb-5'H19), which deletes the
entire DMD, to test the function of the fourth repeat. Comparative analysis of
the 5' deletion alleles reveals that (i) the G-rich repeat element is dispensable
for imprinting, (ii) the Delta DMD and Delta DMD Delta G alleles exhibit slightly
more methylation upon paternal transmission, (iii) removal of the 5' CTCF site
does not further perturb H19 and Igf2 imprinting, suggesting that one
CTCF-binding site is insufficient to generate insulator activity in vivo, (iv)
the DMD sequence is required for full activation of H19 and Igf2, and (v)
deletion of the DMD disrupts H19 and Igf2 expression in a tissue-specific manner.

PMCID: PMC133727
PMID: 11909940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mech Dev. 2002 Apr;113(1):95-8.

Molecular cloning and expression of the chromatin insulator protein CTCF in
Xenopus laevis.

Burke LJ(1), Hollemann T, Pieler T, Renkawitz R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, Justus-Liebig-Universität Giessen, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 
58-62, D-35392, Germany. leslie.burke@gen.bio.uni-giessen.de

The zinc finger protein CTCF has been shown to mediate multiple functions
connected to gene repression. Transcriptional inhibition as well as enhancer
blocking and chromatin insulation are documented for CTCF in men, mice and
chickens. Additionally, hCTCF has been linked to epigenetics and disease. In line
with these basic cellular functions, CTCF has been found to be expressed in every
cell type and adult tissue tested and has thus been deemed an ubiquitous protein.
Here, we report the identification of the CTCF homologue from Xenopus and the
analysis of the spatio-temporal expression of xCTCF during embryogenesis. Within 
the DNA binding domain, xCTCF is virtually identical to other identified
vertebrate CTCF proteins. Homology also extends to other conserved regions that
are important for CTCF function. Although xCTCF mRNA is present during all stages
of early Xenopus development, a remarkable increase in expression is observed in 
neuronal tissues. Early in development, xCTCF is highly expressed in the neural
plate and later in the neural tube and developing brain. By tailbud stage,
elevated expression is also seen in the developing sensory organs of the head.
This is the first detailed description of the expression pattern of a vertebrate 
insulator protein during embryogenesis.

PMID: 11900981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Development. 2002 Feb;129(4):897-904.

The chicken beta-globin insulator element conveys chromatin boundary activity but
not imprinting at the mouse Igf2/H19 domain.

Szabó PE(1), Tang SH, Reed MR, Silva FJ, Tsark WM, Mann JR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, 1450 East
Duarte Road, Duarte, California 91010-3011, USA.

Imprinting of the mouse insulin-like growth factor 2 (Igf2) and H19 genes is
regulated by an imprinting control region (ICR). The hypomethylated maternal copy
functions as a chromatin insulator through the binding of CTCF and prevents Igf2 
activation in cis, while hypermethylation of the paternal copy inactivates
insulator function and leads to inactivation of H19 in cis. The specificity of
the ICR sequence for mediating imprinting and chromatin insulation was
investigated by substituting it for two copies of the chicken beta-globin
insulator element, (Ch beta GI)(2), in mice. This introduced sequence resembles
the ICR in size, and in containing CTCF-binding sites and CpGs, but otherwise
lacks homology. On maternal inheritance, the (Ch beta GI)(2) was hypomethylated
and displayed full chromatin insulator activity. Monoallelic expression of Igf2
and H19 was retained and mice were of normal size. These results suggest that the
ICR sequence, aside from CTCF-binding sites, is not uniquely specialized for
chromatin insulation at the Igf2/H19 region. On paternal inheritance, the (Ch
beta GI)(2) was also hypomethylated and displayed strong insulator
activity--fetuses possessed very low levels of Igf2 RNA and were greatly reduced 
in size, being as small as Igf2-null mutants. Furthermore, the paternal H19
allele was active. These results suggest that differential ICR methylation in the
female and male germ lines is not acquired through differential binding of CTCF. 
Rather, it is likely to be acquired through a separate or downstream process.

PMID: 11861473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Feb 15;11(4):411-8.

A human H19 transgene exhibits impaired paternal-specific imprint acquisition and
maintenance in mice.

Jones BK(1), Levorse J, Tilghman SM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton
University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.

Genomic imprinting, the differential expression of autosomal genes based on their
parent of origin, is observed in all eutherian mammals that have been examined.
In most instances the genes that are imprinted in one species are imprinted in
others as well, suggesting that imprinting predated eutherian radiation. For
example, the RNA-coding H19 gene is repressed upon paternal inheritance in all
species examined to date. Thus, it is surprising that there is remarkably little 
sequence conservation among the cis-acting DNA regulatory elements that are
required for imprinting of H19 and the tightly linked Igf2 gene. The most
conserved characteristic in the imprinting control region (ICR) is the presence
of multiple binding sites for the zinc finger protein CTCF, raising the
possibility that CTCF binding might be sufficient for the reciprocal imprinting
of H19 and Igf2. To investigate whether a human H19 transgene, harboring seven
CTCF sites, is correctly recognized and imprinted in the mouse, a 100 kb
transgene containing the human H19 gene was introduced into the mouse germline.
The human transgene was specifically methylated after passage through the male
germline in a copy number-dependent manner, but the methylation was unstable,
undergoing progressive loss during development. Consequently, the transgene was
highly expressed upon both maternal and paternal inheritance. These results argue
that the signals for both the acquisition and maintenance of methylation
imprinting are diverging rapidly.

PMID: 11854173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Cancer Res. 2002 Jan 1;62(1):48-52.

Tumor-associated zinc finger mutations in the CTCF transcription factor
selectively alter tts DNA-binding specificity.

Filippova GN(1), Qi CF, Ulmer JE, Moore JM, Ward MD, Hu YJ, Loukinov DI,
Pugacheva EM, Klenova EM, Grundy PE, Feinberg AP, Cleton-Jansen AM, Moerland EW, 
Cornelisse CJ, Suzuki H, Komiya A, Lindblom A, Dorion-Bonnet F, Neiman PE, Morse 
HC 3rd, Collins SJ, Lobanenkov VV.

Author information: 
(1)Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98109, USA.

CTCF is a widely expressed 11-zinc finger (ZF) transcription factor that is
involved in different aspects of gene regulation including promoter activation or
repression, hormone-responsive gene silencing, methylation-dependent chromatin
insulation, and genomic imprinting. Because CTCF targets include oncogenes and
tumor suppressor genes, we screened over 100 human tumor samples for mutations
that might disrupt CTCF activity. We did not observe any CTCF mutations leading
to truncations/premature stops. Rather, in breast, prostate, and Wilms' tumors,
we observed four different CTCF somatic missense mutations involving amino acids 
within the ZF domain. Each ZF mutation abrogated CTCF binding to a subset of
target sites within the promoters/insulators of certain genes involved in
regulating cell proliferation but did not alter binding to the regulatory
sequences of other genes. These observations suggest that CTCF may represent a
novel tumor suppressor gene that displays tumor-specific "change of function"
rather than complete "loss of function."

PMID: 11782357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Jan 1;11(1):77-86.

Epigenetic analysis of the Dlk1-Gtl2 imprinted domain on mouse chromosome 12:
implications for imprinting control from comparison with Igf2-H19.

Takada S(1), Paulsen M, Tevendale M, Tsai CE, Kelsey G, Cattanach BM,
Ferguson-Smith AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 
3DY, UK.

Dlk1 and Gtl2 are reciprocally imprinted genes located 80 kb apart on mouse
chromosome 12. Similarities between this domain and that of the well
characterized Igf2-H19 locus have been previously noted. Comparative genomic and 
epigenetic analysis of these two domains might help identify allele-specific
epigenetic regulatory elements and common features involved in aspects of
imprinting control. Here we describe a detailed methylation analysis of the
Dlk1-Gtl2 domain on both parental alleles in the mouse. Like the Igf2-H19 domain,
areas of differential methylation are hypermethylated on the paternal allele and 
hypomethylated on the maternal allele. Three differentially methylated regions
(DMRs), each with different epigenetic characteristics, have been identified. One
DMR is intergenic, contains tandem repeats and is the only region that inherits a
paternal methylation mark from the germline. An intronic DMR contains a conserved
putative CTCF-binding domain. All three DMRs have both unique and common features
compared to those identified in the Igf2-H19 domain.

PMID: 11773001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Science. 2002 Jan 11;295(5553):345-7. Epub 2001 Dec 6.

CTCF, a candidate trans-acting factor for X-inactivation choice.

Chao W(1), Huynh KD, Spencer RJ, Davidow LS, Lee JT.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02114, USA.

In mammals, X-inactivation silences one of two female X chromosomes. Silencing
depends on the noncoding gene, Xist (inactive X-specific transcript), and is
blocked by the antisense gene, Tsix. Deleting the choice/imprinting center in
Tsix affects X-chromosome selection. Here, we identify the insulator and
transcription factor, CTCF, as a candidate trans-acting factor for X-chromosome
selection. The choice/imprinting center contains tandem CTCF binding sites that
function in an enhancer-blocking assay. In vitro binding is reduced by CpG
methylation and abolished by including non-CpG methylation. We postulate that
Tsix and CTCF together establish a regulatable epigenetic switch for
X-inactivation.

PMID: 11743158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Genome Res. 2001 Dec;11(12):2085-94.

Comparative sequence analysis of the imprinted Dlk1-Gtl2 locus in three mammalian
species reveals highly conserved genomic elements and refines comparison with the
Igf2-H19 region.

Paulsen M(1), Takada S, Youngson NA, Benchaib M, Charlier C, Segers K, Georges M,
Ferguson-Smith AC.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Anatomy, Cambridge CB2 3DY, United
Kingdom.

The Dlk1-Gtl2 domain on mouse chromosome 12 contains reciprocally imprinted genes
with the potential to contribute to our understanding of common features involved
in imprinting control. We have sequenced this conserved region in the mouse and
sheep and included the human sequence in a three species comparison. This
analysis resulted in a precise conservation map and identification of highly
conserved sequence elements, some of which we have shown previously to be
differentially methylated in the mouse. Additionally, this analysis facilitated
identification of a CpG-rich tandem repeat array located approximately 13-15 kb
upstream of Gtl2. Furthermore, we have identified a third imprinted transcript
that overlaps with the last Dlk1 exon in the mouse. This transcript lacks a
conserved open reading frame and is probably generated by cleavage of extended
Dlk1 transcripts. Because Dlk1 and Gtl2 share many of the imprinting properties
of the well-characterized Igf2-H19 domain, it has been proposed that the two
regions may be regulated in the same way. Comparative genomic examination of the 
two domains indicates that although there are similarities, other features are
very different, including the location of conserved CTCF-binding sites, and the
level of conservation at regulatory regions.

PMCID: PMC311216
PMID: 11731499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Nov 1;10(23):2619-26.

Large scale mapping of methylcytosines in CTCF-binding sites in the human H19
promoter and aberrant hypomethylation in human bladder cancer.

Takai D(1), Gonzales FA, Tsai YC, Thayer MJ, Jones PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, USC/Norris Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California, 
1441 Eastlake Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

The methylation status of binding sites of the insulator protein, CTCF, in the
H19 promoter has been suggested as being critical to the regulation of imprinting
of the H19/IGF2 locus located in chromosome 11p15. In this study, we have
analyzed the methylation of all of seven potential CTCF-binding sites in the
human H19 promoter since the methylation status of these sites has not been
reported. We found that all the binding sites except the sixth were
hypermethylated whereas only the sixth binding site showed allele-specific
methylation in normal human embryonic ureteral tissue. We also analyzed the
methylation status of these sites in human-mouse somatic-cell-hybrid clones
containing a single copy of human chromosome 11 and which were treated with
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-CdR) to yield clones which expressed human IGF2 and
H19 mutually exclusively of each other. In most of the clones, a correlation
between methylation of the sixth CTCF-binding site and expression of IGF2 was
observed. Therefore, we analyzed the methylation status of this site in human
bladder cancer and found hypomethylation of the paternal allele in two of six
informative cases. These results demonstrate that only the sixth CTCF-binding
site acts as a key regulatory domain for switching between H19 or IGF2
expression, whereas the other sites are not subject to allele-specific
methylation. Loss of methylation imprinting of H19 is linked to hypomethylation
of the paternal allele in human bladder cancer, unlike the situation in Wilms'
tumor and colon cancer where the maternal allele becomes hypermethylated.

PMID: 11726548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 11;277(2):1619-27. Epub 2001 Nov 8.

A region to the N-terminal side of the CTCF zinc finger domain is essential for
activating transcription from the amyloid precursor protein promoter.

Vostrov AA(1), Taheny MJ, Quitschke WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, State University of New York,
Stony Brook, New York 11794-8101, USA.

Transcription from the amyloid precursor protein (APP) promoter is largely
dependent on a nuclear factor binding site designated as APBbeta. The protein
that binds to this site is the multifunctional transcription factor CTCF, which
consists of 727 amino acids and contains a domain of 11 zinc finger motifs that
is flanked by 267 amino acids on the N-terminal side and 150 amino acids on the
C-terminal side. Depleting HeLa cell nuclear extract of endogenous CTCF
specifically reduced transcriptional activity from the APP promoter. However,
transcriptional activity was restored by replenishing the depleted extract with
recombinant CTCF. Deleting 201 amino acids from the C-terminal end of CTCF had no
detrimental effect on transcriptional activation, whereas deleting either 248 or 
284 amino acids from the N-terminal end abolished transcriptional activation.
Competing endogenous CTCF in vivo was accomplished by cotransfecting COS-1 cells 
with a plasmid overexpressing CTCF constructs and a reporter plasmid containing
the APP promoter. Under these conditions, an N-terminal deletion of CTCF reduced 
expression from the APP promoter, whereas the C-terminal deletion had no effect. 
These results demonstrate that CTCF activates transcription from the APP promoter
and that the activation domain is located on the N-terminal side of the zinc
finger domain.

PMID: 11706010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Nutr. 2001 Oct;131(10):2636-42.

Chronic docosahexaenoic acid intake enhances expression of the gene for
uncoupling protein 3 and affects pleiotropic mRNA levels in skeletal muscle of
aged C57BL/6NJcl mice.

Cha SH(1), Fukushima A, Sakuma K, Kagawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Chemistry and. Molecular Nutrition, Kagawa Nutrition
University, 3-9-21 Chiyoda, Sakado, Saitama, 350-0288, Japan.

Docosahexaenoic acid [DHA, 22:6(n-3)] prevents cardiovascular disease by
decreasing obesity. It also prevents cancer and other geriatric diseases. We
studied the chronic pleiotropic effects of DHA on transcription including that of
mRNAs for uncoupling proteins (UCP). Male and female mice (9 mo old) were fed
high (n-6) or high (n-3) fatty acid diets for 4 mo. Compared with controls fed
high (n-6) fatty acid diets [high (n-6) group], the livers of male and female
mice fed DHA [high (n-3) group] contained six- (P < 0.001) and fivefold (P <
0.001) more DHA, respectively. The high (n-3) group had less white adipose tissue
[35.3% in males (P < 0.001) and 27.3% in females (P < 0.001)]. The high (n-3)
group expressed more uncoupling protein 3 (UCP3) in the gastrocnemius, 108%
higher (P < 0.001) and 104% higher (P < 0.001) in males and females,
respectively, than those in the high (n-6) group. However, the prevention of many
diseases by DHA is not explained by UCP3. Thus, the gene expression profiles of
both high (n-3) and high (n-6) groups were analyzed in skeletal muscle using cDNA
expression array. Of 588 genes surveyed in the array, the high (n-3) group showed
12 genes (2%) including those for glucose regulators (e.g., CD38) and tumor
suppressors (e.g., CTCF) that were expressed 100-340% more than those of the high
(n-6) group. Furthermore, 28 genes (4.8%), including growth factors (e.g., ErbB-2
receptor) and immune regulators (e.g., interleukin-1 beta precursor) were
expressed 50-90% less in the high (n-3) group than in the high (n-6) group. These
results explain in part the important pleiotropic effects of DHA, which are
independent of obesity control by UCP3 suppression.

PMID: 11584083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Trends Genet. 2001 Sep;17(9):520-7.

CTCF is a uniquely versatile transcription regulator linked to epigenetics and
disease.

Ohlsson R(1), Renkawitz R, Lobanenkov V.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Genetics and Development, Evolution Biology Centre, Uppsala
University, Norbyvägen 18A, S-752 36 Uppsala, Sweden. Rolf.Ohlsson@ebc.uu.se

CTCF is an evolutionarily conserved zinc finger (ZF) phosphoprotein that binds
through combinatorial use of its 11 ZFs to approximately 50 bp target sites that 
have remarkable sequence variation. Formation of different CTCF-DNA complexes,
some of which are methylation-sensitive, results in distinct functions, including
gene activation, repression, silencing and chromatin insulation. Disrupting the
spectrum of target specificities by ZF mutations or by abnormal selective
methylation of targets is associated with cancer. CTCF emerges, therefore, as a
central player in networks linking expression domains with epigenetics and cell
growth regulation.

PMID: 11525835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Curr Biol. 2001 Jul 24;11(14):1128-30.

CpG methylation regulates the Igf2/H19 insulator.

Holmgren C(1), Kanduri C, Dell G, Ward A, Mukhopadhya R, Kanduri M, Lobanenkov V,
Ohlsson R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Genetics, Uppsala University, Norbyvägen 18A,
S-752 36, Uppsala, Sweden.

The differentially methylated 5'-flank of the mouse H19 gene unidirectionally
regulates the communication between enhancer elements and gene promoters and
presumably represses maternal Igf2 expression in vivo [1-6]. The specific
activation of the paternally inherited Igf2 allele has been proposed to involve
methylation-mediated inactivation of the H19 insulator function during male
germline development [1-4, 6]. Here, we addressed the role of methylation by
inserting a methylated fragment of the H19-imprinting control region (ICR) into a
nonmethylated episomal H19 minigene construct, followed by the transfection of
ligation mixture into Hep3B cells. Individual clones were expanded and analyzed
for genotype, methylation status, chromatin conformation, and insulator function.
The results show that the methylated status of the H19 ICR could be propagated
for several passages without spreading into the episomal vector. Moreover, the
nuclease hypersensitive sites, which are typical for the maternally inherited H19
ICR allele [1], were absent on the methylated ICR, underscoring the suggestion
that the methylation mark dictates parent of origin-specific chromatin
conformations [1] that involve CTCF [2]. Finally, the insulator function was
strongly attenuated in stably maintained episomes. Collectively, these results
provide the first experimental support that the H19 insulator function is
regulated by CpG methylation.

PMID: 11509237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Cancer Res. 2001 Aug 15;61(16):6002-7.

Cell growth inhibition by the multifunctional multivalent zinc-finger factor
CTCF.

Rasko JE(1), Klenova EM, Leon J, Filippova GN, Loukinov DI, Vatolin S, Robinson
AF, Hu YJ, Ulmer J, Ward MD, Pugacheva EM, Neiman PE, Morse HC 3rd, Collins SJ,
Lobanenkov VV.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Therapy Research Unit, Centenary Institute of Cancer Medicine and Cell
Biology, Newtown New South Wales 2042, Australia.

The 11-zinc finger protein CCTC-binding factor (CTCF) employs different sets of
zinc fingers to form distinct complexes with varying CTCF- target sequences
(CTSs) that mediate the repression or activation of gene expression and the
creation of hormone-responsive gene silencers and of diverse vertebrate
enhancer-blocking elements (chromatin insulators). To determine how these varying
effects would integrate in vivo, we engineered a variety of expression systems to
study effects of CTCF on cell growth. Here we show that ectopic expression of
CTCF in many cell types inhibits cell clonogenicity by causing profound growth
retardation without apoptosis. In asynchronous cultures, the cell-cycle profile
of CTCF-expressing cells remained unaltered, which suggested that progression
through the cycle was slowed at multiple points. Although conditionally induced
CTCF caused the S-phase block, CTCF can also arrest cell division. Viable
CTCF-expressing cells could be maintained without dividing for several days.
While MYC is the well-characterized CTCF target, the inhibitory effects of CTCF
on cell growth could not be ascribed solely to repression of MYC, suggesting that
additional CTS-driven genes involved in growth-regulatory circuits, such as
p19ARF, are likely to contribute to CTCF-induced growth arrest. These findings
indicate that CTCF may regulate cell-cycle progression at multiple steps within
the cycle, and add to the growing evidence for the function of CTCF as a tumor
suppressor gene.

PMID: 11507042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Nat Genet. 2001 Aug;28(4):335-43.

CTCF-binding sites flank CTG/CAG repeats and form a methylation-sensitive
insulator at the DM1 locus.

Filippova GN(1), Thienes CP, Penn BH, Cho DH, Hu YJ, Moore JM, Klesert TR,
Lobanenkov VV, Tapscott SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98109, USA.

An expansion of a CTG repeat at the DM1 locus causes myotonic dystrophy (DM) by
altering the expression of the two adjacent genes, DMPK and SIX5, and through a
toxic effect of the repeat-containing RNA. Here we identify two CTCF-binding
sites that flank the CTG repeat and form an insulator element between DMPK and
SIX5. Methylation of these sites prevents binding of CTCF, indicating that the
DM1 locus methylation in congenital DM would disrupt insulator function.
Furthermore, CTCF-binding sites are associated with CTG/CAG repeats at several
other loci. We suggest a general role for CTG/CAG repeats as components of
insulator elements at multiple sites in the human genome.

PMID: 11479593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cancer Res. 2001 Jul 1;61(13):4947-50.

Loss of imprinting of insulin-like growth factor-II in Wilms' tumor commonly
involves altered methylation but not mutations of CTCF or its binding site.

Cui H(1), Niemitz EL, Ravenel JD, Onyango P, Brandenburg SA, Lobanenkov VV,
Feinberg AP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Loss of imprinting (LOI) is the most common molecular abnormality in Wilms' tumor
(WT), other embryonal cancers, and most other tumor types. LOI in WT involves
activation of the normally silent maternal allele of the insulin-like growth
factor-II (IGF2) gene, silencing of the normally active maternal allele of the
H19 gene, and aberrant methylation of a differentially methylated region (DMR)
upstream of the maternal copy of H19. Recently, the transcription factor CTCF,
which binds to the H19 DMR, has been implicated in the maintenance of H19 and
IGF2 imprinting. Here, we show that mutations in the CTCF gene or in the H19 DMR 
do not occur at significant frequency in WT, nor is there transcriptional
silencing of CTCF. We also confirm that methylation of the H19 DMR in WT with LOI
includes the CTCF core consensus site. However, some WTs with normal imprinting
of IGF2 also show aberrant methylation of CTCF binding sites, indicating that
methylation of these sites is necessary but not sufficient for LOI in WT.

PMID: 11431321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Biochemistry. 2001 Jun 12;40(23):6731-42.

The 5' boundary of the human apolipoprotein B chromatin domain in intestinal
cells.

Antes TJ(1), Namciu SJ, Fournier RE, Levy-Wilson B.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute, Palo Alto Medical Foundation, Palo Alto, California 94301,
USA.

The 5' boundary of the chromosomal domain of the human apolipoprotein B (apoB)
gene in intestinal cells has been localized and characterized. It is composed of 
two kinds of boundary elements; the first, functional boundary is an insulator
activity exhibited by a 1.8 kb DNA fragment located between -58 and -56 kb
upstream of the human apoB promoter. In this region, an enhancer-blocking
activity has been mapped to a CTCF binding site that is located upstream of two
apoB intestinal enhancers (IEs), the 315 IE and the 485 IE. The CTCF site
represents a boundary between two types of chromatin structure: an open,
DNaseI-sensitive region 3' of the CTCF site containing the intestinal regulatory 
elements and a closed, DNaseI-resistant region 5' of the CTCF site. The 1.8 kb
fragment harboring the CTCF site also insulated mini-white transgenes against
position effects in Drosophila melanogaster. The second, structural boundary is
represented by a nuclear matrix attachment region (MAR), situated about 3 kb 5'
of the CTCF site. This MAR may represent the 5' anchorage site for a chromosomal 
loop that functions to bring the intestinal regulatory elements closer to the
apoB promoter.

PMID: 11389587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Mar 19;1518(1-2):137-44.

Epigenetic mark sequence of the H19 gene in human sperm.

Hamatani T(1), Sasaki H, Ishihara K, Hida N, Maruyama T, Yoshimura Y, Hata J,
Umezawa A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Keio University School of Medicine,
Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

We have investigated the epigenetic mark in the human H19 gene. The H19 promoter 
is methylation-free in human sperm, but it is methylated in the paternally
derived allele of most adult tissues. Consequently, the H19 gene is exclusively
transcribed from the maternal allele. It was demonstrated that the differentially
methylated region (DMR) located 2 kb upstream from mouse H19 is essential for the
imprinting of H19. A 39 bp sequence in DMR has a high degree of similarity
between humans, mice and rats. The highly conserved 15 bp core region of the
consensus sequence contains four methylatable sites, and thus has been proposed
as a potential imprinting mark region. In this study, fine epigenetic sequencing 
analysis was performed on the sperm DNA in comparison with other adult organs.
Interestingly, the conserved sequence of the potential mark region was methylated
in almost all the sperm genomes analyzed. Furthermore, the single dinucleotide
CpG, whose methylation affects the accessibility of the element to CTCF, was
methylated in the conserved core in the human sperm. These results suggest that
the human core sequences may act as an imprinting center in the reciprocal
monoallelic expression of H19.

PMID: 11267669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Mar;21(6):2221-34.

Functional phosphorylation sites in the C-terminal region of the multivalent
multifunctional transcriptional factor CTCF.

Klenova EM(1), Chernukhin IV, El-Kady A, Lee RE, Pugacheva EM, Loukinov DI,
Goodwin GH, Delgado D, Filippova GN, León J, Morse HC 3rd, Neiman PE, Lobanenkov 
VV.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford 
OX1 3QU, United Kingdom.

CTCF is a widely expressed and highly conserved multi-Zn-finger (ZF) nuclear
factor. Binding to various CTCF target sites (CTSs) is mediated by combinatorial 
contributions of different ZFs. Different CTSs mediate distinct CTCF functions in
transcriptional regulation, including promoter repression or activation and
hormone-responsive gene silencing. In addition, the necessary and sufficient core
sequences of diverse enhancer-blocking (insulator) elements, including CpG
methylation-sensitive ones, have recently been pinpointed to CTSs. To determine
whether a posttranslational modification may modulate CTCF functions, we studied 
CTCF phosphorylation. We demonstrated that most of the modifications that occur
at the carboxy terminus in vivo can be reproduced in vitro with casein kinase II 
(CKII). Major modification sites map to four serines within the
S(604)KKEDS(609)S(610)DS(612)E motif that is highly conserved in vertebrates.
Specific mutations of these serines abrogate phosphorylation of CTCF in vivo and 
CKII-induced phosphorylation in vitro. In addition, we showed that completely
preventing phosphorylation by substituting all serines within this site resulted 
in markedly enhanced repression of the CTS-bearing vertebrate c-myc promoters,
but did not alter CTCF nuclear localization or in vitro DNA-binding
characteristics assayed with c-myc CTSs. Moreover, these substitutions manifested
a profound effect on negative cell growth regulation by wild-type CTCF. CKII may 
thus be responsible for attenuation of CTCF activity, either acting on its own or
by providing the signal for phosphorylation by other kinases and for
CTCF-interacting protein partners.

PMCID: PMC86856
PMID: 11238955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jan 16;98(2):591-6. Epub 2000 Dec 19.

Loss of imprinting of the insulin-like growth factor II gene occurs by biallelic 
methylation in a core region of H19-associated CTCF-binding sites in colorectal
cancer.

Nakagawa H(1), Chadwick RB, Peltomaki P, Plass C, Nakamura Y, de La Chapelle A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Cancer Genetics, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio State
University, 420 West 12th Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jan 16;98(2):392-4.

We hypothesize that loss of imprinting (LOI) of the insulin-like growth factor II
(IGF2) gene is associated with a predisposition to sporadic colorectal cancer. We
confirmed a previously known strong correlation between LOI and microsatellite
instability and showed that LOI was not a consequence of microsatellite
instability or mismatch repair deficiency. LOI of IGF2 correlated strongly with
biallelic hypermethylation of a core of five CpG sites in the insulator region of
IGF2/H19, which is a known CTCF-binding element. As this methylation-dependent
LOI was present in both tumors and normal colonic mucosa, it is possible that
hypermethylation creates a field defect predisposing to cancer.

PMCID: PMC14632
PMID: 11120891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Genome Res. 2000 Nov;10(11):1711-8.

Novel imprinted DLK1/GTL2 domain on human chromosome 14 contains motifs that
mimic those implicated in IGF2/H19 regulation.

Wylie AA(1), Murphy SK, Orton TC, Jirtle RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology and Pathology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Comment in
    Genome Res. 2000 Nov;10(11):1660-3.

The evolution of genomic imprinting in mammals occurred more than 100 million
years ago, and resulted in the formation of genes that are functionally haploid
because of parent-of-origin-dependent expression. Despite ample evidence from
studies in a number of species suggesting the presence of imprinted genes on
human chromosome 14, their identity has remained elusive. Here we report the
identification of two reciprocally imprinted genes, GTL2 and DLK1, which together
define a novel imprinting cluster on human chromosome 14q32. The maternally
expressed GTL2 (gene trap locus 2) gene encodes for a nontranslated RNA. DLK1
(delta, Drosophila, homolog-like 1) is a paternally expressed gene that encodes
for a transmembrane protein containing six epidermal growth factor (EGF) repeat
motifs closely related to those present in the delta/notch/serrate family of
signaling molecules. The paternal expression, chromosomal localization, and
biological function of DLK1 also make it a likely candidate gene for the
callipyge phenotype in sheep. Many of the predicted structural and regulatory
features of the DLK1/GTL2 domain are highly analogous to those implicated in
IGF2/H19 imprint regulation, including two hemimethylated consensus binding sites
for the vertebrate enhancer blocking protein, CTCF. These results provide
evidence that a common mechanism and domain organization may be used for
juxtapositioned, reciprocally imprinted genes.

PMCID: PMC310985
PMID: 11076856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Oncogene. 2000 Aug 17;19(35):3978-87.

Isolation and characterization of sixteen novel p53 response genes.

Kostic C(1), Shaw PH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

The EB-1 cell line is a stable transfectant of EB, a p53 null colon carcinoma
cell line, with an inducible promoter controlling expression of a wild type p53
cDNA. The induced p53 is transcriptionally active and gives rise to apoptosis in 
these cells. Using this cellular model for presence or absence of the
transcription factor p53 and transactivated genes, the Suppression Subtractive
Hybridization (SSH) technique permitted the isolation of 17 mRNA candidates
(GIPs-Genes induced by p53), whose expression appears to be p53-dependent.
Identity has been established for nine of the 17 isolated candidates. These are
HGFL/MSP, Zap-70, APOBEC2, Ponsin/SH3P12/CAP/FLAF2, CDCrel2b/H5/Pnutl2, IgG, lats
2, cytokeratin 15 and PIG-3 (quinone oxidoreductase). The latter gene is the only
GIP previously demonstrated to be p53 regulated. Of the eight remaining GIPs, six
correspond to Unigene clusters. One candidate, GIP #1, is significantly
homologous (72% identity) to a chicken zinc finger protein, CTCF, which binds to 
insulator elements and thus attenuates enhancer cross-talk between physically
adjacent promoters. The p53-dependent expression of GIPs was confirmed by
dependence of expression upon induction of wt p53 expression in the EB-1 cellular
model and by up-regulation following activation of an endogenous wt p53 by
treatment with adriamycin. Oncogene (2000) 19, 3978 - 3987.

PMID: 10962554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Biochem Soc Trans. 2000;28(4):386-9.

Modulation of thyroid hormone receptor silencing function by co-repressors and a 
synergizing transcription factor.

Lutz M(1), Baniahmad A, Renkawitz R.

Author information: 
(1)Genetisches Institut, Justus-Liebig-Universität, D-35392 Giessen, Germany.

We have found that the thyroid hormone receptor (T3R) functionally synergizes
with the CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF). CTCF is a highly conserved zinc-finger
protein that has been connected with multiple functions in gene regulation
including chromatin insulator activity, transcriptional enhancement and silencing
as well as tumour suppression. A specific property of CTCF is that some of the
binding sites are found in the vicinity of T3R-binding sites. Interestingly, both
factors synergize in repression as well as in activation. T3R-mediated repression
has been shown to involve co-repressors such as the silencing mediator for
retinoic acid and thyroid hormone receptor (SMRT), N-CoR or Alien. These
co-repressors in turn have been found to interact with Sin3A. Until now, the
mechanisms by which CTCF synergizes with T3R in transcriptional repression has
not been determined. Here we show that CTCF comprises autonomous silencing
domains that mediate transcriptional repression when tethered to a promoter
sequence. At least one of these domains, the zinc-finger region of CTCF, binds
Sin3A without binding to SMRT or N-CoR and recruits histone deacetylation
activity. For Sin3A we identified two different domains interacting independently
with the CTCF zinc-finger cluster. The ability of regions of CTCF to retain
deacetylase activity is correlated with the ability to bind to Sin3A and to
repress transcription. Taking these results together, the synergy in repression
mediated by T3R and CTCF might be achieved by the binding of multiple molecules
of Sin3A to the T3R/CTCF-DNA complex, thus providing a large platform for the
recruitment of histone deacetylases.

PMID: 10961925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Sep 1;28(17):3370-8.

Differential effect of zinc finger deletions on the binding of CTCF to the
promoter of the amyloid precursor protein gene.

Quitschke WW(1), Taheny MJ, Fochtmann LJ, Vostrov AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, State University of New York 
at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794-8101, USA.
wquitschke@mail.psychiatry.sunysb.edu

High levels of transcription from the amyloid precursor protein promoter are
dependent on the binding of CTCF to the APBbeta core recognition sequence located
between positions -82 and -93 upstream from the transcriptional start site. CTCF 
comprises 727 amino acids and contains 11 zinc finger motifs arranged in tandem
that are flanked by 267 amino acids on the N-terminal side and 150 amino acids on
the C-terminal side. Deletion of either the N- or the C-terminal regions outside 
of the zinc finger domain had no detrimental effect on the binding of CTCF to
APBbeta. However, internal deletions of zinc fingers 5-7 completely abolished
binding. The binding of full-length CTCF generated a DNase I protected domain
extending from position -78 to -116, which was interrupted by a hypersensitive
site at position -99. Selective deletions from the N- and C-terminal sides of the
zinc finger domain showed that the N-terminal end of the zinc finger domain was
aligned toward the transcriptional start site. Furthermore, deletions of zinc
fingers peripheral to the essential zinc fingers 5-7 decreased the stability of
the binding complex by interrupting sequence-specific interactions.

PMCID: PMC110710
PMID: 10954607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Gene. 2000 Aug 8;253(2):209-14.

The insulator protein CTCF represses transcription on binding to the
(gt)(22)(ga)(15) microsatellite in intron 2 of the HLA-DRB1(*)0401 gene.

Arnold R(1), Mäueler W, Bassili G, Lutz M, Burke L, Epplen TJ, Renkawitz R.

Author information: 
(1)Genetisches Institut der Justus-Liebig Universität, 35392, Giessen, Germany.

The insulator and transcription factor CTCF is a highly conserved 11 zinc finger 
protein possessing multiple specifities in DNA sequence recognition. CTCF
regulates transcription of several genes, like the human oncogene c-myc or the
chicken lysozyme gene by binding extremely divergent DNA sequences with different
sets of its 11 zinc fingers. Recently, an insulator function was demonstrated for
several CTCF binding elements. Here we show that CTCF binds to the
(gt)(22)(ga)(15) microsatellite repeat A9 in intron 2 of the HLA-DRB1(*)0401
gene. Reporter gene activity is repressed by the A9 element. This repression is
dependent on coexpressed CTCF and is even stronger compared with the CTCF binding
site F1 of the chicken lysozyme gene, for which a silencer activity has been
shown. This is the first report suggesting a function for microsatellite
sequences in regulating specific gene expression.

PMID: 10940558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 22;275(38):29915-21.

Physical and functional interaction between two pluripotent proteins, the Y-box
DNA/RNA-binding factor, YB-1, and the multivalent zinc finger factor, CTCF.

Chernukhin IV(1), Shamsuddin S, Robinson AF, Carne AF, Paul A, El-Kady AI,
Lobanenkov VV, Klenova EM.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford 
OX1 3QU, United Kingdom.

CTCF is a unique, highly conserved, and ubiquitously expressed 11 zinc finger
(ZF) transcriptional factor with multiple DNA site specificities. It is able to
bind to varying target sequences to perform different regulatory roles, including
promoter activation or repression, creating hormone-responsive gene silencing
elements, and functional block of enhancer-promoter interactions. Because
different sets of ZFs are utilized to recognize different CTCF target DNA sites, 
each of the diverse DNA.CTCF complexes might engage different essential protein
partners to define distinct functional readouts. To identify such proteins, we
developed an affinity chromatography method based on matrix-immobilized purified 
recombinant CTCF. This approach resulted in isolation of several CTCF protein
partners. One of these was identified as the multifunctional Y-box
DNA/RNA-binding factor, YB-1, known to be involved in transcription, replication,
and RNA processing. We examined CTCF/YB-1 interaction by reciprocal
immunoprecipitation experiments with anti-CTCF and anti-YB-1 antibodies, and
found that CTCF and YB-1 form complexes in vivo. We show that the bacterially
expressed ZF domain of CTCF is fully sufficient to retain YB-1 in vitro. To
assess possible functional significance of CTCF/YB-1 binding, we employed the
very first identified by us, negatively regulated, target for CTCF (c-myc
oncogene promoter) as a model in co-transfection assays with both CTCF and YB-1
expression vectors. Although expression of YB-1 alone had no effect,
co-expression with CTCF resulted in a marked enhancement of CTCF-driven c-myc
transcriptional repression. Thus our findings demonstrate, for the first time,
the biological relevance of the CTCF/YB-1 interaction.

PMID: 10906122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Curr Biol. 2000 Jul 13;10(14):853-6.

Functional association of CTCF with the insulator upstream of the H19 gene is
parent of origin-specific and methylation-sensitive.

Kanduri C(1), Pant V, Loukinov D, Pugacheva E, Qi CF, Wolffe A, Ohlsson R,
Lobanenkov VV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Genetics, Uppsala University, Uppsala, S-75236, 
Sweden.

In mammals, a subset of genes inherit gametic marks that establish parent of
origin-dependent expression patterns in the soma ([1] and references therein).
The currently most extensively studied examples of this phenomenon, termed
genomic imprinting, are the physically linked Igf2 (insulin-like growth factor
II) and H19 genes, which are expressed mono-allelically from opposite parental
alleles [1] [2]. The repressed status of the maternal Igf2 allele is due to cis
elements that prevent the H19 enhancers [3] from accessing the Igf2 promoters on 
the maternal chromosome [4] [5]. A differentially methylated domain (DMD) in the 
5' flank of H19 is maintained paternally methylated and maternally unmethylated
[6] [7]. We show here by gel-shift and chromatin immunopurification analyses that
binding of the highly conserved multivalent factor CTCF ([8] [9] and references
therein) to the H19 DMD is methylation-sensitive and parent of origin-dependent. 
Selectively mutating CTCF-contacting nucleotides, which were identified by
methylation interference within the extended binding sites initially revealed by 
nuclease footprinting, abrogated the H19 DMD enhancer-blocking property. These
observations suggest that molecular mechanisms of genomic imprinting may use an
unusual ability of CTCF to interact with a diverse spectrum of variant target
sites, some of which include CpGs that are responsible for methylation-sensitive 
CTCF binding in vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 10899010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Curr Biol. 2000 Jun 15;10(12):R463-5.

Transcriptional control: imprinting insulation.

Wolffe AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sangamo Biosciences Inc, Point Richmond Tech Center, Richmond, CA 94804,USA.
awolffe@sangamo.com

Recent studies on the transcriptional regulation of two linked, imprinted genes, 
Igf2 and H19, have provided evidence for a novel mechanism of epigenetic control.
DNA methylation controls the activity of an insulator element located between the
two linked genes by regulating the binding of the zinc-finger protein CTCF.

PMID: 10873799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Nature. 2000 May 25;405(6785):486-9.

CTCF mediates methylation-sensitive enhancer-blocking activity at the H19/Igf2
locus.

Hark AT(1), Schoenherr CJ, Katz DJ, Ingram RS, Levorse JM, Tilghman SM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton
University, New Jersey 08544, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2000 May 25;405(6785):408-9.

The Insulin-like growth factor 2 (Igf2) and H19 genes are imprinted, resulting in
silencing of the maternal and paternal alleles, respectively. This event is
dependent upon an imprinted-control region two kilobases upstream of H19 (refs 1,
2). On the paternal chromosome this element is methylated and required for the
silencing of H19 (refs 2-4). On the maternal chromosome the region is
unmethylated and required for silencing of the Igf2 gene 90 kilobases upstream.
We have proposed that the unmethylated imprinted-control region acts as a
chromatin boundary that blocks the interaction of Igf2 with enhancers that lie 3'
of H19 (refs 5, 6). This enhancer-blocking activity would then be lost when the
region was methylated, thereby allowing expression of Igf2 paternally. Here we
show, using transgenic mice and tissue culture, that the unmethylated
imprinted-control regions from mouse and human H19 exhibit enhancer-blocking
activity. Furthermore, we show that CTCF, a zinc finger protein implicated in
vertebrate boundary function, binds to several sites in the unmethylated
imprinted-control region that are essential for enhancer blocking. Consistent
with our model, CTCF binding is abolished by DNA methylation. This is the first
example, to our knowledge, of a regulated chromatin boundary in vertebrates.

PMID: 10839547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Nature. 2000 May 25;405(6785):482-5.

Methylation of a CTCF-dependent boundary controls imprinted expression of the
Igf2 gene.

Bell AC(1), Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-0540, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2000 May 25;405(6785):408-9.

The expression of the insulin-like growth factor 2 (Igf2) and H19 genes is
imprinted. Although these neighbouring genes share an enhancer, H19 is expressed 
only from the maternal allele, and Igf2 only from the paternally inherited
allele. A region of paternal-specific methylation upstream of H19 appears to be
the site of an epigenetic mark that is required for the imprinting of these
genes. A deletion within this region results in loss of imprinting of both H19
and Igf2 (ref. 5). Here we show that this methylated region contains an element
that blocks enhancer activity. The activity of this element is dependent upon the
vertebrate enhancer-blocking protein CTCF. Methylation of CpGs within the
CTCF-binding sites eliminates binding of CTCF in vitro, and deletion of these
sites results in loss of enhancer-blocking activity in vivo, thereby allowing
gene expression. This CTCF-dependent enhancer-blocking element acts as an
insulator. We suggest that it controls imprinting of Igf2. The activity of this
insulator is restricted to the maternal allele by specific DNA methylation of the
paternal allele. Our results reveal that DNA methylation can control gene
expression by modulating enhancer access to the gene promoter through regulation 
of an enhancer boundary.

PMID: 10839546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Curr Biol. 2000 May 18;10(10):607-10.

Maternal-specific footprints at putative CTCF sites in the H19 imprinting control
region give evidence for insulator function.

Szabó P(1), Tang SH, Rentsendorj A, Pfeifer GP, Mann JR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte,
CA 91010-3011, USA. pszabo@coh.org

Parent-of-origin-specific expression of the mouse insulin-like growth factor 2
(Igf2) gene and the closely linked H19 gene are regulated by an intervening 2 kb 
imprinting control region (ICR), which displays parentspecific differential DNA
methylation [1] [2]. Four 21 bp repeats are embedded within the ICR and are
conserved in the putative ICR of human and rat Igf2 and H19, suggesting that the 
repeats have a function [3] [4]. Here, we report that prominent DNA footprints
were found in vivo on the unmethylated maternal ICR at all four 21 bp repeats,
demonstrating the presence of protein binding. The methylated paternal ICR
displayed no footprints. Significantly, the maternal-specific footprints were
localized to putative binding sites for CTCF, a highly conserved zinc-finger
DNA-binding protein with multiple roles in gene regulation including that of
chromatin insulator function [5] [6]. These results strongly suggest that the
maternal ICR functions as an insulator element in regulating mutually exclusive
expression of Igf2 and H19 in cis.

PMID: 10837224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jul 28;275(30):22978-85.

Plasma hyaluronan-binding protein is a serine protease.

Vostrov AA(1), Quitschke WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, State University of New York 
at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, New York 11794-8101, USA.

CTCF is an essential factor for optimal transcription from the amyloid
beta-protein precursor promoter. A proteolytic activity detected in bovine,
rabbit, horse, and human serum cleaves CTCF at three major sites, resulting in a 
modified mobility shift pattern of the fragments that retain DNA binding ability.
The protease was purified to electrophoretic homogeneity, partially sequenced,
and identified as the plasma hyaluronan-binding protein. The proteolytic activity
was selectively abolished by various serine protease inhibitors, including the
Kunitz-type protease inhibitor domain of amyloid beta-protein precursor.
Reduction with beta-mercaptoethanol showed that the 70-kDa protein consists of
two polypeptides with apparent molecular masses of 44 and 30 kDa. The serine
protease domain was localized to the 30-kDa polypeptide as determined by
[(3)H]diisopropylfluorophosphate binding.

PMID: 10816595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. EMBO J. 2000 May 15;19(10):2315-22.

Structural and functional conservation at the boundaries of the chicken
beta-globin domain.

Saitoh N(1), Bell AC, Recillas-Targa F, West AG, Simpson M, Pikaart M, Felsenfeld
G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0540, USA.

We show that the 3' boundary of the chicken beta-globin locus bears striking
structural similarities to the 5' boundary. In erythroid cells a clear transition
in DNase I sensitivity of chromatin at the 3' end of the locus is observed, the
location of this transition is marked by a constitutive DNase I hypersensitive
site (HS), and DNA spanning this site has the enhancer-blocking capacity of an
insulator. This HS contains a binding site for the transcription factor CTCF. As 
in the case of the 5' insulator, the CTCF site is both necessary and sufficient
for the enhancer-blocking activity of the 3' boundary. The position of this
insulator is consistent with our proposal that it may function to maintain the
distinct regulatory programs of the globin genes and their closely appended 3'
neighbor, an odorant receptor gene. We conclude that both boundaries of the
chicken beta-globin domain are capable of playing functionally similar roles and 
that the same protein is a necessary component of the molecular mechanism through
which these boundaries are defined.

PMCID: PMC384375
PMID: 10811622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Apr 15;28(8):1707-13.

Transcriptional repression by the insulator protein CTCF involves histone
deacetylases.

Lutz M(1), Burke LJ, Barreto G, Goeman F, Greb H, Arnold R, Schultheiss H, Brehm 
A, Kouzarides T, Lobanenkov V, Renkawitz R.

Author information: 
(1)Genetisches Institut der Justus-Liebig-Universität, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 58-62, 
35392 Giessen, Germany.

The highly conserved zinc-finger protein, CTCF, is a candidate tumor suppressor
protein that binds to highly divergent DNA sequences. CTCF has been connected to 
multiple functions in chromatin organization and gene regulation including
chromatin insulator activity and transcriptional enhancement and silencing. Here 
we show that CTCF harbors several autonomous repression domains. One of these
domains, the zinc-finger cluster, silences transcription in all cell types tested
and binds directly to the co-repressor SIN3A. Two distinct regions of SIN3A, the 
PAH3 domain and the extreme C-terminal region, bind independently to this
zinc-finger cluster. Analysis of nuclear extract from HeLa cells revealed that
CTCF is also capable of retaining functional histone deacetylase activity.
Furthermore, the ability of regions of CTCF to retain deacetylase activity
correlates with the ability to bind to SIN3A and to repress gene activity. We
suggest that CTCF driven repression is mediated in part by the recruitment of
histone deacetylase activity by SIN3A.

PMCID: PMC102824
PMID: 10734189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2000 Feb;17(1):13-5.

[The promoter sequence of human nitric-oxide-synthase gene: functional study].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang X(1), Chen J, Kaoru M, Wang X, Liu T, Lu X.

Author information: 
(1)The Medical School of Jamusi University, Jamusi, Heilongjiang, 154003 P.R.
China. XianFengZ@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: Endothelial nitric oxide synthase (ecNOS) catalyzes the NADPH and O(2)
to nitric oxide(NO). This study aimed at the regulation mechanism of the
transcription of ecNOS gene.
METHODS: The promoter regions of ecNOS gene were analyzed by gel mobility shift
assay and DNase I footprinting assay using nuclear extract from endothelial
cells.
RESULTS: Three regions were protected by protein/transcription-factors. One of
these regions, (-106 to -88) was demonstrated to be SP1 binding consensus
sequence which was extremely rich in GC content. The other two regions, (-79 to
-64) and (-58 to -44), covered the CTCF binding regions, but showed various
binding modes.
CONCLUSION: The protected regions are bound either with aggregated SP1/SP1- like 
proteins or with new transcription factor which have not been reported yet.

PMID: 10653901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Neurochem. 1999 Dec;73(6):2286-98.

CTCF is essential for up-regulating expression from the amyloid precursor protein
promoter during differentiation of primary hippocampal neurons.

Yang Y(1), Quitschke WW, Vostrov AA, Brewer GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Southern Illinois
University School of Medicine, Springfield 62794-9626, USA.

The transcriptional mechanism underlying amyloid precursor protein (APP)
regulation in primary neurons during development was investigated. We observed an
approximately threefold elevation of APP mRNA levels in differentiating rat
hippocampal neurons between day 1 and day 7 in culture and in rat brain
hippocampi between embryonic day 18 and postnatal day 3. When an APP promoter
construct extending to position -2,832 upstream from the main transcriptional
start site was transfected into primary rat hippocampal neurons, promoter
activity increased from day 1 until reaching a maximum on day 7 in culture. This 
increase in APP promoter activity was correlated more closely with the time
course of expression of the synaptic vesicle protein synaptophysin, an indicator 
of synaptogenesis, than with neurofilament accumulation, an indicator of
neuritogenesis. Transfection of 5' APP promoter deletions and internal block
mutations indicated that the CTCF binding domain designated APBbeta was the
primary contributor to the increase in APP promoter activity. Furthermore, the
binding of transcription factor CTCF to the APBbeta element increased
approximately fivefold between day 1 and day 7, whereas the binding of USF to the
APBalpha sequence increased only twofold. These results suggest that CTCF is
pivotal for the up-regulation of APP expression during synaptogenesis in primary 
neurons.

PMID: 10582586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Carcinogenesis. 1999 Nov;20(11):2189-92.

A novel sensitive method to detect frameshift mutations in exonic repeat
sequences of cancer-related genes.

Mironov N(1), Jansen LA, Zhu WB, Aguelon AM, Reguer G, Yamasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Multistage Carcinogenesis, International Agency for Research on
Cancer, 69372 Lyon Cedex 08, France. mironov@iarc.fr

We have investigated frameshift mutations in exonic repeats in the ATR, BRCA1,
BRCA2, PTCH, CTCF, Cx26, NuMa and TGFbetaRII genes, using human tumor samples
from stomach, esophagus, breast and skin and melanoma, as well as colon cancer
and endometrial cancer cell lines (125 samples in total). We developed a
sensitive method to detect mutations in the repeats, using the introduction of an
artificial restriction site into a repeat. The method detects a single mutant
among 10(3) normal genes. Thus, an alteration in a repeated sequence can be
detected unambiguously. The (A)(8) repeat of BRCA2 was found mutated in only two 
of five colon cell lines with microsatellite instability (MI(+)). The ATR gene
has an (A)(10) repeat which was altered in two of three MI(+) stomach cancer
samples and one of three MI(+) endometrial cell lines. The TGFbetaRII gene [with 
an (A)(10) repeat] had the maximal frequency of mutations: 10 out of 13 MI(+)
samples. At least one sample from all types of cancers, except melanomas, was
positive for TGFbetaRII gene mutations. No mutations were found in repeats in the
BRCA1, PTCH, CTCF, NuMA and Cx26 genes in any types of tumors examined. In
conclusion, our study indicates that repeats were altered only in MI(+) cells and
that the mutation frequencies in the genes studied differ among tumor types.
Based on these results, we discuss meaningful and meaningless alterations in
exonic repeats.

PMID: 10545425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Biol Chem. 1999 Sep 17;274(38):27092-8.

Negative transcriptional regulation mediated by thyroid hormone response element 
144 requires binding of the multivalent factor CTCF to a novel target DNA
sequence.

Awad TA(1), Bigler J, Ulmer JE, Hu YJ, Moore JM, Lutz M, Neiman PE, Collins SJ,
Renkawitz R, Lobanenkov VV, Filippova GN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98109-1024, USA.

DNA target sites for a "multivalent" 11-zinc-finger CCTC-binding factor (CTCF)
are unusually long ( approximately 50 base pairs) and remarkably different. In
conjunction with the thyroid receptor (TR), CTCF binding to the lysozyme gene
transcriptional silencer mediates the thyroid hormone response element
(TRE)-dependent transcriptional repression. We tested whether other TREs, which
in addition to the presence of a TR binding site require neighboring sequences
for transcriptional function, might also contain a previously unrecognized
binding site(s) for CTCF. One such candidate DNA region, previously isolated by
Bigler and Eisenman (Bigler, J., and Eisenman, R. N. (1995) EMBO J. 14,
5710-5723), is the TRE-containing genomic element 144. We have identified a new
CTCF target sequence that is adjacent to the TR binding site within the 144
fragment. Comparison of CTCF recognition nucleotides in the lysozyme silencer and
in the 144 sequences revealed both similarities and differences. Several
C-terminal CTCF zinc fingers contribute differently to binding each of these
sequences. Mutations that eliminate CTCF binding impair 144-mediated negative
transcriptional regulation. Thus, the 144 element provides an additional example 
of a functionally significant composite "TRE plus CTCF binding site" regulatory
element suggesting an important role for CTCF in cooperation with the
steroid/thyroid superfamily of nuclear receptors to mediate TRE-dependent
transcriptional repression.

PMID: 10480923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cell. 1999 Aug 6;98(3):387-96.

The protein CTCF is required for the enhancer blocking activity of vertebrate
insulators.

Bell AC(1), West AG, Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-0540, USA.

An insulator is a DNA sequence that can act as a barrier to the influences of
neighboring cis-acting elements, preventing gene activation, for example, when
located between an enhancer and a promoter. We have identified a 42 bp fragment
of the chicken beta-globin insulator that is both necessary and sufficient for
enhancer blocking activity in human cells. We show that this sequence is the
binding site for CTCF, a previously identified eleven-zinc finger DNA-binding
protein that is highly conserved in vertebrates. CTCF sites are present in all of
the vertebrate enhancer-blocking elements we have examined. We suggest that
directional enhancer blocking by CTCF is a conserved component of gene regulation
in vertebrates.

PMID: 10458613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. FEBS Lett. 1999 Feb 5;444(1):5-10.

Differential expression and phosphorylation of CTCF, a c-myc transcriptional
regulator, during differentiation of human myeloid cells.

Delgado MD(1), Chernukhin IV, Bigas A, Klenova EM, León J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de
Cantabria, Santander, Spain.

CTCF is a transcriptional repressor of the c-myc gene. Although CTCF has been
characterized in some detail, there is very little information about the
regulation of CTCF activity. Therefore we investigated CTCF expression and
phosphorylation during induced differentiation of human myeloid leukemia cells.
We found that: (i) both CTCF mRNA and protein are down-regulated during terminal 
differentiation in most cell lines tested; (ii) CTCF down-regulation is retarded 
and less pronounced than that of c-myc; (iii) CTCF protein is differentially
phosphorylated and the phosphorylation profiles depend on the differentiation
pathway. We concluded that CTCF expression and activity is controlled at
transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels.

PMID: 10037138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 9;273(41):26571-9.

Characterization of the chicken CTCF genomic locus, and initial study of the cell
cycle-regulated promoter of the gene.

Klenova EM(1), Fagerlie S, Filippova GN, Kretzner L, Goodwin GH, Loring G, Neiman
PE, Lobanenkov VV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QU, United
Kingdom.

CTCF is a multifunctional transcription factor encoded by a novel candidate tumor
suppressor gene (Filippova, G. N., Lindblom, A., Meinke, L. J., Klenova, E. M.,
Neiman, P. E., Collins, S. J., Doggett, N. D., and Lobanenkov, V. V. (1998) Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 22, 26-36). We characterized genomic organization of the
chicken CTCF (chCTCF) gene, and studied the chCTCF promoter. Genomic locus of
chCTCF contains a GC-rich untranslated exon separated from seven coding exons by 
a long intron. The 2-kilobase pair region upstream of the major transcription
start site contains a CpG island marked by a "Not-knot" that includes sequence
motifs characteristic of a TATA-less promoter of housekeeping genes. When fused
upstream of a reporter chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene, it acts as a
strong transcriptional promoter in transient transfection experiments. The
minimal 180-base pair chCTCF promoter region that is fully sufficient to confer
high level transcriptional activity to the reporter contains high affinity
binding element for the transcription factor YY1. This element is strictly
conserved in chicken, mouse, and human CTCF genes. Mutations in the core
nucleotides of the YY1 element reduce transcriptional activity of the minimal
chCTCF promoter, indicating that the conserved YY1-binding sequence is critical
for transcriptional regulation of vertebrate CTCF genes. We also noted in the
chCTCF promoter several elements previously characterized in cell cycle-regulated
genes, including the "cell cycle-dependent element" and "cell cycle gene homology
region" motifs shown to be important for S/G2-specific up-regulation of cdc25C,
cdc2, cyclin A, and Plk (polo-like kinase) gene promoters. Presence of the cell
cycle-dependent element/cell cycle gene homology region element suggested that
chCTCF expression may be cell cycle-regulated. We show that both levels of the
endogenous chCTCF mRNA, and the activity of the stably transfected chCTCF
promoter constructs, increase in S/G2 cells.

PMID: 9756895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1998 May;22(1):26-36.

A widely expressed transcription factor with multiple DNA sequence specificity,
CTCF, is localized at chromosome segment 16q22.1 within one of the smallest
regions of overlap for common deletions in breast and prostate cancers.

Filippova GN(1), Lindblom A, Meincke LJ, Klenova EM, Neiman PE, Collins SJ,
Doggett NA, Lobanenkov VV.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
Washington 98109, USA.

The cellular protooncogene MYC encodes a nuclear transcription factor that is
involved in regulating important cellular functions, including cell cycle
progression, differentiation, and apoptosis. Dysregulated MYC expression appears 
critical to the development of various types of malignancies, and thus factors
involved in regulating MYC expression may also play a key role in the
pathogenesis of certain cancers. We have cloned one such MYC regulatory factor,
termed CTCF, which is a highly evolutionarily conserved-11-zinc finger
transcriptional factor possessing multiple DNA sequence specificity. CTCF binds
to a number of important regulatory regions within the 5' noncoding sequence of
the human MYC oncogene, and it can regulate its transcription in several
experimental systems. CTCF mRNA is expressed in cells of multiple different
lineages. Enforced ectopic expression of CTCF inhibits cell growth in culture.
Southern blot analyses and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with normal 
human metaphase chromosomes showed that the human CTCF is a single-copy gene
situated at chromosome locus 16q22. Cytogenetic studies have pointed out that
chromosome abnormalities (deletions) at this locus frequently occur in many
different human malignancies, suggesting the presence of one or more tumor
suppressor genes in the region. To narrow down their localization, several loss
of heterozygosity (LOH) studies of chromosome arm 16q in sporadic breast and
prostate cancers have been carried out to define the most recurrent and smallest 
region(s) of overlap (SRO) for commonly deleted chromosome arm 16q material. For 
CTCF to be considered as a candidate tumor suppressor gene associated with
tumorigenesis, it should localize within one of the SROs at 16q. Fine-mapping of 
CTCF has enabled us to assign the CTCF gene to about a 2 centiMorgan (cM)
interval of 16q22.1 between the somatic cell hybrid breakpoints CY130(D) and CY4,
which is between markers D16S186 (16AC16-101) and D16S496 (AFM214zg5). This
relatively small region, containing the CTCF gene, overlaps the most frequently
observed SROs for common chromosomal deletions found in sporadic breast and
prostate tumors. In one of four analyzed paired DNA samples from primary breast
cancer patients, we have detected a tumor-specific rearrangement of CTCF exons
encoding the 11-zinc-finger domain. Therefore, taken together with other CTCF
properties, localization of CTCF to a narrow cancer-associated chromosome region 
suggests that CTCF is a novel candidate tumor suppressor gene at 16q22.1.

PMID: 9591631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Biol Chem. 1997 Dec 26;272(52):33353-9.

The zinc finger protein CTCF binds to the APBbeta domain of the amyloid
beta-protein precursor promoter. Evidence for a role in transcriptional
activation.

Vostrov AA(1), Quitschke WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, State University of New York,
Stony Brook, New York 11794-8101, USA.

The promoter of the amyloid beta-protein precursor (APP) gene directs high levels
of cell type-specific transcription with 94 base pairs 5' to the main
transcriptional start site. An essential activator domain in this proximal APP
promoter is a nuclear factor binding site designated as APBbeta. The recognition 
domain for the APBbeta binding factor is located between position -93 and -82
relative to the main transcriptional start site. The nuclear factor that binds to
the APBbeta site was partially purified by multiple steps of ion exchange and
hydroxyapatite chromatography. Based on UV cross-linking results, a protein with 
an apparent molecular mass of 140 kDa was selected as the putative APBbeta
binding protein. After the final purification step consisting of preparative
SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, partial peptide sequences were obtained
that completely matched the transcriptional factor CTCF. This protein is a known 
regulator of c-myc and lysozyme gene expression, and it binds to a variety of
diverse DNA sequences. The binding of CTCF to the APBbeta domain was further
established by competition with CTCF binding oligonucleotides in mobility shift
electrophoresis. The identity was also confirmed by the observation that the
APBbeta binding factor is recognized by antibodies against C- and N-terminal
sequences of CTCF. In addition, oligonucleotide competition during in vitro
transcription affirmed that CTCF acts as a transcriptional activator in the APP
gene promoter.

PMID: 9407128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Mar;17(3):1281-8.

Negative protein 1, which is required for function of the chicken lysozyme gene
silencer in conjunction with hormone receptors, is identical to the multivalent
zinc finger repressor CTCF.

Burcin M(1), Arnold R, Lutz M, Kaiser B, Runge D, Lottspeich F, Filippova GN,
Lobanenkov VV, Renkawitz R.

Author information: 
(1)Genetisches Institut der Justus-Liebig-Universität, Giessen, Germany.

The transcriptional repressor negative protein 1 (NeP1) binds specifically to the
F1 element of the chicken lysozyme gene silencer and mediates synergistic
repression by v-ERBA, thyroid hormone receptor, or retinoic acid receptor.
Another protein, CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), specifically binds to 50-bp-long
sequences that contain repetitive CCCTC elements in the vicinity of vertebrate
c-myc genes. Previously cloned chicken, mouse, and human CTCF cDNAs encode a
highly conserved 11-Zn-finger protein. Here, NeP1 was purified and DNA bases
critical for NeP1-F1 interaction were determined. NeP1 is found to bind a 50-bp
stretch of nucleotides without any obvious sequence similarity to known CTCF
binding sequences. Despite this remarkable difference, these two proteins are
identical. They have the same molecular weight, and NeP1 contains peptide
sequences which are identical to sequences in CTCF. Moreover, NeP1 and CTCF
specifically recognize each other's binding DNA sequence and induce identical
conformational alterations in the F1 DNA. Therefore, we propose to replace the
name NeP1 with CTCF. To analyze the puzzling sequence divergence in CTCF binding 
sites, we studied the DNA binding of 12 CTCF deletions with serially truncated Zn
fingers. While fingers 4 to 11 are indispensable for CTCF binding to the human
c-myc P2 promoter site A, a completely different combination of fingers, namely, 
1 to 8 or 5 to 11, was sufficient to bind the lysozyme silencer site F1. Thus,
CTCF is a true multivalent factor with multiple repressive functions and multiple
sequence specificities.

PMCID: PMC231853
PMID: 9032255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Feb 1;25(3):466-74.

Molecular weight abnormalities of the CTCF transcription factor: CTCF migrates
aberrantly in SDS-PAGE and the size of the expressed protein is affected by the
UTRs and sequences within the coding region of the CTCF gene.

Klenova EM(1), Nicolas RH, U S, Carne AF, Lee RE, Lobanenkov VV, Goodwin GH.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Unit, Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks
Road, Oxford OX1 3QU, UK. klenovae@bioch.ox.ac.uk

CTCF belongs to the Zn finger transcription factors family and binds to the
promoter region of c-myc. CTCF is highly conserved between species, ubiquitous
and localised in nuclei. The endogenous CTCF migrates as a 130 kDa (CTCF-130)
protein on SDS-PAGE, however, the open reading frame (ORF) of the CTCF cDNA
encodes only a 82 kDa protein (CTCF-82). In the present study we investigate this
phenomenon and show with mass-spectra analysis that this occurs due to aberrant
mobility of the CTCF protein. Another paradox is that our original cDNA, composed
of the ORF and 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR), produces a protein with the
apparent molecular weight of 70 kDa (CTCF-70). This paradox has been found to be 
an effect of the UTRs and sequences within the coding region of the CTCF gene
resulting in C-terminal truncation of CTCF-130. The potential attenuator has been
identified and point-mutated. This restored the electrophoretic mobility of the
CTCF protein to 130 kDa. CTCF-70, the aberrantly migrating CTCF N-terminus per
se, is also detected in some cell types and therefore may have some biological
implications. In particular, CTCF-70 interferes with CTCF-130 normal function,
enhancing transactivation induced by CTCF-130 in COS6 cells. The mechanism of
CTCF-70 action and other possible functions of CTCF-70 are discussed.

PMCID: PMC146483
PMID: 9016583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Jul 15;24(14):2640-7.

DNA bending by the silencer protein NeP1 is modulated by TR and RXR.

Arnold R(1), Burcin M, Kaiser B, Muller M, Renkawitz R.

Author information: 
(1)Genetisches Institut, Justus-Liebig-Universität, Giessen, Germany.

NeP1 binds to the F1 silencer element of the chicken lysozyme gene and, in the
presence of TR, v-ERBA or RAR, synergistically represses transcriptional
activity. This repression involves a silencing mechanism acting independently of 
the relative promoter position. Here we show that NeP1 alone can induce a
significant directed bend on DNA. The chicken homologue of human NeP1, CTCF,
shows identical binding and bending properties. In contrast, the isolated DNA
binding domain of CTCF efficiently binds DNA, but fails to confer bending.
Similarly, the TR-RXR hetero- or homodimer, binding adjacent to NeP1 at the F2
sequence, do not show significant DNA bending. The binding of the T3 ligand to TR
changes neither the magnitude nor the direction of the NeP1 induced bend.
However, when all factors are bound simultaneously as a quaternary complex, the
TR-RXR heterodimer changes the location of the bend center, the flexure angle and
the bending direction.

PMCID: PMC146006
PMID: 8758989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jun;16(6):2802-13.

An exceptionally conserved transcriptional repressor, CTCF, employs different
combinations of zinc fingers to bind diverged promoter sequences of avian and
mammalian c-myc oncogenes.

Filippova GN(1), Fagerlie S, Klenova EM, Myers C, Dehner Y, Goodwin G, Neiman PE,
Collins SJ, Lobanenkov VV.

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington 98104, USA.

We have isolated and analyzed human CTCF cDNA clones and show here that the
ubiquitously expressed 11-zinc-finger factor CTCF is an exceptionally highly
conserved protein displaying 93% identity between avian and human amino acid
sequences. It binds specifically to regulatory sequences in the promoter-proximal
regions of chicken, mouse, and human c-myc oncogenes. CTCF contains two
transcription repressor domains transferable to a heterologous DNA binding
domain. One CTCF binding site, conserved in mouse and human c-myc genes, is found
immediately downstream of the major P2 promoter at a sequence which maps
precisely within the region of RNA polymerase II pausing and release. Gel shift
assays of nuclear extracts from mouse and human cells show that CTCF is the
predominant factor binding to this sequence. Mutational analysis of the
P2-proximal CTCF binding site and transient-cotransfection experiments
demonstrate that CTCF is a transcriptional repressor of the human c-myc gene.
Although there is 100% sequence identity in the DNA binding domains of the avian 
and human CTCF proteins, the regulatory sequences recognized by CTCF in chicken
and human c-myc promoters are clearly diverged. Mutating the contact nucleotides 
confirms that CTCF binding to the human c-myc P2 promoter requires a number of
unique contact DNA bases that are absent in the chicken c-myc CTCF binding site. 
Moreover, proteolytic-protection assays indicate that several more CTCF Zn
fingers are involved in contacting the human CTCF binding site than the chicken
site. Gel shift assays utilizing successively deleted Zn finger domains indicate 
that CTCF Zn fingers 2 to 7 are involved in binding to the chicken c-myc
promoter, while fingers 3 to 11 mediate CTCF binding to the human promoter. This 
flexibility in Zn finger usage reveals CTCF to be a unique "multivalent"
transcriptional factor and provides the first feasible explanation of how certain
homologous genes (i.e., c-myc) of different vertebrate species are regulated by
the same factor and maintain similar expression patterns despite significant
promoter sequence divergence.

PMCID: PMC231272
PMID: 8649389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jul 29;269(30):19410-9.

Functional characterization of the promoter for the gene encoding human
eosinophil peroxidase.

Yamaguchi Y(1), Zhang DE, Sun Z, Albee EA, Nagata S, Tenen DG, Ackerman SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02215.

The molecular basis for commitment of progenitors to the eosinophil lineage and
mechanisms by which eosinophil-specific genes are expressed and regulated during 
differentiation is unknown. Expression of eosinophil peroxidase (EPO) is
restricted to the eosinophil lineage. To understand the mechanisms involved in
transcriptional regulation of EPO gene expression, we clone the region of the EPO
gene upstream of the transcriptional start site and analyzed the cis-acting
elements required for EPO promoter activity in an eosinophil-inducible leukemic
cell line, HL-60-C15. The 5'-flanking region of the EPO gene containing 1.5
kilobases of sequence upstream of the transcriptional start site was subcloned
into the promoterless pXP2-luciferase vector. The EPO-pXP2 construct and 5'
deletion mutants were electroporated into HL-60-C15 cells and luciferase reporter
activity assessed. The -1.5-kilobase EPO-pXP2 promoter construct reproducibly
expressed > 120-fold more luciferase activity than did promoterless pXP2, and a
12-fold (90%) decrease in promoter activity was obtained when sequences between
-122 and -45 base pairs (bp) were deleted. The specificity of the EPO promoter
for the eosinophil lineage was analyzed by transfecting the EPO-pXP2 constructs
and deletion mutants into HL-60-C15 cells and the parental HL-60 line; EPO
promoter activity was 8-10-fold less in the HL-60 parental line, suggesting
lineage specific elements in the -122 to -45 bp region. To further characterize
regulatory sequences important for promoter activity, we performed
linker-scanning analysis on the -122 to -45 bp region and identified a number of 
positively and negatively acting elements in the promoter. DNase I footprinting
was performed with HL-60-C15, HL-60, and HeLa nuclear extracts to identify
nuclear proteins that may bind to the functional elements; these experiments
identified three protected regions of the EPO promoter which correspond to the
functional segments defined by linker-scanning analysis and which contain
consensus, potential binding sites for Egr-1, H4TF-1, PuF, CTCF, UBP-1, and GaEII
transcription factors. Further study of EPO promoter regulation should elucidate 
unique transcriptional features of eosinophil gene regulation in granulocyte
development.

PMID: 8034708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Dec;13(12):7612-24.

CTCF, a conserved nuclear factor required for optimal transcriptional activity of
the chicken c-myc gene, is an 11-Zn-finger protein differentially expressed in
multiple forms.

Klenova EM(1), Nicolas RH, Paterson HF, Carne AF, Heath CM, Goodwin GH, Neiman
PE, Lobanenkov VV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Carcinogenesis, Russian Cancer Research Center, Moscow.

A novel sequence-specific DNA-binding protein, CTCF, which interacts with the
chicken c-myc gene promoter, has been identified and partially characterized (V. 
V. Lobanenkov, R. H. Nicolas, V. V. Adler, H. Paterson, E. M. Klenova, A. V.
Polotskaja, and G. H. Goodwin, Oncogene 5:1743-1753, 1990). In order to test
directly whether binding of CTCF to one specific DNA region of the c-myc promoter
is important for chicken c-myc transcription, we have determined which
nucleotides within this GC-rich region are responsible for recognition of
overlapping sites by CTCF and Sp1-like proteins. Using missing-contact analysis
of all four nucleotides in both DNA strands and homogeneous CTCF protein purified
by sequence-specific chromatography, we have identified three sets of nucleotides
which contact either CTCF or two Sp1-like proteins binding within the same DNA
region. Specific mutations of 3 of 15 purines required for CTCF binding were
designed to eliminate binding of CTCF without altering the binding of other
proteins. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay of nuclear extracts showed that
the mutant DNA sequence did not bind CTCF but did bind two Sp1-like proteins.
When introduced into a 3.3-kbp-long 5'-flanking noncoding c-myc sequence fused to
a reporter CAT gene, the same mutation of the CTCF binding site resulted in 10-
and 3-fold reductions, respectively, of transcription in two different (erythroid
and myeloid) stably transfected chicken cell lines. Isolation and analysis of the
CTCF cDNA encoding an 82-kDa form of CTCF protein shows that DNA-binding domain
of CTCF is composed of 11 Zn fingers: 10 are of C2H2 class, and 1 is of C2HC
class. CTCF was found to be abundant and conserved in cells of vertebrate
species. We detected six major nuclear forms of CTCF protein differentially
expressed in different chicken cell lines and tissues. We conclude that isoforms 
of 11-Zn-finger factor CTCF which are present in chicken hematopoietic HD3 and
BM2 cells can act as a positive regulator of the chicken c-myc gene
transcription. Possible functions of other CTCF forms are discussed.

PMCID: PMC364833
PMID: 8246978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mol Biol (Mosk). 1991 Jul-Aug;25(4):1013-23.

[Regulatory protein factor CTCF interacts with a segment of the chicken c-myc
oncogene promotor, capable of changing to a noncanonical conformation].

[Article in Russian]

Tevosian SG, Gromova ES, Adler VV, Lobanenkov VV.

To identify the regions in the chicken c-myc promoter that are necessary for the 
binding of a nuclear trans-acting factor CTCF--the potential oncogene
activator--we used a synthetic analog of the natural binding site that contains
three correctly spaced CCCTC-repeats that are known to be involved in
CTCF-binding. Gel retardation experiments failed to detect any CTCF-binding
activity with this synthetic site. We conclude that GC-transversions made in the 
regions presumed to be invalid, do in fact interfere with the protein binding.
The secondary structure analysis with S1-nuclease shows the presence of an
unusual DNA conformation of the CTCF-binding site in the supercoiled plasmids,
that can not be detected with the artificial construction. The precise mapping of
S1 nuclease cleavage reveals several hypersensitive sites in the CCCTC-zone.
Thus, an altered secondary structure may be functionally important for the
protein recognition in vivo.

PMID: 1795697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Oncogene. 1990 Dec;5(12):1743-53.

A novel sequence-specific DNA binding protein which interacts with three
regularly spaced direct repeats of the CCCTC-motif in the 5'-flanking sequence of
the chicken c-myc gene.

Lobanenkov VV(1), Nicolas RH, Adler VV, Paterson H, Klenova EM, Polotskaja AV,
Goodwin GH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Carcinogenesis, All-Union Cancer Research Center, Moscow, USSR.

The chicken c-myc 5'-flanking sequence has previously been shown to bind multiple
proteins present in undifferentiated and differentiated red blood cells. In this 
report the protein binding to one specific region within a hypersensitive site
approximately 200 base pairs upstream of the start of transcription has been
analysed in detail. Using a combination of a modified agarose gel retardation
assay with O-phenanthroline-copper footprinting in situ, missing contact point
and methylation interference techniques, two proteins were found to bind to
overlapping sequences within 180-230 bp upstream of the start of transcription.
One protein resembles the transcription factor Sp1, the other is a protein which 
binds to three regularly spaced repeats of the core sequence CCCTC. This
CCCTC-binding factor was termed CTCF. It requires additional sequences outside
the three recognition motifs for tight binding. CTCF was purified to near
homogeneity by sequence-specific DNA chromatography. The approximate molecular
weight of the CTCF was estimated to be 130,000. Removal of 110 bp sequence
binding both CTCF and Sp1-like proteins leads to a 4 to 8-fold increase in
transcription of stably transfected c-myc fusion constructs in chicken embryonic 
fibroblasts, suggesting that the CTCF is likely to be one of multiple nuclear
factors involved in the transcriptional regulation of the chicken c-myc gene.

PMID: 2284094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


