
1. Hepatology. 2016 Mar 26. doi: 10.1002/hep.28573. [Epub ahead of print]

MicroRNA-122 Regulates Polyploidization in the Murine Liver.

Hsu SH(1), Delgado ER(1), Otero PA(1), Teng KY(2), Kutay H(2), Meehan KM(1),
Moroney JB(1), Monga JK(1), Hand NJ(3), Friedman JR(3), Ghoshal K(2), Duncan
AW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine,
University of Pittsburgh, 450 Technology Drive, Suite 300, Pittsburgh, PA, 15219.
(2)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University, 646C MRF Bldg., 420 W.
12th Ave., Columbus, OH, 43210. (3)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research
Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and
Nutrition. 3615 Civic Center Blvd., Philadelphia, PA, 19104.

A defining feature of the mammalian liver is polyploidy, a numerical change in
the entire complement of chromosomes. The first step of polyploidization involves
cell division with failed cytokinesis. Although polyploidy is common, affecting
~90% of hepatocytes in mice and 50% in humans, the specialized role played by
polyploid cells in liver homeostasis and disease remains poorly understood. The
goal of this study was to identify novel signals that regulate polyploidization, 
and we focused on microRNAs (miRNAs). First, to test whether miRNAs could
regulate hepatic polyploidy we examined livers from Dicer1 liver-specific
knockout mice, which are devoid of mature miRNAs. Loss of miRNAs resulted in a
3-fold reduction in binucleate hepatocytes, indicating that miRNAs regulate
polyploidization. Secondly, we surveyed age-dependent expression of miRNAs in
wild-type mice and identified a subset of miRNAs, including miR-122, that is
differentially expressed at 2-3 weeks, a period when extensive polyploidization
occurs. Next, we examined Mir122 knockout mice and observed profound, life-long
depletion of polyploid hepatocytes, proving that miR-122 is required for complete
hepatic polyploidization. Moreover, the polyploidy defect in Mir122 knockout mice
was ameliorated by adenovirus-mediated over-expression of miR-122, underscoring
the critical role miR-122 plays in polyploidization. Finally, we identified
direct targets of miR-122 (Cux1, Rhoa, Iqgap1, Mapre1, Nedd4l and Slc25a34) that 
regulate cytokinesis. Inhibition of each target induced cytokinesis failure and
promoted hepatic binucleation.CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrate that miR-122 is
both necessary and sufficient in liver polyploidization. Among the different
signals that have been associated with hepatic polyploidy, miR-122 is the first
liver-specific signal identified. These studies will serve as the foundation for 
future work investigating miR-122 in liver maturation, homeostasis and disease.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2016 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 27016325  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Cell Adh Migr. 2016 Mar 3:0. [Epub ahead of print]

Developmental role of the cell adhesion molecule Contactin-6 in the cerebral
cortex and hippocampus.

Zuko A(1), Oguro-Ando A(1), Van Dijk R(1), Gregorio-Jordan S(1), Van Der Zwaag
B(2), Burbach JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, Department of Translational Neuroscience ,
University Medical Center Utrecht , Utrecht , The Netherlands. (2)b Department of
Genetics , University Medical Center Utrecht , Utrecht , The Netherlands.

The gene encoding the neural cell adhesion molecule Contactin-6 (Cntn6 a.k.a.
NB-3) has been implicated as an autism risk gene, suggesting that its mutation is
deleterious to brain development. Due to its GPI-anchoring at Cntn6 may exert
cell adhesion/receptor functions in complex with other membrane proteins, or
serve as a ligand. We aimed to uncover novel phenotypes related to Cntn6
functions during development in the cerebral cortex of adult Cntn6(-/-) mice. We 
first determined Cntn6 protein and mRNA expression in the cortex, thalamic nuclei
and the hippocampus at P14, which decreased specifically in the cortex at adult
stages. Neuroanatomical analysis demonstrated a significant decrease of Cux1+
projection neurons in layers II-IV and an increase of FoxP2+ projection neurons
in layer VI in the visual cortex of adult Cntn6(-/-) mice compared to wild-type
controls. Furthermore, the number of parvalbumin+ (PV) interneurons was decreased
in Cntn6(-/-) mice, while the amount of NPY+ interneurons remained unchanged. In 
the hippocampus the delineation and outgrowth of mossy fibers remained largely
unchanged, except for the observation of a larger suprapyramidal bundle. The
observed abnormalities in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus of Cntn6(-/-) mice 
suggests that Cntn6 serves developmental functions involving cell survival,
migration and fasciculation. Furthermore, hese data suggest that Cntn6 engages in
both trans- and cis-interactions and may be involved in larger protein
interaction networks.

PMID: 26939565  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Feb 23;113(8):2146-51. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1522658112. Epub 2016 Feb 8.

Adaptive methylation regulation of p53 pathway in sympatric speciation of blind
mole rats, Spalax.

Zhao Y(1), Tang JW(2), Yang Z(2), Cao YB(3), Ren JL(2), Ben-Abu Y(4), Li K(5),
Chen XQ(6), Du JZ(6), Nevo E(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurobiology and Physiology, Department of Basic Medical Sciences,
School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China; Key Laboratory
of Medical Neurobiology of the Ministry of Health, Hangzhou 310058, China; Key
Laboratory of Neuroscience of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou 310058, China;
Institute of Evolution, University of Haifa, Haifa 3498838, Israel; (2)Division
of Neurobiology and Physiology, Department of Basic Medical Sciences, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China; (3)Division of
Neurobiology and Physiology, Department of Basic Medical Sciences, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China; Division of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Department of Biotechnology, College of Chemistry and Life
Science, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua 321004, China; (4)Projects and
Physics Section, Sapir Academic College, D.N. Hof Ashkelon 79165, Israel;
(5)Institute of Evolution, University of Haifa, Haifa 3498838, Israel; Institute 
of Apicultural Research, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,Beijing 100093,
China. (6)Division of Neurobiology and Physiology, Department of Basic Medical
Sciences, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China; Key
Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology of the Ministry of Health, Hangzhou 310058,
China; Key Laboratory of Neuroscience of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou 310058,
China; dujz@zju.edu.cn nevo@research.haifa.ac.il chewyg@zju.edu.cn. (7)Institute 
of Evolution, University of Haifa, Haifa 3498838, Israel; dujz@zju.edu.cn
nevo@research.haifa.ac.il chewyg@zju.edu.cn.

Epigenetic modifications play significant roles in adaptive evolution. The tumor 
suppressor p53, well known for controlling cell fate and maintaining genomic
stability, is much less known as a master gene in environmental adaptation
involving methylation modifications. The blind subterranean mole rat Spalax
eherenbergi superspecies in Israel consists of four species that speciated
peripatrically. Remarkably, the northern Galilee species Spalax galili (2n = 52) 
underwent adaptive ecological sympatric speciation, caused by the sharply
divergent chalk and basalt ecologies. This was demonstrated by mitochondrial and 
nuclear genomic evidence. Here we show that the expression patterns of the p53
regulatory pathway diversified between the abutting sympatric populations of S.
galili in sharply divergent chalk-basalt ecologies. We identified higher
methylation on several sites of the p53 promoter in the population living in
chalk soil (chalk population). Site mutagenesis showed that methylation on these 
sites linked to the transcriptional repression of p53 involving Cut-Like Homeobox
1 (Cux1), paired box 4 (Pax 4), Pax 6, and activator protein 1 (AP-1). Diverse
expression levels of p53 between the incipiently sympatrically speciating
chalk-basalt abutting populations of S. galili selectively affected cell-cycle
arrest but not apoptosis. We hypothesize that methylation modification of p53 has
adaptively shifted in supervising its target genes during sympatric speciation of
S. galili to cope with the contrasting environmental stresses of the abutting
divergent chalk-basalt ecologies.

PMCID: PMC4776458 [Available on 2016-08-23]
PMID: 26858405  [PubMed - in process]


4. Gene. 2016 May 1;581(2):152-60. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.01.036. Epub 2016 Jan
23.

RNA-sequencing study of peripheral blood monocytes in chronic periodontitis.

Liu YZ(1), Maney P(2), Puri J(3), Zhou Y(4), Baddoo M(5), Strong M(5), Wang
YP(6), Flemington E(5), Deng HW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Genomics and Bioinformatics, Dept. of Biostatistics and
Bioinformatics, Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, 
New Orleans, LA, United States. Electronic address: yliu8@tulane.edu. (2)Dept. of
Periodontics, School of Dentistry, Louisiana State University Health Sciences
Center, New Orleans, LA, United States. Electronic address: pmaney@lsuhsc.edu.
(3)Dept. of Periodontics, School of Dentistry, Louisiana State University Health 
Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA, United States. (4)Center of Genomics and
Bioinformatics, Dept. of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Tulane University
School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, LA, United States.
(5)Tulane Cancer Center, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA,
United States. (6)Dept. of Biomedical Engineering, Tulane University School of
Science and Engineering, United States.

BACKGROUND: Monocytes are an important cell type in chronic periodontitis (CP) by
interacting with oral bacteria and mediating host immune response. The aim of
this study was to reveal new functional genes and pathways for CP at monocyte
transcriptomic level.
METHODS: We performed an RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) study of peripheral blood
monocytes (PBMs) in 5 non-smoking moderate to severe CP (case) individuals vs. 5 
controls. We took advantage of a microarray study of periodontitis to support our
findings. We also performed pathway-based analysis on the identified
differentially expressed (DEx) transcripts/isoforms using DAVID (Database for
Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery).
RESULTS: Through differential expression analyses at both whole gene (or whole
non-coding RNA) and isoform levels, we identified 380 DEx transcripts and 5955
DEx isoforms with a PPEE (posterior probability of equal expression) of <0.05.
Pervasive up-regulation of transcripts at isoform level in CP vs. control
individuals was observed, suggesting a more functionally active monocyte
transcriptome for CP. By comparing with the microarray dataset, we identified
several CP-associated novel genes (e.g., FACR and CUX1) that have functions to
interact with invading microorganisms or enhance TNF production on
lipopolysaccharide stimulation. DAVID analysis of both the RNA-seq and the
microarray datasets leads to converging evidence supporting "endocytosis",
"cytokine production" and "apoptosis" as significant biological processes in CP.
CONCLUSIONS: As the first RNA-seq study of PBMs for CP, this study provided novel
findings at both gene (e.g., FCAR and CUX1) and biological process level. The
findings will contribute to better understanding of CP disease mechanisms.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4767619 [Available on 2017-05-01]
PMID: 26812355  [PubMed - in process]


5. Neuron. 2016 Feb 3;89(3):494-506. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.12.020. Epub 2016
Jan 21.

Cux1 Enables Interhemispheric Connections of Layer II/III Neurons by Regulating
Kv1-Dependent Firing.

Rodríguez-Tornos FM(1), Briz CG(1), Weiss LA(1), Sebastián-Serrano A(1), Ares
S(2), Navarrete M(3), Frangeul L(4), Galazo M(5), Jabaudon D(4), Esteban JA(3),
Nieto M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CNB-CSIC), Campus de Cantoblanco, Darwin 3, 
28049 Madrid, Spain. (2)Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CNB-CSIC), Campus de
Cantoblanco, Darwin 3, 28049 Madrid, Spain; Departamento de Matemáticas
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Grupo Interdisciplinar de Sistemas Complejos
(GISC), 28911 Leganés, Madrid, Spain. (3)Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo
Ochoa," Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC-UAM), 28049 Madrid,
Spain. (4)Department of Basic Neurosciences, University of Geneva, 1211 Geneva 4,
Switzerland. (5)HSCRB Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. (6)Centro
Nacional de Biotecnología (CNB-CSIC), Campus de Cantoblanco, Darwin 3, 28049
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: mnlopez@cnb.csic.es.

Neuronal subtype-specific transcription factors (TFs) instruct key features of
neuronal function and connectivity. Activity-dependent mechanisms also contribute
to wiring and circuit assembly, but whether and how they relate to TF-directed
neuronal differentiation is poorly investigated. Here we demonstrate that the TF 
Cux1 controls the formation of the layer II/III corpus callosum (CC) projections 
through the developmental transcriptional regulation of Kv1 voltage-dependent
potassium channels and the resulting postnatal switch to a Kv1-dependent firing
mode. Loss of Cux1 function led to a decrease in the expression of Kv1
transcripts, aberrant firing responses, and selective loss of CC contralateral
innervation. Firing and innervation were rescued by re-expression of Kv1 or
postnatal reactivation of Cux1. Knocking down Kv1 mimicked Cux1-mediated CC
axonal loss. These findings reveal that activity-dependent processes are central 
bona fide components of neuronal TF-differentiation programs and establish the
importance of intrinsic firing modes in circuit assembly within the neocortex.
VIDEO ABSTRACT.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26804994  [PubMed - in process]


6. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 25;10(9):e0138541. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138541.
eCollection 2015.

Developmental Markers Expressed in Neocortical Layers Are Differentially
Exhibited in Olfactory Cortex.

Brunjes PC(1), Osterberg SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department Psychology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia,
22904, United States of America.

Neurons in the cerebral cortex stratify on the basis of their time of origin,
axonal terminations and the molecular identities assigned during early
development. Olfactory cortices share many feature with the neocortex, including 
clear lamination and similar cell types. The present study demonstrates that the 
markers differentially expressed in the projection neurons of the cerebral cortex
are also found in olfactory areas. Three of the four regions examined (pars
principalis of the anterior olfactory nucleus: AONpP, anterior and posterior
piriform cortices: APC, PPC, and the olfactory tubercle) expressed transcription 
factors found in deep or superficial neurons in the developing neocortex, though 
large differences were found between areas. For example, while the AONpP, APC and
PPC all broadly expressed the deep cortical marker CTIP2, NOR1 (NR4a3) levels
were higher in AONpP and DAARP-32 was more prevalent in the APC and PPC. Similar 
findings were encountered for superficial cortical markers: all three regions
broadly expressed CUX1, but CART was only observed in the APC and PPC.
Furthermore, regional variations were observed even within single structures
(e.g., NOR1 was found primarily in in the dorsal region of AONpP and CART
expression was observed in a discrete band in the middle of layer 2 of both the
APC and PPC). Experiments using the mitotic marker EDU verified that the
olfactory cortices and neocortex share similar patterns of neuronal production:
olfactory cells that express markers found in the deep neocortex are produced
earlier than those that express superficial makers. Projection neurons were
filled by retrograde tracers injected into the olfactory bulb to see if olfactory
neurons with deep and superficial markers had different axonal targets. Unlike
the cerebral cortex, no specificity was observed: neurons with each of the
transcription factors examined were found to be labelled. Together the results
indicate that olfactory cortices are complex: they differ from each other and
each is formed from a variable mosaic of neurons. The results suggest that the
olfactory cortices are not merely a remnant architype of the primordial forebrain
but varied and independent regions.

PMCID: PMC4583488
PMID: 26407299  [PubMed - in process]


7. Autism Res. 2016 Mar;9(3):340-9. doi: 10.1002/aur.1536. Epub 2015 Aug 28.

Genome-wide Association Study of Autism Spectrum Disorder in the East Asian
Populations.

Liu X(1), Shimada T(2), Otowa T(2), Wu YY(3), Kawamura Y(4), Tochigi M(2), Iwata 
Y(5), Umekage T(2), Toyota T(6), Maekawa M(6), Iwayama Y(6), Suzuki K(5),
Kakiuchi C(2), Kuwabara H(7), Kano Y(7), Nishida H(8), Sugiyama T(9), Kato N(10),
Chen CH(3,)(11), Mori N(9), Yamada K(6), Yoshikawa T(6), Kasai K(2), Tokunaga
K(1), Sasaki T(12), Gau SS(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Graduate School of
Medicine, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of Psychiatry, Chang
Gung Memorial Hospital-Linkou, Taoyuan, Taiwan. (4)Department of Psychiatry,
Sakae Seijinkai Hospital, Kanagawa, Japan. (5)Department of Psychiatry and
Neurology, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan.
(6)Laboratory for Molecular Psychiatry, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Wako,
Saitama, Japan. (7)Department of Child Psychiatry, University of Tokyo Hospital, 
Tokyo, Japan. (8)Asunaro Hospital for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Tsu,
Japan. (9)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Hamamatsu University
School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan. (10)Department of Psychiatry, Graduate
School of Medicine, University of Showa, Tokyo, Japan. (11)Department and
Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan,
Taiwan. (12)Department of Physical and Health Education, Graduate School of
Education, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (13)Department of Psychiatry,
National Taiwan University Hospital and College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.

Autism spectrum disorder is a heterogeneous neurodevelopmental disorder with
strong genetic basis. To identify common genetic variations conferring the risk
of ASD, we performed a two-stage genome-wide association study using ASD family
and healthy control samples obtained from East Asian populations. A total of 166 
ASD families (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>500) and 642 healthy controls from the Japanese population were
used as the discovery cohort. Approximately 900,000 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped using Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP array 
6.0 chips. In the replication stage, 205 Japanese ASD cases and 184 healthy
controls, as well as 418 Chinese Han trios (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1,254), were genotyped by TaqMan 
platform. Case-control analysis, family based association test, and
transmission/disequilibrium test (TDT) were then conducted to test the
association. In the discovery stage, significant associations were suggested for 
14 loci, including 5 known ASD candidate genes: GPC6, JARID2, YTHDC2, CNTN4, and 
CSMD1. In addition, significant associations were identified for several novel
genes with intriguing functions, such as JPH3, PTPRD, CUX1, and RIT2. After a
meta-analysis combining the Japanese replication samples, the strongest signal
was found at rs16976358 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>6.04 × 10(-7) ), which is located near the RIT2
gene. In summary, our results provide independent support to known ASD candidate 
genes and highlight a number of novel genes warranted to be further investigated 
in a larger sample set in an effort to improve our understanding of the genetic
basis of ASD. Autism Res 2016, 9: 340-349. © 2015 International Society for
Autism Research, Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 International Society for Autism Research, Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26314684  [PubMed - in process]


8. J Biol Chem. 2015 Sep 11;290(37):22520-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.651042. Epub
2015 Jul 28.

CUX2 protein functions as an accessory factor in the repair of oxidative DNA
damage.

Pal R(1), Ramdzan ZM(1), Kaur S(2), Duquette PM(3), Marcotte R(4), Leduy L(1),
Davoudi S(5), Lamarche-Vane N(3), Iulianella A(6), Nepveu A(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the Goodman Cancer Research Centre and. (2)From the Goodman Cancer
Research Centre and Departments of Biochemistry. (3)Anatomy and Cell Biology,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 1A3, Canada. (4)Princess Margaret Cancer 
Centre, University Health Network, Toronto M5G 1L7, Canada, and. (5)Departments
of Biochemistry. (6)Department of Medical Neuroscience, Dalhousie University,
Life Science Research Institute, Halifax B3H 4R2, Canada. (7)From the Goodman
Cancer Research Centre and Departments of Biochemistry, Medicine, Oncology, and
alain.nepveu@mcgill.ca.

CUX1 and CUX2 proteins are characterized by the presence of three highly similar 
regions called Cut repeats 1, 2, and 3. Although CUX1 is ubiquitously expressed, 
CUX2 plays an important role in the specification of neuronal cells and continues
to be expressed in postmitotic neurons. Cut repeats from the CUX1 protein were
recently shown to stimulate 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase 1 (OGG1), an enzyme that
removes oxidized purines from DNA and introduces a single strand break through
its apurinic/apyrimidinic lyase activity to initiate base excision repair. Here, 
we investigated whether CUX2 plays a similar role in the repair of oxidative DNA 
damage. Cux2 knockdown in embryonic cortical neurons increased levels of
oxidative DNA damage. In vitro, Cut repeats from CUX2 increased the binding of
OGG1 to 7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine-containing DNA and stimulated both the
glycosylase and apurinic/apyrimidinic lyase activities of OGG1. Genetic
inactivation in mouse embryo fibroblasts or CUX2 knockdown in HCC38 cells delayed
DNA repair and increased DNA damage. Conversely, ectopic expression of Cut
repeats from CUX2 accelerated DNA repair and reduced levels of oxidative DNA
damage. These results demonstrate that CUX2 functions as an accessory factor that
stimulates the repair of oxidative DNA damage. Neurons produce a high level of
reactive oxygen species because of their dependence on aerobic oxidation of
glucose as their source of energy. Our results suggest that the persistent
expression of CUX2 in postmitotic neurons contributes to the maintenance of
genome integrity through its stimulation of oxidative DNA damage repair.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4566227 [Available on 2016-09-11]
PMID: 26221032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2015 Jul;54(7):418-32. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22253. Epub
2015 May 7.

NFkB is activated by multiple mechanisms in hairy cell leukemia.

Nagel S(1), Ehrentraut S(1), Meyer C(1), Kaufmann M(1), Drexler HG(1), MacLeod
RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Animal Cell Lines, Leibniz-Institute DSMZ - German
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany.

Hairy cell leukemia (HCL) is a rare chronic B-cell lymphoproliferative disorder
of unclear pathogenesis. Recent studies have identified BRAF(V600E) mutations in 
most HCL patients, highlighting this abnormality as a molecular hallmark for this
disease. Cell lines originating from HCL patients lack BRAF mutations but retain 
the typical piliferous morphology and the distinctive HCL immunophenotype, thus, 
constituting suitable tools for identifying alternative tumor genes and leukemic 
mechanisms in this malignancy. To this end, we integrated genomic and
transcriptional profiling of the HCL cell line MLMA. The expression levels of
genomically targeted genes were compared to four HCL control cell lines, thus,
identifying 91 chromosomally deregulated genes. Gene set enrichment analysis of
these indicted apoptosis, proliferation, and DNA damage response as altered
processes. Accordingly, prominent target genes overexpressed in this cell line
include ATM, BRAF, CDK6, CUTL1/CUX1, H2AFX, and REL. Treatment of MLMA with
selective pharmacological inhibitors and specific siRNA-mediated gene knockdowns 
highlighted a central role for NFkB in their deregulation in HCL. Moreover,
relevant expression profiling data from HCL and ABC-DLBCL cell lines display
elevated NFkB-pathway activity when compared to GC-DLBCL equivalents. Finally,
analysis of HCL patient samples in silico collectively supported the clinical
significance of NFkB activation in this disease. In conclusion, we identified
deregulated genes and multiple mechanisms underlying aberrantly activated
NFkB-pathway in HCL. Therefore, NFkB may represent a B-cell specific hallmark of 
HCL and a promising novel therapeutic target, most notably in patients lacking
BRAF mutations in this entity including variant HCL.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25960206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cereb Cortex. 2016 Mar;26(3):1255-71. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhv079. Epub 2015 Apr
16.

Dynamic Expression Patterns of Progenitor and Pyramidal Neuron Layer Markers in
the Developing Human Hippocampus.

Cipriani S(1), Nardelli J(1), Verney C(1), Delezoide AL(2), Guimiot F(2),
Gressens P(1), Adle-Biassette H(3).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR 1141, Hôpital Robert-Debré, Paris, France Faculté de Médecine Denis
Diderot, Université Paris 7, Paris, France. (2)INSERM UMR 1141, Hôpital
Robert-Debré, Paris, France Faculté de Médecine Denis Diderot, Université Paris
7, Paris, France Service de Biologie du Développement, Hôpital Robert-Debré,
APHP, Paris, France. (3)INSERM UMR 1141, Hôpital Robert-Debré, Paris, France
Faculté de Médecine Denis Diderot, Université Paris 7, Paris, France Service
d'Anatomie et de Cytologie Pathologique, Hôpital Lariboisère, APHP, Paris,
France.

The molecular mechanisms underlying the formation of hippocampus are unknown in
humans. To improve our knowledge of molecules that potentially regulate pyramidal
neurogenesis and layering in various hippocampal fields, we investigated the
expression of progenitor markers and cell fate molecules from gestational week
(GW) 9 to GW 20. At GW 9, the progenitor cell compartment of the hippocampal
formation mainly consisted of PAX6(+) cells in the ventricular zone. Between GW 9
and 11, a second germinal area, the subventricular zone (SVZ), was formed, as
shown by TBR2 labeling. Postmitotic markers (TBR1, CTIP2, SATB2, and CUX1) might 
reflect the inside-out layering of the plate from GW 11 onwards. TBR1(+) neurons 
appeared in the deep plate, whereas CTIP2(+), SATB2(+), and CUX1(+) neurons
occupied the upper layers. From GW 16, differences in layer segregation were
observed between the ammonic and subicular plates. Moreover, an
ammonic-to-subicular maturation gradient was observed in germinal/postmitotic
areas. Taken together, these findings demonstrate for the first time the presence
of an SVZ in the hippocampus of human fetuses and laminar differences in
transcription factor expression in the pyramidal layer of the human ammonic and
subicular plate, and provide new information to further investigate the
connectivity of the hippocampal formation.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25882041  [PubMed - in process]


11. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 28;6(6):3613-26.

The function of CUX1 in oxidative DNA damage repair is needed to prevent
premature senescence of mouse embryo fibroblasts.

Ramdzan ZM(1), Pal R(1,)(2), Kaur S(1,)(3), Leduy L(1), Bérubé G(1), Davoudi
S(1,)(3), Vadnais C(1,)(3), Nepveu A(1,)(3,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Goodman Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 1A3, Canada.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Presidency University, Kolkata 700073,
India. (3)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A
1A3, Canada. (4)Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A
1A3, Canada. (5)Department of Oncology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A
1A3, Canada.

Despite having long telomeres, mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) senesce more
rapidly than human diploid fibroblasts because of the accumulation of oxidative
DNA damage. The CUX1 homeodomain protein was recently found to prevent senescence
in RAS-driven cancer cells that produce elevated levels of reactive-oxygen
species. Here we show that Cux1-/- MEFs are unable to proliferate in atmospheric 
(20%) oxygen although they can proliferate normally in physiological (3%) oxygen 
levels. CUX1 contains three domains called Cut repeats. Structure/function
analysis established that a single Cut repeat domain can stimulate the DNA
binding, Schiff-base formation, glycosylase and AP-lyase activities of
8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase 1, OGG1. Strikingly and in contrast to previous
reports, OGG1 exhibits efficient AP-lyase activity in the presence of a Cut
repeat. Repair of oxidative DNA damage and proliferation in 20% oxygen were both 
rescued in Cux1-/- MEFs by ectopic expression of CUX1 or of a recombinant Cut
repeat protein that stimulates OGG1 but is devoid of transcription activation
potential. These findings reinforce the causal link between oxidative DNA damage 
and cellular senescence and suggest that the role of CUX1 as an accessory factor 
in DNA repair will be critical in physiological situations that generate higher
levels of reactive oxygen species.

PMCID: PMC4414141
PMID: 25682875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Eur J Haematol. 2015 Jul;95(1):3-15. doi: 10.1111/ejh.12515. Epub 2015 Feb 20.

The molecular pathogenesis of the myelodysplastic syndromes.

Pellagatti A(1), Boultwood J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Leukaemia & Lymphoma Research Molecular Haematology Unit, Nuffield Division of
Clinical Laboratory Sciences, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Recent studies have greatly illuminated the genomic landscape of the
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), and the pace of discovery is accelerating. The
most common mutations found in MDS occur in genes involved in RNA splicing
(including SF3B1, SRSF2, U2AF1, and ZRSR2) and epigenetic modification (including
TET2, ASXL1, and DNMT3A). The identification of spliceosome mutations in
approximately half of all patients with MDS implicates abnormalities of RNA
splicing, a pathway not previously known as a target for mutation, in the MDS
pathogenesis. Several regulators of signal transduction (NRAS, JAK2) and
transcription factors (RUNX1, TP53) are also frequently mutated in MDS. The
complex patterns of associations between gene mutations identified have revealed 
epistatic interactions between spliceosome components and epigenetic modifiers in
MDS. The cytogenetic abnormalities found in MDS are characterized by the loss of 
genetic material, whereas translocations are rare. The cytogenetic deletion maps 
of MDS (e.g., 5q-, 7q-, 20q-) provide us with circumstantial evidence for the
presence of tumor suppressor genes. It is now recognized that haploinsufficiency 
(a gene dosage effect) resulting from gene deletions or inactivating mutations is
an important disease mechanism in MDS. Haploinsufficiency of the ribosomal
protein gene RPS14 plays a critical role in the development of anemia in the 5q- 
syndrome, and haploinsufficiency of CUX1 is important in some patients with MDS
and AML with complete or partial loss of chromosome 7. Gene expression profiling 
has identified key deregulated genes and pathways and new prognostic gene
signatures in MDS. Recent advances in the molecular pathogenesis of MDS are
leading to new biological, clinical, and therapeutic insights.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25645650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Brain Pathol. 2015 Sep;25(5):587-97. doi: 10.1111/bpa.12225. Epub 2014 Dec 1.

Homozygous Deletion of the LGI1 Gene in Mice Leads to Developmental Abnormalities
Resulting in Cortical Dysplasia.

Silva J(1), Sharma S(1,)(2), Cowell JK(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA. (2)Department of
Pathology, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA.

LGI1 mutations lead to an autosomal dominant form of epilepsy. Lgi1 mutant null
mice develop seizures and show abnormal neuronal excitability. A fine structure
analysis of the cortex in these mice demonstrated a subtle cortical dysplasia,
preferentially affecting layers II-IV, associated with increased Foxp2 and
Cux1-expressing neurons leading to blurring of the cortical layers. The
hypercellularity observed in the null cortex resulted from an admixture of highly
branched mature pyramidal neurons with short and poorly aligned axons as revealed
by Golgi staining and immature small neurons with branched disoriented dendrites 
with reduced spine density and undersized, morphologically altered and
round-headed spines. In vitro, hippocampal neurons revealed poor neurite
outgrowth in null mice as well as reduced synapse formation. Electron microscopy 
demonstrated reduced spine-localized asymmetric (axospinous) synapses with
postsynaptic densities and vesicle-loaded synapses in the mutant null cortex. The
overall pathology in the null mice suggested cortical dyslamination most likely
because of mislocalization of late-born neurons, with an admixture of those
carrying suboptimally developed axons and dendrites with reduced functional
synapses with normal neurons. Our study suggests that LGI1 has a role in
regulating cortical development, which is increasingly becoming recognized as one
of the causes of idiopathic epilepsy.

© 2014 International Society of Neuropathology.

PMID: 25346110  [PubMed - in process]


14. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2014;21(6):879-90. doi: 10.1530/ERC-14-0152. Epub 2014 Sep
23.

CUX1: a modulator of tumour aggressiveness in pancreatic neuroendocrine
neoplasms.

Krug S(1), Kühnemuth B(1), Griesmann H(1), Neesse A(1), Mühlberg L(1), Boch M(1),
Kortenhaus J(1), Fendrich V(1), Wiese D(1), Sipos B(1), Friemel J(1), Gress
TM(1), Michl P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of GastroenterologyEndocrinology and
MetabolismSurgeryPhilipps-University Marburg, Baldingerstraße, 35043 Marburg,
GermanyDepartment of PathologyEberhard-Karls-University Tübingen, Tübingen,
GermanyDepartment of PathologyUniversity Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Departments of GastroenterologyEndocrinology and
MetabolismSurgeryPhilipps-University Marburg, Baldingerstraße, 35043 Marburg,
GermanyDepartment of PathologyEberhard-Karls-University Tübingen, Tübingen,
GermanyDepartment of PathologyUniversity Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
michlp@med.uni-marburg.de.

Pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasms (PNENs) constitute a rare tumour entity, and 
prognosis and treatment options depend on tumour-mediating hallmarks such as
angiogenesis, proliferation rate and resistance to apoptosis. The molecular
pathways that determine the malignant phenotype are still insufficiently
understood and this has limited the use of effective combination therapies in the
past. In this study, we aimed to characterise the effect of the oncogenic
transcription factor Cut homeobox 1 (CUX1) on proliferation, resistance to
apoptosis and angiogenesis in murine and human PNENs. The expression and function
of CUX1 were analysed using knockdown and overexpression strategies in Ins-1 and 
Bon-1 cells, xenograft models and a genetically engineered mouse model of
insulinoma (RIP1Tag2). Regulation of angiogenesis was assessed using RNA
profiling and functional tube-formation assays in HMEC-1 cells. Finally, CUX1
expression was assessed in a tissue microarray of 59 human insulinomas and
correlated with clinicopathological data. CUX1 expression was upregulated during 
tumour progression in a time- and stage-dependent manner in the RIP1Tag2 model,
and associated with pro-invasive and metastatic features of human insulinomas.
Endogenous and recombinant CUX1 expression increased tumour cell proliferation,
tumour growth, resistance to apoptosis, and angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo.
Mechanistically, the pro-angiogenic effect of CUX1 was mediated via upregulation 
of effectors such as HIF1a and MMP9. CUX1 mediates an invasive pro-angiogenic
phenotype and is associated with malignant behaviour in human insulinomas.

© 2014 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 25248790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Oncogene. 2015 Jul;34(27):3593-604. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.290. Epub 2014 Sep 22.

Hyperactivation of mTORC1 and mTORC2 by multiple oncogenic events causes
addiction to eIF4E-dependent mRNA translation in T-cell leukemia.

Schwarzer A(1), Holtmann H(2), Brugman M(1), Meyer J(1), Schauerte C(2), Zuber
J(3), Steinemann D(4), Schlegelberger B(4), Li Z(1), Baum C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Hematology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany. (2)Institute of Biochemistry, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany. (3)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 7,
Vienna, Austria. (4)Institute of Cell and Molecular Pathology, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany.

High activation of the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway is characteristic for T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). The activity of the master regulator of this
pathway, PTEN, is often impaired in T-ALL. However, experimental evidence
suggests that input from receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) is required for
sustained mTOR activation, even in the absence of PTEN. We previously reported
the expression of Neurotrophin receptor tyrosine kinases (TRKs) and their
respective ligands in primary human leukemia samples. In the present study we
aimed to dissect the downstream signaling cascades of TRK-induced T-ALL in a
murine model and show that T-ALLs induced by deregulated receptor tyrosine kinase
signaling acquire activating mutations in Notch1 and lose PTEN during clonal
evolution. Some clones additionally lost one allele of the homeodomain
transcription factor Cux1. All events independently led to a gradual
hyperactivation of both mTORC1 and mTORC2 signaling. We dissected the role of the
individual mTOR complexes by shRNA knockdown and found that the separate
depletion of mTORC1 or mTORC2 reduced the growth of T-ALL blasts, but was not
sufficient to induce apoptosis. In contrast, knockdown of the mTOR downstream
effector eIF4E caused a striking cytotoxic effect, demonstrating a critical
addiction to cap-dependent mRNA-translation. Although high mTORC2-AKT activation 
is commonly associated with drug-resistance, we demonstrate that T-ALL displaying
a strong mTORC2-AKT activation were specifically susceptible to 4EGI-1, an
inhibitor of the eIF4E-eIF4G interaction. To decipher the mechanism of 4EGI-1, we
performed a genome-wide analysis of mRNAs that are translationally regulated by
4EGI-1 in T-ALL. 4EGI-1 effectively reduced the ribosomal occupancy of mRNAs that
were strongly upregulated in T-ALL blasts compared with normal thymocytes
including transcripts important for translation, mitochondria and cell cycle
progression, such as cyclins and ribosomal proteins. These data suggest that
disrupting the eIF4E-eIF4G interaction constitutes a promising therapy strategy
in mTOR-deregulated T-cell leukemia.

PMID: 25241901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Biol Open. 2014 Sep 12;3(10):937-46. doi: 10.1242/bio.20148193.

Autocrine Activation of the Wnt/ß-Catenin Pathway by CUX1 and GLIS1 in Breast
Cancers.

Vadnais C(1), Shooshtarizadeh P(2), Rajadurai CV(1), Lesurf R(3), Hulea L(1),
Davoudi S(2), Cadieux C(4), Hallett M(5), Park M(6), Nepveu A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 1A3,
Canada Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3G 1Y6,
Canada. (2)Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A
1A3, Canada. (3)Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University, Montreal, QC
H3A 1A3, Canada Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3G
1Y6, Canada McGill Centre for Bioinformatics, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3G
0B1, Canada. (4)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3G
1Y6, Canada. (5)Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University, Montreal, QC
H3A 1A3, Canada McGill Centre for Bioinformatics, McGill University, Montreal, QC
H3G 0B1, Canada. (6)Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University, Montreal, 
QC H3A 1A3, Canada Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC
H3G 1Y6, Canada Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 1A1, 
Canada Department of Oncology, McGill University, Montreal, QC H2W 1S6, Canada.
(7)Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 1A3,
Canada Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3G 1Y6,
Canada Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 1A1, Canada
Department of Oncology, McGill University, Montreal, QC H2W 1S6, Canada
alain.nepveu@mcgill.ca.

Autocrine activation of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway occurs in several cancers,
notably in breast tumors, and is associated with higher expression of various Wnt
ligands. Using various inhibitors of the FZD/LRP receptor complex, we demonstrate
that some adenosquamous carcinomas that develop in MMTV-CUX1 transgenic mice
represent a model for autocrine activation of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway. By
comparing expression profiles of laser-capture microdissected mammary tumors, we 
identify Glis1 as a transcription factor that is highly expressed in the subset
of tumors with elevated Wnt gene expression. Analysis of human cancer datasets
confirms that elevated WNT gene expression is associated with high levels of CUX1
and GLIS1 and correlates with genes of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) signature: VIM, SNAI1 and TWIST1 are elevated whereas CDH1 and OCLN are
decreased. Co-expression experiments demonstrate that CUX1 and GLIS1 cooperate to
stimulate TCF/ß-catenin transcriptional activity and to enhance cell migration
and invasion. Altogether, these results provide additional evidence for the role 
of GLIS1 in reprogramming gene expression and suggest a hierarchical model for
transcriptional regulation of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway and the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197442
PMID: 25217618  [PubMed]


17. Nat Rev Cancer. 2014 Oct;14(10):673-82. doi: 10.1038/nrc3805. Epub 2014 Sep 5.

CUX1, a haploinsufficient tumour suppressor gene overexpressed in advanced
cancers.

Ramdzan ZM(1), Nepveu A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Goodman Cancer Centre, McGill University, 1160 Pine Avenue West, Montreal,
Quebec, H3A 1A3, Canada. (2)1] Goodman Cancer Centre, McGill University, 1160
Pine Avenue West, Montreal, Quebec, H3A 1A3, Canada. [2] Department of
Biochemistry, McGill University, 1160 Pine Avenue West, Montreal, Quebec, H3A
1A3, Canada. [3] Department of Medicine, McGill University, 1160 Pine Avenue
West, Montreal, Quebec, H3A 1A3, Canada. [4] Department of Oncology, McGill
University, 1160 Pine Avenue West, Montreal, Quebec, H3A 1A3, Canada.

CUT-like homeobox 1 (CUX1) is a homeobox gene that is implicated in both tumour
suppression and progression. The accumulated evidence supports a model of
haploinsufficiency whereby reduced CUX1 expression promotes tumour development.
Paradoxically, increased CUX1 expression is associated with tumour progression,
and ectopic CUX1 expression in transgenic mice increases tumour burden in several
tissues. One CUX1 isoform functions as an ancillary factor in base excision
repair and the other CUX1 isoforms act as transcriptional activators or
repressors. Several transcriptional targets and cellular functions of CUX1 affect
tumorigenesis; however, we have yet to develop a mechanistic framework to
reconcile the opposite roles of CUX1 in cancer protection and progression.

PMID: 25190083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Sep 26;452(3):473-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.08.088. Epub 2014 Aug 23.

Cytohesin-associated scaffolding protein (CASP) is a substrate for granzyme B and
ubiquitination.

Tompkins N(1), MacNeil AJ(2), Pohajdak B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Canada. (2)Department of Health
Sciences, Brock University, Canada. (3)Department of Biology, Dalhousie
University, Canada. Electronic address: bill.pohajdak@dal.ca.

Natural killer (NK) cells are a sub-population of cytotoxic lymphocytes that can 
kill tumor or infected cells without prior exposure, by secreting the contents of
preformed cytotoxic vesicles, containing perforin and granzymes, at the immune
synapse. Cytohesin-associated scaffolding protein (CASP) is an adaptor molecule
uniquely expressed in lymphocytes that forms complexes with both
vesicle-initiating and sorting proteins, and has roles in NK cell migration,
cytotoxicity, and cytokine secretion. In this study, we show that CASP contains a
conserved granzyme B cleavage site that could modify its intracellular
localization and interaction with sorting nexin 27. We also provide evidence that
CASP is modified by ubiquitination. Both of these post-translational
modifications could rapidly modify CASP function and highlight the dynamic
regulatory mechanisms that direct its role in NK cell functions.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25159843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Circulation. 2014 Oct 7;130(15):1225-35. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.009892. 
Epub 2014 Aug 14.

Integrating genetic, transcriptional, and functional analyses to identify 5 novel
genes for atrial fibrillation.

Sinner MF, Tucker NR, Lunetta KL, Ozaki K, Smith JG, Trompet S, Bis JC, Lin H,
Chung MK, Nielsen JB, Lubitz SA, Krijthe BP, Magnani JW, Ye J, Gollob MH, Tsunoda
T, Müller-Nurasyid M, Lichtner P, Peters A, Dolmatova E, Kubo M, Smith JD, Psaty 
BM, Smith NL, Jukema JW, Chasman DI, Albert CM, Ebana Y, Furukawa T, Macfarlane
PW, Harris TB, Darbar D, Dörr M, Holst AG, Svendsen JH, Hofman A, Uitterlinden
AG, Gudnason V, Isobe M, Malik R, Dichgans M, Rosand J, Van Wagoner DR;
METASTROKE Consortium; AFGen Consortium, Benjamin EJ, Milan DJ, Melander O,
Heckbert SR, Ford I, Liu Y, Barnard J, Olesen MS, Stricker BH, Tanaka T, Kääb S, 
Ellinor PT.

BACKGROUND: Atrial fibrillation (AF) affects >30 million individuals worldwide
and is associated with an increased risk of stroke, heart failure, and death. AF 
is highly heritable, yet the genetic basis for the arrhythmia remains
incompletely understood.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To identify new AF-related genes, we used a multifaceted
approach, combining large-scale genotyping in 2 ethnically distinct populations, 
cis-eQTL (expression quantitative trait loci) mapping, and functional validation.
Four novel loci were identified in individuals of European descent near the genes
NEURL (rs12415501; relative risk [RR]=1.18; 95% confidence interval [CI],
1.13-1.23; P=6.5×10(-16)), GJA1 (rs13216675; RR=1.10; 95% CI, 1.06-1.14;
P=2.2×10(-8)), TBX5 (rs10507248; RR=1.12; 95% CI, 1.08-1.16; P=5.7×10(-11)), and 
CAND2 (rs4642101; RR=1.10; 95% CI, 1.06-1.14; P=9.8×10(-9)). In Japanese, novel
loci were identified near NEURL (rs6584555; RR=1.32; 95% CI, 1.26-1.39;
P=2.0×10(-25)) and CUX2 (rs6490029; RR=1.12; 95% CI, 1.08-1.16; P=3.9×10(-9)).
The top single-nucleotide polymorphisms or their proxies were identified as
cis-eQTLs for the genes CAND2 (P=2.6×10(-19)), GJA1 (P=2.66×10(-6)), and TBX5
(P=1.36×10(-5)). Knockdown of the zebrafish orthologs of NEURL and CAND2 resulted
in prolongation of the atrial action potential duration (17% and 45%,
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified 5 novel loci for AF. Our results expand the
diversity of genetic pathways implicated in AF and provide novel molecular
targets for future biological and pharmacological investigation.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4190011
PMID: 25124494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Fertil Steril. 2014 Sep;102(3):621-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2014.06.050. Epub
2014 Aug 5.

Genomics of uterine leiomyomas: insights from high-throughput sequencing.

Mehine M(1), Mäkinen N(1), Heinonen HR(1), Aaltonen LA(1), Vahteristo P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and Genome-Scale Biology Research Program,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (2)Department of Medical Genetics and 
Genome-Scale Biology Research Program, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
Electronic address: pia.vahteristo@helsinki.fi.

Uterine leiomyomas are benign smooth-muscle tumors of extremely low malignant
potential. Early work utilizing classical cytogenetics revealed that a subset of 
uterine leiomyomas harbor recurrent chromosomal rearrangements, such as
translocations affecting the HMGA2 gene. Our understanding of the genetics of
many tumor types has deepened remarkably with the emergence of next-generation
sequencing technologies. Exome sequencing identified that the majority of
leiomyomas display highly specific MED12 mutations. Further studies suggest that 
these MED12 hotspot mutations are also frequent in breast fibroadenomas, but not 
in other human tumors. Whole-genome sequencing showed that a subset of leiomyomas
display complex chromosomal rearrangements resembling chromothripsis. These were 
formed in a single event of chromosomal breakage and random reassembly involving 
one or a limited number of chromosomes. Although most leiomyomas have been shown 
to arise independently, these studies also revealed that distinct nodules within 
a uterus may display identical genetic changes indicating a common clonal origin.
A minority of leiomyomas were also found to display deletions within the
COL4A5-COL4A6 genes, leading to upregulation of the adjacent gene IRS4. The
findings derived from high-throughput sequencing combined with previous knowledge
have led to an emerging molecular classification of leiomyomas, suggesting that
there are several distinct pathogenic pathways involved in leiomyoma formation.
The evidence points to at least 4 molecular subclasses: leiomyomas with MED12
mutation, FH inactivation, HMGA2 overexpression, and COL4A6-COL4A5 deletion.
Elucidating the molecular pathogenesis of leiomyomas should be relevant for
developing treatments for this very common disease.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25106763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cerebellum. 2014 Dec;13(6):698-712. doi: 10.1007/s12311-014-0588-x.

The transcription factor Cux1 in cerebellar granule cell development and
medulloblastoma pathogenesis.

Topka S(1), Glassmann A, Weisheit G, Schüller U, Schilling K.

Author information: 
(1)Anatomisches Institut, Anatomie & Zellbiologie, Rheinische
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität, Nussallee 10, 53115, Bonn, Germany,
stopka@uni-bonn.de.

Cux1, also known as Cutl1, CDP or Cut is a homeodomain transcription factor
implicated in the regulation of normal and oncogenic development in diverse
peripheral tissues and organs. We studied the expression and functional role of
Cux1 in cerebellar granule cells and medulloblastoma. Cux1 is robustly expressed 
in proliferating granule cell precursors and in postmitotic, migrating granule
cells. Expression is lost as postmigratory granule cells mature. Moreover, Cux1
is also strongly expressed in a well-established mouse model of medulloblastoma. 
In contrast, expression of CUX1 in human medulloblastoma tissue samples is lower 
than in normal fetal cerebellum. In these tumors, CUX1 expression tightly
correlates with a set of genes which, when mapped on a global protein-protein
interaction dataset, yields a tight network that constitutes a cell cycle control
signature and may be related to p53 and the DNA damage response pathway.
Antisense-mediated reduction of CUX1 levels in two human medulloblastoma cell
lines led to a decrease in proliferation and altered motility. The developmental 
expression of Cux1 in the cerebellum and its action in cell lines support a role 
in granule cell and medulloblastoma proliferation. Its expression in human
medulloblastoma shifts that perspective, suggesting that CUX1 is part of a
network involved in cell cycle control and maintenance of DNA integrity. The
constituents of this network may be rational targets to therapeutically approach 
medulloblastomas.

PMID: 25096634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 Feb;75(2):163-72. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22215. Epub 2014 Jul 30.

Cux1 and Cux2 selectively target basal and apical dendritic compartments of layer
II-III cortical neurons.

Cubelos B(1), Briz CG, Esteban-Ortega GM, Nieto M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular, Centro de Biología Molecular 'Severo
Ochoa', Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, UAM-CSIC, Nicolás Cabrera, 1, Madrid,
28049, Spain.

A number of recent reports implicate the differential regulation of apical and
basal dendrites in autism disorders and in the higher functions of the human
brain. They show that apical and basal dendrites are functionally specialized and
that mechanisms regulating their development have important consequences for
neuron function. The molecular identity of layer II-III neurons of the cerebral
cortex is determined by the overlapping expression of Cux1 and Cux2. We
previously showed that both Cux1 and Cux2 are necessary and nonredundant for
normal dendrite development of layer II-III neurons. Loss of function of either
gene reduced dendrite arbors, while overexpression increased dendritic complexity
and suggested additive functions. We herein characterize the function of Cux1 and
Cux2 in the development of apical and basal dendrites. By in vivo loss and gain
of function analysis, we show that while the expression level of either Cux1 or
Cux2 influences both apical and basal dendrites, they have distinct effects.
Changes in Cux1 result in a marked effect on the development of the basal
compartment whereas modulation of Cux2 has a stronger influence on the apical
compartment. These distinct effects of Cux genes might account for the functional
diversification of layer II-III neurons into different subpopulations, possibly
with distinct connectivity patterns and modes of neuron response. Our data
suggest that by their differential effects on basal and apical dendrites, Cux1
and Cux2 can promote the integration of layer II-III neurons in the intracortical
networks in highly specific ways.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25059644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Aug 22;451(2):165-70. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.07.065. Epub 2014 Jul 21.

Cytohesin-associated scaffolding protein (CASP) is involved in migration and
IFN-<U+03B3> secretion in natural killer cells.

Tompkins N(1), MacKenzie B(1), Ward C(1), Salgado D(1), Leidal A(2), McCormick
C(3), Pohajdak B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Canada. (2)Department of
Pathology, University California San Francisco, United States. (3)Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Canada. (4)Department of
Biology, Dalhousie University, Canada. Electronic address: bill.pohajdak@dal.ca.

Natural Killer (NK) cells are highly mobile, specialized sub-populations of
lymphocytic cells that survey their host to identify and eliminate infected or
tumor cells. They are one of the key players in innate immunity and do not need
prior activation through antigen recognition to deliver cytotoxic packages and
release messenger chemicals to recruit immune cells. Cytohesin associated
scaffolding protein (CASP) is a highly expressed lymphocyte adaptor protein that 
forms complexes with vesicles and sorting proteins including SNX27 and
Cytohesin-1. In this study we show that by using stably integrated shRNA, CASP
has a direct role in the secretion of IFN-<U+03B3>, and NK cell motility and ability to 
kill tumor cells. CASP polarizes to the leading edge of migrating NK cells, and
to the immunological synapse when engaged with tumor cells. However, CASP is not 
associated with cytotoxic granule mediated killing. CASP is a multi-faceted
protein, which has a very diverse role in NK cell specific immune functions.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25058460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Oncoimmunology. 2014 Mar 27;3:e28270. eCollection 2014.

The role of CUX1 in antagonizing NF-<U+03BA>B signaling in TAMs.

Kühnemuth B(1), Michl P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Endocrinology and Metabolism;
Philipps-University Marburg; Marburg, Germany.

Macrophages represent a major component of the tumor microenvironment and
contribute to neoplasia initiation and cancer progression. However, the molecular
mechanisms underlying these phenomena are only partially understood. Manipulating
the transcriptional activity of the macrophage functional specification factor
NF-<U+03BA>B by virtue of a novel regulatory factor cut-like homeobox 1 (CUX1) may
provide a potential target for therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC4063149
PMID: 25050198  [PubMed]


25. Br J Haematol. 2014 Aug;166(4):550-6. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12964. Epub 2014 Jun 13.

The spectrum of somatic mutations in high-risk acute myeloid leukaemia with
-7/del(7q).

McNerney ME(1), Brown CD, Peterson AL, Banerjee M, Larson RA, Anastasi J, Le Beau
MM, White KP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genomics and Systems Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago,
IL, USA; Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA;
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

-7/del(7q) occurs in half of myeloid malignancies with adverse-risk cytogenetic
features and is associated with poor survival. We identified the spectrum of
mutations that co-occur with -7/del(7q) in 40 patients with de novo or
therapy-related myeloid neoplasms. -7/del(7q) leukaemias have a distinct
mutational profile characterized by low frequencies of alterations in genes
encoding transcription factors, cohesin and DNA-methylation-related proteins. In 
contrast, RAS pathway activating mutations occurred in 50% of cases, a
significantly higher frequency than other acute myeloid leukaemias and higher
than previously reported. Our data provide guidance for which pathways may be
most relevant in the treatment of adverse-risk myeloid leukaemia.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24931631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Cell Metab. 2014 May 6;19(5):767-79. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2014.04.009.

Hypomorphism for RPGRIP1L, a ciliary gene vicinal to the FTO locus, causes
increased adiposity in mice.

Stratigopoulos G(1), Martin Carli JF(2), O'Day DR(3), Wang L(2), Leduc CA(2),
Lanzano P(2), Chung WK(2), Rosenbaum M(2), Egli D(2), Doherty DA(3), Leibel
RL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Naomi Berrie Diabetes Center and Division of Molecular Genetics, Department of
Pediatrics, College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University, New York, 
NY 10032, USA. Electronic address: gs2172@columbia.edu. (2)Naomi Berrie Diabetes 
Center and Division of Molecular Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, College of
Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(3)Divisions of Developmental Medicine and Genetic Medicine, Department of
Pediatrics, Seattle Children's Research Institute and University of Washington
1959 NE Pacific St, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. (4)Naomi Berrie Diabetes Center and
Division of Molecular Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, College of Physicians
and Surgeons of Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA. Electronic address:
rl232@columbia.edu.

Common polymorphisms in the first intron of FTO are associated with increased
body weight in adults. Previous studies have suggested that a CUX1-regulatory
element within the implicated FTO region controls expression of FTO and the
nearby ciliary gene, RPGRIP1L. Given the role of ciliary genes in energy
homeostasis, we hypothesized that mice hypomorphic for Rpgrip1l would display
increased adiposity. We find that Rpgrip1l<U+207A>/<U+207B> mice are hyperphagic and fatter,
and display diminished suppression of food intake in response to leptin
administration. In the hypothalamus of Rpgrip1l<U+207A>/<U+207B> mice, and in human fibroblasts
with hypomorphic mutations in RPGRIP1L, the number of AcIII-positive cilia is
diminished, accompanied by impaired convening of the leptin receptor to the
vicinity of the cilium, and diminished pStat3 in response to leptin. These
findings suggest that RPGRIP1L may be partly or exclusively responsible for the
obesity susceptibility signal at the FTO locus.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4131684
PMID: 24807221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2014 Apr 15;2:45. doi: 10.1186/2051-5960-2-45.

Layer-specific gene expression in epileptogenic type II focal cortical dysplasia:
normal-looking neurons reveal the presence of a hidden laminar organization.

Rossini L, Medici V, Tassi L, Cardinale F, Tringali G, Bramerio M, Villani F,
Spreafico R, Garbelli R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Epileptology and Experimental Neurophysiology Unit, Istituto
Neurologico "C, Besta", Via Amadeo 42, 20133 Milano, Italy.
garbelli.r@istituto-besta.it.

BACKGROUND: Type II focal cortical dysplasias (FCDs) are malformations of
cortical development characterised by the disorganisation of the normal
neocortical structure and the presence of dysmorphic neurons (DNs) and balloon
cells (BCs). The pathogenesis of FCDs has not yet been clearly established,
although a number of histopathological patterns and molecular findings suggest
that they may be due to abnormal neuronal and glial proliferation and migration
processes.In order to gain further insights into cortical layering disruption and
investigate the origin of DNs and BCs, we used in situ RNA hybridisation of human
surgical specimens with a neuropathologically definite diagnosis of Type IIa/b
FCD and a panel of layer-specific genes (LSGs) whose expression covers all
cortical layers. We also used anti-phospho-S6 ribosomal protein antibody to
investigate mTOR pathway hyperactivation.
RESULTS: LSGs were expressed in both normal and abnormal cells (BCs and DNs) but 
their distribution was different. Normal-looking neurons, which were visibly
reduced in the core of the lesion, were apparently located in the appropriate
cortical laminae thus indicating a partial laminar organisation. On the contrary,
DNs and BCs, labelled with anti-phospho-S6 ribosomal protein antibody, were
spread throughout the cortex without any apparent rule and showed a highly
variable LSG expression pattern. Moreover, LSGs did not reveal any differences
between Type IIa and IIb FCD.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest the existence of hidden cortical lamination
involving normal-looking neurons, which retain their ability to migrate correctly
in the cortex, unlike DNs which, in addition to their morphological abnormalities
and mTOR hyperactivation, show an altered migratory pattern.Taken together these 
data suggest that an external or environmental hit affecting selected precursor
cells during the very early stages of cortical development may disrupt normal
cortical development.

PMCID: PMC4023625
PMID: 24735483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Melanoma Res. 2014 Jun;24(3):198-206. doi: 10.1097/CMR.0000000000000064.

The transcription factor CUTL1 is associated with proliferation and prognosis in 
malignant melanoma.

Fan X(1), Wang H, Zhou J, Wang S, Zhang X, Li T, Nie Y, Liu B.

Author information: 
(1)aInstitute of Plastic Surgery of the Chinese PLA bDepartment of Dermatology,
Xijing Hospital cState Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Xijing Hospital of
Digestive Diseases, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.

The transcription factor CUTL1 (CCAAT displacement protein 1) has been reported
to participate in the proliferation of diverse types of cancer. In the present
study, we investigated the potential involvement of CUTL1 in the proliferation of
malignant melanoma. We found that CUTL1 expression was upregulated in malignant
melanoma tissues and cell lines, and CUTL1 expression was selected as a
prognostic predictor for malignant melanoma patients by both univariate and
multivariate analysis. Knockdown of CUTL1 by short hairpin RNA significantly
reduced the colony-forming ability of malignant melanoma cells in vitro and
reduced tumor growth in vivo, whereas forced overexpression of CUTL1 produced the
opposite results. Consistently, cell cycle progression was impaired upon
downregulation of CUTL1 and enhanced when CUTL1 was upregulated. Additional
experiments suggested that CUTL1 may regulate the proliferation of malignant
melanoma by modulating the expression of cell cycle-related proteins.

PMID: 24686420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. PLoS Biol. 2014 Mar 11;12(3):e1001807. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001807.
eCollection 2014.

RAS transformation requires CUX1-dependent repair of oxidative DNA damage.

Ramdzan ZM(1), Vadnais C(2), Pal R(1), Vandal G(3), Cadieux C(2), Leduy L(1),
Davoudi S(2), Hulea L(2), Yao L(2), Karnezis AN(4), Paquet M(5), Dankort D(3),
Nepveu A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Goodman Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (2)Goodman
Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of
Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (3)Goodman Cancer
Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Biology,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (4)BC Cancer Agency, Centre for
Translational and Applied Genomics, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(5)Département de Pathologie et Microbiologie, Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire,
Université de Montréal, St-Hyacinthe, Quebec, Canada. (6)Goodman Cancer Centre,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Biochemistry, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Medicine, McGill University, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Oncology McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.

The Cut homeobox 1 (CUX1) gene is a target of loss-of-heterozygosity in many
cancers, yet elevated CUX1 expression is frequently observed and is associated
with shorter disease-free survival. The dual role of CUX1 in cancer is
illustrated by the fact that most cell lines with CUX1 LOH display amplification 
of the remaining allele, suggesting that decreased CUX1 expression facilitates
tumor development while increased CUX1 expression is needed in tumorigenic cells.
Indeed, CUX1 was found in a genome-wide RNAi screen to identify synthetic lethal 
interactions with oncogenic RAS. Here we show that CUX1 functions in base
excision repair as an ancillary factor for the 8-oxoG-DNA glycosylase, OGG1.
Single cell gel electrophoresis (comet assay) reveals that Cux1<U+207A>/<U+207B> MEFs are
haploinsufficient for the repair of oxidative DNA damage, whereas elevated CUX1
levels accelerate DNA repair. In vitro base excision repair assays with purified 
components demonstrate that CUX1 directly stimulates OGG1's enzymatic activity.
Elevated reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels in cells with sustained RAS pathway
activation can cause cellular senescence. We show that elevated expression of
either CUX1 or OGG1 prevents RAS-induced senescence in primary cells, and that
CUX1 knockdown is synthetic lethal with oncogenic RAS in human cancer cells.
Elevated CUX1 expression in a transgenic mouse model enables the emergence of
mammary tumors with spontaneous activating Kras mutations. We confirmed
cooperation between Kras(G12V) and CUX1 in a lung tumor model. Cancer cells can
overcome the antiproliferative effects of excessive DNA damage by inactivating a 
DNA damage response pathway such as ATM or p53 signaling. Our findings reveal an 
alternate mechanism to allow sustained proliferation in RAS-transformed cells
through increased DNA base excision repair capability. The heightened dependency 
of RAS-transformed cells on base excision repair may provide a therapeutic window
that could be exploited with drugs that specifically target this pathway.

PMCID: PMC3949673
PMID: 24618719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Front Neurol. 2014 Jan 7;4:213. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2013.00213. eCollection 2014.

Culturing layer-specific neocortical neurons as a cell replacement therapy
following traumatic brain injury.

Cramer NP(1), Chatterjee M(2), Lischka FW(2), Juliano SL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience and Regenerative Medicine, Uniformed Services
University of the Health Sciences , Bethesda, MD , USA ; Department of Anatomy,
Physiology and Genetics, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences ,
Bethesda, MD , USA. (2)Center for Neuroscience and Regenerative Medicine,
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences , Bethesda, MD , USA.
(3)Center for Neuroscience and Regenerative Medicine, Uniformed Services
University of the Health Sciences , Bethesda, MD , USA ; Department of Anatomy,
Physiology and Genetics, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences ,
Bethesda, MD , USA ; Program in Neuroscience, Uniformed Services University of
the Health Sciences , Bethesda, MD , USA.

Neurophysiological changes resulting from traumatic brain injury (TBI) can result
in adverse changes in behavior including mood instability and cognitive
dysfunction. Cell death following TBI likely contributes to these altered
behaviors and remains an elusive but attractive target for therapies aiming at
functional recovery. Previously we demonstrated that neural progenitor cells
derived from embryonic rats can be transplanted into donor neonatal rat brain
slices and, over the course of 2<U+2009>weeks in culture, mature into neurons that
express neuronal immunohistochemical markers and develop electrophysiological
profiles consistent with excitatory and inhibitory interneurons. Here we examine 
the potential of generating electrophysiologically mature neurons with a
layer-specific phenotype as a next step in developing a therapy designed to
rebuild a damaged cortical column with the functionally appropriate neuronal
subtypes. Preliminary results suggest that neurons derived from passaged
neurospheres and grown in dissociated cell culture develop GABAergic and presumed
glutamatergic phenotypes and that the percentage of GABAergic cells increases as 
a function of passage. After 2<U+2009>weeks in culture, the neurons have a mix of
immature and mature neuronal electrophysiological profiles and receive synaptic
inputs from surrounding neurons. Subsets of cells expressing neuron specific
markers also express layer-specific markers such as Cux1, ER81, and RORß. Future 
studies will investigate the potential of transplanting layer-specific neurons
generated and isolated in vitro into the neocortex of neonatal brain slices and
their potential to maintain their phenotype and integrate into the host tissue.

PMCID: PMC3882877
PMID: 24432011  [PubMed]


31. Leukemia. 2014 Jun;28(6):1348-51. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.25. Epub 2014 Jan 16.

Recurrent genetic defects on chromosome 7q in myeloid neoplasms.

Hosono N(1), Makishima H(2), Jerez A(2), Yoshida K(3), Przychodzen B(2), McMahon 
S(4), Shiraishi Y(5), Chiba K(5), Tanaka H(6), Miyano S(7), Sanada M(3),
Gómez-Seguí I(2), Verma AK(8), McDevitt MA(9), Sekeres MA(10), Ogawa S(3),
Maciejewski JP(11).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Taussig
Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA [2] First Department of
Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Fukui, Fukui,
Japan. (2)Department of Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Taussig
Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA. (3)1] Cancer Genomics
Project, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan [2]
Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto Japan. (4)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA. (5)Laboratory of DNA Information 
Analysis, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Laboratory of Sequence Analysis, Human Genome Center,
Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (7)1]
Laboratory of DNA Information Analysis, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan [2] Laboratory of Sequence
Analysis, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (8)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.
(9)Divisions of Hematology and Hematological Malignancy, Departments of Internal 
Medicine and Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD, USA. (10)1] Leukemia Program, Cleveland Clinic Taussig Cancer Institute,
Cleveland, OH, USA [2] Department of Hematologic Oncology and Blood Disorders,
Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA. (11)1] Department
of Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Taussig Cancer Institute,
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA [2] Department of Hematologic Oncology and
Blood Disorders, Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.

PMID: 24429498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Mol Diagn. 2014 Mar;16(2):229-43. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2013.11.007. Epub 2014 
Jan 10.

A single-tube multiplexed assay for detecting ALK, ROS1, and RET fusions in lung 
cancer.

Lira ME(1), Choi YL(2), Lim SM(3), Deng S(1), Huang D(1), Ozeck M(1), Han J(4),
Jeong JY(5), Shim HS(5), Cho BC(3), Kim J(6), Ahn MJ(7), Mao M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Research Unit, Pfizer Inc, San Diego, California. (2)Department of
Pathology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei Cancer
Center, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of
Pathology, Kyungpook National University Hospital, Daegu, Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
jkimsmc@skku.edu. (7)Department of Medical Oncology, Samsung Medical Center,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic 
address: silkahn@skku.edu. (8)Oncology Research Unit, Pfizer Inc, San Diego,
California. Electronic address: mao_m@yahoo.com.

Approximately 7% of non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLCs) harbor oncogenic
fusions involving ALK, ROS1, and RET. Although tumors harboring ALK fusions are
highly sensitive to crizotinib, emerging preclinical and clinical data
demonstrate that patients with ROS1 or RET fusions may also benefit from
inhibitors targeting these kinases. Using a transcript-based method, we designed 
a combination of 3' overexpression and fusion-specific detection strategies to
detect ALK, ROS1 and RET fusion transcripts in NSCLC tumors. We validated the
assay in 295 NSCLC specimens and showed that the assay is highly sensitive and
specific. ALK results were 100% concordant with fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) (n = 52) and 97.8% concordant with IHC (n = 179)
[sensitivity, 96.8% (95% CI 91.0%-98.9%); specificity, 98.8% (95% CI
93.6%-99.8%)]. For ROS1 and RET, we also observed 100% concordance with FISH (n =
46 and n = 15, respectively). We identified seven ROS1 and 14 RET fusion-positive
tumors and confirmed the fusion status by RT-PCR and FISH. One RET fusion
involved a novel partner, cutlike homeobox 1 gene (CUX1), yielding an in-frame
CUX1-RET fusion. ROS1 and RET fusions were significantly enriched in tumors
without KRAS/EGFR/ALK alterations. ALK/ROS1/RET/EGFR/KRAS alterations were
mutually exclusive. As a single-tube assay, this test shows promise as a more
practical and cost-effective screening modality for detecting rare but targetable
fusions in NSCLC.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Investigative Pathology and the Association
for Molecular Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24418728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Oncogene. 2015 Jan 8;34(2):177-87. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.530. Epub 2013 Dec 16.

CUX1 modulates polarization of tumor-associated macrophages by antagonizing NF-<U+03BA>B
signaling.

Kühnemuth B(1), Mühlberg L(1), Schipper M(2), Griesmann H(1), Neesse A(1),
Milosevic N(1), Wissniowski T(1), Buchholz M(1), Gress TM(1), Michl P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Endocrinology, University Hospital,
Philipps University, Marburg, Germany. (2)Department of Biology, Philipps
University, School of Medicine, Marburg, Germany.

Many solid cancers including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) are
characterized by an extensive stromal reaction that is accompanied by
infiltrating tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs). The role of TAMs in malignant
tumors is only partially understood. Previously, we identified the transcription 
factor CUX1 as an important mediator of tumor progression in PDAC. Interestingly,
we found that CUX1 is highly expressed not only in tumor cells but also in TAMs. 
On the basis of these data, we aimed to elucidate the effects of CUX1 in TAMs in 
vitro and in vivo. We analyzed the effects of CUX1 on cytokine expression using
overexpression and knockdown strategies. The cytokine regulation by CUX1 was
further assessed by reporter assays, DNA pulldown experiments and
chromatin-immunoprecipitation. CUX1 expression in TAMs was analyzed in human
pancreatic cancer tissues and in a genetic mouse model. Immunohistochemical
analysis revealed strong expression levels of CUX1 in a distinct subset of TAMs
in human PDAC tissues. Furthermore, its expression increased during tumor
progression in a genetic mouse model of PDAC. Profiling experiments showed that
CUX1 downregulates several NF-<U+03BA>B-regulated chemokines such as CXCL10, which have 
been associated with M1 polarization and inhibition of angiogenesis and tumor
progression. We could demonstrate that CUX1 interacts with NF-<U+03BA>B p65, leading to 
reduced binding of NF-<U+03BA>B p65 to the chemokine promoters. In addition, CUX1
reduces acetylation of NF-<U+03BA>B p65 at K310 by recruiting HDAC1. Functionally, CUX1 
expression in TAMs antagonizes T-cell attraction and enhances angiogenesis in
vitro. We identified CUX1 as an important modulator of the TAMs phenotype and
function by modulating NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent cytokines.

PMID: 24336331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Nat Genet. 2014 Jan;46(1):33-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.2846. Epub 2013 Dec 8.

Inactivating CUX1 mutations promote tumorigenesis.

Wong CC(1), Martincorena I(2), Rust AG(3), Rashid M(3), Alifrangis C(2),
Alexandrov LB(2), Tiffen JC(3), Kober C(4); Chronic Myeloid Disorders Working
Group of the International Cancer Genome Consortium, Green AR(5), Massie CE(5),
Nangalia J(5), Lempidaki S(6), Döhner H(7), Döhner K(7), Bray SJ(6), McDermott
U(2), Papaemmanuil E(2), Campbell PJ(8), Adams DJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Experimental Cancer Genetics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton,
Cambridge, UK. [2] Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Hills
Road, Cambridge, UK. (2)The Cancer Genome Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK. (3)Experimental Cancer Genetics, Wellcome
Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK. (4)1] Experimental Cancer
Genetics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK. [2]. (5)1]
Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, UK.
[2] Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills
Road, Cambridge, UK. [3] Wellcome Trust/MRC Stem Cell Institute, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. (6)Department of Physiology, Development and
Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. (7)Department of Internal
Medicine III, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany. (8)1] Department of Haematology,
University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, UK. [2] The Cancer Genome
Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK.

A major challenge in cancer genetics is to determine which low-frequency somatic 
mutations are drivers of tumorigenesis. Here we interrogate the genomes of 7,651 
diverse human cancers and find inactivating mutations in the homeodomain
transcription factor gene CUX1 (cut-like homeobox 1) in ~1-5% of various tumors. 
Meta-analysis of CUX1 mutational status in 2,519 cases of myeloid malignancies
reveals disruptive mutations associated with poor survival, highlighting the
clinical significance of CUX1 loss. In parallel, we validate CUX1 as a bona fide 
tumor suppressor using mouse transposon-mediated insertional mutagenesis and
Drosophila cancer models. We demonstrate that CUX1 deficiency activates
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling through direct transcriptional
downregulation of the PI3K inhibitor PIK3IP1 (phosphoinositide-3-kinase
interacting protein 1), leading to increased tumor growth and susceptibility to
PI3K-AKT inhibition. Thus, our complementary approaches identify CUX1 as a
pan-driver of tumorigenesis and uncover a potential strategy for treating
CUX1-mutant tumors.

PMCID: PMC3874239
PMID: 24316979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Epigenetics. 2014 Mar;9(3):366-76. doi: 10.4161/epi.27161. Epub 2013 Nov 19.

DNA hypermethylation and DNA hypomethylation is present at different loci in
chronic kidney disease.

Smyth LJ(1), McKay GJ(1), Maxwell AP(1), McKnight AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology Research; Centre for Public Health; Queen's University of Belfast; 
Belfast Northern Ireland.

Genetic risk factors for chronic kidney disease (CKD) are being identified
through international collaborations. By comparison, epigenetic risk factors for 
CKD have only recently been considered using population-based approaches. DNA
methylation is a major epigenetic modification that is associated with complex
diseases, so we investigated methylome-wide loci for association with CKD. A
total of 485,577 unique features were evaluated in 255 individuals with CKD
(cases) and 152 individuals without evidence of renal disease (controls).
Following stringent quality control, raw data were quantile normalized and ß
values calculated to reflect the methylation status at each site. The difference 
in methylation status was evaluated between cases and controls with resultant P
values adjusted for multiple testing. Genes with significantly increased and
decreased levels of DNA methylation were considered for biological relevance by
functional enrichment analysis using KEGG pathways in Partek Genomics Suite.
Twenty-three genes, where more than one CpG per loci was identified with
Padjusted<10(-8), demonstrated significant methylation changes associated with
CKD and additional support for these associated loci was sought from published
literature. Strong biological candidates for CKD that showed statistically
significant differential methylation include CUX1, ELMO1, FKBP5, INHBA-AS1,
PTPRN2, and PRKAG2 genes; several genes are differentially methylated in kidney
tissue and RNA-seq supports a functional role for differential methylation in
ELMO1 and PRKAG2 genes. This study reports the largest, most comprehensive,
genome-wide quantitative evaluation of DNA methylation for association with CKD. 
Evidence confirming methylation sites influence development of CKD would
stimulate research to identify epigenetic therapies that might be clinically
useful for CKD.

PMCID: PMC4053455
PMID: 24253112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Nat Neurosci. 2013 Dec;16(12):1725-7. doi: 10.1038/nn.3566. Epub 2013 Nov 3.

The mouse C9ORF72 ortholog is enriched in neurons known to degenerate in ALS and 
FTD.

Suzuki N(1), Maroof AM, Merkle FT, Koszka K, Intoh A, Armstrong I, Moccia R,
Davis-Dusenbery BN, Eggan K.

Author information: 
(1)1] The Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA. [2].

Using transgenic mice harboring a targeted LacZ insertion, we studied the
expression pattern of the C9ORF72 mouse ortholog (3110043O21Rik). Unlike most
genes that are mutated in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), which are
ubiquitously expressed, the C9ORF72 ortholog was most highly transcribed in the
neuronal populations that are sensitive to degeneration in ALS and frontotemporal
dementia. Thus, our results provide a potential explanation for the cell type
specificity of neuronal degeneration caused by C9ORF72 mutations.

PMCID: PMC4397902
PMID: 24185425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Syndromol. 2013 Sep;4(6):285-91. doi: 10.1159/000353510.

Delineation of a de novo 7q21.3q31.1 Deletion by CGH-SNP Arrays in a Girl with
Multiple Congenital Anomalies Including Severe Glaucoma.

Martínez-Jacobo L(1), Córdova-Fletes C, Ortiz-López R, Rivas F, Saucedo-Carrasco 
C, Rojas-Martínez A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Medicina Molecular, Facultad de Medicina,
Monterrey, Mexico.

In this study, we present a female patient with a constitutional de novo deletion
in 7q21.3q31.1 as determined by G-banding and CGH-SNP arrays. She exhibited,
among other features, psychomotor retardation, congenital severe bilateral
glaucoma, a cleft palate, and heart defect. Microarray assay disclosed a deleted 
12.5-Mb region roughly 88 kb downstream the ectrodactyly critical region; thus,
the patient's final karyotype was 46,XX.arr 7q21.3q31.1(96,742,140-109,246,085)×1
dn. This girl represents the fourth patient described so far with congenital
glaucoma and a deletion encompassing or overlapping the 7q21.3q31.1 region, and
confirms the presence of a locus or loci related to such a clinical feature.
According to our results, the proneness to ocular defects secondary to 7q
intermediate deletions could be caused by co-deletion of TAC1, HBP1, and a small 
cluster of cytochrome P450 genes (subfamily 3A). This conclusion is supported by 
their functional roles and expression locations as well as because TAC1 is
related to the functional pathway of the MYOC gene whose mutations are linked to 
glaucoma. Moreover, given that this girl is clinically reminiscent of several
phenotypes related to diverse deletions within 7q21q32, our results and
observations offer a general overview of the gene content of deletions/phenotypes
overlapping 7q21.3q31.1 and confirm that loci distal to DLX genes including the
CUX1 gene and potential regulatory elements downstream from DLX5 are unrelated to
ectrodactyly.

PMCID: PMC3776397
PMID: 24167464  [PubMed]


38. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 3;8(9):e74235. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074235. eCollection 
2013.

Identification of fat mass and obesity associated (FTO) protein expression in
cardiomyocytes: regulation by leptin and its contribution to leptin-induced
hypertrophy.

Gan XT(1), Zhao G, Huang CX, Rowe AC, Purdham DM, Karmazyn M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, The University of Western Ontario, 
London, Ontario, Canada.

The recently-identified fat mass and obesity-associated (FTO) protein is
associated with various physiological functions including energy and body weight 
regulation. Ubiquitously expressed, FTO was identified in heart homogenates
although its function is unknown. We studied whether FTO is specifically
expressed within the cardiac myocyte and its potential role pertaining to the
hypertrophic effect of the adipokine leptin. Most experiments were performed
using cultured neonatal rat cardiomyocytes which showed nuclei-specific FTO
expression. Leptin significantly increased FTO expression which was associated
with myocyte hypertrophy although both events were abrogated by FTO knockdown
with siRNA. Administration of a leptin receptor antibody to either normal or
obese rats significant reduced myocardial FTO protein expression. Responses in
cardiomyocytes were accompanied by JAK2/STAT3 activation whereas JAK2/STAT3
inhibition abolished these effects. Expression of the cut-like homeobox 1(CUX1)
transcriptional factor was significantly increased by leptin although this was
restricted to the cathepsin L-dependent, proteolytically-derived shorter p110CUX1
isoform whereas the longer p200CUX1 protein was not significantly affected.
Cathepsin L expression and activity were both significantly increased by leptin
whereas a cathepsin L peptide inhibitor or siRNA specific for CUX1 completely
prevented the leptin-induced increase in FTO expression. The cathepsin L peptide 
inhibitor or siRNA-induced knockdown of either CUX1 or FTO abrogated the
hypertrophic response to leptin. Two other pro-hypertrophic factors, endothelin-1
or angiotensin II had no effect on FTO expression and FTO knockdown did not alter
the hypertrophic response to either agent. This study demonstrates leptin-induced
FTO upregulation in cardiomyocytes via JAK2/STAT3- dependent CUX1 upregulation
and suggests an FTO regulatory function of leptin. It also demonstrates for the
first time a functional role of FTO in the cardiomyocyte.

PMCID: PMC3760875
PMID: 24019958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Dev Biol. 2013 Oct 15;382(2):530-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.08.023. Epub 2013
Sep 5.

Loss of functional Dicer in mouse radial glia cell-autonomously prolongs cortical
neurogenesis.

Nowakowski TJ(1), Mysiak KS, O'Leary T, Fotaki V, Pratt T, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh, Hugh Robson
Building, George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, UK. Electronic address:
tomasz.j.nowakowski@gmail.com.

Radial glia of the mouse cerebral cortex emerge from neuroepithelial stem cells
around embryonic day 11 and produce excitatory cortical neurons until a few days 
before birth. The molecular mechanisms that regulate the end of cortical
neurogenesis remain largely unknown. Here we investigated if the Dicer-dependent 
microRNA (miRNA) pathway is involved. By electroporating a cre-recombinase
expression vector into the cortex of E13.5 embryos carrying a conditional allele 
of Dicer1, we induced mosaic recombination causing Dicer1 deletion and reporter
activation in a subset of radial glia. We analysed the long-term fates of their
progeny. We found that mutant radial glia produced abnormally large numbers of
Cux1-positive neurons, many of which populated the superficial cortical layers.
Injections of the S-phase marker bromodeoxyuridine between postnatal days 3 and
14 showed that much of this population was generated postnatally. Our findings
suggest a role for Dicer-dependent processes in limiting the timespan of cortical
neurogenesis.

© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3793872
PMID: 24012747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 23;8(7):e68877. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068877. Print 2013.

The effect of hypothermia therapy on cortical laminar disruption following
ischemic injury in neonatal mice.

Kida H(1), Nomura S, Shinoyama M, Ideguchi M, Owada Y, Suzuki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Neuroscience, Graduate School of Medicine Yamaguchi
University, Ube, Japan. h-kida@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp

Hypothermia has been proposed as a treatment for reducing neuronal damage in the 
brain induced by hypoxic ischemia. In the developing brain, hypoxic
ischemia-induced injury may give rise to cerebral palsy (CP). However, it is
unknown whether hypothermia might affect the development of CP. The purpose of
this study was to investigate whether hypothermia would have a protective effect 
on the brains of immature, 3-day old (P3) mice after a challenge of cerebral
ischemia. Cerebral ischemia was induced in P3 mice with a right common carotid
artery ligation followed by hypoxia (6% O2, 37°C) for 30 min. Immediately after
hypoxic ischemia, mice were exposed to hypothermia (32°C) or normothermia (37°C) 
for 24 h. At 4 weeks of age, mouse motor development was tested in a behavioral
test. Mice were sacrificed at P4, P7, and 5 weeks to examine brain morphology.
The laminar structure of the cortex was examined with immunohistochemistry
(Cux1/Ctip2); the number of neurons was counted; and the expression of myelin
basic protein (MBP) was determined. The hypothermia treatment was associated with
improved neurological outcomes in the behavioral test. In the normothermia group,
histological analyses indicated reduced numbers of neurons, reduced cortical
laminar thickness in the deep, ischemic cortical layers, and significant
reduction in MBP expression in the ischemic cortex compared to the contralateral 
cortex. In the hypothermia group, no reductions were noted in deep cortical layer
thickness and in MBP expression in the ischemic cortex compared to the
contralateral cortex. At 24 h after the hypothermia treatment prevented the
neuronal cell death that had predominantly occurred in the ischemic cortical deep
layers with normothermia treatment. Our findings may provide a preclinical basis 
for testing hypothermal therapies in patients with CP induced by hypoxic ischemia
in the preterm period.

PMCID: PMC3720877
PMID: 23894362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Neurosci Res. 2013 Sep-Oct;77(1-2):42-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2013.06.004. Epub 
2013 Jul 4.

Prenatal exposure to suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid perturbs corticogenesis.

Yuniarti N(1), Juliandi B, MuhChyi C, Noguchi H, Sanosaka T, Nakashima K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation Research, Graduate School of Biological
Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Nara, Japan; Laboratory of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacy,
Faculty of Pharmacy, Universitas Gadjah Mada (UGM), Yogyakarta, Indonesia.

Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) is one of the epidrugs developed for
cancer treatment that works epigenetically by inhibiting histone deacetylases
(HDACs). SAHA has been reported to diffuse across the placenta and found in fetal
plasma in preclinical study, implying that it can influence fetus if taken by
pregnant cancer patients. However, report regarding this aspect and the study of 
in utero HDAC inhibition by SAHA especially on fate specification of neural
stem/progenitor cells within the developing mammalian cortex, is yet unavailable.
Here we show that transient exposure of SAHA to mouse embryos during prominent
neurogenic period resulted in an enhancement of cortical neurogenesis, which is
accompanied by an increased expression of proneuronal transcription factor
Neurog1. Neurogenesis was enhanced due to the increase number of proliferating
Tbr2+ intermediate progenitor cells following SAHA exposure. In this relation, we
observed that SAHA perturbed neonatal cortical lamination because of the
increased production of Cux1+ and Satb2+ upper-layer neurons, and decreased that 
of Ctip2+ deep-layer neurons. Furthermore, an upper-layer neuronal lineage
determinant Satb2 was also up-regulated, whereas those of deep-layer ones Fezf2
and Ctip2 were down-regulated by SAHA treatment. Taken together, our study
suggests that proper regulation of HDACs is important for precise embryonic
corticogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd and the Japan Neuroscience Society. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 23831515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 21;8(6):e66520. Print 2013.

Soluble CD26/Dipeptidyl Peptidase IV Enhances the Transcription of IL-6 and TNF-a
in THP-1 Cells and Monocytes.

Ikeda T(1), Kumagai E, Iwata S, Yamakawa A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tokyo, Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo, Japan.

CD26 is a 110-kDa multifunctional molecule having dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPPIV)
enzyme activity and is present on the surface of human T cells. Soluble CD26
(sCD26) exists in human blood and enhances the proliferation of peripheral T
lymphocytes induced by tetanus toxoid (TT). The mechanisms by which CD26 enhances
the activation of T cells and monocytes remain to be fully elucidated. In this
study, we compared the stimulation of THP-1 cells and isolated human monocytes
with a combination of recombinant sCD26 and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and the
stimulation of these cells with LPS alone. We found that addition of sCD26
increased TNF-a and IL-6 mRNA and protein expression and enhanced ERK1/2 levels
in the cytosol as well as c-Fos, NF-<U+03BA>B p50, NF-<U+03BA>B p65, and CUX1 levels in the
nuclei of these cells. On the other hand, the selective DPPIV inhibitor
sitagliptin inhibited the increase in TNF-a mRNA and protein expression as well
as the increase in ERK, c-Fos, NF-<U+03BA>B p50, NF-<U+03BA>B p65, and CUX1 levels. However, it
did not inhibit the increase in IL-6 mRNA and protein expression. We then
demonstrated that sCD26 enhanced binding of transcription factors to the TNF- and
IL-6 promoters and used reporter assays to demonstrate that transcription factor 
binding enhanced promoter activity. Once again, we observed differential
activities at the TNF- and IL-6 promoters. Finally, we demonstrated that CUX-1
overexpression enhanced TNF- production on sCD26/LPS stimulation, while CUX-1
depletion had no effect. Neither CUX-1 overexpression nor CUX-1 depletion had an 
effect on IL-6 stimulation. These results are discussed in the context of a model
that describes the mechanisms by which stimulation of monocytic cells by sCD26
and LPS leads to elevation of TNF- and IL-6 expression. CUX-1 is identified as a 
new transcription factor that differently regulates the activities of the TNF-
and IL-6 promoters.

PMCID: PMC3689814
PMID: 23805228  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


43. BMC Genomics. 2013 Apr 16;14:258. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-258.

Long-range transcriptional regulation by the p110 CUX1 homeodomain protein on the
ENCODE array.

Vadnais C(1), Awan AA, Harada R, Clermont PL, Leduy L, Bérubé G, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Goodman Cancer Centre, McGill University, 1160 Pine avenue West, Montreal,
Quebec H3A 1A3, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Overexpression of the Cut homeobox 1 gene, CUX1, inversely correlates
with patient survival in breast cancers. Cell-based assays and molecular studies 
have revealed that transcriptional regulation by CUX1 involves mostly the
proteolytically processed p110 isoform. As there is no antibody specific to p110 
CUX1 only, an alternate strategy must be employed to identify its targets.
RESULTS: We expressed physiological levels of a tagged-p110 CUX1 protein and
performed chromatin affinity purification followed by hybridization on ENCODE and
promoter arrays. Targets were validated by chromatin immunoprecipitation and
transcriptional regulation by CUX1 was analyzed in expression profiling and
RT-qPCR assays following CUX1 knockdown or p110 CUX1 overexpression.
Approximately 47% and 14% of CUX1 binding sites were respectively mapped less
than 4 Kbp, or more than 40 Kbp, away from a transcription start site. More genes
exhibited changes in expression following CUX1 knockdown than p110 CUX1
overexpression. CUX1 directly activated or repressed 7.4% and 8.4% of putative
targets identified on the ENCODE and promoter arrays respectively. This
proportion increased to 11.2% for targets with 2 binding sites or more.
Transcriptional repression was observed in a slightly higher proportion of target
genes. The CUX1 consensus binding motif, ATCRAT, was found at 47.2% of the CUX1
binding sites, yet only 8.3% of the CUX1 consensus motifs present on the array
were bound in vivo. The presence of a consensus binding motif did not have an
impact on whether a target gene was repressed or activated. Interestingly, the
distance between a binding site and a transcription start site did not
significantly reduced the ability of CUX1 to regulate a target gene. Moreover,
CUX1 not only was able to regulate the next adjacent gene, but also regulated the
gene located beyond this one as well as the gene located further away in the
opposite direction.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that p110 CUX1 can activate or repress
transcription when bound at a distance and can regulate more than one gene on
certain genomic loci.

PMCID: PMC3770232
PMID: 23590133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2013 Oct;31(6):424-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2013.02.006.
Epub 2013 Mar 4.

Epigenetic regulation of neural stem cell fate during corticogenesis.

MuhChyi C(1), Juliandi B, Matsuda T, Nakashima K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, Graduate School of Biological Sciences, 
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Takayama 8916-5, Ikoma, Nara 630-0192, 
Japan.

The cerebral cortex comprises over three quarters of the brain, and serves as
structural basis for the sophisticated perceptual and cognitive functions. It
develops from common multipotent neural stem cells (NSCs) that line the neural
tube. Development of the NSCs encompasses sequential phases of progenitor
expansion, neurogenesis, and gliogenesis along with the progression of
developmental stages. Interestingly, NSCs steadfastly march through all of these 
phases and give rise to specific neural cell types in a temporally defined and
highly predictable manner. Herein, we delineate the intrinsic and extrinsic
factors that dictate the progression and tempo of NSC differentiation during
cerebral cortex development, and how epigenetic modifications contribute to the
dynamic properties of NSCs.

Copyright © 2013 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23466416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Blood. 2013 Feb 7;121(6):869-71. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-12-473421.

CUX1 in leukemia: dosage matters.

Boultwood J(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Oxford.

Comment on
    Blood. 2013 Feb 7;121(6):975-83.

PMID: 23393017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Neoplasia. 2013 Jan;15(1):11-22.

WNT5A-NFAT signaling mediates resistance to apoptosis in pancreatic cancer.

Griesmann H(1), Ripka S, Pralle M, Ellenrieder V, Baumgart S, Buchholz M,
Pilarsky C, Aust D, Gress TM, Michl P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Endocrinology, University Hospital,
Philipps-University, D-35043 Marburg, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: WNT5A belongs to the Wnt family of secreted signaling molecules.
Using transcriptional profiling, we previously identified WNT5A as target of the 
antiapoptotic transcription factor CUX1 and demonstrated high expression levels
in pancreatic cancer. However, the impact of WNT5A on drug resistance and the
signaling pathways employed by WNT5A remain to be elucidated.
OBJECTIVES: This project aims to decipher the impact of WNT5A on resistance to
apoptosis and the signaling pathways employed by WNT5A in pancreatic cancer.
METHODS: The impact of WNT5A and its downstream effectors on tumor growth and
drug resistance was studied in vitro and in xenograft models in vivo. Tissue
microarrays of pancreatic cancer specimens were employed for immunohistochemical 
studies.
RESULTS: Knockdown of WNT5A results in a significant increase in drug-induced
apoptosis. In contrast, overexpression of WNT5A or addition of recombinant WNT5A 
mediates resistance to apoptosis in vitro. In our attempt to identify downstream 
effectors of WNT5A, we identified the transcription factor nuclear factor of
activated T cells c2 (NFATc2) as transcriptional target of WNT5A signaling.
NFATc2 confers a strong antiapoptotic phenotype mediating at least in part the
effects of WNT5A on drug resistance and tumor cell survival. In vivo, WNT5A
expression leads to resistance to gemcitabine-induced apoptosis in a xenograft
model, which is paralleled by up-regulation of NFATc2. Both WNT5A and NFATc2
proteins are highly expressed in human pancreatic cancer tissues and their
expression levels correlated significantly.
CONCLUSION: We identified the WNT5A-NFATc2 axis as important mediator of drug
resistance in pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC3556935
PMID: 23359789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Hepatol Res. 2013 Aug;43(8):820-5. doi: 10.1111/hepr.12052. Epub 2013 Jan 25.

Recent topics on a-fetoprotein.

Nakao K(1), Ichikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.

Zinc-fingers and homeoboxes 2 (ZHX2) and zinc-finger and BTB domain containing 20
(ZBTB20) repress the postnatal expression of a-fetoprotein (AFP) by interacting
with the AFP gene promoter regions. ZHX2 inhibits the expression of AFP and
cyclins A and E. ZBTB20 is negatively regulated by CUX1, which promotes
cell-cycle progression, suggesting that AFP reactivation is closely linked to
hepatocyte proliferation. A slight elevation in the serum AFP level often occurs 
in patients with chronic hepatitis C in the absence of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) and is an independent risk factor for HCC development to complement the
fibrosis stage. In addition, the sustained elevation of AFP after interferon
therapy is a risk factor of HCC development. AFP levels are clinically useful in 
predicting the outcomes of liver transplantation and sorafenib therapy for HCC
patients. A low preoperative AFP level is a predictor of long-term survival and
is associated with a low recurrence rate of HCC after liver transplantation. AFP 
response (=20% decrease in AFP during 6-8 weeks of treatment) rather than
radiological outcomes is a significant prognostic factor for survival in
sorafenib-treated HCC patients. Highly sensitive Lens culinaris
agglutinin-reactive AFP (AFP-L3) is 5-10 times more sensitive than conventional
AFP-L3, and useful for early detection of HCC in patients with total AFP below
20<U+2009>ng/mL.

© 2013 The Japan Society of Hepatology.

PMID: 23347387  [PubMed]


48. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(1):e1003171. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003171. Epub 2013 Jan 
17.

A systematic mapping approach of 16q12.2/FTO and BMI in more than 20,000 African 
Americans narrows in on the underlying functional variation: results from the
Population Architecture using Genomics and Epidemiology (PAGE) study.

Peters U(1), North KE, Sethupathy P, Buyske S, Haessler J, Jiao S, Fesinmeyer MD,
Jackson RD, Kuller LH, Rajkovic A, Lim U, Cheng I, Schumacher F, Wilkens L, Li R,
Monda K, Ehret G, Nguyen KD, Cooper R, Lewis CE, Leppert M, Irvin MR, Gu CC,
Houston D, Buzkova P, Ritchie M, Matise TC, Le Marchand L, Hindorff LA, Crawford 
DC, Haiman CA, Kooperberg C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, Washington, United States of America. upeters@fhcrc.org

Genetic variants in intron 1 of the fat mass- and obesity-associated (FTO) gene
have been consistently associated with body mass index (BMI) in Europeans.
However, follow-up studies in African Americans (AA) have shown no support for
some of the most consistently BMI-associated FTO index single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs). This is most likely explained by different race-specific
linkage disequilibrium (LD) patterns and lower correlation overall in AA, which
provides the opportunity to fine-map this region and narrow in on the functional 
variant. To comprehensively explore the 16q12.2/FTO locus and to search for
second independent signals in the broader region, we fine-mapped a 646-kb region,
encompassing the large FTO gene and the flanking gene RPGRIP1L by investigating a
total of 3,756 variants (1,529 genotyped and 2,227 imputed variants) in 20,488
AAs across five studies. We observed associations between BMI and variants in the
known FTO intron 1 locus: the SNP with the most significant p-value, rs56137030
(8.3 × 10(-6)) had not been highlighted in previous studies. While rs56137030was 
correlated at r(2)>0.5 with 103 SNPs in Europeans (including the GWAS index
SNPs), this number was reduced to 28 SNPs in AA. Among rs56137030 and the 28
correlated SNPs, six were located within candidate intronic regulatory elements, 
including rs1421085, for which we predicted allele-specific binding affinity for 
the transcription factor CUX1, which has recently been implicated in the
regulation of FTO. We did not find strong evidence for a second independent
signal in the broader region. In summary, this large fine-mapping study in AA has
substantially reduced the number of common alleles that are likely to be
functional candidates of the known FTO locus. Importantly our study demonstrated 
that comprehensive fine-mapping in AA provides a powerful approach to narrow in
on the functional candidate(s) underlying the initial GWAS findings in European
populations.

PMCID: PMC3547789
PMID: 23341774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Cereb Cortex. 2014 May;24(5):1216-29. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs400. Epub 2013 Jan
2.

Zbtb20 defines a hippocampal neuronal identity through direct repression of genes
that control projection neuron development in the isocortex.

Nielsen JV(1), Thomassen M, Møllgård K, Noraberg J, Jensen NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology Research, Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Southern Denmark, DK-5000 Odense C, Denmark.

Hippocampal pyramidal neurons are important for encoding and retrieval of spatial
maps and episodic memories. While previous work has shown that Zbtb20 is a cell
fate determinant for CA1 pyramidal neurons, the regulatory mechanisms governing
this process are not known. In this study, we demonstrate that Zbtb20 binds to
genes that control neuronal subtype specification in the developing isocortex,
including Cux1, Cux2, Fezf2, Foxp2, Mef2c, Rorb, Satb2, Sox5, Tbr1, Tle4, and
Zfpm2. We show that Zbtb20 represses these genes during ectopic CA1 pyramidal
neuron development in transgenic mice. These data reveal a novel regulatory
mechanism by which Zbtb20 suppresses the acquisition of an isocortical fate
during archicortical neurogenesis to ensure commitment to a CA1 pyramidal neuron 
fate. We further show that the expression pattern of Zbtb20 is evolutionary
conserved in the fetal human hippocampus, where it is complementary to the
expression pattern of the Zbtb20 target gene Tbr1. Therefore, the disclosed
Zbtb20-mediated transcriptional repressor mechanism may be involved in
development of the human archicortex.

PMID: 23283686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 8;288(6):4135-47. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.345942. Epub 2012
Dec 19.

Transcription factor CUTL1 is a negative regulator of drug resistance in gastric 
cancer.

Li T(1), Wang H, Sun Y, Zhao L, Gang Y, Guo X, Huang R, Yang Z, Pan Y, Wu K, Xu
L, Liu Z, Fan D.

Author information: 
(1)Xijing Hospital of Digestive Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology,
Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032, China.

Gastric cancer is one of the leading causes of malignancy-related mortality
worldwide, and drug resistance hampered the clinical efficacy of chemotherapy. To
better understand the molecular mechanism causing drug resistance, we previously 
established an isogenic pair of doxorubicin-sensitive and -resistant gastric
cancer cell lines, SGC7901 and SGC7901/ADR cells. Here, we investigated how
modulation of CUTL1 activity affects the response of gastric cancer to frequently
used chemotherapeutic agents. In this study, we demonstrated that CUTL1
transcription activity was significantly reduced in doxorubicin-resistant cells. 
Furthermore, decreased CUTL1 expression was strongly associated with intrinsic
drug resistance in human gastric cancer tissues and could be used as a poor
prognosis biomarker. Both gain-of-function (by overexpression of active CUTL1)
and loss-of-function (by CUTL1-specific shRNA knockdown) studies showed that
increased CUTL1 activity significantly enhanced cell sensitivity to drugs and led
to increased apoptosis, whereas decreased CUTL1 expression dramatically reduced
cell sensitivity to drugs and thus fewer apoptoses. Importantly, modulation of
CUTL1 activity resulted in altered sensitivity to multiple drugs. In vivo mouse
studies indicated that overexpression of active CUTL1 significantly resulted in
increased cancer tissue response to chemotherapy and therefore inhibited growth, 
whereas knockdown of CUTL1 conferred resistance to chemotherapy. Taken together, 
our results strongly indicate that CUTL1 activity is inversely associated with
drug resistance and thus is an attractive therapeutic target to modulate
multidrug resistance in gastric cancer.

PMCID: PMC3567664
PMID: 23255599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Cereb Cortex. 2014 Apr;24(4):1088-101. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs375. Epub 2012 Dec 
16.

Accumulation of GABAergic neurons, causing a focal ambient GABA gradient, and
downregulation of KCC2 are induced during microgyrus formation in a mouse model
of polymicrogyria.

Wang T(1), Kumada T, Morishima T, Iwata S, Kaneko T, Yanagawa Y, Yoshida S,
Fukuda A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurophysiology, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine,
Hamamatsu, Shizuoka 431-3192, Japan.

Although focal cortical malformations are considered neuronal migration
disorders, their formation mechanisms remain unknown. We addressed how the
<U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic system affects the GABAergic and glutamatergic
neuronal migration underlying such malformations. A focal freeze-lesion (FFL) of 
the postnatal day zero (P0) glutamic acid decarboxylase-green fluorescent protein
knock-in mouse neocortex produced a 3- or 4-layered microgyrus at P7. GABAergic
interneurons accumulated around the necrosis including the superficial region
during microgyrus formation at P4, whereas E17.5-born, Cux1-positive pyramidal
neurons outlined the GABAergic neurons and were absent from the superficial
layer, forming cell-dense areas in layer 2 of the P7 microgyrus. GABA imaging
showed that an extracellular GABA level temporally increased in the GABAergic
neuron-positive area, including the necrotic center, at P4. The expression of the
Cl(-) transporter KCC2 was downregulated in the microgyrus-forming GABAergic and 
E17.5-born glutamatergic neurons at P4; these cells may need a high intracellular
Cl(-) concentration to induce depolarizing GABA effects. Bicuculline decreased
the frequency of spontaneous Ca(2+) oscillations in these microgyrus-forming
cells. Thus, neonatal FFL causes specific neuronal accumulation, preceded by an
increase in ambient GABA during microgyrus formation. This GABA increase induces 
GABAA receptor-mediated Ca(2+) oscillation in KCC2-downregulated
microgyrus-forming cells, as seen in migrating cells during early neocortical
development.

PMCID: PMC3948493
PMID: 23246779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Blood. 2013 Feb 7;121(6):975-83. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-04-426965. Epub 2012 Dec
3.

CUX1 is a haploinsufficient tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 7 frequently
inactivated in acute myeloid leukemia.

McNerney ME(1), Brown CD, Wang X, Bartom ET, Karmakar S, Bandlamudi C, Yu S, Ko
J, Sandall BP, Stricker T, Anastasi J, Grossman RL, Cunningham JM, Le Beau MM,
White KP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genomics and Systems Biology, Department of Pathology,
University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Feb 7;121(6):869-71.

Loss of chromosome 7 and del(7q) [-7/del(7q)] are recurring cytogenetic
abnormalities in hematologic malignancies, including acute myeloid leukemia and
therapy-related myeloid neoplasms, and associated with an adverse prognosis.
Despite intensive effort by many laboratories, the putative myeloid tumor
suppressor(s) on chromosome 7 has not yet been identified.We performed
transcriptome sequencing and SNP array analysis on de novo and therapy-related
myeloid neoplasms, half with -7/del(7q). We identified a 2.17-Mb commonly deleted
segment on chromosome band 7q22.1 containing CUX1, a gene encoding a
homeodomain-containing transcription factor. In 1 case, CUX1 was disrupted by a
translocation, resulting in a loss-of-function RNA fusion transcript. CUX1 was
the most significantly differentially expressed gene within the commonly deleted 
segment and was expressed at haploinsufficient levels in -7/del(7q) leukemias.
Haploinsufficiency of the highly conserved ortholog, cut, led to hemocyte
overgrowth and tumor formation in Drosophila melanogaster. Similarly,
haploinsufficiency of CUX1 gave human hematopoietic cells a significant
engraftment advantage on transplantation into immunodeficient mice. Within the
RNA-sequencing data, we identified a CUX1-associated cell cycle transcriptional
gene signature, suggesting that CUX1 exerts tumor suppressor activity by
regulating proliferative genes. These data identify CUX1 as a conserved,
haploinsufficient tumor suppressor frequently deleted in myeloid neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC3567344
PMID: 23212519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Cell Signal. 2013 Jan;25(1):349-54. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.10.008. Epub 2012
Oct 17.

Cutl1: a potential target for cancer therapy.

Liu KC(1), Lin BS, Zhao M, Wang KY, Lan XP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Laboratory Medicine, Fuzhou General Hospital, PLA, Fuzhou,
Fujian 350025, PR China.

CDP, a key transcription regulator encoded by Cutl1 gene, has been demonstrated
to be involved in repressing or promoting expression of target genes through its 
specific DNA-binding, meanwhile, the activity of CDP was influenced by some types
of modifications including transcriptional, posttranscriptional, translational
and posttranslational modifications. In this review, we systematically analyzed
the role of CDP in normal development and tumor progression, and then emphasized 
its interactors and downstream molecules. Eventually, we concluded that Cut1
could promote cancer progression and its down-regulating expression will be a
promising strategy for cancer therapy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23085261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2013 Jan;52(1):11-23. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22001. Epub 2012
Sep 10.

Identification of CUX1 as the recurrent chromosomal band 7q22 target gene in
human uterine leiomyoma.

Schoenmakers EF(1), Bunt J, Hermers L, Schepens M, Merkx G, Janssen B, Kersten M,
Huys E, Pauwels P, Debiec-Rychter M, van Kessel AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre and
Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Eric.Schoenmakers@Pfizer.com

Uterine leiomyomas are benign solid tumors of mesenchymal origin which occur with
an estimated incidence of up to 77% of all women of reproductive age. The
majority of these tumors remains symptomless, but in about a quarter of cases
they cause leiomyoma-associated symptoms including chronic pelvic pain,
menorrhagia-induced anemia, and impaired fertility. As a consequence, they are
the most common indication for pre-menopausal hysterectomy in the USA and Japan
and annually translate into a multibillion dollar healthcare problem.
Approximately 40% of these neoplasms present with recurring structural
cytogenetic anomalies, including del(7)(q22), t(12;14)(q15;q24), t(1;2)(p36;p24),
and anomalies affecting 6p21 and/or 10q22. Using positional cloning strategies,
we and others previously identified HMGA1, HMGA2, RAD51L1, MORF, and, more
recently, NCOA1 as primary target (fusion) genes associated with tumor initiation
in four of these distinct cytogenetic subgroups. Despite the fact that the
del(7)(q22) subgroup is the largest among leiomyomas, and was first described
more than twenty years ago, the 7q22 leiomyoma target gene still awaits
unequivocal identification. We here describe a positional cloning effort from two
independent uterine leiomyomas, containing respectively a pericentric and a
paracentric chromosomal inversion, both affecting band 7q22. We found that both
chromosomal inversions target the cut-like homeobox 1 (CUX1) gene on chromosomal 
band 7q22.1 in a way which is functionally equivalent to the more frequently
observed del(7q) cases, and which is compatible with a mono-allelic knock-out
scenario, similar as was previously described for the cytogenetic subgroup
showing chromosome 14q involvement.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22965931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mol Carcinog. 2014 Feb;53(2):117-24. doi: 10.1002/mc.21955. Epub 2012 Aug 28.

Intronic promoters and their noncoding transcripts: a new source of
cancer-associated genes.

Relle M(1), Becker M, Meyer RG, Stassen M, Schwarting A.

Author information: 
(1)I. Department of Medicine, University Medical Center of the Johannes-Gutenberg
University Mainz, Mainz, Germany.

Recent studies of mammalian genomes suggest that alternative promoters are
associated with various disorders, including cancer. Here we present an intronic 
promoter of the murine proteinase 3 gene, which drives the expression of an
alternative mRNA in intron 2 of the prtn3 gene. The proximal promoter sequences
were identified and a series of promoter deletion constructs were used to
identify the sequence elements that are required for basal promoter activity.
Expression of the homeobox transcription factor CUX1 p75 isoform was found to
suppress the activity of the alternative PR3 promoter. Data base analyses,
multiple alignments and expression data showed that the intronic PR3 promoter is 
active in leukemia and other tumor cells as well as in mouse embryo, male mammary
gland and bone marrow. In the spleen, the transcript is exclusively expressed by 
Gr-1(int) /CD11b(+) cells, which are also known as myeloid-derived suppressor
cells (MDSCs). In humans, an alternative transcript of the PR3-gene could be
detected in the bone marrow and in various cancer cell lines but not in primary
leukemia cells, suggesting a species-overarching function of this kind of
promoter. Therefore, the alternative PR3 promoter and its mRNA may be useful
tools to investigate the fate of hematopoietic stem cells.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22930395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Am J Hematol. 2012 Nov;87(11):1010-6. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23309. Epub 2012 Aug 7.

Clinical significance of genetic aberrations in secondary acute myeloid leukemia.

Milosevic JD(1), Puda A, Malcovati L, Berg T, Hofbauer M, Stukalov A, Klampfl T, 
Harutyunyan AS, Gisslinger H, Gisslinger B, Burjanivova T, Rumi E, Pietra D,
Elena C, Vannucchi AM, Doubek M, Dvorakova D, Robesova B, Wieser R, Koller E,
Suvajdzic N, Tomin D, Tosic N, Colinge J, Racil Z, Steurer M, Pavlovic S, Cazzola
M, Kralovics R.

Author information: 
(1)CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of
Sciences, Vienna, Austria.

The study aimed to identify genetic lesions associated with secondary acute
myeloid leukemia (sAML) in comparison with AML arising de novo (dnAML) and assess
their impact on patients' overall survival (OS). High-resolution genotyping and
loss of heterozygosity mapping was performed on DNA samples from 86 sAML and 117 
dnAML patients, using Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP 6.0 arrays. Genes TP53,
RUNX1, CBL, IDH1/2, NRAS, NPM1, and FLT3 were analyzed for mutations in all
patients. We identified 36 recurrent cytogenetic aberrations (more than five
events). Mutations in TP53, 9pUPD, and del7q (targeting CUX1 locus) were
significantly associated with sAML, while NPM1 and FLT3 mutations associated with
dnAML. Patients with sAML carrying TP53 mutations demonstrated lower 1-year OS
rate than those with wild-type TP53 (14.3% ± 9.4% vs. 35.4% ± 7.2%; P = 0.002),
while complex karyotype, del7q (CUX1) and del7p (IKZF1) showed no significant
effect on OS. Multivariate analysis confirmed that mutant TP53 was the only
independent adverse prognostic factor for OS in sAML (hazard ratio 2.67; 95% CI: 
1.33-5.37; P = 0.006). Patients with dnAML and complex karyotype carried
sAML-associated defects (TP53 defects in 54.5%, deletions targeting FOXP1 and
ETV6 loci in 45.4% of the cases). We identified several co-occurring lesions
associated with either sAML or dnAML diagnosis. Our data suggest that distinct
genetic lesions drive leukemogenesis in sAML. High karyotype complexity of sAML
patients does not influence OS. Somatic mutations in TP53 are the only
independent adverse prognostic factor in sAML. Patients with dnAML and complex
karyotype show genetic features associated with sAML and myeloproliferative
neoplasms.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22887079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Neurosci Bull. 2012 Jun;28(3):259-70.

Characterization of amyloid-ß precursor protein intracellular domain-associated
transcriptional complexes in SH-SY5Y neurocytes.

Yang W(1), Lau AY, Luo S, Zhu Q, Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology and Food Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, 
Hefei 230009, China. wulinyoung@163.com

OBJECTIVE: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is one of the major disorders worldwide.
Recent research suggests that the amyloid-ß precursor protein intracellular
domain (AICD) is a potential contributor to AD development and progression. The
small AICD is rapidly degraded after processing from the full-length protein. The
present study aimed to apply a highly efficient biotinylation approach in vitro
to study AICD-associated complexes in neurocytes.
METHODS: By co-expressing Escherichia coli biotin ligase with biotinyl-tagged
AICD in the SH-SY5Y neuronal cell line, the effects of AICD overexpression on
cell proliferation and apoptosis were analyzed. Besides, AICD-associated nuclear 
transcriptional complexes were purified and then examined by mass spectrometry.
RESULTS: Our data showed that AICD overexpression not only affected cell
proliferation but also led to apoptosis in differentiated SH-SY5Y cells.
Moreover, biotinylation allowed single-step purification of biotinylated
AICD-associated complexes from total nuclear extract via high-affinity
biotin-streptavidin binding. Following this by mass spectrometry, we identified
physically associated proteins, some reported previously and other novel binding 
partners, CUX1 and SPT5.
CONCLUSION: Based on these results, a map of the AICD-associated nuclear
interactome was depicted. Specifically, AICD can activate CUX1 transcriptional
activity, which may be associated with AICD-dependent neuronal cell death. This
work helps to understand the AICD-associated biological events in AD progression 
and provides novel insights into the development of AD.

PMID: 22622826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Pharmacogenomics J. 2013 Aug;13(4):354-8. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2012.18. Epub 2012 May
15.

Possible association of CUX1 gene polymorphisms with antidepressant response in
major depressive disorder.

Sasayama D(1), Hiraishi A, Tatsumi M, Kamijima K, Ikeda M, Umene-Nakano W,
Yoshimura R, Nakamura J, Iwata N, Kunugi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mental Disorder Research, National Institute of Neuroscience,
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Tokyo, Japan.

Association between response to antidepressant treatment and genetic
polymorphisms was examined in two independent Japanese samples of patients with
major depressive disorder (MDD). Genome-wide approach using the Illumina Human
CNV370-quad Bead Chip was utilized in the analysis of the 92 MDD patients in the 
first sample. In all, 11 non-intergenic single-nucleotide polymorphisms with
uncorrected allelic P-value <0.0001 were selected for the subsequent association 
analyses in the second sample of 136 MDD patients. Difference in allele
distribution between responders and nonresponders were found in the second-stage 
sample for rs365836 and rs201522 of the CUX1 gene (P=0.005 and 0.004,
respectively). The allelic P-values for rs365836 and rs201522 in both samples
combined were 0.0000023 and 0.0000040, respectively. Our results provide the
first evidence that polymorphisms of the CUX1 gene may be associated with
response to antidepressant treatment in Japanese patients with MDD.

PMID: 22584459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Alcohol. 2012 Sep;46(6):603-12. doi: 10.1016/j.alcohol.2012.01.003. Epub 2012 May
7.

Postnatal day 7 ethanol treatment causes persistent reductions in adult mouse
brain volume and cortical neurons with sex specific effects on neurogenesis.

Coleman LG Jr(1), Oguz I, Lee J, Styner M, Crews FT.

Author information: 
(1)Bowles Center for Alcohol Studies, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
CB# 7178, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7178, USA.

Ethanol treatment on postnatal day seven (P7) causes robust brain cell death and 
is a model of late gestational alcohol exposure (Ikonomidou et al., 2000). To
investigate the long-term effects of P7 ethanol treatment on adult brain, mice
received either two doses of saline or ethanol on P7 (2.5 g/kg, s.c., 2 h apart) 
and were assessed as adults (P82) for brain volume (using postmortem MRI) and
cellular architecture (using immunohistochemistry). Adult mice that received P7
ethanol had reduced MRI total brain volume (4%) with multiple brain regions being
reduced in both males and females. Immunohistochemistry indicated reduced frontal
cortical parvalbumin immunoreactive (PV + IR) interneurons (18-33%) and reduced
Cux1+IR layer II pyramidal neurons (15%) in both sexes. Interestingly, markers of
adult hippocampal neurogenesis differed between sexes, with only ethanol treated 
males showing increased doublecortin and Ki67 expression (52 and 57%
respectively) in the dentate gyrus, consistent with increased neurogenesis
compared to controls. These findings suggest that P7 ethanol treatment causes
persistent reductions in adult brain volume and frontal cortical neurons in both 
males and females. Increased adult neurogenesis in males, but not females, is
consistent with differential adaptive responses to P7 ethanol toxicity between
the sexes. One day of ethanol exposure, e.g. P7, causes persistent adult brain
dysmorphology.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3552379
PMID: 22572057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(3):e1002582. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002582. Epub 2012 Mar 
15.

Antagonistic regulation of apoptosis and differentiation by the Cut transcription
factor represents a tumor-suppressing mechanism in Drosophila.

Zhai Z(1), Ha N, Papagiannouli F, Hamacher-Brady A, Brady N, Sorge S, Bezdan D,
Lohmann I.

Author information: 
(1)CellNetworks-Cluster of Excellence, Centre for Organismal Studies (COS)
Heidelberg, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 May;12(5):320.

Apoptosis is essential to prevent oncogenic transformation by triggering
self-destruction of harmful cells, including those unable to differentiate.
However, the mechanisms linking impaired cell differentiation and apoptosis
during development and disease are not well understood. Here we report that the
Drosophila transcription factor Cut coordinately controls differentiation and
repression of apoptosis via direct regulation of the pro-apoptotic gene reaper.
We also demonstrate that this regulatory circuit acts in diverse cell lineages to
remove uncommitted precursor cells in status nascendi and thereby interferes with
their potential to develop into cancer cells. Consistent with the role of Cut
homologues in controlling cell death in vertebrates, we find repression of
apoptosis regulators by Cux1 in human cancer cells. Finally, we present evidence 
that suggests that other lineage-restricted specification factors employ a
similar mechanism to put the brakes on the oncogenic process.

PMCID: PMC3305397
PMID: 22438831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 May;40(10):4483-95. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks041. Epub 2012
Feb 8.

CUX1 transcription factor is required for optimal ATM/ATR-mediated responses to
DNA damage.

Vadnais C(1), Davoudi S, Afshin M, Harada R, Dudley R, Clermont PL, Drobetsky E, 
Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Goodman Cancer Centre, Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, 1160
Pine avenue West, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, H3A 1A3.

The p110 Cut homeobox 1 (CUX1) transcription factor regulates genes involved in
DNA replication and chromosome segregation. Using a genome-wide-approach, we now 
demonstrate that CUX1 also modulates the constitutive expression of DNA damage
response genes, including ones encoding ATM and ATR, as well as proteins involved
in DNA damage-induced activation of, and signaling through, these kinases.
Consistently, RNAi knockdown or genetic inactivation of CUX1 reduced ATM/ATR
expression and negatively impacted hallmark protective responses mediated by ATM 
and ATR following exposure to ionizing radiation (IR) and UV, respectively.
Specifically, abrogation of CUX1 strongly reduced ATM autophosphorylation after
IR, in turn causing substantial decreases in (i) levels of phospho-Chk2 and p53, 
(ii) <U+03B3>-H2AX and Rad51 DNA damage foci and (iii) the efficiency of DNA strand
break repair. Similarly remarkable reductions in ATR-dependent responses,
including phosphorylation of Chk1 and H2AX, were observed post-UV. Finally,
multiple cell cycle checkpoints and clonogenic survival were compromised in CUX1 
knockdown cells. Our results indicate that CUX1 regulates a transcriptional
program that is necessary to mount an efficient response to mutagenic insult.
Thus, CUX1 ensures not only the proper duplication and segregation of the genetic
material, but also the preservation of its integrity.

PMCID: PMC3378881
PMID: 22319212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 14;109(7):2479-84. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1120791109. Epub 2012 Jan 30.

Nonimmunoglobulin target loci of activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID)
share unique features with immunoglobulin genes.

Kato L(1), Begum NA, Burroughs AM, Doi T, Kawai J, Daub CO, Kawaguchi T, Matsuda 
F, Hayashizaki Y, Honjo T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8501, Japan.

Activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) is required for both somatic
hypermutation and class-switch recombination in activated B cells. AID is also
known to target nonimmunoglobulin genes and introduce mutations or chromosomal
translocations, eventually causing tumors. To identify as-yet-unknown AID
targets, we screened early AID-induced DNA breaks by using two independent
genome-wide approaches. Along with known AID targets, this screen identified a
set of unique genes (SNHG3, MALAT1, BCL7A, and CUX1) and confirmed that these
loci accumulated mutations as frequently as Ig locus after AID activation.
Moreover, these genes share three important characteristics with the Ig gene:
translocations in tumors, repetitive sequences, and the epigenetic modification
of chromatin by H3K4 trimethylation in the vicinity of cleavage sites.

PMCID: PMC3289292
PMID: 22308462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Gene. 2012 Apr 10;497(1):18-26. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.01.039. Epub 2012 Jan
28.

CUX1 transcription factors: from biochemical activities and cell-based assays to 
mouse models and human diseases.

Hulea L(1), Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Goodman Cancer Centre, McGill University, 1160 Pine avenue West, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada H3A 1A3.

ChIP-chip and expression analyses indicated that CUX1 transcription factors
regulate a large number of genes and microRNAs involved in multiple cellular
processes. Indeed, in proliferating cells CUX1 was shown to regulate several
genes involved in DNA replication, progression into S phase and later, the
spindle assembly checkpoint that controls progression through mitosis.
siRNA-mediated knockdown established that CUX1 is required for cell motility.
Moreover, higher expression of short CUX1 isoforms, as observed in many cancers, 
was shown to stimulate cell migration and invasion. In parallel, elevated
expression particularly in higher grade tumors of breast and pancreatic cancers
implicated CUX1 in tumor initiation and progression. Indeed, transgenic mouse
models demonstrated a causal role of CUX1 in cancers originating from various
cell types. These studies revealed that higher CUX1 expression or activity not
only stimulates cell proliferation and motility, but also promotes genetic
instability. CUX1 has also been implicated in the etiology of polycystic kidney
diseases, both from a transgenic approach and the analysis of CUX1 activity in
multiple mouse models of this disease. Studies in neurobiology have uncovered a
potential implication of CUX1 in cognitive disorders, neurodegeneration and
obesity. CUX1 was shown to be expressed specifically in pyramidal neurons of the 
neocortex upper layers where it regulates dendrite branching, spine development, 
and synapse formation. In addition, modulation of CUX1 expression in neurons of
the hypothalamus has been associated with changes in leptin receptor trafficking 
in the vicinity of the primary cilium resulting in altered leptin signaling and
ultimately, eating behavior. Overall, studies in various fields have allowed the 
development of several cell-based assays to monitor CUX1 function and have
extended the range of organs in which CUX1 plays an important role in development
and tissue homeostasis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22306263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Apr 4;351(2):184-98. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.12.004.
Epub 2011 Dec 19.

Transcription of the human EAP1 gene is regulated by upstream components of a
puberty-controlling Tumor Suppressor Gene network.

Mueller JK(1), Koch I, Lomniczi A, Loche A, Rulfs T, Castellano JM, Kiess W,
Ojeda S, Heger S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Biochemistry, Hannover Medical School, Germany.

Mammalian puberty is initiated by an increased pulsatile release of
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) from specialized neurons located in the
hypothalamus. GnRH secretion is controlled by neuronal and glial networks, whose 
activity appears to be coordinated via transcriptional regulation. One of the
transcription factors involved in this process is thought to be the recently
described gene Enhanced at Puberty 1 (EAP1), which encodes a protein with dual
transcriptional activity. In this study we used gene reporter and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays to examine the hypothesis that EAP1 expression 
is controlled by transcriptional regulators earlier postulated to serve as
central nodes of a gene network involved in the neuroendocrine control of
puberty. These regulators include Thyroid Transcription Factor 1 (TTF1), Yin Yang
1 (YY1), and CUX1, in addition to EAP1 itself. While TTF1 has been shown to
facilitate the advent of puberty, YY1 (a zinc finger protein component of the
Polycomb silencing complex) may play a repressive role. The precise role of CUX1 
in this context is not known, but like EAP1, CUX1 can either activate or repress 
gene transcription. We observed that DNA segments of two different lengths (998
and 2744bp) derived from the 5'-flanking region of the human EAP1 gene display
similar transcriptional activity. TTF1 stimulates transcription from both DNA
segments with equal potency, whereas YY1, CUX1, and EAP1 itself, behave as
transcriptional repressors. All four proteins are recruited in vivo to the EAP1
5'-flanking region. These observations suggest that EAP1 gene expression is under
dual transcriptional regulation imposed by a trans-activator (TTF1) and two
repressors (YY1 and CUX1) previously postulated to be upstream components of a
puberty-controlling gene network. In addition, EAP1 itself appears to control its
own expression via a negative auto-feedback loop mechanism. Further studies are
needed to determine if the occupancy of the EAP1 promoter by these regulatory
factors changes at the time of puberty.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3288847
PMID: 22209758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Apr 1;21(7):1566-80. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr594. Epub 2011 Dec
16.

Cut-like homeobox 1 and nuclear factor I/B mediate ENGRAILED2 autism spectrum
disorder-associated haplotype function.

Choi J(1), Ababon MR, Matteson PG, Millonig JH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Both common and rare variants contribute to autism spectrum disorder (ASD) risk, 
but few variants have been established as functional. Previously we demonstrated 
that an intronic haplotype (rs1861972-rs1861973 A-C) in the homeobox
transcription factor ENGRAILED2 (EN2) is significantly associated with ASD.
Positive association has also been reported in six additional data sets,
suggesting EN2 is an ASD susceptibility gene. Additional support for this
possibility requires identification of functional variants that affect EN2
regulation or activity. In this study, we demonstrate that the A-C haplotype is a
transcriptional activator. Luciferase (luc) assays in mouse neuronal cultures
determined that the A-C haplotype increases expression levels (50%, P < 0.01, 24 
h; 250%, P < 0.0001, 72 h). Mutational analysis indicates that the A-C haplotype 
activator function requires both associated A and C alleles. A minimal 202-bp
element is sufficient for function and also specifically binds a protein complex.
Mass spectrometry identified these proteins as the transcription factors,
Cut-like homeobox 1 (Cux1) and nuclear factor I/B (Nfib). Subsequent antibody
supershifts and chromatin immunoprecipitations demonstrated that human CUX1 and
NFIB bind the A-C haplotype. Co-transfection and knock-down experiments
determined that both CUX1 and NFIB are required for the A-C haplotype activator
function. These data demonstrate that the ASD-associated A-C haplotype is a
transcriptional activator, and both CUX1 and NFIB mediate this activity. These
results provide biochemical evidence that the ASD-associated A-C haplotype is
functional, further supporting EN2 as an ASD susceptibility gene.

PMCID: PMC3298280
PMID: 22180456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Development. 2011 Nov;138(22):4979-90. doi: 10.1242/dev.068155.

Dpy19l1, a multi-transmembrane protein, regulates the radial migration of
glutamatergic neurons in the developing cerebral cortex.

Watanabe K(1), Takebayashi H, Bepari AK, Esumi S, Yanagawa Y, Tamamaki N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphological Neural Science, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan. watak@kumamoto-u.ac.jp

Erratum in
    Development. 2012 Mar;139(6):1225.

During corticogenesis, the regulation of neuronal migration is crucial for the
functional organization of the neocortex. Glutamatergic neurons are major
excitatory components of the mammalian neocortex. In order to elucidate the
specific molecular mechanisms underlying their development, we used single-cell
microarray analysis to screen for mouse genes that are highly expressed in
developing glutamatergic neurons. We identified dpy-19-like 1 (Dpy19l1), a
homolog of C. elegans dpy-19, which encodes a putative multi-transmembrane
protein shown to regulate directed migration of Q neuroblasts in C. elegans. At
embryonic stages Dpy19l1 is highly expressed in glutamatergic neurons in the
mouse cerebral cortex, whereas in the subpallium, where GABAergic neurons are
generated, expression was below detectable levels. Downregulation of Dpy19l1
mediated by shRNA resulted in defective radial migration of glutamatergic neurons
in vivo, which was restored by the expression of shRNA-insensitive Dpy19l1. Many 
Dpy19l1-knockdown cells were aberrantly arrested in the intermediate zone and the
deep layer and, additionally, some extended single long processes towards the
pial surface. Furthermore, we observed defective radial migration of bipolar
cells in Dpy19l1-knockdown brains. Despite these migration defects, these cells
correctly expressed Cux1, which is a marker for upper layer neurons, suggesting
that Dpy19l1 knockdown results in migration defects but does not affect cell type
specification. These results indicate that Dpy19l1 is required for the proper
radial migration of glutamatergic neurons, and suggest an evolutionarily
conserved role for the Dpy19 family in neuronal migration.

PMCID: PMC3207862
PMID: 22028030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Neurosci Res. 2012 Jan;72(1):23-31. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2011.09.012. Epub 2011 
Oct 6.

Induction of superficial cortical layer neurons from mouse embryonic stem cells
by valproic acid.

Juliandi B(1), Abematsu M, Sanosaka T, Tsujimura K, Smith A, Nakashima K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, Graduate School of Biological Sciences, 
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Ikoma, Nara 630-0192, Japan.

Within the developing mammalian cortex, neural progenitors first generate
deep-layer neurons and subsequently more superficial-layer neurons, in an
inside-out manner. It has been reported recently that mouse embryonic stem cells 
(mESCs) can, to some extent, recapitulate cortical development in vitro, with the
sequential appearance of neurogenesis markers resembling that in the developing
cortex. However, mESCs can only recapitulate early corticogenesis;
superficial-layer neurons, which are normally produced in later developmental
periods in vivo, are under-represented. This failure of mESCs to reproduce later 
corticogenesis in vitro implies the existence of crucial factor(s) that are
absent or uninduced in existing culture systems. Here we show that mESCs can give
rise to superficial-layer neurons efficiently when treated with valproic acid
(VPA), a histone deacetylase inhibitor. VPA treatment increased the production of
Cux1-positive superficial-layer neurons, and decreased that of Ctip2-positive
deep-layer neurons. These results shed new light on the mechanisms of later
corticogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd and the Japan Neuroscience Society. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 22001759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25788. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025788. Epub 2011 Sep 30.

Anti-Aß drug screening platform using human iPS cell-derived neurons for the
treatment of Alzheimer's disease.

Yahata N(1), Asai M, Kitaoka S, Takahashi K, Asaka I, Hioki H, Kaneko T, Maruyama
K, Saido TC, Nakahata T, Asada T, Yamanaka S, Iwata N, Inoue H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for iPS Cell Research and Application, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder that causes 
progressive memory and cognitive decline during middle to late adult life. The AD
brain is characterized by deposition of amyloid ß peptide (Aß), which is produced
from amyloid precursor protein by ß- and <U+03B3>-secretase (presenilin
complex)-mediated sequential cleavage. Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells
potentially provide an opportunity to generate a human cell-based model of AD
that would be crucial for drug discovery as well as for investigating mechanisms 
of the disease.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We differentiated human iPS (hiPS) cells into
neuronal cells expressing the forebrain marker, Foxg1, and the neocortical
markers, Cux1, Satb2, Ctip2, and Tbr1. The iPS cell-derived neuronal cells also
expressed amyloid precursor protein, ß-secretase, and <U+03B3>-secretase components, and
were capable of secreting Aß into the conditioned media. Aß production was
inhibited by ß-secretase inhibitor, <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor (GSI), and an NSAID;
however, there were different susceptibilities to all three drugs between early
and late differentiation stages. At the early differentiation stage, GSI
treatment caused a fast increase at lower dose (Aß surge) and drastic decline of 
Aß production.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results indicate that the hiPS cell-derived
neuronal cells express functional ß- and <U+03B3>-secretases involved in Aß production; 
however, anti-Aß drug screening using these hiPS cell-derived neuronal cells
requires sufficient neuronal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3184175
PMID: 21984949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23676. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023676. Epub 2011 Aug 19.

APC(cdh1) mediates degradation of the oncogenic Rho-GEF Ect2 after mitosis.

Liot C(1), Seguin L, Siret A, Crouin C, Schmidt S, Bertoglio J.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U749, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.

BACKGROUND: Besides regulation of actin cytoskeleton-dependent functions, Rho
GTPase pathways are essential to cell cycle progression and cell division. Rho,
Rac and Cdc42 regulate G1 to S phase progression and are involved in cytokinesis.
RhoA GDP/GTP cycling is required for normal cytokinesis and recent reports have
shown that the exchange factor Ect2 and the GTPase activating protein MgcRacGAP
regulate RhoA activity during mitosis. We previously showed that the
transcription factors E2F1 and CUX1 regulate expression of MgcRacGAP and Ect2 as 
cells enter S-phase.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We now report that Ect2 is subject to proteasomal
degradation after mitosis, following ubiquitination by the APC/C complex and its 
co-activator Cdh1. A proper nuclear localization of Ect2 is necessary for its
degradation. APC-Cdh1 assembles K11-linked poly-ubiquitin chains on Ect2,
depending upon a stretch of ~25 amino acid residues that contain a bi-partite
NLS, a conventional D-box and two TEK-like boxes. Site-directed mutagenesis of
target sequences generated stabilized Ect2 proteins. Furthermore, such
degradation-resistant mutants of Ect2 were found to activate RhoA and subsequent 
signalling pathways and are able to transform NIH3T3 cells.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results identify Ect2 as a bona fide cell
cycle-regulated protein and suggest that its ubiquitination-dependent degradation
may play an important role in RhoA regulation at the time of mitosis. Our
findings raise the possibility that the overexpression of Ect2 that has been
reported in some human tumors might result not only from deregulated
transcription, but also from impaired degradation.

PMCID: PMC3158779
PMID: 21886810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Epilepsia. 2011 Oct;52(10):1928-37. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03246.x. Epub
2011 Aug 29.

Altered layer-specific gene expression in cortical samples from patients with
temporal lobe epilepsy.

Rossini L(1), Moroni RF, Tassi L, Watakabe A, Yamamori T, Spreafico R, Garbelli
R.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Epileptology and Experimental Neurophysiology Unit, IRCCS Foundation,
C. Besta Neurological Institute, Milan, Italy.

PURPOSE: Neuropathologic investigations frequently reveal the presence of
architectural cortical dysplasia in patients with temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE),
sometimes as an isolated finding but more commonly associated with hippocampal
sclerosis (HS) and white matter abnormalities. The histologic pattern and the
developmental origin of these alterations are not clear, and their diagnostic
criteria are poorly defined. The aim of this study was to investigate the
expression patterns of layer-specific genes in cortical specimens from patients
with TLE presenting different subtypes of cortical malformations in order to
elucidate the disorganization of the laminar architecture of such epileptogenic
abnormalities and provide evidence to enable a more objective neuropathologic
diagnosis.
METHODS: We analyzed the expression patterns of CUX2, RORBETA, ER81, NURR1, and
CTGF genes, respectively specific markers of layers II-III, IV, V, VI, and VIb,
in surgical samples by means of in situ hybridization and compared them with
those observed in control cortices. The pathologic samples included typical
architectural dysplasia (group 1); temporal lobe sclerosis, a variant of
architectural dysplasia (group 2); and white matter heterotopic neuronal
aggregates, namely small lentiform nodules (group 3). These abnormalities may
have been associated or not with HS.
KEY FINDINGS: All of the genes had a laminar expression pattern in normal
cortices, whereas groups 1 and 2 showed alterations mainly involving layers V and
VI, and highlighted by the altered distribution of ER81- and NURR1-positive
cells. The expression of ER81 and NURR1 genes was different among the groups, and
atypical coexpression of NURR1 and CUX2 mRNA was detected in the neurons making
up the small lentiform nodules.
SIGNIFICANCE: These findings indicate that defects in cortical organization
involving the deeper cortical neurons may be a common etiopathogenic mechanism in
group 1 and 2 cortical dysplasia, whether isolated or associated with HS, and
that developmental disorders may also be present in the white matter (group 3).
They also provide evidence that the layer-specific genes can be usefully used to 
investigate the neuropathology of human cortical dysplasia.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. © 2011 International League Against Epilepsy.

PMID: 21883179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Am J Hematol. 2011 Aug;86(8):703-5. doi: 10.1002/ajh.22069. Epub 2011 Jun 14.

Novel CUX1 missense mutation in association with 7q- at leukemic transformation
of MPN.

Thoennissen NH(1), Lasho T, Thoennissen GB, Ogawa S, Tefferi A, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, UCLA School 
of Medicine, Los Angeles, California, USA. nils.thoennissen@ukmuenster.de

PMID: 21674579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2011 Aug 6;342(1-2):8-19. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.04.025.
Epub 2011 Jun 6.

Transcriptional regulation of the human KiSS1 gene.

Mueller JK(1), Dietzel A, Lomniczi A, Loche A, Tefs K, Kiess W, Danne T, Ojeda
SR, Heger S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Biochemistry, Hannover Medical School, Germany.

Kisspeptin, the product of the KiSS1 gene, has emerged as a key component of the 
mechanism by which the hypothalamus controls puberty and reproductive
development. It does so by stimulating the secretion of gonadotropin releasing
hormone (GnRH). Little is known about the transcriptional control of the KiSS1
gene. Here we show that a set of proteins postulated to be upstream components of
a hypothalamic network involved in controlling female puberty regulates KiSS1
transcriptional activity. Using RACE-PCR we determined that transcription of
KiSS1 mRNA is initiated at a single transcription start site (TSS) located
153-156bp upstream of the ATG translation initiation codon. Promoter assays
performed using 293 MSR cells showed that the KiSS1 promoter is activated by TTF1
and CUX1-p200, and repressed by EAP1, YY1, and CUX1-p110. EAP1 and CUX-110 were
also repressive in GT1-7 cells. All four TFs are recruited in vivo to the KiSS1
promoter and are expressed in kisspeptin neurons. These results suggest that
expression of the KiSS1 gene is regulated by trans-activators and repressors
involved in the system-wide control of mammalian puberty.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3148268
PMID: 21672609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Nat Commun. 2011 Jun 7;2:338. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1345.

MicroRNA122 is a key regulator of a-fetoprotein expression and influences the
aggressiveness of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Kojima K(1), Takata A, Vadnais C, Otsuka M, Yoshikawa T, Akanuma M, Kondo Y, Kang
YJ, Kishikawa T, Kato N, Xie Z, Zhang WJ, Yoshida H, Omata M, Nepveu A, Koike K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2012;3:985.

Comment in
    Cell Mol Immunol. 2012 Jan;9(1):7-8.

a-fetoprotein (AFP) is not only a widely used biomarker in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) surveillance, but is also clinically recognized as linked with
aggressive tumour behaviour. Here we show that deregulation of microRNA122, a
liver-specific microRNA, is a cause of both AFP elevation and a more biologically
aggressive phenotype in HCC. We identify CUX1, a direct target of microRNA122, as
a common central mediator of these two effects. Using liver tissues from
transgenic mice in which microRNA122 is functionally silenced, an orthotopic
xenograft tumour model, and human clinical samples, we further demonstrate that a
microRNA122/CUX1/microRNA214/ZBTB20 pathway regulates AFP expression. We also
show that the microRNA122/CUX1/RhoA pathway regulates the aggressive
characteristics of tumours. We conclude that microRNA122 and associated
signalling proteins may represent viable therapeutic targets, and that serum AFP 
levels in HCC patients may be a surrogate marker for deregulated intracellular
microRNA122 signalling pathways in HCC tissues.

PMID: 21654638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Future Oncol. 2011 May;7(5):591-4. doi: 10.2217/fon.11.34.

Gene signatures of genomic instability as prognostic tools for breast cancer.

Sansregret L, Nepveu A.

PMID: 21568672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Blood. 2011 Jul 7;118(1):167-76. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-01-331678. Epub 2011 Apr
29.

Genome integrity of myeloproliferative neoplasms in chronic phase and during
disease progression.

Klampfl T(1), Harutyunyan A, Berg T, Gisslinger B, Schalling M, Bagienski K,
Olcaydu D, Passamonti F, Rumi E, Pietra D, Jäger R, Pieri L, Guglielmelli P,
Iacobucci I, Martinelli G, Cazzola M, Vannucchi AM, Gisslinger H, Kralovics R.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna,
Austria.

Philadelphia chromosome-negative myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) are clonal
myeloid disorders with increased production of terminally differentiated cells.
The disease course is generally chronic, but some patients show disease
progression (secondary myelofibrosis or accelerated phase) and/or leukemic
transformation. We investigated chromosomal aberrations in 408 MPN samples using 
high-resolution single-nucleotide polymorphism microarrays to identify
disease-associated somatic lesions. Of 408 samples, 37.5% had a wild-type
karyotype and 62.5% harbored at least 1 chromosomal aberration. We identified 25 
recurrent aberrations that were found in 3 or more samples. An increased number
of chromosomal lesions was significantly associated with patient age, as well as 
with disease progression and leukemic transformation, but no association was
observed with MPN subtypes, Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) mutational status, or disease
duration. Aberrations of chromosomes 1q and 9p were positively associated with
disease progression to secondary myelofibrosis or accelerated phase. Changes of
chromosomes 1q, 7q, 5q, 6p, 7p, 19q, 22q, and 3q were positively associated with 
post-MPN acute myeloid leukemia. We mapped commonly affected regions to single
target genes on chromosomes 3p (forkhead box P1 [FOXP1]), 4q (tet oncogene family
member 2 [TET2]), 7p (IKAROS family zinc finger 1 [IKZF1]), 7q (cut-like homeobox
1 [CUX1]), 12p (ets variant 6 [ETV6]), and 21q (runt-related transcription factor
1 [RUNX1]). Our data provide insight into the genetic complexity of MPNs and
implicate new genes involved in disease progression.

PMID: 21531982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Mol Biol Cell. 2011 Jun 1;22(11):1836-44. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E10-08-0669. Epub 2011
Apr 6.

High doses of TGF-ß potently suppress type I collagen via the transcription
factor CUX1.

Fragiadaki M(1), Ikeda T, Witherden A, Mason RM, Abraham D, Bou-Gharios G.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Medicine, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Campus, London W12 ONN,
United Kingdom. m.fragiadaki05@imperial.ac.uk

Transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) is an inducer of type I collagen, and
uncontrolled collagen production leads to tissue scarring and organ failure. Here
we hypothesize that uncovering a molecular mechanism that enables us to switch
off type I collagen may prove beneficial in treating fibrosis. For the first
time, to our knowledge, we provide evidence that CUX1 acts as a negative
regulator of TGF-ß and potent inhibitor of type I collagen transcription. We show
that CUX1, a CCAAT displacement protein, is associated with reduced expression of
type I collagen both in vivo and in vitro. We show that enhancing the expression 
of CUX1 results in effective suppression of type I collagen. We demonstrate that 
the mechanism by which CUX1 suppresses type I collagen is through interfering
with gene transcription. In addition, using an in vivo murine model of
aristolochic acid (AA)-induced interstitial fibrosis and human AA nephropathy, we
observe that CUX1 expression was significantly reduced in fibrotic tissue when
compared to control samples. Moreover, silencing of CUX1 in fibroblasts from
kidneys of patients with renal fibrosis resulted in increased type I collagen
expression. Furthermore, the abnormal CUX1 expression was restored by addition of
TGF-ß via the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. Collectively, our
study demonstrates that modifications of CUX1 expression lead to aberrant
expression of type I collagen, which may provide a molecular basis for
fibrogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3103400
PMID: 21471005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Dev Dyn. 2011 Jun;240(6):1493-501. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22625. Epub 2011 Apr 4.

Ectopic expression of Cux1 is associated with reduced p27 expression and
increased apoptosis during late stage cyst progression upon inactivation of Pkd1 
in collecting ducts.

Paul BM(1), Vassmer D, Taylor A, Magenheimer L, Carlton CG, Piontek KB, Germino
GG, Vanden Heuvel GB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

Polycystic kidney diseases (PKD) are inherited disorders characterized by
fluid-filled cysts primarily in the kidneys. We previously reported differences
between the expression of Cux1, p21, and p27 in the cpk and Pkd1 null mouse
models of PKD. Embryonic lethality of Pkd1 null mice limits its study to early
stages of kidney development. Therefore, we examined mice with a collecting duct 
specific deletion in the Pkd1 gene. Cux1 was ectopically expressed in the cyst
lining epithelial cells of newborn, P7 and P15 Pkd1(CD) mice. Cux1 expression
correlated with cell proliferation in early stages of cystogenesis, however, as
the disease progressed, fewer cyst lining cells showed increased cell
proliferation. Rather, Cux1 expression in late stage cystogenesis was associated 
with increased apoptosis. Taken together, our results suggest that increased Cux1
expression associated with apoptosis is a common feature of late stage cyst
progression in both the cpk and Pkd1(CD) mouse models of PKD.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3092830
PMID: 21465620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Commun Integr Biol. 2010 Nov;3(6):483-6. doi: 10.4161/cib.3.6.12755. Epub 2010
Nov 1.

Intrinsic programs regulating dendrites and synapses in the upper layer neurons
of the cortex.

Cubelos B(1), Nieto M.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional de Biotecnología; CSIC; Campus de Cantoblanco; Madrid, Spain.

Dendrites and spines are key regulators of neuronal function often affected in
cognitive disorders. Neuronal subclasses are characterized by a wide range of
dendritic morphologies that aid their specific functions. However, how
subclass-specific dendritic trees arise during vertebrate development remains
largely unknown. We have recently reported that the restricted expression of Cux1
and Cux2 genes in the upper layers of the cerebral cortex determines the specific
morphology of dendrites and spines and the function of these neurons. Since Cux
genes are the vertebrate homologs of Drosophila Cut, which specifies the
dendritic morphologies of certain sensory neuron populations, our findings
suggest that mechanisms of dendrite differentiation are conserved between
Drosophila and mammals, which had yet to be demonstrated. Importantly, we found
that Cux genes not only modulate dendritic branching, but also dendritic spine
morphogenesis, the functional synapse and cognition. Dendritic spine
stabilization was partly mediated by direct repression of genes of the Xlr
family, previously implicated in cognitive defects in a model of Turner syndrome.
Hence, our work indicates that neuronal subclass specific determinants may
intrinsically affect synaptic activity beyond expected. The functions of Cux1 and
Cux2 were additive and complement each other to establish the final pattern of
the dendritic tree and the number and strength of the synapses. This work
unravels novel mechanisms of dendritogenesis and synaptogenesis and illustrates
how regulating dendritic structures contributes to the specialization of upper
layer neurons. It will be interesting to dissect how these mechanisms regulate
cortical activity, area specialization and cognitive functions.

PMCID: PMC3038044
PMID: 21331220  [PubMed]


79. Haematologica. 2011 Jun;96(6):922-6. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.036558. Epub 2011
Feb 17.

The kinase inhibitor TKI258 is active against the novel CUX1-FGFR1 fusion
detected in a patient with T-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma and t(7;8)(q22;p11).

Wasag B(1), Lierman E, Meeus P, Cools J, Vandenberghe P.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, K.U.Leuven, O&N1 Gasthuisberg, Herestraat 49,
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.

We report a patient with T-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma and a t(7;8)(q22;p11).
CUX1 was identified as the fusion partner of FGFR1 by fluorescence in situ
hybridization and 5' RACE-PCR. We further investigated this novel FGFR1 fusion
using the interleukin-3 (IL-3) dependent Ba/F3 cell line and demonstrated IL-3
independent cell growth of CUX1-FGFR1 expressing cells. TKI258 and PKC412
potently inhibited proliferation of CUX1-FGFR1 transformed Ba/F3 cells. This
growth inhibition was shown to be mediated by inhibition of CUX1-FGFR1 kinase
activity for TKI258 but not PKC412. In summary, we identified a novel CUX1-FGFR1 
fusion oncogene in a patient with the 8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome and
demonstrated its transforming potential in the Ba/F3 cell line. Our in vitro data
support the further investigation of TKI258 for the treatment of constitutively
active FGFR1 fusion proteins.

PMCID: PMC3105656
PMID: 21330321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Feb 1;108(5):1949-54. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1008403108. Epub 2011 Jan 18.

Cut homeobox 1 causes chromosomal instability by promoting bipolar division after
cytokinesis failure.

Sansregret L(1), Vadnais C, Livingstone J, Kwiatkowski N, Awan A, Cadieux C,
Leduy L, Hallett MT, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry Oncology, and Medicine, McGill University, Rosalind
and Morris Goodman Cancer Research Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada.

Cell populations able to generate a large repertoire of genetic variants have
increased potential to generate tumor cells that survive through the multiple
selection steps involved in tumor progression. A mechanism for the generation of 
aneuploid cancer cells involves passage through a tetraploid stage. Supernumerary
centrosomes, however, can lead to multipolar mitosis and cell death. Using tissue
culture and transgenic mouse models of breast cancer, we report that Cut homeobox
1 (CUX1) causes chromosomal instability by activating a transcriptional program
that prevents multipolar divisions and enables the survival of tetraploid cells
that evolve to become genetically unstable and tumorigenic. Transcriptional
targets of CUX1 involved in DNA replication and bipolar mitosis defined a gene
expression signature that, across 12 breast cancer gene expression datasets, was 
associated with poor clinical outcome. The signature not only was higher in
breast tumor subtypes of worse prognosis, like the basal-like and HER2(+)
subtypes, but also identified poor outcome among estrogen
receptor-positive/node-negative tumors, a subgroup considered to be at lower
risk. The CUX1 signature therefore represents a unique criterion to stratify
patients and provides insight into the molecular determinants of poor clinical
outcome.

PMCID: PMC3033318
PMID: 21245318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 21;286(3):2155-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.188482. Epub 2010 
Oct 31.

Cut-like homeobox 1 (CUX1) regulates expression of the fat mass and
obesity-associated and retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator-interacting
protein-1-like (RPGRIP1L) genes and coordinates leptin receptor signaling.

Stratigopoulos G(1), LeDuc CA, Cremona ML, Chung WK, Leibel RL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Department of Pediatrics and Naomi Berrie
Diabetes Center, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.
GS2172@columbia.edu

The first intron of FTO contains common single nucleotide polymorphisms
associated with body weight and adiposity in humans. In an effort to identify the
molecular basis for this association, we discovered that FTO and RPGRIP1L (a
ciliary gene located in close proximity to the transcriptional start site of FTO)
are regulated by isoforms P200 and P110 of the transcription factor, CUX1. This
regulation occurs via a single AATAAATA regulatory site (conserved in the mouse) 
within the FTO intronic region associated with adiposity in humans. Single
nucleotide polymorphism rs8050136 (located in this regulatory site) affects
binding affinities of P200 and P110. Promoter-probe analysis revealed that
binding of P200 to this site represses FTO, whereas binding of P110 increases
transcriptional activity from the FTO as well as RPGRIP1L minimal promoters.
Reduced expression of Fto or Rpgrip1l affects leptin receptor isoform b
trafficking and leptin signaling in N41 mouse hypothalamic or N2a neuroblastoma
cells in vitro. Leptin receptor clusters in the vicinity of the cilium of arcuate
hypothalamic neurons in C57BL/6J mice treated with leptin, but not in fasted
mice, suggesting a potentially important role of the cilium in leptin signaling
that is, in part, regulated by FTO and RPGRIP1L. Decreased Fto/Rpgrip1l
expression in the arcuate hypothalamus coincides with decreased nuclear enzymatic
activity of a protease (cathepsin L) that has been shown to cleave full-length
CUX1 (P200) to P110. P200 disrupts (whereas P110 promotes) leptin receptor
isoform b clustering in the vicinity of the cilium in vitro. Clustering of the
receptor coincides with increased leptin signaling as reflected in protein levels
of phosphorylated Stat3 (p-Stat3). Association of the FTO locus with adiposity in
humans may reflect functional consequences of A/C alleles at rs8050136. The
obesity-risk (A) allele shows reduced affinity for the FTO and RPGRIP1L
transcriptional activator P110, leading to the following: 1) decreased FTO and
RPGRIP1L mRNA levels; 2) reduced LEPR trafficking to the cilium; and, as a
consequence, 3) a diminished cellular response to leptin.

PMCID: PMC3023512
PMID: 21037323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Biol Reprod. 2011 Mar;84(3):455-65. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.084335. Epub 2010
Oct 27.

Asynchronous expression of the homeodomain protein CUX1 in Sertoli cells and
spermatids during spermatogenesis in mice.

Kroll MR(1), Viss ES, Lamb J, Horstman J, Powell A, Van Wyk A, Hinkkala K,
Hoogland T, Schippers M, Shannon S, Carlton CG, Sharma M, Taylor A, Vanden Heuvel
GB, Jelsma TN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Dordt College, Sioux Center, Iowa, USA.

The homeodomain CUX1 protein exists as multiple isoforms that arise from
proteolytic processing of a 200-kDa protein or an alternate splicing or from the 
use of an alternate promoter. The 200-kDa CUX1 protein is highly expressed in the
developing kidney, where it functions to regulate cell proliferation. Transgenic 
mice ectopically expressing the 200-kDa CUX1 protein develop renal hyperplasia
associated with reduced expression of the cyclin kinase inhibitor p27. A 55-kDa
CUX1 isoform is expressed exclusively in the testes. We determined the pattern
and timing of CUX1 protein expression in developing testes. CUX1 expression was
continuous in Sertoli cells from prepubertal testes but became cyclic when
spermatids appeared. In testes from mature mice, CUX1 was highly expressed only
in round spermatids at stages IV-V of spermatogenesis, in both spermatids and
Sertoli cells at stages VI-X of spermatogenesis, and only in Sertoli cells at
stage XI of spermatogenesis. While most of the seminiferous tubules in wild-type 
mice were between stages VI and X of spermatogenesis, there was a significant
reduction in the percentage of seminiferous tubules between stages VI and X in
Cux1 transgenic mice and a significant increase in the percentage of seminiferous
tubules in stages IV-V and XI. Moreover, CUX1 was not expressed in proliferating 
cells in testes from either wild-type or transgenic mice. Thus, unlike the
somatic form of CUX1, which has a role in cell proliferation, the testis-specific
form of CUX1 is not involved in cell division and appears to play a role in
signaling between Sertoli cells and spermatids.

PMCID: PMC3043128
PMID: 20980687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Nutr Biochem. 2011 Jun;22(6):595-604. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2010.05.003. Epub 
2010 Oct 20.

Exogenous nucleosides modulate expression and activity of transcription factors
in Caco-2 cells.

Ortega Á(1), Gil Á, Sánchez-Pozo A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemical Engineering, University Pablo 
de Olavide - Andalusian Molecular Biology and Regenerative Medicine Centre
(CABIMER), Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Diabetes y Enfermedades
Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM), 41092 Seville, Spain. maortega@upo.es

Dietary nucleotides (NTs) have an important role in cellular and humoral
immunity, intestinal growth, differentiation and recovery from tissue damage.
Nucleosides (NSs) are the best-absorbed chemical form of NTs in the intestinal
epithelium. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of NSs on the
activity and expression of multiple transcription factors (TFs) in Caco-2 cells, 
as a possible molecular mechanism by which NSs modulate gene expression in human 
intestinal cells. The effects of NS-supplemented media on human Caco-2 cell
proliferation, viability, protein and RNA concentration were determined, and the 
activity and expression profiles of multiple TFs were analyzed by using an
array-based technology. Exogenous NSs did not affect Caco-2 cell proliferation or
viability but increased the protein content in cytoplasm and nucleus and the
nuclear protein/RNA ratio. The addition of NSs to the media increased the
expression and activity of the TFs CCAAT displacement protein (CUX1), v-ets avian
erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 1 (ETS1) and SMAD family member 2. In
contrast, NS addition decreased the expression and activity of the general
upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1), glucocorticoid receptor (NR3C1), NFKB and
tumor protein p53. In conclusion, our results suggest that exogenous NSs affect
the expression and activity of several TFs involved in cell growth,
differentiation, apoptosis, immune response and inflammation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20970311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. FEBS J. 2010 Oct;277(20):4241-53.

The Promyelocytic Leukemia Zinc Finger (PLZF<U+200A>) gene is a novel transcriptional
target of the CCAAT-Displacement-protein (CUX1) repressor.

Fréchette I(1), Darsigny M, Brochu-Gaudreau K, Jones C, Boudreau F.

Author information: 
(1)Département dAnatomie et Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine et des
Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

The CCAAT-Displacement-Protein (CUX1) can transcriptionally repress
sucraseisomaltase gene expression, a specific product of enterocytes that
becomes re-expressed during human colonic polyposis. Little is known of the gene 
repertoire that is directly affected by CUX1 in the intestinal epithelial
context. This article identifies the Promyelocytic Leukemia Zinc Finger (PLZF)
gene as a transcriptional target for the CUX1 repressor. CUX1 interacts in vivo
with multiple DNA-binding sites in the 5'-UTR and promoter of the PLZF gene in
colorectal cancer cells, a region that is functionally targeted by CUX1 in
cotransfection assays. PLZF was found to be induced in colorectal cancer cell
lines, correlating with a low detectable level of CUX1, a pattern that was
reversed in normal human colonocytes. Reduction of p200CUX1 expression by RNAi in
the Caco-2/15 cell line increased PLZF gene transcript expression. Because of the
implication of Plzf in the regulation of stem cell maintenance, as well as Wnt
and Ras signaling, in other systems, our observations suggest that the novel
genetic relationship between CUX1 and PLZF could be of relevance to human
diseases, such as leukemia, and open up a new field of investigation for the
implication of these regulators during intestinal polyposis and cancer.

PMID: 20945532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2010 Oct;16(10):1739-50. doi: 10.1002/ibd.21274.

Cux1 transcription factor is induced in inflammatory bowel disease and protects
against experimental colitis.

Darsigny M(1), St-Jean S, Boudreau F.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Anatomie et Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine et des
Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Cux1 is a ubiquitous transcriptional factor that has been associated 
with cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and differentiation. Cux1 is an
effector of the transforming growth factor beta (TGFß) pathway, PAR(2) receptor
signaling, and cellular migration, mechanisms intimately related to inflammatory 
bowel diseases (IBD).
METHODS: CD1 mice treated with dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) in drinking water and
cultured intestinal epithelial cells were used to determine Cux1 expression under
inflammatory conditions. A commercial cDNA library was used to monitor CUX1
expression in IBD patients. The Cux1(<U+0394>HD/<U+0394>HD) hypomorphic mouse model (Cux1<U+0394>HD)
treated with DSS in drinking water was used and the disease severity assessed.
RESULTS: Cux1 expression increased in cultured intestinal epithelial cells
stimulated with tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFa), in the mouse intestinal
epithelium during experimental colitis and in human IBD patient samples.
DSS-induced colitis in Cux1<U+0394>HD mice was more severe according to clinical
observations such as weight loss, colon length, and rectal bleeding. Histological
observations confirmed an increase of IBD-related morphological changes including
ulceration and mucosal infiltration of leukocytes in Cux1<U+0394>HD mice. An increased
number of pSer(276)-RelA-positive cells and higher expression levels of
proinflammatory cytokines were also measured in the colon of Cux1<U+0394>HD diseased
animals. Elevated levels of Cxcl1 were measured before and after DSS-treatment
and a greater neutrophilic infiltration was quantified in DSS-treated Cux1<U+0394>HD
mice. Finally, mucosal healing was significantly impaired in Cux1<U+0394>HD mice during 
recovery from DSS treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: CUX1 is increased in response to inflammatory stress and its nuclear
expression is crucial to protect against DSS-induced colitis and subsequent
mucosal healing.

PMID: 20848487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Hepatology. 2010 Oct;52(4):1431-42. doi: 10.1002/hep.23818.

Liver-enriched transcription factors regulate microRNA-122 that targets CUTL1
during liver development.

Xu H(1), He JH, Xiao ZD, Zhang QQ, Chen YQ, Zhou H, Qu LH.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Gene Engineering of the Ministry of Education, State Key
Laboratory for Biocontrol, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, People's Republic
of China.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2010 Oct;52(4):1517; author reply 1518.

MicroRNA-122 (miR-122) is a liver-specific microRNA whose expression is
specifically turned on in the mouse liver during embryogenesis, thus it is
expected to be involved in liver development. However, the role of miR-122 in
liver development and its potential underlying mechanism remain unclear. Here, we
show that the expression of miR-122 is closely correlated with four
liver-enriched transcription factors (LETFs)-hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1a, 
HNF3ß, HNF4a, and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) a-in the livers of
developing mouse embryos and in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell lines. 
Correspondingly, promoter analysis revealed that these LETFs are coordinately
involved in the transcriptional regulation of miR-122, and three HNFs directly
bind to the miR-122 promoter as transcriptional activators. Using a luciferase
reporter system, we identified a group of miR-122 targets involved in
proliferation and differentiation regulation. Among these targets, the most
prominently repressed target was CUTL1, a transcriptional repressor of genes
specifying terminal differentiation in multiple cell lineages, including
hepatocytes. We show that CUTL1 expression is gradually silenced at the
posttranscriptional level during mouse liver development. Overexpression and
knockdown studies both showed that miR-122 repressed CUTL1 protein expression in 
HCC cell lines. Finally, we show that the stable restoration of miR-122 in HepG2 
cells suppresses cellular proliferation and activates the expression of three
hepatocyte functional genes, including the cholesterol-7a hydroxylase gene
(CYP7A1), a known target of CUTL1 in hepatocytes.CONCLUSION: Our study provides a
model in which miR-122 functions as an effector of LETFs and contributes to liver
development by regulating the balance between proliferation and differentiation
of hepatocytes, at least by targeting CUTL1.

PMID: 20842632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 22;285(43):32834-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.156406. Epub
2010 Aug 19.

Hyperphosphorylation by cyclin B/CDK1 in mitosis resets CUX1 DNA binding clock at
each cell cycle.

Sansregret L(1), Gallo D, Santaguida M, Leduy L, Harada R, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)McGill University Cancer Pavilion, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A
1A3, Canada.

The p110 CUX1 homeodomain protein participates in the activation of DNA
replication genes in part by increasing the affinity of E2F factors for the
promoters of these genes. CUX1 expression is very weak in quiescent cells and
increases during G(1). Biochemical activities associated with transcriptional
activation by CUX1 are potentiated by post-translational modifications in late
G(1), notably a proteolytic processing event that generates p110 CUX1.
Constitutive expression of p110 CUX1, as observed in some transformed cells,
leads to accelerated entry into the S phase. In this study, we investigated the
post-translation regulation of CUX1 during mitosis and the early G(1) phases of
proliferating cells. We observed a major electrophoretic mobility shift and a
complete inhibition of DNA binding during mitosis. We show that cyclin B/CDK1
interacts with CUX1 and phosphorylates it at multiple sites. Serine to alanine
replacement mutations at 10 SP dipeptide sites were required to restore DNA
binding in mitosis. Passage into G(1) was associated with the degradation of some
p110 CUX1 proteins, and the remaining proteins were gradually dephosphorylated.
Indirect immunofluorescence and subfractionation assays using a phospho-specific 
antibody showed that most of the phosphorylated protein remained in the
cytoplasm, whereas the dephosphorylated protein was preferentially located in the
nucleus. Globally, our results indicate that the hyperphosphorylation of CUX1 by 
cyclin B/CDK1 inhibits its DNA binding activity in mitosis and interferes with
its nuclear localization following cell division and formation of the nuclear
membrane, whereas dephosphorylation and de novo synthesis contribute to gradually
restore CUX1 expression and activity in G(1).

PMCID: PMC2963374
PMID: 20729212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Neoplasia. 2010 Aug;12(8):659-67.

Glutamate receptor GRIA3--target of CUX1 and mediator of tumor progression in
pancreatic cancer.

Ripka S(1), Riedel J, Neesse A, Griesmann H, Buchholz M, Ellenrieder V, Moeller
F, Barth P, Gress TM, Michl P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospital, Philipps University,
Marburg, Germany.

Previously, we identified the transcription factor CUX1 as an important modulator
of invasion and resistance to apoptosis. Expression profiles suggested that CUX1 
regulates a complex transcriptional program mediating tumor progression. We aimed
to identify functionally relevant targets of CUX1 by using RNA interference
(RNAi)-based loss-of-function screens. Therefore, we generated an RNAi library
containing putative transcriptional targets of CUX1 identified by microarrays and
performed cell viability screens. Using this approach, several CUX1 targets with 
effect on tumor cell viability were identified, including the glutamate receptor 
GRIA3, which was validated in detail for its effects on proliferation, apoptosis,
and cell migration using RNAi knock-down and overexpression strategies in vitro, 
as well as xenograft models in vivo. The expression of GRIA3 was evaluated in
human pancreatic cancer tissues. We found that knock-down of GRIA3 significantly 
reduced proliferation and migration and enhanced apoptosis. In contrast,
overexpression of GRIA3 significantly reduced apoptosis and enhanced both
proliferation and tumor cell migration. GRIA3 could be confirmed as a downstream 
effector of CUX1 and was expressed in pancreatic cancer tissues. In vivo, GRIA3
significantly enhanced the growth of subcutaneous xenografts. Inhibitors of
glutamate receptors such as GYKI52466 and SYM2206 significantly decreased
survival of pancreatic cancer cells, suggesting the presence of glutamate
signaling in pancreatic cancer. In conclusion, GRIA3 plays a role as a mediator
of tumor progression in pancreatic cancer downstream CUX1. To our knowledge, this
is the first report to identify a glutamate receptor as a modulator of tumor
progression in a solid cancer outside the brain.

PMCID: PMC2915410
PMID: 20689760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Oct 15;19(20):3936-47. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq308. Epub 2010 Jul
22.

Application of statistical and functional methodologies for the investigation of 
genetic determinants of coronary heart disease biomarkers: lipoprotein lipase
genotype and plasma triglycerides as an exemplar.

Smith AJ(1), Palmen J, Putt W, Talmud PJ, Humphries SE, Drenos F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Medicine, University
College London, 5 University Street, London WC1E 6JF, UK.

Genome-wide association studies have proved very successful in identifying novel 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with disease or traits, but the
related, functional SNP is usually unknown. In this paper, we describe a
methodology to locate and validate candidate functional SNPs using lipoprotein
lipase (LPL), a gene previously associated with triglyceride levels, as an
exemplar. Two thousand seven hundred and eighty-six healthy middle-aged men from 
the NPHSII UK prospective study (with up to six measures of plasma lipid levels) 
were genotyped for 20 LPL tagging (t)SNPs using Illumina Bead technology. Using
model-selection procedures and haplotypes, we identified eight SNPs that
consistently maximized the fit of the model to the phenotype. Fifteen SNPs in
high linkage disequilibrium with these were identified, and functional assays
were carried out on all 23 SNPs. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) was 
used to identify SNPs that had the potential to alter DNA-protein interactions,
reducing the number to eight possible candidate SNPs. These were examined for
ability to alter expression using a luciferase reporter assay, and two regulatory
SNPs, showing genotype differences, rs327 and rs3289, were identified. Finally,
multiplexed-competitor-EMSA (MC-EMSA) and supershift EMSA identified FOXA2 to
rs327T, and CREB-binding protein (CBP) and CCAAT displacement protein (CDP) to
rs3289C as the factors responsible for transcription binding. We have identified 
two novel candidate functional SNPs in LPL and presented a procedure aimed to
efficiently detect SNPs potentially causal to genetic association. We believe
that this methodology could be successfully applied to future re-sequencing data.

PMCID: PMC2947402
PMID: 20650961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Gut. 2010 Aug;59(8):1014-5. doi: 10.1136/gut.2009.206854.

CUX1 mediates tumour cell survival: implications for future therapies?

Malek NP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology and Institute for
Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School, 130625 Hannover, Germany.
malek.nisar@mh-hannover.de

Comment on
    Gut. 2010 Aug;59(8):1101-10.

PMID: 20639245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Comp Neurol. 2010 Aug 15;518(16):3272-89. doi: 10.1002/cne.22399.

Molecular analysis of neocortical layer structure in the ferret.

Rowell JJ(1), Mallik AK, Dugas-Ford J, Ragsdale CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA.

Molecular markers that distinguish specific layers of rodent neocortex are
increasingly employed to study cortical development and the physiology of
cortical circuits. The extent to which these markers represent general features
of neocortical cell type identity across mammals, however, is unknown. To assess 
the conservation of layer markers more broadly, we isolated orthologs for 15
layer-enriched genes in the ferret, a carnivore with a large, gyrencephalic
brain, and analyzed their patterns of neocortical gene expression. Our major
findings are: 1) Many but not all layer markers tested show similar patterns of
layer-specific gene expression between mouse and ferret cortex, supporting the
view that layer-specific cell type identity is conserved at a molecular level
across mammalian superorders; 2) Our panel of deep layer markers (ER81/ETV1,
SULF2, PCP4, FEZF2/ZNF312, CACNA1H, KCNN2/SK2, SYT6, FOXP2, CTGF) provides
molecular evidence that the specific stratifications of layers 5 and 6 into 5a,
5b, 6a, and 6b are also conserved between rodents and carnivores; 3) Variations
in layer-specific gene expression are more pronounced across areas of ferret
cortex than between homologous areas of mouse and ferret cortex; 4) This
variation of area gene expression was clearest with the superficial layer markers
studied (SERPINE2, MDGA1, CUX1, UNC5D, RORB/NR1F2, EAG2/KCNH5). Most
dramatically, the layer 4 markers RORB and EAG2 disclosed a molecular
sublamination to ferret visual cortex and demonstrated a molecular dissociation
among the so-called agranular areas of the neocortex. Our findings establish
molecular markers as a powerful complement to cytoarchitecture for neocortical
layer and cell-type comparisons across mammals.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2894274
PMID: 20575059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Neuron. 2010 May 27;66(4):523-35. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.04.038.

Cux1 and Cux2 regulate dendritic branching, spine morphology, and synapses of the
upper layer neurons of the cortex.

Cubelos B(1), Sebastián-Serrano A, Beccari L, Calcagnotto ME, Cisneros E, Kim S, 
Dopazo A, Alvarez-Dolado M, Redondo JM, Bovolenta P, Walsh CA, Nieto M.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, CSIC, Darwin 3, Campus de Cantoblanco,
Madrid 28049, Spain.

Dendrite branching and spine formation determines the function of morphologically
distinct and specialized neuronal subclasses. However, little is known about the 
programs instructing specific branching patterns in vertebrate neurons and
whether such programs influence dendritic spines and synapses. Using knockout and
knockdown studies combined with morphological, molecular, and
electrophysiological analysis, we show that the homeobox Cux1 and Cux2 are
intrinsic and complementary regulators of dendrite branching, spine development, 
and synapse formation in layer II-III neurons of the cerebral cortex. Cux genes
control the number and maturation of dendritic spines partly through direct
regulation of the expression of Xlr3b and Xlr4b, chromatin remodeling genes
previously implicated in cognitive defects. Accordingly, abnormal dendrites and
synapses in Cux2(-/-) mice correlate with reduced synaptic function and defects
in working memory. These demonstrate critical roles of Cux in dendritogenesis and
highlight subclass-specific mechanisms of synapse regulation that contribute to
the establishment of cognitive circuits.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2894581
PMID: 20510857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. PLoS One. 2010 May 11;5(5):e10596. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010596.

The transcription factor Cux1 regulates dendritic morphology of cortical
pyramidal neurons.

Li N(1), Zhao CT, Wang Y, Yuan XB.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Neurobiology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

In the murine cerebral cortex, mammalian homologues of the Cux family
transcription factors, Cux1 and Cux2, have been identified as restricted
molecular markers for the upper layer (II-IV) pyramidal neurons. However, their
functions in cortical development are largely unknown. Here we report that
increasing the intracellular level of Cux1, but not Cux2, reduced the dendritic
complexity of cultured cortical pyramidal neurons. Consistently, reducing the
expression of Cux1 promoted the dendritic arborization in these pyramidal
neurons. This effect required the existence of the DNA-binding domains, hence the
transcriptional passive repression activity of Cux1. Analysis of downstream
signals suggested that Cux1 regulates dendrite development primarily through
suppressing the expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27(Kip1),
and RhoA may mediate the regulation of dendritic complexity by Cux1 and p27.
Thus, Cux1 functions as a negative regulator of dendritic complexity for cortical
pyramidal neurons.

PMCID: PMC2868054
PMID: 20485671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Dev Biol. 2010 Aug 1;344(1):196-209. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.04.030. Epub 2010 
May 5.

Opposing interactions between Drosophila cut and the C/EBP encoded by slow border
cells direct apical constriction and epithelial invagination.

Levine B(1), Hackney JF, Bergen A, Dobens L 3rd, Truesdale A, Dobens L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, School of Biological Sciences,
University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA.

Stage 10 of Drosophila oogenesis can be subdivided into stages 10A and 10B based 
on a change in the morphology of the centripetal follicle cells (FC) from a
columnar to an apically constricted shape. This coordinated cell shape change
drives epithelial cell sheet involution between the oocyte and nurse cell complex
which patterns the operculum structure of the mature eggshell. We have shown
previously that proper centripetal FC migration requires transient expression of 
the C/EBP encoded by slow border cells (slbo) at 10A, due in part to Notch
activation followed by slbo autorepression (Levine et al., 2007). Here we show
that decreased slbo expression in the centripetal FC coincides with increased
expression of the transcription factor Cut, a Cut/Cux/CDP family member, at 10B. 
The 10A/10B temporal switch from Slbo to Cut expression is refined by both cross 
repression between Slbo and Cut, Slbo auto repression and Cut auto activation.
High Cut levels are necessary and sufficient to direct polarized, supracellular
accumulation of Actin, DE-cadherin and Armadillo associated with apical
constriction of the centripetal FC. Separately, Slbo in the border cell rosette
and Cut in the pole cells have antagonistic interactions to restrict Fas2
accumulation to the pole cells, which is important for proper border cell
migration. The opposing effects of Cut and Slbo in these two tissues reflect the 
opposing interactions between their respective mammalian homologs CAAT
Displacement Protein (CDP; now CUX1) and CAAT Enhancer Binding Protein (C/EBP) in
tissue culture.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20450903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Gut. 2010 Aug;59(8):1101-10. doi: 10.1136/gut.2009.189720. Epub 2010 May 4.

CUX1: target of Akt signalling and mediator of resistance to apoptosis in
pancreatic cancer.

Ripka S(1), Neesse A, Riedel J, Bug E, Aigner A, Poulsom R, Fulda S, Neoptolemos 
J, Greenhalf W, Barth P, Gress TM, Michl P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Endocrinology, University Hospital,
Philipps-University, Marburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Gut. 2010 Aug;59(8):1014-5.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The transcription factor CUX1 is known as a regulator of
cell differentiation and cell cycle progression. Previously, CUX1 was identified 
as a modulator of invasiveness in various cancers. Based on expression profiles
suggesting a role for CUX1 in mediating chemoresistance, the aim of this study
was to characterise the effect of CUX1 on apoptosis as well as its regulation by 
signalling pathways modulating drug resistance in pancreatic cancer.
METHODS: The effect of CUX1 on TRAIL- (tumour necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand) and drug-induced apoptosis was analysed using
overexpression and knock-down strategies. Regulation of CUX1 by
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt signalling was examined at the mRNA and 
protein level. The effect of CUX1 knock-down by nanoparticle-complexed small
interfering RNA (siRNA) in vivo was analysed in a murine xenograft model.
Furthermore, CUX1 RNA and protein expression was evaluated in human pancreatic
cancer and adjacent normal tissues.
RESULTS: Knock-down of CUX1 resulted in significantly enhanced TRAIL- and
drug-induced apoptosis, associated with increased PARP (poly ADP-ribose
polymerase) cleavage and caspase activity. Vice versa, overexpression of CUX1
inhibited apoptosis. CUX1 expression was induced by activation of Akt/protein
kinase B signalling, and decreased by PI3K inhibitors. The antiapoptotic effect
of CUX1 was associated with upregulation of BCL2 and downregulation of tumour
necrosis factor alpha. CUX1 was significantly overexpressed in pancreatic
cancers, as analysed by in situ hybridisation and immunohistochemistry. In vivo, 
silencing of CUX1 by intratumourally administered polyethylenimine-complexed
siRNA led to reduced tumour growth and increased apoptosis in pancreatic cancer
xenografts.
CONCLUSION: CUX1 was identified as an important mediator of tumour cell survival 
in pancreatic cancer in vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 20442202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Cell Adh Migr. 2010 Jul-Sep;4(3):348-52. Epub 2010 Jul 4.

The roles of CUX1 homeodomain proteins in the establishment of a transcriptional 
program required for cell migration and invasion.

Kedinger V(1), Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Goodman Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.

The Cut homeobox gene 1 (CUX1) codes for several homeodomain proteins that
display distinct DNA binding and transcriptional properties. Some CUX1 isoforms
were previously shown to stimulate entry into S phase. More recently,
siRNA-mediated knockdown of CUX1 was shown to cause a decrease in cell migration 
and invasion. In contrast, ectopic expression of p110 or p75 CUX1 stimulated cell
migration and invasion in tissue culture. Moreover, metastasis to the lung was
observed in a few cases following development of mammary tumors in p75 CUX1
transgenic mice. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays followed by
hybridization on promoter arrays (ChIP-chip) led to the identification of more
than 20 genes that are directly regulated by CUX1 and code for proteins involved 
in cytoskeleton remodeling, cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesion, epithelial to
mesenchymal transition and transcriptional regulation. Many targets of CUX1 are
regulators of Rho GTPases that play a role both in cell cycle progression and
cell motility. Interestingly, some genes that promote cell motility are activated
by CUX1, while some genes that inhibit cell motility are repressed by CUX1. The
dual function of CUX1 as an activator and repressor is best exemplified by the
regulatory cascade whereby CUX1 activates expression of the Snail and Slug
transcription factors and then cooperates with them to repress the E-cadherin and
occludin genes, thereby causing a severe disorganization of cell-cell junctions. 
Together, these studies indicate that CUX1 stimulates cell motility by regulating
a large number of genes involved in various molecular functions.

PMCID: PMC2958607
PMID: 20224295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 26;285(13):10078-86. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.034793. Epub
2010 Jan 14.

Stefin B interacts with histones and cathepsin L in the nucleus.

Ceru S(1), Konjar S, Maher K, Repnik U, Krizaj I, Bencina M, Renko M, Nepveu A,
Zerovnik E, Turk B, Kopitar-Jerala N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Structural Biology, Jozef Stefan 
Institute, Ljubljana SI-1000, Slovenia.

Stefin B (cystatin B) is an endogenous inhibitor of cysteine proteinases
localized in the nucleus and the cytosol. Loss-of-function mutations in the
stefin B gene (CSTB) gene were reported in patients with Unverricht-Lundborg
disease (EPM1). We have identified an interaction between stefin B and
nucleosomes, specifically with histones H2A.Z, H2B, and H3. In synchronized T98G 
cells, stefin B co-immunoprecipitated with histone H3, predominantly in the G(1) 
phase of the cell cycle. Stefin B-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts entered S
phase earlier than wild type mouse embryonic fibroblasts. In contrast, increased 
expression of stefin B in the nucleus delayed cell cycle progression in T98G
cells. The delay in cell cycle progression was associated with the inhibition of 
cathepsin L in the nucleus, as judged from the decreased cleavage of the CUX1
transcription factor. In vitro, inhibition of cathepsin L by stefin B was
potentiated in the presence of histones, whereas histones alone did not affect
the cathepsin L activity. Interaction of stefin B with the Met-75 truncated form 
of cathepsin L in the nucleus was confirmed by fluorescence resonance energy
transfer experiments in the living cells. Stefin B could thus play an important
role in regulating the proteolytic activity of cathepsin L in the nucleus,
protecting substrates such as transcription factors from its proteolytic
processing.

PMCID: PMC2843170
PMID: 20075068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Bone Miner Res. 2010 May;25(5):1157-66. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.091105.

CDP/cut is an osteoblastic coactivator of the vitamin D receptor (VDR).

Ochiai E(1), Kitagawa H, Takada I, Fujiyama S, Sawatsubashi S, Kim MS, Mezaki Y, 
Tsushima Y, Takagi K, Azuma Y, Takeyama K, Yamaoka K, Kato S, Kamimura T.

Author information: 
(1)Teijin Institute for Bio-Medical Research, Teijin Pharma, Ltd., Tokyo, Japan.

Retraction in
    J Bone Miner Res. 2013 Feb;28(2):432.

Vitamin D plays an important role in regulating bone and calcium metabolism. The 
actions of vitamin D are mediated through the nuclear vitamin D receptor (VDR),
and gene disruption of the VDR in mice causes skeletal disorders. However, the
precise role of the VDR in each stage of osteoblastogenesis is not well
understood. To address this issue, we used a biochemical approach to identify an 
osteoblast-specific coregulator of the VDR. Using a GST-fused VDR ligand-binding 
domain as bait, proteins associated with liganded VDR were purified from nuclear 
extracts of HOS osteoblastic cells and compared with those of HeLa cells. Among
the interactants identified by mass fingerprinting, CCAAT displacement protein
(CDP) was found as a novel ligand-dependent VDR interactant in HOS cells,
together with other previously reported DRIP/TRAP complex components. Further
biochemical analysis showed that complex formation between the VDR and CDP was
distinct from the previously known DRIP/TRAP complex and the p160 family
coactivator complexes. Transient expression of CDP potentiated VDR-mediated
transcriptional activation in HOS cells. Furthermore, modulation of CDP
expression levels in osteoblastic SaM-1 cells affected vitamin D-dependent
osteoblast differentiation before the maturation (mineralization) stage. These
findings suggest that CDP is a novel differentiation stage-specific coactivator
of the VDR in osteoblasts.

(c) 2010 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 19888899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cancer Res. 2009 Sep 15;69(18):7188-97. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4899. Epub 
2009 Sep 8.

Mouse mammary tumor virus p75 and p110 CUX1 transgenic mice develop mammary
tumors of various histologic types.

Cadieux C(1), Kedinger V, Yao L, Vadnais C, Drossos M, Paquet M, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Goodman Cancer Centre and Department of Biochemistry, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The p75 and p110 isoforms of the CUX1 homeodomain protein are overexpressed in
breast tumors and cancer cell lines. To assess and compare the ability of these
short CUX1 isoforms in driving mammary tumor development, we used site-specific
transgenesis into the Hprt locus to generate transgenic mice expressing p75 or
p110 CUX1 under the control of the mouse mammary tumor virus-long terminal
repeat. We report that mammary tumors developed after a long latency period, and 
although various histopathologies were observed, the proportion of adenosquamous 
carcinomas was significantly higher in p75 CUX1 than in p110 CUX1 transgenic
mice. Metastasis to the lung was observed in three p75 CUX1 transgenic mice.
Comparisons between tumors and adjacent normal mammary glands revealed that
transgenes were overexpressed in most but not all tumors, yet in all cases
tested, CUX1 DNA binding was increased, suggesting that both higher expression
and changes in post-translational modifications can contribute to stimulate
transgene activity. Interestingly, higher expression of erbB2 mRNA was seen in
most tumors, not only solid carcinomas but also adenosquamous carcinomas, whereas
higher expression of various Wnt genes and activation of the beta-catenin pathway
was observed primarily in adenosquamous carcinomas. Activation of erbB2
expression appeared to represent a cooperating event that occurred independently 
of CUX1. In contrast, chromatin immunoprecipitation, short hairpin RNA-mediated
knockdown, and reporter assays established that CUX1 is involved in the
transcriptional regulation of several Wnt genes. Together, these results support 
the notion that oncogenic activity of CUX1 can facilitate the establishment of a 
Wnt/beta-catenin autocrine loop.

PMID: 19738070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Cereb Cortex. 2010 Apr;20(4):884-97. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhp154. Epub 2009 Aug
13.

The effect of variation in expression of the candidate dyslexia susceptibility
gene homolog Kiaa0319 on neuronal migration and dendritic morphology in the rat.

Peschansky VJ(1), Burbridge TJ, Volz AJ, Fiondella C, Wissner-Gross Z, Galaburda 
AM, Lo Turco JJ, Rosen GD.

Author information: 
(1)The Dyslexia Research Laboratory, Division of Behavioral Neurology, Department
of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

We investigated the postnatal effects of embryonic knockdown and overexpression
of the candidate dyslexia gene homolog Kiaa0319. We used in utero electroporation
to transfect cells in E15/16 rat neocortical ventricular zone with either 1)
small hairpin RNA (shRNA) vectors targeting Kiaa0319, 2) a KIAA0319 expression
construct, 3) Kiaa0319 shRNA along with KIAA0319 expression construct ("rescue"),
or 4) a scrambled version of Kiaa0319 shRNA. Knockdown, but not overexpression,
of Kiaa0319 resulted in periventricular heterotopias that contained large numbers
of both transfected and non-transfected neurons. This suggested that Kiaa0319
shRNA disrupts neuronal migration by cell autonomous as well as non-cell
autonomous mechanisms. Of the Kiaa0319 shRNA-transfected neurons that migrated
into the cortical plate, most migrated to their appropriate lamina. In contrast, 
neurons transfected with the KIAA0319 expression vector attained laminar
positions subjacent to their expected positions. Neurons transfected with
Kiaa0319 shRNA exhibited apical, but not basal, dendrite hypertrophy, which was
rescued by overexpression of KIAA0319. The results provide additional supportive 
evidence linking candidate dyslexia susceptibility genes to migrational
disturbances during brain development, and extends the role of Kiaa0319 to
include growth and differentiation of dendrites.

PMCID: PMC2837091
PMID: 19679544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mol Cancer. 2009 Aug 5;8:60. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-8-60.

Transcriptional activation of the Lats1 tumor suppressor gene in tumors of CUX1
transgenic mice.

Siam R(1), Harada R, Cadieux C, Battat R, Vadnais C, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Goodman Cancer Center, McGill University, 1160 Pine Avenue West, Room 410,
Montreal, Quebec H3A 1A3, Canada. rsiam@aucegypt.edu

BACKGROUND: Lats1 (large tumor suppressor 1) codes for a serine/threonine kinase 
that plays a role in the progression through mitosis. Genetic studies
demonstrated that the loss of LATS1 in mouse, and of its ortholog wts (warts) in 
Drosophila, is associated with increased cancer incidence. There are conflicting 
reports, however, as to whether overexpression of Lats1 inhibits cell
proliferation. CUX1 is a transcription factor that exists in different isoforms
as a result of proteolytic processing or alternative transcription initiation.
Expression of p110 and p75 CUX1 in transgenic mice increases the susceptibility
to cancer in various organs and tissues. In tissue culture, p110 CUX1 was shown
to accelerate entry into S phase and stimulate cell proliferation.
RESULTS: Genome-wide location arrays in cell lines of various cell types revealed
that Lats1 was a transcriptional target of CUX1. Scanning ChIP analysis confirmed
that CUX1 binds to the immediate promoter of Lats1. Expression of Lats1 was
reduced in cux1-/- MEFs, whereas it was increased in cells stably or transiently 
expressing p110 or p75 CUX1. Reporter assays confirmed that the immediate
promoter of Lats1 was sufficient to confer transcriptional activation by CUX1.
Lats1 was found to be overexpressed in tumors from the mammary gland, uterus and 
spleen that arise in p110 or p75 CUX1 transgenic mice. In tissue culture, such
elevated LATS1 expression did not hinder cell cycle progression in cells
overexpressing p110 CUX1.
CONCLUSION: While inactivation of Lats1/wts in mouse and Drosophila can increase 
cancer incidence, results from the present study demonstrate that Lats1 is a
transcriptional target of CUX1 that can be overexpressed in tumors of various
tissue-types. Interestingly, two other studies documented the overexpression of
LATS1 in human cervical cancers and basal-like breast cancers. We conclude that, 
similarly to other genes involved in mitotic checkpoint, cancer can be associated
with either loss-of-function or overexpression of Lats1.

PMCID: PMC2731069
PMID: 19656388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 2;284(40):27701-11. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.031849. Epub 2009
Jul 27.

p110 CUX1 homeodomain protein stimulates cell migration and invasion in part
through a regulatory cascade culminating in the repression of E-cadherin and
occludin.

Kedinger V(1), Sansregret L, Harada R, Vadnais C, Cadieux C, Fathers K, Park M,
Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)McGill University Cancer Pavilion, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A
1A3, Canada.

In this study, we investigated the mechanism by which the CUX1 transcription
factor can stimulate cell migration and invasion. The full-length p200 CUX1 had a
weaker effect than the proteolytically processed p110 isoform; moreover,
treatments that affect processing similarly impacted cell migration. We conclude 
that the stimulatory effect of p200 CUX1 is mediated in part, if not entirely,
through the generation of p110 CUX1. We established a list of putative
transcriptional targets with functions related to cell motility, and we then
identified those targets whose expression was directly regulated by CUX1 in a
cell line whose migratory potential was strongly stimulated by CUX1. We
identified 18 genes whose expression was directly modulated by p110 CUX1, and its
binding to all target promoters was validated in independent chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays. These genes code for regulators of Rho-GTPases,
cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesion proteins, cytoskeleton-associated proteins,
and markers of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. Interestingly, p110 CUX1
activated the expression of genes that promote cell motility and at the same time
repressed genes that inhibit this process. Therefore, the role of p110 CUX1 in
cell motility involves its functions in both activation and repression of
transcription. This was best exemplified in the regulation of the E-cadherin
gene. Indeed, we uncovered a regulatory cascade whereby p110 CUX1 binds to the
snail and slug gene promoters, activates their expression, and then cooperates
with these transcription factors in the repression of the E-cadherin gene,
thereby causing disorganization of cell-cell junctions.

PMCID: PMC2785698
PMID: 19635798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2009 Jun 1;14:4978-91.

Regulation of cell proliferation and differentiation in the kidney.

Alcalay NI(1), Vanden Heuvel GB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS
66160, USA.

The mammalian cut proteins are a broadly expressed family of nuclear
transcription factors related to the Drosophila protein cut. One member of the
cut family, Cux1, has been shown to function as a cell cycle dependent
transcription factor, regulating the expression of a number of cell cycle
regulatory proteins. Cux1 expression is developmentally regulated in multiple
tissues suggesting an important regulatory function. Cux1 exists as multiple
isoforms that arise from proteolytic processing of a 200 kD protein or use of an 
alternate promoter. Several mouse models of Cux1 have been generated that suggest
important roles for this gene in cell cycle regulation during hair growth, lung
development and maturation, and genitourinary tract development. Moreover, the
aberrant expression of Cux1 may contribute to diseases such as polycystic kidney 
disease and cancer. In this review, we will focus on the phenotypes observed in
the five existing transgenic mouse models of Cux1, and discuss the role of Cux1
in kidney development and disease.

PMCID: PMC2749561
PMID: 19482600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Int J Mol Med. 2009 Jun;23(6):763-9.

Transcriptional mechanisms of WNT5A based on NF-kappaB, Hedgehog, TGFbeta, and
Notch signaling cascades.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh-kkr@umin.ac.jp

WNT5A is a cancer-associated gene involved in invasion and metastasis of
melanoma, breast cancer, pancreatic cancer, and gastric cancer. WNT5A transduces 
signals through Frizzled, ROR1, ROR2 or RYK receptors to beta-catenin-TCF/LEF,
DVL-RhoA-ROCK, DVL-RhoB-Rab4, DVL-Rac-JNK, DVL-aPKC, Calcineurin-NFAT,
MAP3K7-NLK, MAP3K7-NF-kappaB, and DAG-PKC signaling cascades in a
context-dependent manner. SNAI1 (Snail), CD44, G3BP2, and YAP1 are WNT5A target
genes. We and other groups previously reported that IL6- or LIF-induced signaling
through JAK-STAT3 signaling cascade is involved in WNT5A upregulation
(STAT3-WNT5A signaling loop). Here, refined integrative genomic analyses of WNT5A
were carried out to elucidate other mechanisms of WNT5A transcription. The WNT5A 
gene was found to encode two isoforms by using alternative first exons 1A and 1B.
Quadruple Smad-binding elements (SBEs), single Sp1-binding site (GC-box),
PPARgamma-binding site, C/EBP-binding site and bHLH-binding site within the
promoter A region, 5'-adjacent to exon 1A, were conserved in human WNT5A,
chimpanzee WNT5A, mouse Wnt5a, and rat Wnt5a. NF-kappaB-binding site,
CUX1-binding site, double SBEs and double GC-boxes within the promoter B region, 
5'-adjacent to exon 1B, were conserved in mammalian WNT5A orthologs. Quadruple
FOX-binding sites and double SBEs within ultra-conserved intron 1 were also
conserved in mammalian WNT5A orthologs. Conserved NF-kappaB-binding site within
the WNT5A promoter B region elucidated the mechanisms that TNFalpha and toll-like
receptor (TLR) signals upregulate WNT5A via MAP3K7. Quadruple FOX-binding sites
rather than GLI-binding site revealed that Hedgehog signals induce WNT5A
upregulation indirectly via FOX family members, such as FOXA2, FOXC2, FOXE1,
FOXF1 and FOXL1. TGFbeta signals were found to upregulate WNT5A expression
directly through the Smad complex, and also indirectly through Smad-induced CUX1 
and MAP3K7-mediated NF-kappaB. Together these facts indicate that WNT5A is
transcribed based on multiple mechanisms, such as NF-kappaB, Hedgehog, TGFbeta,
and Notch signaling cascades.

PMID: 19424602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Exp Cell Res. 2009 Jul 1;315(11):1819-31. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.04.001. Epub 
2009 Apr 8.

CUX1/Wnt signaling regulates epithelial mesenchymal transition in EBV infected
epithelial cells.

Malizia AP(1), Lacey N, Walls D, Egan JJ, Doran PP.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Centre, School of Medicine and Medical Science, University
College Dublin. 21, Nelson Street. Dublin, 7. Ireland.

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a refractory and lethal interstitial lung 
disease characterized by alveolar epithelial cells apoptosis, fibroblast
proliferation and extra-cellular matrix protein deposition. EBV, localised to
alveolar epithelial cells of pulmonary fibrosis patients is associated with a
poor prognosis. A strategy based on microarray-differential gene expression
analysis to identify molecular drivers of EBV-associated lung fibrosis was
utilized. Alveolar epithelial cells were infected with EBV to identify genes
whose expression was altered following TGFbeta1-mediated lytic phase. EBV lytic
reactivation by TGFbeta1 drives a selective alteration in CUX1 variant (a) (NCBI 
accession number NM_181552) expression, inducing activation of non-canonical Wnt 
pathway mediators, implicating it in Epithelial Mesenchymal Transition (EMT), the
molecular event underpinning scar production in tissue fibrosis. The role of EBV 
in EMT can be attenuated by antiviral strategies and inhibition of Wnt signaling 
by using All-Trans Retinoic Acids (ATRA). Activation of non-canonical Wnt
signaling pathway by EBV in epithelial cells suggests a novel mechanism of EMT
via CUX1 signaling. These data present a framework for further description of the
link between infectious agents and fibrosis, a significant disease burden.

PMID: 19361498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Gene. 2009 Jun 15;439(1-2):87-94. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2009.03.014. Epub 2009 Mar 
28.

The homeodomain protein Cux1 interacts with Grg4 to repress p27 kip1 expression
during kidney development.

Sharma M(1), Brantley JG, Vassmer D, Chaturvedi G, Baas J, Vanden Heuvel GB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City,
Kansas 66160, USA. msharma3@kumc.edu

The homeodomain protein Cux1 is highly expressed in the nephrogenic zone of the
developing kidney where it functions to regulate cell proliferation. Here we show
that Cux1 directly interacts with the co-repressor Grg4 (Groucho 4), a known
effector of Notch signaling. Promoter reporter based luciferase assays revealed
enhanced repression of p27(kip1) promoter activity by Cux1 in the presence of
Grg4. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays demonstrated the direct
interaction of Cux1 with p27(kip1) in newborn kidney tissue in vivo. ChIP assays 
also identified interactions of Cux1, Grg4, HDAC1, and HDAC3 with p27(kip1) at
two separate sites in the p27(kip1) promoter. DNAse1 footprinting experiments
revealed that Cux1 binds to the p27(kip1) promoter on the sequence containing two
Sp1 sites and a CCAAT box approximately 500 bp from the transcriptional start
site, and to an AT rich sequence approximately 1.5 kb from the transcriptional
start site. Taken together, these results identify Grg4 as an interacting partner
for Cux1 and suggest a mechanism of p27(kip1) repression by Cux1 during kidney
development.

PMCID: PMC2742960
PMID: 19332113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jan;29(2):570-81. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01275-08. Epub 2008 Nov
17.

CUX1 and E2F1 regulate coordinated expression of the mitotic complex genes Ect2, 
MgcRacGAP, and MKLP1 in S phase.

Seguin L(1), Liot C, Mzali R, Harada R, Siret A, Nepveu A, Bertoglio J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U749, Faculté de Pharmacie Paris XI, 92296 Châtenay-Malabry, France.

Rho GTPases are critical for mitosis progression and completion of cytokinesis.
During mitosis, the GDP/GTP cycle of Rho GTPases is regulated by the exchange
factor Ect2 and the GTPase activating protein MgcRacGAP which associates with the
kinesin MKLP1 in the centralspindlin complex. We report here that expression of
Ect2, MgcRacGAP, and MKLP1 is tightly regulated during cell cycle progression.
These three genes share similar cell cycle-related signatures within their
promoter regions: (i) cell cycle gene homology region (CHR) sites located at -20 
to +40 nucleotides of their transcription start sites that are required for
repression in G(1), (ii) E2F binding elements, and (iii) tandem repeats of target
sequences for the CUX1 transcription factor. CUX1 and E2F1 bind these three
promoters upon S-phase entry, as demonstrated by chromatin immunoprecipitation,
and regulate transcription of these genes, as established using
promoter-luciferase reporter constructs and expression of activated or dominant
negative transcription factors. Overexpression of either E2F1 or CUX1 increased
the levels of the endogenous proteins whereas small interfering RNA knockdown of 
E2F1 or use of a dominant negative E2F1 reduced their expression levels. Thus,
CUX1, E2F, and CHR elements provide the transcriptional controls that coordinate 
induction of Ect2, MgcRacGAP, and MKLP1 in S phase, leading to peak expression of
these interacting proteins in G(2)/M, at the time they are required to regulate
cytokinesis.

PMCID: PMC2612504
PMID: 19015243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 2;284(1):36-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803808200. Epub 2008 Oct 
24.

CUX1 transcription factor is a downstream effector of the proteinase-activated
receptor 2 (PAR2).

Wilson BJ(1), Harada R, LeDuy L, Hollenberg MD, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Goodman Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 1A3.

Proteinase-activated receptors (PARs) are G-protein-coupled receptors that have
been linked to an array of cellular processes, including inflammation, migration,
and proliferation. Although signal transduction downstream of PARs has been
actively investigated, little is known about the mechanisms that lead to changes 
in transcriptional programs. Here we show that the CUX1 homeodomain protein is a 
downstream effector of PAR2. Treatment of epithelial and fibroblastic cells with 
trypsin or the PAR2-activating peptide (PAR2-AP) caused a rapid increase in CUX1 
DNA binding activity. The stimulation of CUX1 was specific to PAR2 because no
effect was observed with thrombin or the PAR1-AP. Using a panel of recombinant
CUX1 proteins, the regulation was found to involve the cut repeat 3 (CR3) and the
cut homeodomain, two DNA binding domains that are present in all CUX1 isoforms.
Expression analysis in cux1(-/-) mouse embryo fibroblasts led to the
identification of three genes that are regulated downstream of both PAR2 and CUX1
as follows: interleukin-1alpha, matrix metalloproteinase-10, and
cyclo-oxygenase-2. p110 CUX1 was able to activate each of these genes, both in
reporter assays and following the infection of cells. Moreover, the treatment of 
Hs578T breast tumor cells with trypsin led to a rapid recruitment of p110 CUX1 to
the promoter of these genes and to a concomitant increase in their mRNA
steady-state levels. Altogether, these results suggest a model whereby activation
of PAR2 triggers a signaling cascade that culminates with the stimulation of p110
CUX1 DNA binding and the transcriptional activation of target genes.

PMID: 18952606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2008 Dec;295(6):F1725-34. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.90420.2008. Epub 2008 Oct 1.

Acceleration of polycystic kidney disease progression in cpk mice carrying a
deletion in the homeodomain protein Cux1.

Alcalay NI(1), Sharma M, Vassmer D, Chapman B, Paul B, Zhou J, Brantley JG,
Wallace DP, Maser RL, Vanden Heuvel GB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Univ. of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas
City, KS 66160, USA.

Polycystic kidney diseases (PKD) are inherited as autosomal dominant (ADPKD) or
autosomal recessive (ARPKD) traits and are characterized by progressive
enlargement of renal cysts. Aberrant cell proliferation is a key feature in the
progression of PKD. Cux1 is a homeobox gene that is related to Drosophila cut and
is the murine homolog of human CDP (CCAAT Displacement Protein). Cux1 represses
the cyclin kinase inhibitors p21 and p27, and transgenic mice ectopically
expressing Cux1 develop renal hyperplasia. However, Cux1 transgenic mice do not
develop PKD. Here, we show that a 246 amino acid deletion in Cux1 accelerates PKD
progression in cpk mice. Cystic kidneys isolated from 10-day-old cpk/Cux1 double 
mutant mice were significantly larger than kidneys from 10-day-old cpk mice.
Moreover, renal function was significantly reduced in the Cux1 mutant cpk mice,
compared with cpk mice. The mutant Cux1 protein was ectopically expressed in
cyst-lining cells, where expression corresponded to increased cell proliferation 
and apoptosis, and a decrease in expression of the cyclin kinase inhibitors p27
and p21. While the mutant Cux1 protein altered PKD progression, kidneys from mice
carrying the mutant Cux1 protein alone were phenotypically normal, suggesting the
Cux1 mutation modifies PKD progression in cpk mice. During cell cycle
progression, Cux1 is proteolytically processed by a nuclear isoform of the
cysteine protease cathepsin-L. Analysis of the deleted sequences reveals that a
cathepsin-L processing site in Cux1 is deleted. Moreover, nuclear cathepsin-L is 
significantly reduced in both human ADPKD cells and in Pkd1 null kidneys,
corresponding to increased levels of Cux1 protein in the cystic cells and
kidneys. These results suggest a mechanism in which reduced Cux1 processing by
cathepsin-L results in the accumulation of Cux1, downregulation of p21/p27, and
increased cell proliferation in PKD.

PMCID: PMC2604819
PMID: 18829740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Immunol Cell Biol. 2009 Jan;87(1):72-80. doi: 10.1038/icb.2008.71. Epub 2008 Sep 
30.

Getting a GRASP on CASP: properties and role of the cytohesin-associated
scaffolding protein in immunity.

MacNeil AJ(1), Pohajdak B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

Cytohesin-associated scaffolding protein (CASP) is a novel human adaptor protein 
that participates in the assembly and recruitment of protein complexes associated
with intracellular trafficking and signaling. Owing to its exclusive expression
in cells of hematopoietic origin, CASP has attracted attention from many groups
of researchers as a potential key contributor to molecular mechanisms governing
cells of the immune system. The functional characterization of CASP has involved 
a wide range of experimental approaches and provided broad and interesting
insights that, collectively, distinguish CASP as an important contributor for a
fully functioning and rapidly responsive immune system. Protein interaction
studies have demonstrated that CASP interacts with members of the ADP
ribosylation factor (ARF)-activating cytohesin family and with a unique PDZ
domain-containing member of the sorting nexin family of endocytic trafficking
proteins. Physiological knockout studies, however, have revealed that CASP may
not be an essential protein in immunity under normal conditions, but rather a
streamlining protein that greatly ameliorates the efficiency of the immune system
under circumstances of significant stress. Interestingly, an evolutionarily
related neuronal protein, called GRP1-associated scaffolding protein, may further
participate in CASP-related functions in immune cells, conferring a level of
redundancy in associated molecular pathways. In this review, we summarize and
critically review the current literature, bringing together common themes from a 
variety of studies that, when considered together, provide new insights into the 
nature and significance of CASP function in the broad context of immunity.

PMID: 18825161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Infect Immun. 2008 Nov;76(11):4905-12. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00851-08. Epub 2008 Sep
2.

Anaplasma phagocytophilum increases cathepsin L activity, thereby globally
influencing neutrophil function.

Thomas V(1), Samanta S, Fikrig E.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520-8031, USA.

Anaplasma phagocytophilum, the agent of human granulocytic anaplasmosis, is an
unusual obligate intracellular pathogen that persists in neutrophils. A.
phagocytophilum increases the binding of a repressor, CCAAT displacement protein 
(CDP), to the gp91(phox) promoter, thereby diminishing the host oxidative burst. 
We now show that A. phagocytophilum infection also enhances the binding of CDP to
the promoters of human neutrophil peptide 1 and C/EBPepsilon--molecules important
for neutrophil defense and maturation--suggesting that this is a general strategy
used by this pathogen to alter polymorphonuclear leukocyte function. To explore
the mechanism by which A. phagocytophilum increases CDP activity, we assessed the
effects of this microbe on cathepsin L, a protease that cleaves CDP into a form
with increased DNA binding ability. A. phagocytophilum infection resulted in
elevated cathepsin L activity and the proteolysis of CDP. Blocking the action of 
cathepsin L with a chemical inhibitor or small interfering RNA targeting of this 
molecule caused a marked reduction in the degree of A. phagocytophilum infection.
These data demonstrate that increasing cathepsin L activity is a strategy used by
A. phagocytophilum to alter CDP activity and thereby globally influence
neutrophil function. As therapeutic options for A. phagocytophilum and related
organisms are limited, these results also identify a cellular pathway that may be
targeted for the treatment of A. phagocytophilum infection.

PMCID: PMC2573316
PMID: 18765732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Virology. 2008 Sep 1;378(2):214-25. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2008.05.024. Epub 2008
Jul 9.

Repression of human cytomegalovirus major immediate early gene expression by the 
cellular transcription factor CCAAT displacement protein.

Stern JL(1), Cao JZ, Xu J, Mocarski ES, Slobedman B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Virus Research, Westmead Millennium Institute, PO Box 412,
Westmead, New South Wales 2145, Australia.

Initiation of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) productive infection is dependent on
the major immediate early (MIE) genes ie1 and ie2. Several putative binding sites
for CCAAT displacement protein (CDP or CUX1) were identified within the MIE
promoter/regulatory region. Binding assays demonstrated binding of CUX1 to
MIE-region oligonucleotides containing the CUX1 core binding sequence ATCGAT and 
mutagenesis of this sequence abrogated CUX1 binding. Furthermore, CUX1 repressed 
expression of a luciferase reporter construct controlled by the MIE promoter, and
mutation of CUX1 binding sites within the promoter diminished this repressive
function of CUX1. In the context of virus infection of HEK293 cells transfected
with the CUX1 expression vector, CUX1 showed evidence of association with the
HCMV MIE regulatory region and inhibited the capacity of the virus to express ie1
and ie2 transcripts, suggesting that this cellular factor regulates MIE gene
expression following virus entry. These data identify a role for CUX1 in
repressing HCMV gene expression essential for initiation of the replicative
cycle.

PMID: 18614194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Apr;6(4):644-53. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-07-0268.

Proteolytic processing of cut homeobox 1 by neutrophil elastase in the MV4;11
myeloid leukemia cell line.

Goulet B(1), Markovic Y, Leduy L, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada H3A 1A1.

Proteolytic processing by cathepsin L generates p110 Cut homeobox 1 (CUX1) at the
end of the G(1) phase, whereas an alternative transcript encodes p75 CUX1. These 
short CUX1 isoforms were reported to be overexpressed in cancer cells, and
transgenic mice overexpressing the p75 isoform were found to develop
myeloproliferative disease-like myeloid leukemias. In the present study, we
report that the neutrophil elastase can also generate a short CUX1 isoform in the
MV4;11 acute myeloid leukemia cell line. Proteolytic processing was so efficient 
that the full-length CUX1 protein was detected only when cells were maintained in
the presence of the specific elastase inhibitor III. In agreement with these
findings, higher levels of the processed cyclin E isoforms were also detected in 
MV4;11 cells. Reappearance of full-length cyclin E and CUX1 could be induced upon
the treatment of MV4;11 cells with the differentiation inducer phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate or, unexpectedly, following overexpression of a short
recombinant CUX1 protein. In both cases, the mechanism involved transcriptional
repression of the neutrophil elastase gene. This result revealed a negative
feedback loop whereby CUX1 shuts down the expression of the protease that cleaves
it. Overall, the findings in MV4;11 and other cancer cells suggest that various
mechanisms are used in cancer to favor the expression of short CUX1 isoforms.

PMID: 18403643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 16;283(20):13817-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709332200. Epub 2008
Mar 20.

Polycystic kidneys caused by sustained expression of Cux1 isoform p75.

Cadieux C(1), Harada R, Paquet M, Côté O, Trudel M, Nepveu A, Bouchard M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal H3G 1Y6 Canada.

The transcriptional regulator Cux1 (CDP, Cutl1) is aberrantly expressed in mouse 
models for polycystic kidney disease. Here we show that p75-Cux1, the shortest
isoform of Cux1, transcribed from an alternative promoter within intron 20, is
also deregulated in polycystic kidneys derived from Pkd1 mutant embryos. To
determine the role of the p75-Cux1 isoform in cystogenesis, we generated
transgenic mice expressing p75-CUX1 in the kidneys and other tissues. Strikingly,
these animals developed polycystic kidneys at variable penetrance and severity,
correlating with transgene expression levels. Histological and marker analysis of
p75-CUX1-derived polycystic kidneys revealed renal cysts derived from the tubular
nephron, supporting a model of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease.
Transgenic p75-CUX1 kidneys additionally showed an up-regulation of the
protooncogene c-myc and a down-regulation of the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor p27. Chromatin affinity purification experiments confirmed the direct
interaction of Cux1 with the c-myc and p27 promoters. These molecular alterations
were accompanied by an increase in cilia length and in the proliferative index of
epithelial cells lining the cysts. Together, these results identify an important 
role for the short isoform of CUX1 in polycystic kidney disease development.

PMID: 18356167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 May;28(10):3127-38. doi: 10.1128/MCB.02089-07. Epub 2008 Mar 
17.

p110 CUX1 cooperates with E2F transcription factors in the transcriptional
activation of cell cycle-regulated genes.

Truscott M(1), Harada R, Vadnais C, Robert F, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)McGill University, Molecular Oncology Group, 687 Pine Ave. West, Rm. H5.21,
Montreal H3A-1A1, Canada.

The transcription factor p110 CUX1 was shown to stimulate cell proliferation by
accelerating entry into S phase. As p110 CUX1 can function as a transcriptional
repressor or activator depending on promoter context, we investigated its
mechanism of transcriptional activation using the DNA polymerase alpha gene
promoter as a model system. Linker-scanning analysis revealed that a low-affinity
E2F binding site is required for transcriptional activation. Moreover,
coexpression with a dominant-negative mutant of DP-1 suggested that endogenous
E2F factors are indeed needed for p110-mediated activation. Tandem affinity
purification, coimmunoprecipitation, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and reporter 
assays indicated that p110 CUX1 can engage in weak protein-protein interactions
with E2F1 and E2F2, stimulate their recruitment to the DNA polymerase alpha gene 
promoter, and cooperate with these factors in transcriptional activation. On the 
other hand, in vitro assays suggested that the interaction between CUX1 and E2F1 
either is not direct or is regulated by posttranslational modifications.
Genome-wide location analysis revealed that targets common to p110 CUX1 and E2F1 
included many genes involved in cell cycle, DNA replication, and DNA repair.
Comparison of the degree of enrichment for various E2F factors suggested that
binding of p110 CUX1 to a promoter will favor the specific recruitment of E2F1,
and to a lesser extent E2F2, over E2F3 and E2F4. Reporter assays on a subset of
common targets confirmed that p110 CUX1 and E2F1 cooperate in their
transcriptional activation. Overall, our results show that p110 CUX1 and E2F1
cooperate in the regulation of many cell cycle genes.

PMCID: PMC2423173
PMID: 18347061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Gene. 2008 Apr 15;412(1-2):84-94. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2008.01.017. Epub 2008 Feb 
2.

The multiple roles of CUX1: insights from mouse models and cell-based assays.

Sansregret L(1), Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University Health Center, Canada.

Cux (Cut homeobox) genes are present in all metazoans. Early reports described
many phenotypes caused by cut mutations in Drosophila melanogaster. In
vertebrates, CUX1 was originally characterized as the CCAAT-displacement protein 
(CDP). Another line of investigation revealed the presence of CUX1 within a
multi-protein complex called the histone nuclear factor D (HiNF-D). Recent
studies led to the identification of several CUX1 isoforms with distinct DNA
binding and transcriptional properties. While the CCAAT-displacement activity was
implicated in the transcriptional repression of several genes, some CUX1 isoforms
were found to participate in the transcriptional activation of some genes. The
expression and activity of CUX1 was shown to be regulated through the cell cycle 
and to be a target of TGF-beta signaling. Mechanisms of regulation include
alternative transcription initiation, proteolytic processing, phosphorylation and
acetylation. Cell-based assays have established a role for CUX1 in the control of
cell cycle progression, cell motility and invasion. In the mouse, gene
inactivation as well as over-expression in transgenic mice has revealed
phenotypes in multiple organs and cell types. While some phenotypes could be
explained by the presumed functions of CUX1 in the affected cells, other
phenotypes invoked non-cell-autonomous effects that suggest regulatory functions 
with an impact on cell-cell interactions. The implication of CUX1 in cancer was
suggested first from its over-expression in primary tumors and cancer cell lines 
and was later confirmed in mouse models.

PMID: 18313863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2008 Apr;294(4):R1185-96. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00839.2007. Epub 2008 Feb 6.

Regulation of Fto/Ftm gene expression in mice and humans.

Stratigopoulos G(1), Padilla SL, LeDuc CA, Watson E, Hattersley AT, McCarthy MI, 
Zeltser LM, Chung WK, Leibel RL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Naomi Berrie Diabetes Center, Columbia
University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Erratum in
    Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2008 Oct;295(4):R1360-3.

Two recent, large whole-genome association studies (GWAS) in European populations
have associated a approximately 47-kb region that contains part of the FTO gene
with high body mass index (BMI). The functions of FTO and adjacent FTM in human
biology are not clear. We examined expression of these genes in organs of mice
segregating for monogenic obesity mutations, exposed to underfeeding/overfeeding,
and to 4 degrees C. Fto/Ftm expression was reduced in mesenteric adipose tissue
of mice segregating for the Ay, Lep ob, Lepr db, Cpe fat, or tub mutations, and
there was a similar trend in other tissues. These effects were not due to
adiposity per se. Hypothalamic Fto and Ftm expression were decreased by fasting
in lean and obese animals and by cold exposure in lean mice. The fact that
responses of Fto and Ftm expression to these manipulations were almost
indistinguishable suggested that the genes might be coregulated. The putative
overlapping regulatory region contains at least two canonical CUTL1 binding
sites. One of these nominal CUTL1 sites includes rs8050136, a SNP associated with
high body mass. The A allele of rs8050136 preferentially bound CUTL1[corrected]
in human fibroblast DNA. 70% knockdown of CUTL1 expression in human fibroblasts
decreased FTO and FTM expression by 90 and 65%, respectively. Animals and humans 
with various genetic interruptions of FTO or FTM have phenotypes reminiscent of
aspects of the Bardet-Biedl obesity syndrome, a confirmed "ciliopathy." FTM has
recently been shown to be a ciliary basal body protein.

PMCID: PMC2808712
PMID: 18256137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Jan;36(1):189-202. Epub 2007 Nov 14.

Genome-wide location analysis and expression studies reveal a role for p110 CUX1 
in the activation of DNA replication genes.

Harada R(1), Vadnais C, Sansregret L, Leduy L, Bérubé G, Robert F, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, Canada.

Proteolytic processing of the CUX1 transcription factor generates an isoform,
p110 that accelerates entry into S phase. To identify targets of p110 CUX1 that
are involved in cell cycle progression, we performed genome-wide location
analysis using a promoter microarray. Since there are no antibodies that
specifically recognize p110, but not the full-length protein, we expressed
physiological levels of a p110 isoform with two tags and purified chromatin by
tandem affinity purification (ChAP). Conventional ChIP performed on synchronized 
populations of cells confirmed that p110 CUX1 is recruited to the promoter of
cell cycle-related targets preferentially during S phase. Multiple approaches
including silencing RNA (siRNA), transient infection with retroviral vectors,
constitutive expression and reporter assays demonstrated that most cell cycle
targets are activated whereas a few are repressed or not affected by p110 CUX1.
Functional classes that were over-represented among targets included DNA
replication initiation. Consistent with this finding, constitutive expression of 
p110 CUX1 led to a premature and more robust induction of replication genes
during cell cycle progression, and stimulated the long-term replication of a
plasmid bearing the oriP replicator of Epstein Barr virus (EBV).

PMCID: PMC2248751
PMID: 18003658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Virus Genes. 2007 Dec;35(3):473-81. Epub 2007 Feb 1.

Human papillomavirus type 16 P670 promoter is negatively regulated by CCAAT
displacement protein.

Sato K(1), Takeuchi T, Kukimoto I, Mori S, Yasugi T, Yano T, Taketani Y, Kanda T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Pathogen Genomics, National Institute of Infectious Diseases,
1-23-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8640, Japan.

HPV16 late gene transcription from P670 is suppressed in undifferentiated
keratinocytes. To identify DNA sites involved in the negative regulation, we
examined the effect of a series of substitutions in the P670 promoter region
(nucleotide (nt) 106-855) on the transcription, using an expression plasmid
having the promoter fragment placed to drive the firefly-luciferase gene.
Twenty-base pair-long segments covering the entire promoter region were replaced 
with a sequence lacking any so far known factor-binding motifs to produce 38
mutants. These plasmids were introduced by transfecton into undifferentiated or
partially differentiated human HaCaT and HeLa cells, and transient expression of 
the reporter was examined with the cell extracts. The reporter expression from
the wild-type promoter region was lower, half to one-third, in the
undifferentiated cells than in the partially differentiated cells, which
expressed hSkn-1a, a keratinocyte specific transcription factor that activates
P670, and CCAAT displacement protein (CDP), a transcriptional repressor involved 
in cell differentiation. Two mutants with substitutions including the putative
CDP-binding sites, one from nt 562 to 567 and the other from nt 673 to 678,
induced markedly enhanced reporter expression particularly in the partially
differentiated cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift analysis demonstrated that
bacterially produced GST-CDP bound to the two sites in a sequence-specific
manner. The data strongly suggest that CDP acts as a major suppressor for P670
transcription by binding to the promoter region in the undifferentiated cells and
even in the partially differentiated cells that express the activator hSkn-1a.

PMID: 17957475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;27(20):7345-53. Epub 2007 Aug 6.

Protein kinase C-mediated modulation of FIH-1 expression by the homeodomain
protein CDP/Cut/Cux.

Li J(1), Wang E, Dutta S, Lau JS, Jiang SW, Datta K, Mukhopadhyay D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Gugg 1401A, Mayo Clinic
College of Medicine, 200 First Street SW, Rochester MN 55905, USA.

Under normoxia, FIH-1 (factor inhibiting HIF-1) inhibits the transcriptional
activity of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF); however, under such conditions, we
observed a significant level of HIF activity in renal cell carcinoma (RCC). This 
phenomenon could be attributed to a decrease in the level of functional FIH that 
has been identified in our previous work. Nonetheless, the molecular mechanism of
FIH regulation in cancer, in particular RCC, was unclear until now. In this
communication, we have demonstrated that in RCC, the Cut-like homeodomain protein
(CDP/Cut) is involved in FIH transcriptional regulation and is controlled by a
specific signaling event involving protein kinase C (PKC) zeta. Furthermore, we
have defined a unique CDP/Cut binding site on the FIH promoter. With chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, we show that CDP binds to the FIH-1 promoter in vivo 
and that this binding is PKC zeta dependent. Moreover, we have also defined a
potential phosphorylation site in CDP (serine 987) that modulates FIH expression.
CDP/Cut is a transcriptional repressor that decreases FIH-1 expression and
subsequently leads to a decrease in the repressor activity of FIH-1. Without this
repression, HIF activity increases, allowing for the increased transcription of
the genes it regulates, such as the vascular endothelial growth factor and GLUT-1
genes. Both CDP and HIF levels are increased in several cancers and are
responsible for the metastatic progression of the tumors. Taken together, our
results suggest for the first time a potential connection between CDP and FIH
that could lead to the development of future therapeutic interventions.

PMCID: PMC2168911
PMID: 17682059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Biol Chem. 2007 Oct 12;282(41):30216-26. Epub 2007 Aug 6.

Carboxyl-terminal proteolytic processing of CUX1 by a caspase enables
transcriptional activation in proliferating cells.

Truscott M(1), Denault JB, Goulet B, Leduy L, Salvesen GS, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, Quebec
H3A 1A1, Canada.

Proteolytic processing at the end of the G(1) phase generates a CUX1 isoform,
p110, which functions either as a transcriptional activator or repressor and can 
accelerate entry into S phase. Here we describe a second proteolytic event that
generates an isoform lacking two active repression domains in the COOH terminus. 
This processing event was inhibited by treatment of cells with synthetic and
natural caspase inhibitors. In vitro, several caspases generated a processed
isoform that co-migrated with the in vivo generated product. In cells,
recombinant CUX1 proteins in which the region of cleavage was deleted or in which
Asp residues were mutated to Ala, were not proteolytically processed.
Importantly, this processing event was not associated with apoptosis, as assessed
by terminal dUTP nick end labeling assay, cytochrome c localization,
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavage, and fluorescence-activated cell sorting.
Moreover, processing was observed in S phase but not in early G(1), suggesting
that it is regulated through the cell cycle. The functional importance of this
processing event was revealed in reporter and cell cycle assays. A recombinant,
processed, CUX1 protein was a more potent transcriptional activator of several
cell cycle-related genes and was able to accelerate entry into S phase, whereas
mutants that could not be processed were inactive in either assay. Conversely,
cells treated with the quinoline-Val Asp-2,6-difluorophenoxymethylketone caspase 
inhibitor proliferated more slowly and exhibited delayed S phase entry following 
exit from quiescence. Together, our results identify a substrate of caspases in
proliferating cells and suggest a mechanism by which caspases can accelerate cell
cycle progression.

PMID: 17681953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Melanoma Res. 2007 Apr;17(2):91-103.

CCAAT displacement protein regulates nuclear factor-kappa beta-mediated chemokine
transcription in melanoma cells.

Ueda Y(1), Su Y, Richmond A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

Members of the nuclear factor-kappa beta (NF-kappaB) family maintain cellular
homeostasis by enhancing the transcription of genes involved in inflammation,
immune response, cell proliferation, and apoptosis. Melanoma tumor cells often
express inflammatory mediators through enhanced activation of NF-kappaB. The
NF-kappaB activation appears to result from the enhancer formation including
NF-kappaB and lysine acetyl transferases such as p300, CREB (cyclic
AMP-responsive element binding protein)-binding protein (CBP), and/or p300/CBP
associating factor (PCAF). We observed that proteins expressed by Hs294T
metastatic melanoma cells are highly acetylated compared with normal melanocytes,
and dominant-negative PCAF reduced the basal and tumor necrosis
factor-alpha-stimulated transcriptional activity of NF-kappaB. The promoter
activity of NF-kappaB-regulated chemokines was also reduced by the expression of 
dominant-negative PCAF. The promoters of these chemokines contain a CCAAT
displacement protein (CDP)-binding site near the NF-kappaB element. compared with
vector-transduced cells, in CDP-transduced Hs294T cells: (i) over-expressed CDP
bound efficiently to PCAF, (ii) tumor necrosis factor-alpha-stimulated chemokine 
expression and NF-kappaB-mediated transcription were reduced, and (iii) the
binding of CBP to Rel A was reduced. These data suggest that CDP inhibits
cytokine-induced NF-kappaB-regulated chemokine transcription. This study
contributes to our understanding of the role of CDP in an enhanceosome of
NF-kappaB-mediated chemokine transcription in human melanoma cells.

PMCID: PMC2665270
PMID: 17496784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Oncogene. 2007 Aug 30;26(40):5939-49. Epub 2007 Mar 19.

CUTL1 promotes tumor cell migration by decreasing proteasome-mediated Src
degradation.

Aleksic T(1), Bechtel M, Krndija D, von Wichert G, Knobel B, Giehl K, Gress TM,
Michl P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

Recently, we identified the homeodomain transcription factor CUTL1 as important
mediator of cell migration and tumor invasion downstream of transforming growth
factor beta (TGFbeta). The molecular mechanisms and effectors mediating the
pro-migratory and pro-invasive phenotype induced by CUTL1 have not been
elucidated so far. Therefore, the aim of this study was to identify signaling
pathways downstream of CUTL1 which are responsible for its effects on tumor cell 
migration. We found that the reduced motility seen after knock down of CUTL1 by
RNA interference is accompanied by a delay in tumor cell spreading. This
spreading defect is paralleled by a marked reduction of Src protein levels. We
show that CUTL1 leads to Src protein stabilization and activation of
Src-regulated downstream signaling molecules such as RhoA, Rac1, Cdc42 and ROCK. 
In addition, we demonstrate that CUTL1 decreases proteasome-mediated Src protein 
degradation, possibly via transcriptionally upregulating C-terminal Src kinase
(Csk). Based on experiments using Src knockout cells (SYF), we present evidence
that Src plays a crucial role in CUTL1-induced tumor cell migration. In
conclusion, our findings linking the pro-invasive transcription factor CUTL1 and 
the Src pathway provide important new insights in the molecular effector pathways
mediating CUTL-induced migration and invasion.

PMID: 17369846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Carcinogenesis. 2007 Jun;28(6):1178-87. Epub 2007 Jan 16.

WNT5A--target of CUTL1 and potent modulator of tumor cell migration and invasion 
in pancreatic cancer.

Ripka S(1), König A, Buchholz M, Wagner M, Sipos B, Klöppel G, Downward J, Gress 
T, Michl P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

Previously, we have identified the transcription factor CUTL1 as an important
mediator of tumor invasion and target of tumor growth factor-beta. Using
high-throughput approaches, we identified several putative downstream effectors
of CUTL1, among them WNT5A, a secreted member of the Wnt multigene family. The
aim of this study was to investigate the role of WNT5A as a novel target of CUTL1
in pancreatic cancer. CUTL1 and WNT5A were stably over-expressed as well as
transiently and stably knocked down by RNA interference. Effects on
proliferation, migration and invasiveness were investigated by thymidine
incorporation, Boyden chamber experiments and time-lapse microscopy. Expression
of WNT5A in pancreatic cancer tissues was analyzed by real-time polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry. We found that CUTL1 transcriptionally
up-regulated WNT5A on RNA, protein and promoter level. WNT5A significantly
enhanced migration, proliferation and invasiveness, mediating the pro-invasive
effects of CUTL1 to a major extent. WNT5A effects were accompanied by a marked
modulation of marker genes associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition.
Using RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry, we found that WNT5A is up-regulated early 
during pancreatic cancerogenesis in pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasias lesions
and in invasive pancreatic adenocarcinomas, as compared with normal pancreas
tissues. These data identify WNT5A as important target of CUTL1 and as novel
mediator of invasiveness and tumor progression in pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 17227781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Neurosci. 2006 Dec 20;26(51):13273-8.

Molecular interaction between projection neuron precursors and invading
interneurons via stromal-derived factor 1 (CXCL12)/CXCR4 signaling in the
cortical subventricular zone/intermediate zone.

Tiveron MC(1), Rossel M, Moepps B, Zhang YL, Seidenfaden R, Favor J, König N,
Cremer H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie du Développement de Marseille Luminy, Centre National de 
la Recherche Scientifique/Université de Mediterranée, 13288 Marseille, France.

Most cortical interneurons are generated in the subpallial ganglionic eminences
and migrate tangentially to their final destinations in the neocortex. Within the
cortex, interneurons follow mainly stereotype routes in the subventricular
zone/intermediate zone (SVZ/IZ) and in the marginal zone. It has been suggested
that interactions between invading interneurons and locally generated projection 
neurons are implicated in the temporal and spatial regulation of the invasion
process. However, so far experimental evidence for such interactions is lacking. 
We show here that the chemokine stromal-derived factor 1 (SDF-1; CXCL12) is
expressed in the main invasion route for cortical interneurons in the SVZ/IZ.
Most SDF-1-positive cells are proliferating and express the homeodomain
transcription factors Cux1 and Cux2. Using MASH-1 mutant mice in concert with the
interneuron marker DLX, we exclude that interneurons themselves produce the
chemokine in an autocrine manner. We conclude that the SDF-1-expressing cell
population represents the precursors of projection neurons during their
transition and amplification in the SVZ/IZ. Using mice lacking the SDF-1 receptor
CXCR4 or Pax6, we demonstrate that SDF-1 expression in the cortical SVZ/IZ is
essential for recognition of this pathway by interneurons. These results
represent the first evidence for a molecular interaction between precursors of
projection neurons and invading interneurons during corticogenesis.

PMID: 17182777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Leuk Res. 2007 Sep;31(9):1323-4. Epub 2006 Nov 30.

Mutation analysis of CUTL1 in childhood myeloid neoplasias with monosomy 7.

Hindersin S, Niemeyer CM, Germing U, Göbel U, Kratz CP.

PMID: 17140660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Cancer Res. 2006 Oct 1;66(19):9492-501.

Transgenic mice expressing the p75 CCAAT-displacement protein/Cut homeobox
isoform develop a myeloproliferative disease-like myeloid leukemia.

Cadieux C(1), Fournier S, Peterson AC, Bédard C, Bedell BJ, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University Health Center, Department of
Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The p75 CCAAT-displacement protein/Cut homeobox (CDP/Cux) isoform was previously 
reported to be overexpressed in human breast cancers. To investigate its
oncogenic potential, we engineered two transgenic mouse lines expressing p75
CDP/Cux under the control of the mouse mammary tumor virus-long terminal repeat. 
The FVB strain of mouse is generally used in the generation of mouse models for
breast cancer. The transgene was introduced into the hprt locus of 129/Ola
embryonic stem cells and, following germ line passage, was backcrossed onto the
FVB and C57BL/6 mouse strains. Here, we describe the phenotype of p75 CDP/Cux
transgenic virgin female mice of the first backcross generations. We report that 
after a long latency period, approximately 33% of mice from two independent
transgenic lines and from backcrosses into either the FVB or the C57BL/6 strains 
succumbed to a similar disease characterized by splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, and
frequent infiltration of leukocytes into nonhematopoietic organs like the kidneys
and lungs. Although an excess of B or T cells was observed in three diseased
mice, in 17 other cases, histologic and flow cytometry analyses revealed the
expansion of a population of neutrophils in the blood, spleen, and bone marrow.
The increase in neutrophils correlated with signs of anemia and thrombocytopenia,
whereas there was no indication of a reactive process. Therefore, p75 CDP/Cux
transgenic mice displayed heightened susceptibility to a disease defined as a
myeloproliferative disease-like myeloid leukemia. These results indicate that the
overexpression of p75 CDP/Cux could alter homeostasis in the hematopoietic
compartment.

PMID: 17018605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Biol Chem. 2006 Sep;387(9):1285-93.

A novel proteolytically processed CDP/Cux isoform of 90 kDa is generated by
cathepsin L.

Goulet B(1), Truscott M, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University Health Center, McGill University, 
Montreal H3A 1A1, Canada.

The Cut-like genes code for multiple isoforms of the CDP/Cux transcription
factor. The full-length protein contains four DNA-binding domains: Cut repeats 1,
2 and 3 (CR1, CR2 and CR3) and the Cut homeodomain (HD). The p75 isoform is
expressed from an mRNA that is initiated within intron 20 and contains only CR3
and HD. The p110 isoform is generated by proteolytic processing by cathepsin L
and contains CR2, CR3 and HD. In the present study, we show that an additional
isoform of 90 kDa is expressed in many cell lines of epithelial origin. Mapping
experiments with deletion mutants indicated that the N-terminus of p90 is located
upstream of CR2, between amino acids 918 and 938. Indeed, p90 and p110 displayed 
similar DNA-binding and transcriptional activities. The p90 isoform, like p110,
was found to be generated by proteolytic processing. The steady-state level of
both p90 and p110 correlated with the level of cathepsin L activity. Importantly,
co-expression with a cathepsin L mutant that is initiated at downstream AUG sites
also stimulated the generation of p90 and p110. These results strongly suggest
that p90, like p110, is generated by cathepsin L isoforms that are devoid of a
signal peptide.

PMID: 16972798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Nefrologia. 2006;26(2):195-205.

[What are the Hox genes? Its importance in vascular and renal disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Hernández Perera O(1), Marrero A, Rodríguez Pérez JC.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Investigación, Hospital Universitario de Gran Canaria Dr Negrín,
Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria.

PMID: 16808257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 2;281(22):15138-44. Epub 2006 Mar 30.

CUTL1 is phosphorylated by protein kinase A, modulating its effects on cell
proliferation and motility.

Michl P(1), Knobel B, Downward J.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Laboratory, Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, 
44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3PX, United Kingdom.

CUTL1, also known as CDP (CCAAT Displacement Protein), Cut, or Cux-1, is a
homeodomain transcription factor known to play an essential role in development
and cell cycle progression. Previously, we identified CUTL1 as modulator of cell 
motility and invasiveness. Here we report that protein kinase A (PKA), known to
inhibit tumor progression in various tumor types, directly phosphorylates CUTL1
at serine 1215 in NIH3T3 fibroblasts. The PKA-induced phosphorylation results in 
decreased DNA binding affinity of CUTL1 and diminished CUTL1-mediated cell cycle 
progression and cell motility. Furthermore, the expression of several CUTL1
target genes involved in proliferation and migration, such as DNA polymerase A
and DKK2, was modulated by PKA-induced phosphorylation. These data identify CUTL1
as a novel target of PKA through which this protein kinase can modulate tumor
cell motility and tumor progression.

PMID: 16574653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Virology. 2006 Jul 5;350(2):302-11. Epub 2006 Mar 9.

Interactions of the cellular CCAAT displacement protein and human papillomavirus 
E2 protein with the viral origin of replication can regulate DNA replication.

Narahari J(1), Fisk JC, Melendy T, Roman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine and Walther Cancer Institute, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
jnarahar@iupui.edu

Previously, we and others have shown that CCAAT displacement protein (CDP)
negatively regulates the papillomavirus promoters. Overexpression of CDP has been
shown to inhibit high-risk human papillomavirus virus (HPV) and bovine
papillomavirus DNA replication in vivo presumably through reduction in expression
of viral replication proteins, E1 and E2. Sequence analysis of the HPV origin
indicates several potential CDP-binding sites with one site overlapping the
E1-binding site. Therefore, CDP could also negatively regulate papillomavirus
replication directly by preventing the loading of the initiation complex. We show
here that purified CDP inhibits in vitro HPV DNA replication. Footprint analysis 
demonstrated that CDP binds the E1-binding site and the TATA box, and that the
binding of purified CDP to the E1-binding site is decreased by the addition of
purified E2 protein. Consistent with this, E2-independent in vitro HPV
replication is inhibited by CDP to a greater extent than E2-dependent
replication. These results suggest that binding of E2 at the E2-binding site may 
play an important role in overcoming the inhibition of E1 initiation complex
formation caused by the binding of negative regulators like CDP to the origin of 
replication.

PMID: 16529788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Methods Enzymol. 2005;404:279-96.

Preparation and characterization of recombinant golgin tethers.

Satoh A(1), Beard M, Warren G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA.

Golgin tethers are integral or peripheral Golgi proteins with predicted
coiled-coil domains and many are known to interact directly with small GTPases of
the Ypt/Rab or Arl families. Here we describe the preparation of recombinant
golgins: GM130, p115 (and truncations thereof), the N-terminal fragment of
giantin, CASP, and golgin-84.

PMID: 16413277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Methods Enzymol. 2005;404:125-34.

Tethering assays for COPI vesicles mediated by golgins.

Satoh A(1), Malsam J, Warren G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA.

A method is described that allows the attachment of COPI vesicles and Golgi
membranes to glass slides that can then be analyzed using electron microscopy
(EM) and immuno-EM methods. Subpopulations of COPI vesicles can be bound
selectively using recombinant golgins. Alternatively, COPI vesicles can be
attached to prebound Golgi membranes. Marking these vesicles selectively with
biotin allows their site of attachment to be identified.

PMID: 16413264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Cell Cycle. 2006 Jan;5(2):132-4. Epub 2006 Jan 16.

CUTL1: a key mediator of TGFbeta-induced tumor invasion.

Michl P(1), Downward J.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Innere Medizin I, Klinikum der Universität Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

The TGFbeta pathway plays a dual role in human carcinogenesis. On one hand,
TGFbeta is well known for its ability to inhibit epithelial cell proliferation
and promote apoptosis. However, many advanced cancers acquire resistance to the
growth-inhibitory effects of TGFbeta and respond to it instead with promotion of 
proliferation, invasion and tumor progression. The homeobox transcription factor 
CUTL1, also known as CCAAT displacement protein, CDP or Cux-1, is involved in the
control of normal embryonic development and differentiation. Recently, we found
that CUTL1 is a transcriptional target of TGFbeta and is an important mediator of
the TGFbeta-induced cell migration and invasion. In addition, CUTL1 is highly
expressed in various epithelial cancers and seems to negatively correlate with
tumor differentiation and patient survival. Therefore we postulate that CUTL1
might be a key mediator of the tumor-promoting effects of TGFbeta in advanced
cancers.

PMID: 16357536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 2;280(35):30681-8. Epub 2005 Jul 1.

Negative transcriptional modulation and silencing of the bi-exonic Rnf35 gene in 
the preimplantation embryo. Binding of the CCAAT-displacement protein/Cux to the 
untranslated exon 1 sequence.

Huang CJ(1), Chang JG, Wu SC, Choo KB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science and Graduate Institute of Biotechnology, College 
of Agriculture, Chinese Culture University, Taipei 111, Taiwan 111.

Previous works have indicated promiscuous transcription from the zygotic genome
immediately after fertilization. The mouse Rnf35 gene is bi-exonic in structure
and is transcribed in the preimplantation embryo until it is permanently silenced
at the blastocyst stage of development. We have previously shown that Rnf35
transcription is positively regulated by the nuclear factor Y. Using the uniquely
permissive Chinese hamster ovary-K1 cell line in transient transfection assays,
we demonstrate in this work that the Rnf35 promoter was negatively modulated by a
cis-cognate repressor element, designated as the downstream exon 1 repressor, or 
DER, residing between +72 and +95 in the untranslated exon 1 of the Rnf35 gene.
Simultaneous mutagenesis of the two half-sections, DER1 and DER2, of the DER
sequence was required for derepression suggesting participation of multiple
proteins in the DER-dependent transcriptional repression. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays demonstrated that the 3'-half of DER (DER2) was targeted by
the repressor CCAAT-displacement protein (CDP)/Cux. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments further demonstrated in vivo CDP-DER association in the blastocyst
and the 8.5 day embryo. Furthermore, the DER-dependent repression was partially
relieved in vivo in co-transfection with an antisense CDP construct.
Transcription of the Cdp gene was shown to first occur between the eight-cell and
the blastocyst stages, correlating and possibly explaining the onset of Rnf35
silencing at the blastocyst stage. Taken together, our results suggest that the
evolutionarily acquired exon 1 of Rnf35, and possibly exon 1 of other similarly
structured bi-exonic early embryonic genes, contributes to transcriptional
modulation and silencing in the developing mouse embryo.

PMID: 15994318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cancer Cell. 2005 Jun;7(6):521-32.

CUTL1 is a target of TGF(beta) signaling that enhances cancer cell motility and
invasiveness.

Michl P(1), Ramjaun AR, Pardo OE, Warne PH, Wagner M, Poulsom R, D'Arrigo C,
Ryder K, Menke A, Gress T, Downward J.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Laboratory, Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, 
44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3PX, United Kingdom.

CUTL1, also known as CDP, Cut, or Cux-1, is a homeodomain transcriptional
regulator known to be involved in development and cell cycle progression. Here we
report that CUTL1 activity is associated with increased migration and
invasiveness in numerous tumor cell lines, both in vitro and in vivo.
Furthermore, we identify CUTL1 as a transcriptional target of transforming growth
factor beta and a mediator of its promigratory effects. CUTL1 activates a
transcriptional program regulating genes involved in cell motility, invasion, and
extracellular matrix composition. CUTL1 expression is significantly increased in 
high-grade carcinomas and is inversely correlated with survival in breast cancer.
This suggests that CUTL1 plays a central role in coordinating a gene expression
program associated with cell motility and tumor progression.

PMID: 15950902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Microbiol Immunol. 2005;49(4):331-42.

The time-dependent serial gene response to Zeocin treatment involves
caspase-dependent apoptosis in HeLa cells.

Hwang J(1), Kim YY, Huh S, Shim J, Park C, Kimm K, Choi DK, Park TK, Kim S.

Author information: 
(1)National Genome Research Institute, NIH, Seoul, Korea.

Zeocin, a member of the bleomycin/phleomycin family of antibiotics, is known to
bind DNA and to induce apoptosis in cervical cancer cells, but the mechanism
underlying this apoptotic response is poorly understood. The present study was
undertaken to elucidate time-dependent serial transcript patterns in the HeLa
cervical carcinoma cell line, following treatment with Zeocin. The HeLa cell
proliferation rate was found to gradually decrease following Zeocin exposure, in 
a time-and dose-dependent manner. RNA transcript level measurements, for
time-dependent serial gene expression profiling, were determined at 0, 6, 12, 18 
and 24 hr using a 0.5 k apoptosis functional microarray chip. Further statistical
analysis, using a significance test at a 95% confidence level, for transcripts
with a greater than 2-fold change on the array chips, identified 49 up-regulated 
and 57 down-regulated genes. Our gene expression profile data indicate that
Zeocin treatment induces an initial release of cytochrome c, the down-regulation 
of Bcl-X (L), ENDOG, DAXX and MDM2, and the up-regulation of CASP and BID. This
suggests that a p53-independent mitochondrial caspase cascade pathway is
primarily involved in Zeocin-induced apoptosis. Such caspasedependent cytotoxic
activity also implies that this cell death pathway occurs via the caspase 8 and
BID genes. However, disruption of either FAS or TNFR1 signaling did not interfere
with the Zeocin induced apoptotic response in our experimental system. We
hypothesize that Zeocin could be active against cervical cancer cell resistance
to conventional chemotherapy and postulate that Zeocin is a novel candidate for
the development of new chemotherapeutic treatments of gynecological cancers.

PMID: 15840958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Science. 2005 Feb 18;307(5712):1095-8.

Golgin tethers define subpopulations of COPI vesicles.

Malsam J(1), Satoh A, Pelletier L, Warren G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Yale
University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520-8002, USA.

Coiled-coil proteins of the golgin family have been implicated in intra-Golgi
transport through tethering coat protein complex I (COPI) vesicles. The
p115-golgin tether is the best studied, and here we characterize the
golgin-84-CASP tether. The vesicles bound by this tether were strikingly
different from those bound by the p115-golgin tether in that they lacked members 
of the p24 family of putative cargo receptors and contained enzymes instead of
anterograde cargo. Microinjected golgin-84 or CASP also inhibited Golgi-enzyme
transport to the endoplasmic reticulum, further implicating this tether in
retrograde transport. These and other golgins may modulate the flow patterns
within the Golgi stack.

PMID: 15718469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Virol. 2005 Mar;79(5):2831-8.

Functional interaction of the adenovirus IVa2 protein with adenovirus type 5
packaging sequences.

Ostapchuk P(1), Yang J, Auffarth E, Hearing P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, School of Medicine, Stony
Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.

Adenovirus type 5 (Ad5) DNA packaging is initiated in a polar fashion from the
left end of the genome. The packaging process is dependent on the cis-acting
packaging domain located between nucleotides 230 and 380. Seven AT-rich repeats
that direct packaging have been identified within this domain. A1, A2, A5, and A6
are the most important repeats functionally and share a bipartite sequence motif.
Several lines of evidence suggest that there is a limiting trans-acting factor(s)
that plays a role in packaging. Both cellular and viral proteins that interact
with adenovirus packaging elements in vitro have been identified. In this study, 
we characterized a group of recombinant viruses that carry site-specific point
mutations within a minimal packaging domain. The mutants were analyzed for growth
properties in vivo and for the ability to bind cellular and viral proteins in
vitro. Our results are consistent with a requirement of the viral IVa2 protein
for DNA packaging via a direct interaction with packaging sequences. Our results 
also indicate that higher-order IVa2-containing complexes that form on adjacent
packaging repeats in vitro are the complexes required for the packaging activity 
of these sites in vivo. Chromatin immunoprecipitation was used to study proteins 
that bind directly to the packaging sequences. These results demonstrate
site-specific interaction of the viral IVa2 and L1 52/55K proteins with the Ad5
packaging domain in vivo. These results confirm and extend those previously
reported and provide a framework on which to model the adenovirus assembly
process.

PMCID: PMC548476
PMID: 15709002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Gene. 2005 Jan 3;344:273-85. Epub 2004 Dec 10.

Biochemical characterization of the mammalian Cux2 protein.

Gingras H(1), Cases O, Krasilnikova M, Bérubé G, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University Health Center, Canada; Department 
of Biochemistry, McGill University, Canada.

The CCAAT displacement protein (CDP) and cux (Cut homeobox) genes were originally
identified as the human and mouse orthologs of Drosophila melanogaster cut. More 
recently, vertebrates were found to possess a second cut orthologs that was
generated by gene duplication: Cux2. We report the initial biochemical
characterization of the Cux2 protein in tissue culture and in vitro. We generated
four polyclonal antibodies that were able to recognize the human and mouse Cux2
protein but displayed little or no cross-reactivity towards CDP1 and Cux1. The
expression of the Cux2 protein was convincingly detected in only one among 19
neuronal cell lines: the SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cell line. CDP/Cux proteins 
contain four DNA binding domains, three Cut repeat (CR1, CR2 and CR3) and one Cut
homeodomain (HD). Purified fusion proteins containing either CR1CR2, CR2CR3HD or 
CR3HD exhibited similar DNA binding specificities as the corresponding domains of
Cux1, but their DNA binding kinetics were much more rapid. Similarly, the
full-length Cux2 protein made rapid but transient interactions with DNA. We did
not observe an N-terminally processed Cux2 isoform equivalent to the Cux1 p110
isoform. Whereas Cux1 can function as a repressor or activator in a
promoter-specific manner, Cux2 functioned exclusively as a transcriptional
repressor in NIH3T3 cells. Overall, our results suggest that the Cux1 and Cux2
proteins carry distinct biochemical functions. Cux2 is able, like Cux1, to
perform the CCAAT-displacement activity. However, Cux2 is unlikely to execute
transcriptional regulatory functions that require stable interaction with DNA.

PMID: 15656993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Infect Immun. 2005 Jan;73(1):208-18.

Anaplasma phagocytophilum modulates gp91phox gene expression through altered
interferon regulatory factor 1 and PU.1 levels and binding of CCAAT displacement 
protein.

Thomas V(1), Samanta S, Wu C, Berliner N, Fikrig E.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University
School of Medicine, S525A, 300 Cedar St., P.O. Box 208031, New Haven, CT
06520-8031, USA.

Infection of neutrophil precursors with Anaplasma phagocytophilum, the causative 
agent of human granulocytic ehrlichiosis, results in downregulation of the
gp91(phox) gene, a key component of NADPH oxidase. We now show that repression of
gp91(phox) gene transcription is associated with reduced expression of interferon
regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1) and PU.1 in nuclear extracts of A.
phagocytophilum-infected cells. Loss of PU.1 and IRF-1 correlated with increased 
binding of the repressor, CCAAT displacement protein (CDP), to the promoter of
the gp91(phox) gene. Reduced protein expression of IRF-1 was observed with or
without gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) stimulation, and the defect in IFN-gamma
signaling was associated with diminished binding of phosphorylated Stat1 to the
Stat1 binding element of the IRF-1 promoter. The diminished levels of activator
proteins and enhanced binding of CDP account for the transcriptional inhibition
of the gp91(phox) gene during A. phagocytophilum infection, providing evidence of
the first molecular mechanism that a pathogen uses to alter the regulation of
genes that contribute to an effective respiratory burst.

PMCID: PMC538944
PMID: 15618156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Sep 15;32(16):4862-75. Print 2004.

SMAR1 and Cux/CDP modulate chromatin and act as negative regulators of the
TCRbeta enhancer (Ebeta).

Kaul-Ghanekar R(1), Jalota A, Pavithra L, Tucker P, Chattopadhyay S.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Cell Science, Ganeshkhind, Pune 411007, India.

Chromatin modulation at various cis-acting elements is critical for V(D)J
recombination during T and B cell development. MARbeta, a matrix-associated
region (MAR) located upstream of the T cell receptor beta (TCRbeta) enhancer
(Ebeta), serves a crucial role in silencing Ebeta-mediated TCR activation. By
DNaseI hypersensitivity assays, we show here that overexpression of the MAR
binding proteins SMAR1 and Cux/CDP modulate the chromatin structure at MARbeta.
We further demonstrate that the silencer function of MARbeta is mediated
independently by SMAR1 and Cux/CDP as judged by their ability to repress
Ebeta-dependent reporter gene expression. Moreover, the repressor activity of
SMAR1 is strongly enhanced in the presence of Cux/CDP. These two proteins
physically interact with each other and colocalize within the perinuclear region 
through a SMAR1 domain required for repression. The repression domain of SMAR1 is
separate from the MARbeta binding domain and contains a nuclear localization
signal and an arginine-serine (RS)-rich domain, characteristic of pre-mRNA
splicing regulators. Our data suggest that at the double positive stage of T cell
development, cis-acting MARbeta elements recruit the strong negative regulators
Cux and SMAR1 to control Ebeta-mediated recombination and transcription.

PMCID: PMC519105
PMID: 15371550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Aug 3;101(31):11257-62. Epub 2004 Jul 21.

CCAAT displacement protein/cut homolog recruits G9a histone lysine
methyltransferase to repress transcription.

Nishio H(1), Walsh MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy 
Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

CCAAT displacement protein/cut homolog (CDP/cut) is a highly conserved
homeodomain protein that contains three cut repeat sequences. CDP/cut is a
transcriptional factor for many diverse cellular and viral genes that are
involved in most cellular processes, including differentiation, development, and 
proliferation. Here, we report that CDP/cut interacts with a histone lysine
methyltransferase (HKMT), G9a, in vivo and in vitro. The deletion of the cut
repeats within CDP/cut abrogates the interaction with G9a. The transcriptional
repressor function of CDP/cut is mediated through HKMT activity of G9a associated
with CDP/cut. We show that the recruitment of G9a to the human p21(waf1/cdi1)
promoter is contingent on the interaction with CDP/cut, and CDP/cut is directly
associated with an increase in the methylation in vivo of Lys-9 in histone H3
within the CDP/cut-regulatory region of the p21(waf1/cdi1) promoter. The
endogenous level of p21(waf1/cdi1) expression is repressed through CDP/cut and
mediated by HKMT activity of G9a. Furthermore, we report the identification of
G9a as a component of CDP/cut complex. G9a colocalizes with CDP/cut in the
nucleus. These results indicate that G9a functions as a transcriptional
corepressor in association with a CDP/cut complex. These studies now reveal the
interaction of G9a with a sequence-specific transcription factor that regulates
gene repression through CDP/cut.

PMCID: PMC509191
PMID: 15269344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Dev Cell. 2004 May;6(5):610-1.

Cathepsins as transcriptional activators?

Chapman HA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of
California, San Francisco, 513 Parnassus Avenue, HSE-201, San Francisco, CA
94143, USA.

One action of proteases is limited cleavage of latent transcription factors,
releasing active factors to initiate nuclear signaling. Goulet et al., in a
recent Molecular Cell paper, provide evidence that a lysosomal protease,
cathepsin L, exists in a previously unsuspected isoform capable of trafficking to
the nucleus and activating the CDP/Cux transcription factor. The findings should 
stimulate new research on the nature of nuclear proteases involved in signaling.

PMID: 15130484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Exp Med. 2004 Feb 2;199(3):315-21. Epub 2004 Jan 26.

The metallo-beta-lactamase/beta-CASP domain of Artemis constitutes the catalytic 
core for V(D)J recombination.

Poinsignon C(1), Moshous D, Callebaut I, de Chasseval R, Villey I, de Villartay
JP.

Author information: 
(1)Développement Normal et Pathologique de Système Immunitaire, INSERM U429,
Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, 75015 Paris, France.

The V(D)J recombination/DNA repair factor Artemis belongs to the
metallo-beta-lactamase (beta-Lact) superfamily of enzymes. Three regions can be
defined within the Artemis protein sequence: (a) the beta-Lact homology domain,
to which is appended (b) the beta-CASP region, specific of members of the
beta-Lact superfamily acting on nucleic acids, and (c) the COOH-terminal domain. 
Using in vitro mutagenesis, here we show that the association of the beta-Lact
and the beta-CASP regions suffices for in vivo V(D)J recombination of
chromosome-integrated substrates. Single amino acid mutants point to critical
catalytic residues for V(D)J recombination activity. The results presented here
define the beta-Lact/beta-CASP domain of Artemis as the minimal core catalytic
domain needed for V(D)J recombination and suggest that Artemis uses one or two
Zn(II) ions to exert its catalytic activity, like bacterial class B beta-Lact
enzymes hydrolyzing beta-lactam compounds.

PMCID: PMC2211804
PMID: 14744996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Gene. 2003 Nov 13;319:177-87.

Characterization of the mouse lysosomal sialidase promoter.

Champigny MJ(1), Johnson M, Igdoura SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Lysosomal sialidase is required for the catabolism of sialoglycoconjugates such
as gangliosides and deficiency in this enzyme results in the autosomal recessive 
disease sialidosis. Furthermore, we have shown that overexpression of human
sialidase is sufficient to clear accumulated ganglioside in Tay-Sachs neuroglia
[Hum. Mol. Genet. 8 (1999) 1111]. In this paper, we have characterized the 5'
regulatory region of the mouse lysosomal sialidase gene in order to understand
the molecular mechanisms regulating its expression. We used bioinformatic
approaches to identify a transcriptional initiation site at -45 bp relative to
the ATG and significant sequence homology with the rat and human promoters.
Expression by the promoter was found to be cell-type restricted and required at
least 750 bp upstream of the ATG for high-level expression. DNAse I footprinting 
analysis and reporter gene assays indicated that the promoter is responsive to
Sp-1. We discovered a CCAAT box and four E-boxes within the mouse upstream region
and demonstrated that CCAAT displacement protein as well as the muscle regulatory
factors MyoD and Myf-5 influence sialidase expression. Taken together, these
results identify cis- and trans-acting factors involved in the regulation of
sialidase and point to mechanisms of gene upregulation.

PMID: 14597183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Gene Expr Patterns. 2003 Oct;3(5):571-7.

Dynamic expression of murine Cux2 in craniofacial, limb, urogenital and neuronal 
primordia.

Iulianella A(1), Vanden Heuvel G, Trainor P.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute For Medical Research, 1000E 50th Street, Kansas City, MO
64110, USA.

CDP/Cut homeodomain factors are a divergent group of transcriptional repressors
that are conserved during metazoan evolution. The cut locus of Drosophila is
required for external sensory organ development and dorso-ventral boundary
formation in the wing. In vertebrates, two CDP/Cut genes have been identified,
Cux1 and Cux2. While Cux1 is widely expressed in mouse embryos particularly in
the nephrogenic and urogenital systems, in contrast the early embryonic
expression of Cux2 has not been characterized. Here we describe the dynamic
profile of Cux2 during mouse embryogenesis. Cux2 expression becomes elaborated in
a number of tissues during organogenesis including the olfactory epithelium,
branchial arch and limb bud progress zones, roof plate, motor neurons, dorsal
root ganglia and urogenital tissues. The conservation of signaling pathways
between the branchial arches and limb buds is well documented and surprisingly
this can also be applied to the developing urogenital system. Cux2 expression
coincides with many tissue regions undergoing proliferative growth or cell
rearrangements, however some later expression domains also include sites of
programmed cell death. Cux2 is hypothesized to function as a transcriptional
regulator that inhibits terminal differentiation and cell cycle exit.

PMID: 12971989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Cell Physiol. 2003 Sep;196(3):541-56.

Tumor suppressor pRB functions as a co-repressor of the CCAAT displacement
protein (CDP/cut) to regulate cell cycle controlled histone H4 transcription.

Gupta S(1), Luong MX, Bleuming SA, Miele A, Luong M, Young D, Knudsen ES, Van
Wijnen AJ, Stein JL, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester 01655, USA.

The CCAAT displacement protein (CDP-cut/CUTL1/cux) performs a key
proliferation-related function as the DNA binding subunit of the cell cycle
controlled HiNF-D complex. HiNF-D interacts with all five classes (H1, H2A, H2B, 
H3, and H4) of the cell-cycle dependent histone genes, which are
transcriptionally and coordinately activated at the G(1)/S phase transition
independent of E2F. The tumor suppressor pRB/p105 is an intrinsic component of
the HiNF-D complex. However, the molecular interactions that enable CDP and pRB
to form a complex and thus convey cell growth regulatory information onto histone
gene promoters must be further defined. Using transient transfections, we show
that CDP represses the H4 gene promoter and that pRB functions with CDP as a
co-repressor. Direct physical interaction between CDP and pRB was observed in
glutathione-S-transferase (GST) pull-down assays. Furthermore, interactions
between these proteins were established by yeast and mammalian two-hybrid
experiments and co-immunoprecipitation assays. Confocal microscopy shows that
subsets of each protein are co-localized in situ. Using a series of pRB mutants, 
we find that the CDP/pRB interaction, similar to the E2F/pRB interaction,
utilizes the A/B large pocket (LP) of pRB. Thus, several converging lines of
evidence indicate that complexes between CDP and pRB repress cell cycle regulated
histone gene promoters.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12891711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Mol Carcinog. 2003 Jun;37(2):61-4.

Mutation analysis of CDP, TP53, and KRAS in uterine leiomyomas.

Patrikis MI(1), Bryan EJ, Thomas NA, Rice GE, Quinn MA, Baker MS, Campbell IG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Gynaecological Cancer Research
Centre, University of Melbourne, Royal Women's Hospital, Carlton, Victoria,
Australia.

Leiomyomas are the most common gynecologic tumors in women, but very little is
known about their molecular pathology. We used single-stranded conformational
polymorphism/heteroduplex analysis to analyze 42 unselected uterine leiomyomas
for somatic mutations in all coding exons of the gene encoding CCAAT displacement
protein (CDP), as well as exons 5-8 of TP53 and codons 1-36 and 38-80 of KRAS. No
somatic mutations were identified in either TP53 or KRAS, indicating that
disregulation of these genes is not required for leiomyomas development. Aberrant
band shifts were identified in CDP, but these were all germline nonpathogenic
variants that have been reported previously. There is good functional and genetic
evidence indicating that CDP is a leiomyoma suppressor, but our data suggested
that somatic mutations in this gene were rare in unselected uterine leiomyomas.
It is possible that CDP belongs to a class of tumor suppressor in which loss of
only one copy of the gene, either by genetic or epigenetic mechanisms, is
sufficient to allow tumor growth.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12766905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Virol. 2003 Jun;77(11):6255-64.

Binding of CCAAT displacement protein CDP to adenovirus packaging sequences.

Erturk E(1), Ostapchuk P, Wells SI, Yang J, Gregg K, Nepveu A, Dudley JP, Hearing
P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, School of Medicine, Stony
Brook University, New York 11794, USA.

Adenovirus (Ad) type 5 DNA packaging is initiated in a polar fashion from the
left end of the genome. The packaging process is dependent upon the cis-acting
packaging domain located between nucleotides 194 and 380. Seven A/T-rich repeats 
have been identified within this domain that direct packaging. A1, A2, A5, and A6
are the most important repeats functionally and share a bipartite sequence motif.
Several lines of evidence suggest that there is a limiting trans-acting factor(s)
that plays a role in packaging. Two cellular activities that bind to minimal
packaging domains in vitro have been previously identified. These binding
activities are P complex, an uncharacterized protein(s), and chicken ovalbumin
upstream promoter transcription factor (COUP-TF). In this work, we report that a 
third cellular protein, octamer-1 protein (Oct-1), binds to minimal packaging
domains. In vitro binding analyses and in vivo packaging assays were used to
examine the relevance of these DNA binding activities to Ad DNA packaging. The
results of these experiments reveal that COUP-TF and Oct-1 binding does not play 
a functional role in Ad packaging, whereas P-complex binding directly correlates 
with packaging function. We demonstrate that P complex contains the cellular
protein CCAAT displacement protein (CDP) and that full-length CDP is found in
purified virus particles. In addition to cellular factors, previous evidence
indicates that viral factors play a role in the initiation of viral DNA
packaging. We propose that CDP, in conjunction with one or more viral proteins,
binds to the packaging sequences of Ad to initiate the encapsidation process.

PMCID: PMC154998
PMID: 12743282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 18;278(29):26589-96. Epub 2003 May 5.

The tumor suppressor interferon regulatory factor 1 interferes with SP1
activation to repress the human CDK2 promoter.

Xie RL(1), Gupta S, Miele A, Shiffman D, Stein JL, Stein GS, van Wijnen AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

Cell growth control by interferons (IFNs) involves up-regulation of the tumor
suppressor interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1). To exert its anti-proliferative
effects, this factor must ultimately control transcription of several key genes
that regulate cell cycle progression. Here we show that the G1/S phase-related
cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2) gene is a novel proliferation-related downstream
target of IRF1. We find that IRF1, but not IRF2, IRF3, or IRF7, selectively
represses CDK2 gene transcription in a dose- and time-dependent manner. We
delineate the IRF1-responsive repressor element between nt -68 to -31 of the CDK2
promoter. For comparison, the tumor suppressor p53 represses CDK2 promoter
activity independently of IRF1 through sequences upstream of nt -68, and the
CDP/cut/Cux1 homeodomain protein represses transcription down-stream of -31.
Thus, IRF1 repression represents one of three distinct mechanisms to attenuate
CDK2 levels. The -68/-31 segment lacks a canonical IRF responsive element but
contains a single SP1 binding site. Mutation of this element abrogates
SP1-dependent enhancement of CDK2 promoter activity as expected but also
abolishes IRF1-mediated repression. Forced elevation of SP1 levels increases
endogenous CDK2 levels, whereas IRF1 reduces both endogenous SP1 and CDK2 protein
levels. Hence, IRF1 represses CDK2 gene expression by interfering with
SP1-dependent transcriptional activation. Our findings establish a causal series 
of events that functionally connect the anti-proliferative effects of interferons
with the IRF1-dependent suppression of the CDK2 gene, which encodes a key
regulator of the G1/S phase transition.

PMID: 12732645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Apr;23(8):3013-28.

CDP/Cux stimulates transcription from the DNA polymerase alpha gene promoter.

Truscott M(1), Raynal L, Premdas P, Goulet B, Leduy L, Bérubé G, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University Health Center and Department of
Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 1A1.

CDP/Cux (CCAAT-displacement protein/cut homeobox) contains four DNA binding
domains, namely, three Cut repeats (CR1, CR2, and CR3) and a Cut homeodomain.
CCAAT-displacement activity involves rapid but transient interaction with DNA.
More stable DNA binding activity is up-regulated at the G(1)/S transition and was
previously shown to involve an N-terminally truncated isoform, CDP/Cux p110, that
is generated by proteolytic processing. CDP/Cux has been previously characterized
as a transcriptional repressor. However, here we show that expression of reporter
plasmids containing promoter sequences from the human DNA polymerase alpha (pol
alpha), CAD, and cyclin A genes is stimulated in cotransfections with
N-terminally truncated CDP/Cux proteins but not with full-length CDP/Cux.
Moreover, expression of the endogenous DNA pol alpha gene was stimulated
following the infection of cells with a retrovirus expressing a truncated CDP/Cux
protein. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays revealed that CDP/Cux was
associated with the DNA pol alpha gene promoter specifically in the S phase.
Using linker scanning analyses, in vitro DNA binding, and ChIP assays, we
established a correlation between binding of CDP/Cux to the DNA pol alpha
promoter and the stimulation of gene expression. Although we cannot exclude the
possibility that stimulation of gene expression by CDP/Cux involved the
repression of a repressor, our data support the notion that CDP/Cux participates 
in transcriptional activation. Notwithstanding its mechanism of action, these
results establish CDP/Cux as an important transcriptional regulator in the S
phase.

PMCID: PMC152546
PMID: 12665598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Blood. 2003 May 1;101(9):3460-8. Epub 2003 Jan 9.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) studies indicate a role for CCAAT enhancer
binding proteins alpha and epsilon (C/EBP alpha and C/EBP epsilon ) and CDP/cut
in myeloid maturation-induced lactoferrin gene expression.

Khanna-Gupta A(1), Zibello T, Sun H, Gaines P, Berliner N.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School
of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

In vitro models of granulopoiesis involving the inducible expression of either
CCAAT enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBP alpha) or C/EBP epsilon in myeloid
cells have been shown to lead to the induction of a granulocytic maturation
program accompanied by the expression of myeloid-specific genes. Since members of
the C/EBP family of transcription factors recognize and bind to similar
DNA-binding motifs, it has been difficult to elucidate the specific role of each 
of the C/EBP family members in eliciting myeloid gene expression. In order to
address this issue, we focused on the expression of the lactoferrin (LF) gene. LF
expression is transcriptionally regulated in a C/EBP-dependent manner in myeloid 
cells. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis we demonstrate that
C/EBP alpha binds to the LF promoter in nonexpressing cells. Upon induction of
maturation, C/EBP epsilon binds to the LF promoter, which correlates with LF
expression. Lack of LF expression in the acute promyelocytic leukemia cell line
NB4, which harbors the t(15;17) translocation, cannot be correlated with aberrant
binding at the C/EBP site in the LF promoter. It is, however, associated with the
persistent binding of the silencer CCAAT displacement protein (CDP/cut) to the LF
promoter in these cells. We conclude that C/EBP alpha, C/EBP epsilon, and CDP/cut
all play definitive roles in regulating late gene expression during normal
myeloid development.

PMID: 12522000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Cancer Res. 2002 Nov 15;62(22):6625-33.

Characterization of a tissue-specific CDP/Cux isoform, p75, activated in breast
tumor cells.

Goulet B(1), Watson P, Poirier M, Leduy L, Bérubé G, Meterissian S, Jolicoeur P, 
Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, Quebec,
QC H3A 1A1, Canada.

Two isoforms of the CCAAT-displacement protein/cut homeobox (CDP/Cux)
transcription factor have been characterized thus far. The full length protein,
p200, which contains four DNA binding domains, transiently binds to DNA and
carries the CCAAT-displacement activity. The p110 isoform is generated by
proteolytic processing at the G1-S transition and is capable of stable
interaction with DNA. Here we demonstrate the existence of a shorter CDP/Cux
isoform, p75, which contains only two DNA binding domains, Cut repeat 3 and the
Cut homeodomain, and binds more stably to DNA. CDP/Cux p75 was able to repress a 
reporter carrying the promoter for the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 gene
and to activate a DNA polymerase alpha gene reporter. Expression of CDP/Cux p75
involved a novel mechanism: transcription initiation within intron 20. The intron
20-initiated mRNA (I20-mRNA) was expressed at higher level in the thymus and in
CD4+/CD8+ and CD4+ T cells. I20-mRNA was expressed only weakly or not at all in
normal human mammary epithelial cells and normal breast tissues but was detected 
in many breast tumor cells lines and breast tumors. In invasive tumors a
significant association was established between higher I20-mRNA expression and a 
diffuse infiltrative growth pattern (n = 41, P = 0.0137). In agreement with these
findings, T47D breast cancer cells stably expressing p75 could not form tubule
structures in collagen but rather developed as solid undifferentiated aggregates 
of cells. Taken together, these results suggest that aberrant expression of the
CDP/Cux p75 isoform in mammary epithelial cells may be associated with the
process of tumorigenesis in breast cancer.

PMID: 12438259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Mol Biol Cell. 2002 Nov;13(11):3761-74.

CASP, the alternatively spliced product of the gene encoding the
CCAAT-displacement protein transcription factor, is a Golgi membrane protein
related to giantin.

Gillingham AK(1), Pfeifer AC, Munro S.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge CB2 2QH, United Kingdom.

Large coiled-coil proteins are being found in increasing numbers on the membranes
of the Golgi apparatus and have been proposed to function in tethering of
transport vesicles and in the organization of the Golgi stack. Members of one
class of Golgi coiled-coil protein, comprising giantin and golgin-84, are
anchored to the bilayer by a single C-terminal transmembrane domain (TMD). In
this article, we report the characterization of another mammalian coiled-coil
protein, CASP, that was originally identified as an alternatively spliced product
of the CUTL1 gene that encodes CCAAT-displacement protein (CDP), the human
homologue of the Drosophila homeodomain protein Cut. We find that the
Caenorhabditis elegans homologues of CDP and CASP are also generated from a
single gene. CASP lacks the DNA binding motifs of CDP and was previously reported
to be a nuclear protein. Herein, we show that it is in fact a Golgi protein with 
a C-terminal TMD and shares with giantin and golgin-84 a conserved histidine in
its TMD. However, unlike these proteins, CASP has a homologue in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, which we call COY1. Deletion of COY1 does not affect viability, but
strikingly restores normal growth to cells lacking the Golgi soluble
N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor Gos1p. The
conserved histidine is necessary for Coy1p's activity in cells lacking Gos1p,
suggesting that the TMD of these transmembrane Golgi coiled-coil proteins is
directly involved in their function.

PMCID: PMC133590
PMID: 12429822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Immunol. 2002 Sep 1;169(5):2477-87.

High frequency of matrix attachment regions and cut-like protein
x/CCAAT-displacement protein and B cell regulator of IgH transcription binding
sites flanking Ig V region genes.

Goebel P(1), Montalbano A, Ayers N, Kompfner E, Dickinson L, Webb CF, Feeney AJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

A major component in controlling V(D)J recombination is differential
accessibility through localized changes in chromatin structure. Attachment of DNA
to the nuclear matrix via matrix attachment region (MAR) sequences, and
interaction with MAR-binding proteins have been shown to alter chromatin
conformation, promote histone acetylation, and influence gene transcription. In
this study, the flanking regions of several human and mouse Ig V(H) and Ig Vkappa
genes were analyzed extensively for the presence of MARs by in vitro
matrix-binding assay, and for interaction with the MAR-binding proteins cut-like 
protein x/CCAAT-displacement protein (Cux/CDP), B cell regulator of IgH
transcription (Bright), and special AT-rich sequence-binding protein (SATB1) by
EMSA. Cux/CDP and SATB1 are associated with repression, while Bright is an
activator of Ig transcription. Binding sites were identified in the vicinity of
all analyzed Ig V genes, and were also found flanking TCR Vbeta genes. We also
show that the binding sites of the different factors do not always occur at MAR
sequences. MAR sequences were also found within the Ig V loci at a much higher
frequency than throughout the rest of the genome. Overall, the frequency and
location of binding sites relative to the coding regions, and the strength of
DNA-protein interaction showed much heterogeneity. Thus, variations in factor
binding and MAR activity could potentially influence the extent of localized
accessibility to V(D)J recombination and thus could play a role in unequal
rearrangement of individual V genes. These sites could also contribute to
effective transcription of Ig genes in mature and/or activated B cells, bringing 
both the promoter as well as the enhancer regions into close proximity at the
nuclear matrix.

PMID: 12193717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Int J Cancer. 2002 Aug 1;100(4):429-32.

Expression of N-terminally truncated isoforms of CDP/CUX is increased in human
uterine leiomyomas.

Moon NS(1), Rong Zeng W, Premdas P, Santaguida M, Bérubé G, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.

Genetic analyses and mRNA expression studies have implicated CUTL1 as a candidate
tumor-suppressor gene in uterine leiomyomas and breast cancers. However,
modulation of CDP/Cux, the protein encoded by CUTL1, does not agree with this
notion. The activity of CDP/Cux, which is the DNA binding subunit of HiNF-D, was 
upregulated as normal cells progressed into S phase and constitutively elevated
in several tumor cell lines. Activation of CDP/Cux at the G(1)/S transition
involved the proteolytic processing of the protein to generate a shorter isoform.
Uterine leiomyomas represent a unique reagent for molecular analysis because they
are resected as homogeneous tumor tissue together with the adjacent normal
myometrium and they are often very large. In the present study, proteins were
isolated from 16 pairs of matched tumors and adjacent myometrium and analyzed by 
Western blot and electrophoretic mobility shift assays. Strikingly, in 11/16
tumors, the steady-state level of small CDP/Cux isoforms was increased compared
to normal control tissue. Where tested, a corresponding increase in CDP/Cux
stable DNA binding activity was observed. DNA sequencing analysis of CUTL1 cDNAs 
from 6 leiomyomas, including 4 with LOH of CUTL1, did not reveal any gross
rearrangement or point mutations. Altogether these findings suggest that CUTL1 is
probably not the tumor suppressor on 7q22. Moreover, the frequent increase in
smaller CDP/Cux isoforms indicates that molecular events associated with the
truncation of CDP/Cux proteins may be selected in uterine leiomyomas.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12115525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Aug;22(15):5467-78.

A novel colonic repressor element regulates intestinal gene expression by
interacting with Cux/CDP.

Boudreau F(1), Rings EH, Swain GP, Sinclair AM, Suh ER, Silberg DG, Scheuermann
RH, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Intestinal gene regulation involves mechanisms that direct temporal expression
along the vertical and horizontal axes of the alimentary tract.
Sucrase-isomaltase (SI), the product of an enterocyte-specific gene, exhibits a
complex pattern of expression. Generation of transgenic mice with a mutated SI
transgene showed involvement of an overlapping CDP (CCAAT displacement
protein)-GATA element in colonic repression of SI throughout postnatal intestinal
development. We define this element as CRESIP (colon-repressive element of the SI
promoter). Cux/CDP interacts with SI and represses SI promoter activity in a
CRESIP-dependent manner. Cux/CDP homozygous mutant mice displayed increased
expression of SI mRNA during early postnatal development. Our results demonstrate
that an intestinal gene can be repressed in the distal gut and identify Cux/CDP
as a regulator of this repression during development.

PMCID: PMC133930
PMID: 12101240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 30;277(35):32302-9. Epub 2002 Jun 6.

The N-terminal coiled coil domain of the cytohesin/ARNO family of guanine
nucleotide exchange factors interacts with the scaffolding protein CASP.

Mansour M(1), Lee SY, Pohajdak B.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3H 4J1,
Canada.

Cytohesin is a guanine nucleotide exchange factor that regulates members of the
ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF) family of small GTPases. All of the members of the 
cytohesin family (including ARNO, ARNO3, and the newly characterized cytohesin-4)
have a similar domain distribution consisting of a Sec7 homology domain, a
pleckstrin homology domain, and an N-terminal coiled coil. In this study, we
attempt to identify proteins that interact specifically with the coiled coil
motif of cytohesin. Yeast two-hybrid screening of a B cell library using the
cytohesin N terminus as bait, identified CASP, a scaffolding protein of
previously unknown function, as a binding partner. CASP contains an internal
coiled coil motif that is required for cytohesin binding both in vitro and in
COS-1 cells. The specificity of the coiled coil of CASP is not restricted to
cytohesin, however, because it is also capable of interacting with other members 
of the cytohesin/ARNO family, ARNO and ARNO3. In immunofluorescence experiments, 
CASP localizes to perinuclear tubulovesicular structures that are in close
proximity to the Golgi. These structures remain relatively undisturbed when the
cells are treated with brefeldin A. In epidermal growth factor-stimulated COS-1
cells overexpressing cytohesin and CASP, cytohesin recruits CASP to membrane
ruffles, revealing a functional interaction between the two proteins. These
observations collectively suggest that CASP is a scaffolding protein that
facilitates the function of at least one member of the cytohesin/ARNO family in
response to specific cellular stimuli.

PMID: 12052827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. DNA Cell Biol. 2002 Feb;21(2):109-13.

Transfection of keratinocytes abrogates detectable DNA-binding activity of CCAAT 
displacement protein.

Narahari J(1), Roman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, and Walther Cancer Institute, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5120, USA.

Transfection of keratinocytes with plasmid DNA leads to the loss of detectable
DNA-binding activity of CCAAT displacement protein but not of Yin Yang 1, as
monitored by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. This phenomenon was found to
be attributable to the presence of plasmid DNA in the nuclear extracts prepared
from transfected cells. Treatment of these nuclear extracts with DNase I restored
the ability to monitor DNA-binding activity of CDP. This report documents a new
pitfall associated with transfection.

PMID: 11953010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Dev Biol. 2002 Mar 1;243(1):44-54.

Studies on the role of Cux1 in regulation of the onset of joint formation in the 
developing limb.

Lizarraga G(1), Lichtler A, Upholt WB, Kosher RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of BioStructure and Function, School of Dental Medicine, University
of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, Connecticut 06030, USA.

Joint formation, the onset of which is characterized by the segmentation of
continuous skeletal rudiments into two or more separate elements, is a
fundamental aspect of limb pattern formation, playing a critical role in
determining the size, shape, and number of individual skeletal elements. Joint
formation is initiated by conversion of differentiated chondrocytes at sites of
presumptive joints into densely packed nonchondrogenic cells of the joint
interzone. This conversion is accompanied by loss of Alcian blue-staining
cartilage matrix and downregulation of cartilage-specific gene expression. Here, 
we report that Cux1, which encodes a transcription factor containing a
homeodomain and other DNA-binding motifs, is highly expressed at all of the
discrete sites of incipient joint formation in the developing limb concomitant
with conversion of differentiated chondrocytes into interzone tissue. Moreover,
differentiated limb chondrocytes in micromass cultures infected with a Cux1
retroviral expression vector are converted into nonchondrogenic cells which
exhibit loss of Alcian blue cartilage matrix and downregulation of
cartilage-specific gene expression as occurs at the onset of normal joint
formation. These results suggest that Cux1 is involved in regulating the onset of
joint formation by facilitating conversion of chondrocytes into nonchondrogenic
cells of the interzone.

(C)2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11846476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 7;276(49):45780-90. Epub 2001 Oct 2.

Phosphorylation of the CCAAT displacement protein (CDP)/Cux transcription factor 
by cyclin A-Cdk1 modulates its DNA binding activity in G(2).

Santaguida M(1), Ding Q, Bérubé G, Truscott M, Whyte P, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University Health Center, Department of
Biochemistry, McGill University Hamilton, Ontario L8N 3Z5, Canada.

Stable DNA binding by the mammalian CCAAT displacement protein (CDP)/Cux
transcription factor was previously found to be up-regulated at the G(1)/S
transition as the result of two events, dephosphorylation by the Cdc25A
phosphatase and proteolytic processing, to generate an amino-truncated isoform of
110 kDa. In S phase, CDP/Cux was shown to interact with and repress the core
promoter of the p21(WAF1) gene. Here we demonstrate that DNA binding by p110
CDP/Cux is down-modulated as cells progress into G(2). Accordingly, cyclin A-Cdk1
was found to bind to CDP/Cux and modulate its DNA binding activity in vitro and
in vivo. Interaction with CDP/Cux required the presence of both cyclin A and a
cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk)-activating kinase-activated Cdk1 and involved the
Cut homeodomain and a downstream Cy motif. Phosphorylation of serines 1237 and
1270 caused inhibition of DNA binding in vitro. In cotransfection studies, cyclin
A-Cdk1 inhibited CDP/Cux stable DNA binding and prevented repression of the
p21(WAF1) reporter. In contrast, mutant CDP/Cux proteins in which serines 1237
and 1270 were replaced with alanines were not affected by cyclin A-Cdk1. In
summary, our results suggest that the phosphorylation of CDP/Cux by cyclin A-Cdk1
contributes to down-modulate CDP/Cux activity as cells progress into the G(2)
phase of the cell cycle.

PMID: 11584018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Sep;21(18):6332-45.

S phase-specific proteolytic cleavage is required to activate stable DNA binding 
by the CDP/Cut homeodomain protein.

Moon NS(1), Premdas P, Truscott M, Leduy L, Bérubé G, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University Health Center, McGill University, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 1A1.

The CCAAT displacement protein (CDP), the homologue of the Drosophila
melanogaster Cut protein, contains four DNA binding domains that function in
pairs. Cooperation between Cut repeat 3 and the Cut homeodomain allows stable DNA
binding to the ATCGAT motif, an activity previously shown to be upregulated in S 
phase. Here we showed that the full-length CDP/Cut protein is incapable of stable
DNA binding and that the ATCGAT binding activity present in cells involves a
110-kDa carboxy-terminal peptide of CDP/Cut. A vector expressing CDP/Cut with Myc
and hemagglutinin epitope tags at either end generated N- and C-terminal products
of 90 and 110 kDa, suggesting that proteolytic cleavage was involved. In vivo
pulse/chase labeling experiments confirmed that the 110-kDa protein was derived
from the full-length CDP/Cut protein. Proteolytic processing was weak or not
detectable in G(0) and G(1) but increased in populations of cells enriched in S
phase, and the appearance of the 110-kDa protein coincided with the increase in
ATCGAT DNA binding. Interestingly, the amino-truncated and the full-length
CDP/Cut isoforms exhibited different transcriptional properties in a reporter
assay. We conclude that proteolytic processing of CDP/Cut at the G(1)/S
transition generates a CDP/Cut isoform with distinct DNA binding and
transcriptional activities. These findings, together with the cleavage of the
Scc1 protein at mitosis, suggest that site-specific proteolysis may play an
important role in the regulation of cell cycle progression.

PMCID: PMC87367
PMID: 11509674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jul 3;98(14):8000-5.

C/EBP epsilon mediates myeloid differentiation and is regulated by the CCAAT
displacement protein (CDP/cut).

Khanna-Gupta A(1), Zibello T, Sun H, Lekstrom-Himes J, Berliner N.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology WWW 428, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar
Street, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

Neutrophils from CCAAT enhancer binding protein epsilon (C/EBP epsilon) knockout 
mice have morphological and biochemical features similar to those observed in
patients with an extremely rare congenital disorder called neutrophil-specific
secondary granule deficiency (SGD). SGD is characterized by frequent bacterial
infections attributed, in part, to the lack of neutrophil secondary granule
proteins (SGP). A mutation that results in loss of functional C/EBP epsilon
activity has recently been described in an SGD patient, and has been postulated
to be the cause of the disease in this patient. We have previously demonstrated
that overexpression of CCAAT displacement protein (CDP/cut), a highly conserved
transcriptional repressor of developmentally regulated genes, suppresses
expression of SGP genes in 32Dcl3 cells. This phenotype resembles that observed
in both C/EBP epsilon(-/-) mice and in SGD patients. Based on these observations 
we investigated potential interactions between C/EBP epsilon and CDP/cut during
neutrophil maturation. In this study, we demonstrate that inducible expression of
C/EBP epsilon in 32Dcl3/tet cells results in granulocytic differentiation.
Furthermore, Northern blot analysis of G-CSF-induced CDP/cut overexpressing
32Dcl3 cells revealed absence of C/EBP epsilon mRNA. We therefore hypothesize
that C/EBP epsilon positively regulates SGP gene expression, and that C/EBP
epsilon is itself negatively regulated by CDP/cut during neutrophil maturation.
We further demonstrate that the C/EBP epsilon promoter is regulated by CDP/cut
during myeloid differentiation.

PMCID: PMC35457
PMID: 11438745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Gene. 2001 May 30;270(1-2):1-15.

Role of the multifunctional CDP/Cut/Cux homeodomain transcription factor in
regulating differentiation, cell growth and development.

Nepveu A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University Health Center, 687 Pine Ave West, 
Quebec, H3A 1A1, Montreal, Canada. alain@molonc.mcgill.ca

CDP/Cux/Cut proteins are an evolutionarily conserved family of proteins
containing several DNA binding domains: one Cut homeodomain and one, two or three
Cut repeats. In Drosophila melanogaster, genetic studies indicated that Cut
functions as a determinant of cell-type specification in several tissues, notably
in the peripheral nervous system, the wing margin and the Malpighian tubule.
Moreover, Cut was found to be a target and an effector of the Notch signaling
pathway. In vertebrates, the same functions appear to be fulfilled by two
cut-related genes with distinct patterns of expression. Cloning of the cDNA for
the CCAAT-displacement protein (CDP) revealed that it was the human homologue of 
Drosophila Cut. CDP was later found be the DNA binding protein of the previously 
characterized histone nuclear factor D (HiNF-D). CDP and its mouse counterpart,
Cux, were also reported to interact with regulatory elements from a large number 
of genes, including matrix attachment regions (MARs). CDP/Cut proteins were found
generally to function as transcriptional repressors, although a participation in 
transcriptional activation is suggested by some data. Repression by CDP/Cut
involves competition for binding site occupancy and active repression via the
recruitment of a histone deacetylase activity. Various combinations of Cut
repeats and the Cut homeodomains can generate distinct DNA binding activities.
These activities are elevated in proliferating cells and decrease during terminal
differentiation. One activity, involving the Cut homeodomain, is upregulated in S
phase. CDP/Cut function is regulated by several post-translational modification
events including phosphorylation, dephosphorylation, and acetylation. The CUTL1
gene in human was mapped to 7q22, a chromosomal region that is frequently
rearranged in various cancers.

PMID: 11403998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 13;276(28):26122-31. Epub 2001 May 22.

The role of CDP in the negative regulation of CXCL1 gene expression.

Nirodi C(1), Hart J, Dhawan P, Moon NS, Nepveu A, Richmond A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs, Nashville, Tennessee 37212, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Department of Cancer Biology, Nashville, Tennessee
37232, and the Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 
1A1, Canada.

The CXC chemokine, melanoma growth stimulatory activity/growth-regulated protein,
CXCL1 is an important modulator of inflammation, wound healing, angiogenesis, and
tumorigenesis. Transcription of CXCL1 is regulated through several cis-acting
elements including Sp1, NF-kappa B, and an element that lies immediately upstream
of the NF-kappa B element, the immediate upstream region (IUR). A transcription
element data base search indicated that the IUR element contains a binding site
for the transcriptional repressor, human CUT homeodomain protein/CCAAT
displacement protein (CDP). It is shown here that in electrophoretic mobility
shift assays, complexes obtained with the IUR oligonucleotide probe are
supershifted by anti-CDP antibodies and that a CDP polypeptide containing a high 
affinity DNA binding domain binds to the sequence GGGATCGATC in the IUR element. 
In Southwestern blot analyses, oligonucleotides containing the wild-type IUR
sequence, but not a mutant oligonucleotide with substitutions in the GGGATCGATC
sequence, bind a 170--180-kDa protein. Furthermore, overexpression of the CDP
protein blocks CXCL1 promoter activity in reporter gene assays, whereas
overexpression of an antisense CDP construct leads to a significant increase in
CXCL1 promoter activity. Mutations in the IUR element, which map in the putative 
CDP-binding site, inhibit the binding of CDP to the IUR element and favor
increased transcription from the CXCL1 promoter. Based on these results, we
propose that transcriptional regulation of the CXCL1 gene is mediated in part by 
CDP, which could play an important role in inflammatory processes and
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2665279
PMID: 11371564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1999;64:109-18.

Differential regulation of immunoglobulin gene transcription via nuclear
matrix-associated regions.

Webb C(1), Zong RT, Lin D, Wang Z, Kaplan M, Paulin Y, Smith E, Probst L, Bryant 
J, Goldstein A, Scheuermann R, Tucker P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology and Cancer, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA.

PMID: 11232275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Int J Cancer. 2001 Feb 1;91(3):345-9.

Loss of heterozygosity at 7q22 and mutation analysis of the CDP gene in human
epithelial ovarian tumors.

Neville PJ(1), Thomas N, Campbell IG.

Author information: 
(1)Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Princess Anne Hospital, Southampton, United
Kingdom.

Many tumor types including that of the ovary show loss of heterozygosity (LOH) on
chromosome arm 7q, which suggests the existence of at least one tumor suppressor 
gene (TSG) on this chromosome arm. We have studied the region surrounding the
putative tumor suppressor gene CUTL1 at 7q22 in 127 epithelial ovarian tumors.
LOH was found across 7q22 in 31% of malignant and 14% of benign ovarian tumors.
In 16% of the tumors the LOH appeared to be centered on the CUTL1 gene. This gene
has been implicated previously as a TSG in both uterine leiomyomas and breast
carcinoma. However, mutation analysis of the CUTL1 gene in 47 tumors with 7q22
LOH failed to identify any somatic alterations in the coding regions. This
finding suggests that CUTL1 may not be the target of the 7q22 LOH in ovarian
cancers.

PMID: 11169958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Biol Chem. 2001 Feb 16;276(7):5323-30. Epub 2000 Nov 17.

Identification of CCAAT displacement protein (CDP/cut) as a locus-specific
repressor of major histocompatibility complex gene expression in human tumor
cells.

Snyder SR(1), Wang J, Waring JF, Ginder GD.

Author information: 
(1)Massey Cancer Center, Medical College of Virginia at Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond, VA 23298, USA. ssnyder@hsc.vcu.edu

Human major histocompatibility (MHC) class I antigen expression is important in
controlling the metastatic growth of malignant tumors. Locus-specific
down-regulation of MHC class I gene expression is frequently observed in human
tumors, leading to decreased susceptibility to cytotoxic T-cell-mediated lysis.
The mechanism of this down-regulation is incompletely understood. Here, we
describe the identification of human CCAAT displacement protein (CDP/cut) as a
locus-specific repressor of HLA-B and C gene expression. Transient and stable
transfections in HeLa and K562 cells demonstrated the presence of a repressor
element 650 base pairs upstream of the first exon of HLA-B7. A specific binding
complex with the HLA-B7 and Cw2 repressor elements was demonstrated by EMSA.
Formation of the EMSA complex was inhibited specifically with polyclonal
antiserum to human CDP/cut, demonstrating that CDP/cut binds the HLA-B7 repressor
element. The corresponding region of the HLA-A2 promoter neither repressed HLA-A2
gene expression nor bound CDP/cut. Overexpression of CDP/cut in cell lines
deficient in CDP/cut resulted in a nearly 4-fold repression of reporter
constructs containing the HLA-B7 repressor element but not the corresponding
region of the HLA-A2 promoter. Repression of HLA-B and C gene expression by
CDP/cut does not involve displacement of NF-Y, nor is CDP/cut associated with the
histone deacetylase HDAC1 when bound to the HLA-B7 repressor element. To our
knowledge, these results identify CDP/cut as the first example of a
locus-specific repressor of MHC class I gene transcription in human tumor cells.

PMID: 11084046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Development. 2000 Dec;127(23):5133-44.

Evidence that members of the Cut/Cux/CDP family may be involved in AER
positioning and polarizing activity during chick limb development.

Tavares AT(1), Tsukui T, Izpisúa Belmonte JC.

Author information: 
(1)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, Gene Expression Laboratory, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

In vertebrates, the apical ectodermal ridge (AER) is a specialized epithelium
localized at the dorsoventral boundary of the limb bud that regulates limb
outgrowth. In Drosophila, the wing margin is also a specialized region located at
the dorsoventral frontier of the wing imaginal disc. The wingless and Notch
pathways have been implicated in positioning both the wing margin and the AER.
One of the nuclear effectors of the Notch signal in the wing margin is the
transcription factor cut. Here we report the identification of two chick
homologues of the Cut/Cux/CDP family that are expressed in the developing limb
bud. Chick cux1 is expressed in the ectoderm outside the AER, as well as around
ridge-like structures induced by (&bgr;)-catenin, a downstream target of the Wnt 
pathway. cux1 overexpression in the chick limb results in scalloping of the AER
and limb truncations, suggesting that Cux1 may have a role in limiting the
position of the AER by preventing the ectodermal cells around it from
differentiating into AER cells. The second molecule of the Cut family identified 
in this study, cux2, is expressed in the pre-limb lateral plate mesoderm,
posterior limb bud and flank mesenchyme, a pattern reminiscent of the
distribution of polarizing activity. The polarizing activity is determined by the
ability of a certain region to induce digit duplications when grafted into the
anterior margin of a host limb bud. Several manipulations of the chick limb bud
show that cux2 expression is regulated by retinoic acid, Sonic hedgehog and the
posterior AER. These results suggest that Cux2 may have a role in generating or
mediating polarizing activity. Taking into account the probable involvement of
Cut/Cux/CDP molecules in cell cycle regulation and differentiation, our results
raise the hypothesis that chick Cux1 and Cux2 may act by modulating proliferation
versus differentiation in the limb ectoderm and polarizing activity regions,
respectively.

PMID: 11060239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 25;275(34):26649-60.

The nuclear matrix protein CDP represses hepatic transcription of the human
cholesterol-7alpha hydroxylase gene.

Antes TJ(1), Chen J, Cooper AD, Levy-Wilson B.

Author information: 
(1)Palo Alto Medical Foundation Research Institute, Palo Alto, California 94301, 
USA.

To date, the molecular mechanisms that govern hepatic-specific transcription of
the human cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1) gene are poorly understood. We 
recently reported that the region extending from -1888 to +46, which includes the
promoter, is not capable of conferring expression to human CYP7A1 promoter lacZ
transgenes in the livers of mice, but that expression is observed with transgenes
containing the entire structural gene. To locate liver-specific elements in other
segments of the human gene, DNase I hypersensitivity studies were performed with 
transcriptionally active, liver-derived HepG2 cells and with transcriptionally
inactive HeLa cells. Three DNase I hypersensitivity sites were detected within
the first intron of the human CYP7A1 gene, but only in HepG2 cells. Transient
transfection experiments with HepG2 cells revealed a transcriptional repressor
within intron 1. Five binding sites for the CAAT displacement protein (CDP) were 
detected within intron 1. Since CDP is a nuclear matrix protein, two methods were
employed to localize nuclear matrix attachment sites within intron 1 of the human
CYP7A1 gene. A matrix attachment site was found throughout the entirety of intron
1. Gel retardation experiments and cell transfection studies provided evidence
for the repression mechanism. Repression is achieved by displacement by CDP of
two hepatic activators, namely HNF-1alpha and C/EBPalpha, that bind to three
different sites within intron 1. Additionally, CDP represses transactivation
mediated by these two activators.

PMID: 10869351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 6;275(40):31325-34.

CCAAT displacement activity involves CUT repeats 1 and 2, not the CUT
homeodomain.

Moon NS(1), Bérubé G, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University Health Center, and the Departments
of Biochemistry, Medicine, and Oncology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 
1A1, Canada.

The CCAAT displacement protein, the homolog of the Drosophila melanogaster CUT
protein, contains four DNA-binding domains: three CUT repeats (CR1, CR2, and CR3)
and the CUT homeodomain (HD). Using a panel of fusion proteins, we found that a
CUT repeat cannot bind to DNA as a monomer, but that certain combinations of
domains exhibit high DNA-binding affinity: CR1+2, CR3HD, CR1HD, and CR2HD. One
combination (CR1+2) exhibited strikingly different DNA-binding kinetics and
specificities. CR1+2 displayed rapid on and off rates and bound preferably to two
C(A/G)AT sites, organized as direct or inverted repeats. Accordingly, only CR1+2 
was able to bind to the CCAAT sequence, and its affinity was increased by the
presence of a C(A/G)AT site at close proximity. A purified CCAAT displacement
protein/CUT protein exhibited DNA-binding properties similar to those of CR1+2;
and in nuclear extracts, the CCAAT displacement activity also required the
simultaneous presence of a C(A/G)AT site. Moreover, CR1+2, but not CR3HD, was
able to displace nuclear factor Y. Thus, the CCAAT displacement activity requires
the presence of an additional sequence (CAAT or CGAT) and involves CR1 and CR2,
but not the CUT homeodomain.

PMID: 10864926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Jun 20;97(13):7166-71.

Regulation of the homeodomain CCAAT displacement/cut protein function by histone 
acetyltransferases p300/CREB-binding protein (CBP)-associated factor and CBP.

Li S(1), Aufiero B, Schiltz RL, Walsh MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine of New York
University, New York, NY 10029, USA.

The CCAAT displacement protein/cut homologue (CDP/cut) is a divergent homeodomain
protein that is highly conserved through evolution and has properties of a potent
transcriptional repressor. CDP/cut contains three conserved cut-repeat domains
and a conserved homeobox, each involved in directing binding specificity to
unique nucleotide sequence elements. Furthermore, CDP/cut may play a role as a
structural component of chromatin through its direct interaction with nucleosomal
DNA and association with nuclear matrix attachment regions. CDP/cut is cell-cycle
regulated through interactions with Rb, p107, specific kinases and phosphatases
directing the transcriptional activity of CDP/cut on such genes encoding
p21(WAF1,CIP1), c-myc, thymidine kinase, and histones. Our previous studies
indicate that CDP/cut is associated with histone deacetylase activity and is
associated with a corepressor complex through interactions with histone
deacetylases. Here, we report the interaction of CDP/cut with CBP and
p300/CREB-binding protein-associated factor (PCAF) along with the modification of
CDP/cut by the histone acetyltransferase PCAF. Acetylation of CDP/cut by PCAF is 
directed at conserved lysine residues near the homeodomain region and regulates
CDP/cut function. These observations are consistent with the ability of CDP/cut
to regulate genes as a transcriptional repressor, suggesting acetylation as a
mechanism that regulates CDP/cut function.

PMCID: PMC16517
PMID: 10852958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Leukemia. 2000 May;14(5):863-73.

CDP/Cut DNA binding activity is down-modulated in granulocytes, macrophages and
erythrocytes but remains elevated in differentiating megakaryocytes.

Martin-Soudant N(1), Drachman JG, Kaushansky K, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University, Royal Victoria Hospital,
Montreal, Quebec.

DNA binding by the CCAAT-displacement protein, the mammalian homologue of the
Drosophila melanogaster Cut protein, was previously found to increase sharply in 
S phase, suggesting a role for CDP/Cut in cell cycle progression. Genetic studies
in Drosophila indicated that cut plays an important role in cell-type
specification in several tissues. In the present study, we have investigated
CDP/Cut expression and activity in a panel of multipotent hematopoietic cell
lines that can be induced to differentiate in vitro into distinct cell types.
While CDP/Cut DNA binding activity declined in the pathways leading to
macrophages, granulocytes and erythrocytes, it remained elevated in
megakaryocytes. CDP/Cut was also highly expressed in primary megakaryocytes
isolated from mouse, and some DNA binding activity could be detected. Altogether,
these results raise the possibility that CDP/Cut may be a determinant of cell
type identity downstream of the myelo-erythroid precursor cell. Another
possibility, which does not exclude a role in lineage identity, is that CDP/Cut
activity in megakaryocytes is linked to endomitosis. Indeed, elevated CDP/Cut
activity in differentiating megakaryocytes and during the S phase of the cell
cycle suggests that it may be required for DNA replication.

PMID: 10803519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Virol. 2000 Jun;74(11):5198-205.

Yin yang 1 negatively regulates the differentiation-specific E1 promoter of human
papillomavirus type 6.

Ai W(1), Narahari J, Roman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, and Walther Cancer Institute, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5120, USA.

Human papillomavirus type 6 (HPV-6) is a low-risk HPV whose replication cycle,
like that of all HPVs, is differentiation dependent. We have previously shown
that CCAAT displacement protein (CDP) binds the differentiation-induced HPV-6 E1 
promoter and negatively regulates its activity in undifferentiated cells (W. Ai, 
E. Toussaint, and A. Roman, J. Virol. 73:4220-4229, 1999). Using electrophoretic 
mobility shift assays (EMSAs), we now report that Yin Yang 1 (YY1), a
multifunctional protein that can act as a transcriptional activator or repressor 
and that can also inhibit HPV replication in vitro, binds the HPV-6 E1 promoter. 
EMSAs, using subfragments of the promoter as competitors, showed that the YY1
binding site is located at the 5' end of the E1 promoter. When a putative YY1
site was mutated, the ability of YY1 to bind was greatly decreased. The activity 
of the mutated E1 promoter, monitored with the reporter gene luciferase, was
threefold greater than that of the wild-type promoter, suggesting that YY1
negatively regulates HPV-6 E1 promoter activity. Nuclear extracts from
differentiated keratinocytes showed decreased binding of YY1 to the wild-type
promoter. Consistent with this, in differentiated keratinocytes, the activity of 
the transfected luciferase gene transcribed from the mutated promoter was
comparable to that of the wild-type promoter; both promoters were up-regulated in
differentiated keratinocytes compared to undifferentiated cells. These data
suggest that YY1 functions in undifferentiated keratinocytes but not in
differentiated keratinocytes. Both the wild-type and mutated promoters could be
negatively regulated by overexpression of a plasmid encoding CDP. Thus, both YY1 
and CDP appear to be negative regulators of the differentiation-induced HPV-6 E1 
promoter and thereby the HPV life cycle. In contrast, only binding of CDP was
detected using the E1 promoter of the high-risk HPV-31.

PMCID: PMC110873
PMID: 10799595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 1999 Dec;45(8):1149-60.

DNA-binding properties of CCAAT displacement protein cut repeats.

Catt D(1), Luo W, Skalnik DG.

Author information: 
(1)Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Department of Pediatrics,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis 46202, USA.

CCAAT displacement protein (CDP) is a transcriptional repressor that contains
four distinct DNA-binding domains; a homeodomain and three cut repeats. Each
DNA-binding domain of CDP was expressed as a glutathione S-transferase
(GST)-fusion protein and analyzed for relative binding affinity to five
CDP-binding sites within the gp91phox promoter. Each cut repeat exhibits a unique
pattern of DNA-binding affinities for the five binding sites in the gp91phox
promoter, suggesting that each may make a distinct contribution to the
DNA-binding behavior of native CDP. Although measurement of DNA/protein complex
mass indicates that an isolated cut repeat can bind DNA as a monomer, mixing of
GST-cut repeat and GST-homeodomain fusion proteins enhances DNA-binding activity.
Far-Western blot and two-hybrid analyses indicate, however, that the CDP domains 
do not directly interact. We hypothesize that GST-mediated dimerization leads to 
spatial juxtaposition of these DNA-binding domains, and that the resulting
enhanced DNA-binding activity mimics cooperative interactions that occur between 
these domains in native CDP.

PMID: 10643964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Gene. 2000 Jan 4;241(1):75-85.

Exon/intron structure and alternative transcripts of the CUTL1 gene.

Rong Zeng W(1), Soucie E, Sung Moon N, Martin-Soudant N, Bérubé G, Leduy L,
Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, Departments of Medicine and Oncology, McGill
University, Montreal, Canada.

The human CUTL1 gene (Cut-like 1) is a candidate tumor suppressor gene located on
chromosome 7 at band 22, a region that is frequently deleted in several human
cancers. The gene spans at least 340kb and contains 33 exons. Synthesis of five
different transcripts involves two promoter regions, two polyadenylation sites
and seven alternative splicing events. The two polyadenylation sites are located 
at the ends of exons 24 and 33 and are separated by approximately 40kb.
Transcription is initiated in two genomic regions, giving rise to alternate first
exons which are spliced to a common exon 2. All transcripts contain exons 2 to
14, but differ in their 3' regions. Exon 14 can be spliced alternatively to the
beginning or the middle of exon 15, or to exon 25, generating transcripts with
exons 15 to 24 or exons 25 to 33. Moreover, exon 16 can be spliced out from the
mature transcripts that contain exons 15 to 24. Overall, five distinct
transcripts are generated as a result of alternative transcription initiation,
splicing and polyadenylation. We discuss potential mechanisms by which alternate 
polyadenylation site usage may affect alternative splicing events and vice versa.

PMID: 10607901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Virol. 2000 Jan;74(1):401-10.

The differentiation-specific factor CDP/Cut represses transcription and
replication of human papillomaviruses through a conserved silencing element.

O'Connor MJ(1), Stünkel W, Koh CH, Zimmermann H, Bernard HU.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Singapore 117 609, Singapore.

The life cycles of human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are intimately linked to the
differentiation program of infected stratified epithelia, with both viral gene
expression and replication being maintained at low levels in undifferentiated
basal cells and increased upon host cell differentiation. We recently identified,
in HPV-16, a negative regulatory element between the epithelial-cell-specific
enhancer and the E6 promoter that is capable of silencing E6 promoter activity,
and we termed this element a papillomavirus silencing motif (PSM) and the unknown
cellular factor that bound to it PSM binding protein (PSM-BP). Here we show that 
the homologous genomic segments of six other distantly related genital HPV types 
contain a PSM that binds PSM-BP and is capable of repressing transcription.
Conservation of the PSM suggests that it is indispensable for the HPV life cycle.
Purification, electrophoretic mobility shift assay experiments, and the use of
specific antibodies proved that the cellular factor PSM-BP is identical to a
previously described transcriptional repressor, the CCAAT displacement protein
(CDP), also referred to as the human Cut protein (Cut). CDP/Cut repression of
HPV-16 may stem from the modification of specifically positioned nucleosomes, as 
suggested by transcriptional stimulation under the influence of the histone
deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A. CDP/Cut is an important developmental
regulator in several different tissues. It was recently shown that CDP/Cut is
expressed in basal epithelial cells but not in differentiated primary
keratinocytes. This suggests the possibility that repression by PSM couples HPV
transcription to the stratification of epithelia. In each of the studied HPV
types, the two CDP/Cut binding sites of PSM overlap with the known or presumed
binding sites of the replication initiator protein E1. Transfection of CDP/Cut
expression vectors into cells that support HPV-16 or HPV-31 replication leads to 
the elimination of viral episomes. Similarly, two PSM-like motifs overlapping the
E1 binding site of bovine papillomavirus type 1 bind CDP/Cut, and CDP/Cut
overexpression reduces the copy number of episomally replicating BPV-1 genomes in
mouse fibroblasts. CDP/Cut appears to be a master regulator of HPV transcription 
and replication during epithelial differentiation, and PSMs are important
cis-responsive targets of this repressor.

PMCID: PMC111551
PMID: 10590129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Blood. 1999 Nov 1;94(9):3151-60.

Overexpression of CCAAT displacement protein represses the promiscuously active
proximal gp91(phox) promoter.

Catt D(1), Hawkins S, Roman A, Luo W, Skalnik DG.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Section of
Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine and Walther Cancer Institute, Indianapolis 
46202, USA.

CCAAT displacement protein (CDP) is a transcriptional repressor that restricts
expression of the gp91(phox) gene to mature myeloid cells. CDP interacts with
multiple sites within the -450 to +12 bp human gp91(phox) promoter, and
down-regulation of CDP DNA-binding activity is required for induction of
gp91(phox) transcription in mature phagocytes. Truncation of the gp91(phox)
promoter to -102 to +12 bp removes 4 CDP-binding sites and reveals a promiscuous 
promoter activity that is active in some nonphagocytic cells. A cis-element at
-90 bp is required for derepressed transcription and serves as a binding site for
multiple transcriptional activators. We now report that this element also serves 
as a binding site for CDP. The affinity of CDP for this element is relatively
weak compared with upstream CDP-binding sites within the promoter, consistent
with the promiscuous transcriptional activity exhibited by the -102 to +12 bp
gp91(phox) promoter fragment. Further analysis of the proximal promoter reveals
an additional weak-affinity CDP-binding site centered at approximately -20 bp.
Overexpression of cloned CDP represses the -102 to +12 bp gp91(phox) promoter,
indicating that these proximal CDP-binding sites are functionally significant.
The constellation of transcriptional activators and a repressor that interacts
with the -90 bp cis-element is identical to that observed for a promoter element 
at -220 bp, reflecting the highly modular organization of the gp91(phox)
promoter. These studies illustrate the complex interplay between transcriptional 
activators and a repressor that contribute to the myeloid-restricted expression
of the gp91(phox) gene.

PMID: 10556202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1999 Nov 15;371(2):290-300.

Human cut-like repressor protein binds TGFbeta type II receptor gene promoter.

Jackson RJ(1), Antonia SJ, Wright KL, Moon NS, Nepveu A, Muñoz-Antonia T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Cancer Center and Research Institute, University of South Florida,
12902 Magnolia Drive, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

Resistance to the growth inhibitory effects of transforming growth factor beta
(TGFbeta) has been associated with decreased levels of the TGFbeta type II
receptor (TbetaR-II) and has been correlated with tumorigenicity. Previously, we 
reported an A --> G mutation at position -364 in the TbetaR-II promoter in A431
tumor cells which results in reduced TbetaR-II promoter activity. In this study, 
we show that the CDP/Cut (CCAAT displacement protein) transcription factor, a
transcriptional repressor, binds both the wild type and the mutant TbetaR-II
promoter. We also demonstrate that the A --> G mutation increases CDP/Cut binding
affinity, and that overexpression of CDP/Cut reduces transcription from TbetaR-II
promoter reporter constructs. Increased binding of the CDP/Cut repressor protein,
as a result of a mutation at position -364, represents a novel mechanism of
regulation in a neoplastic cell of the promoter of a tumor suppressor gene,
TbetaR-II.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10545217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Mol Biol Rep. 1999 Aug;26(3):185-94.

The homeodomain transcription factor CDP/cut interacts with the cell cycle
regulatory element of histone H4 genes packaged into nucleosomes.

Last TJ(1), van Wijnen AJ, de Ridder MC, Stein GS, Stein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester 01655, USA.

The homeodomain transcription factor CDP/cut contains four separate DNA binding
domains and interacts with large segments of DNA. Thus, CDP/cut has the potential
to function as an architectural protein and perhaps to support modifications in
chromatin structure and nucleosomal organization. To begin to examine the ability
of CDP/cut to interact with chromatin, we analyzed binding of CDP/cut to the
histone H4 gene promoter (-90 to +75) reconstituted into nucleosome cores. The
-90 to +75 region encompasses the cell cycle regulatory element (Site II) that
controls histone H4 gene transcription, a CDP/cut binding site and a nuclease
hypersensitive region. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays and DNase I
footprinting experiments, we show that CDP/cut specifically interacts with its
recognition motif in a nucleosomal context without displacing the nucleosome
core. The competency of CDP/cut to interact with nucleosomes suggests that this
transcription factor may facilitate chromatin remodeling in response to cell
cycle regulatory and/or developmental cues.

PMID: 10532314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jul;19(7):4918-26.

Homeoproteins CDP and SATB1 interact: potential for tissue-specific regulation.

Liu J(1), Barnett A, Neufeld EJ, Dudley JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology,
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA.

Homeoproteins are known to participate in development and cell type
specification. The homeoproteins CCAAT displacement protein (CDP) and special
AT-rich sequence binding protein 1 (SATB1) have been shown to bind to nuclear
matrix-associated regions and to act as repressors of many cellular genes.
Moreover, binding of SATB1 to the mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter
region dramatically affects the tissue-specific transcription of this retrovirus.
Because protein-protein interactions are a common means of regulating
homeoprotein function, we tested whether SATB1 and CDP interact in vivo and in
vitro. SATB1 interacted with CDP through its DNA-binding domain, as demonstrated 
by glutathione S-transferase (GST) pull-down assays. GST pull-down assays also
showed that CDP associated with SATB1 through three of its four DNA-binding
domains (CR1, CR2, and the homeodomain). SATB1-specific antisera, but not
preimmune sera, precipitated CDP from nuclear extracts, and CDP-specific antisera
precipitated SATB1 from the same extracts. Far-Western blotting detected
interaction of SATB1 and CDP in several different tissue extracts. Association of
purified SATB1 and CDP in vitro resulted in the inability of each protein to bind
to DNA in gel retardation assays. CDP overexpression in cultured T cells led to a
loss of detectable SATB1 binding to the MMTV promoter region, as measured by gel 
shift experiments. CDP overexpression also elevated MMTV long terminal repeat
reporter gene activity in transient-transfection assays, a result consistent with
neutralization of the SATB1 repressor function in T cells. SATB1 is very abundant
in certain tissues, particularly thymus, whereas CDP is relatively ubiquitous,
except in certain terminally differentiated cell types. Because of the tissue and
cell type distribution of SATB1 and CDP, we propose that the SATB1-to-CDP ratio
in different tissues is a novel mechanism for homeoproteins to control gene
expression and differentiation in mammals.

PMCID: PMC84297
PMID: 10373541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Oncogene. 1999 Mar 18;18(11):2015-21.

Refined mapping of the region of loss of heterozygosity on the long arm of
chromosome 7 in human breast cancer defines the location of a second tumor
suppressor gene at 7q22 in the region of the CUTL1 gene.

Zeng WR(1), Watson P, Lin J, Jothy S, Lidereau R, Park M, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

In breast cancer, loss of heterozygosity (LOH) has been described on the long arm
of chromosome 7, at band q31, suggesting the presence of a tumor suppressor gene 
in this region. In this study, we have identified a second region of LOH on 7q,
at band 7q22. Deletion of genetic material at 7q22 was found in all tumor types
and grades and was associated with increased tumor size. The region of LOH at
7q22 in every case included one or more of three polymorphic markers that are
located within the CUTL1 gene. LOH of 7q22 has also been documented in the case
of human uterine leiomyomas (Zeng et al., 1997; Ishwad et al., 1997).
Interestingly, in both leiomyomas and mammary tumors induced in transgenic mice
expressing the Polyomavirus (PyV) large T (LT) antigen, immunocomplexes of CUTL1 
and PyV LT antigen were detected (Webster et al., 1998). Altogether, genetic data
in human breast cancer and biochemical analyses in breast tumors from transgenic 
mice suggest that CUTL1 is a candidate tumor suppressor gene.

PMID: 10208423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Virol. 1999 May;73(5):4220-9.

CCAAT displacement protein binds to and negatively regulates human papillomavirus
type 6 E6, E7, and E1 promoters.

Ai W(1), Toussaint E, Roman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, and Walther Cancer Institute, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5120, USA.

Expression of human papillomavirus genes increases as the target cell, the
keratinocyte, differentiates. CCAAT displacement protein (CDP) is a cellular
protein which has been shown in other cell types to negatively regulate gene
expression in undifferentiated cells but not in differentiated cells. We have
previously shown that a 66-bp purine-thymidine-rich sequence (the 66-mer) binds
CDP and negatively regulates the human papillomavirus type 6 (HPV-6) E6 promoter 
(S. Pattison, D. G. Skalnik, and A. Roman, J. Virol. 71:2013-2022, 1997).
Cotransfection experiments with a plasmid expressing luciferase from the HPV-6
E6, E7, or E1 regulatory region and a plasmid carrying the CDP gene indicate that
CDP represses transcription from all three HPV-6 promoters. Using electrophoretic
mobility shift assays (EMSAs), we have shown that CDP binds HPV-6 both upstream
and downstream of the E6, E7, and E1 transcription initiation start sites.
Furthermore, when keratinocytes were induced to differentiate, all three promoter
activities increased. Consistent with this, immunoblotting and EMSAs revealed
that endogenous nucleus CDP and, correspondingly, DNA binding activity decreased 
when keratinocytes were induced to differentiate. The elevated promoter
activities were abrogated by exogenously transfected CDP. Our data demonstrate
that CDP fulfills the requirement of a differentiation-dependent negative
regulator that could tie the HPV life cycle to keratinocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC104201
PMID: 10196318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 19;274(12):7803-15.

Transcriptional repression of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
regulator gene, mediated by CCAAT displacement protein/cut homolog, is associated
with histone deacetylation.

Li S(1), Moy L, Pittman N, Shue G, Aufiero B, Neufeld EJ, LeLeiko NS, Walsh MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Liver
Diseases, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA.

Human cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene (CFTR)
transcription is tightly regulated by nucleotide sequences upstream of the
initiator sequences. Our studies of human CFTR transcription focus on identifying
transcription factors bound to an inverted CCAAT consensus or "Y-box element."
The human homeodomain CCAAT displacement protein/cut homolog (CDP/cut) can bind
to the Y-box element through a cut repeat and homeobox. Analysis of stably
transfected cell lines with wild-type and mutant human CFTR-directed reporter
genes demonstrates that human histone acetyltransferase GCN5 and transcription
factor ATF-1 can potentiate CFTR transcription through the Y-box element. We have
found 1) that human CDP/cut acts as a repressor of CFTR transcription through the
Y-box element by competing for the sites of transactivators hGCN5 and ATF-1; 2)
that the ability of CDP/cut to repress activities of hGCN5 and ATF-1 activity is 
contingent on the amount of CDP/cut expression; 3) that histone acetylation may
have a role in the regulation of gene transcription by altering the accessibility
of the CFTR Y-box for sequence-specific transcription factors; 4) that
trichostatin A, an inhibitor of histone deacetylase activity, activates
transcription of CFTR through the Y-box element; 5) that the inhibition of
histone deacetylase activity leads to an alteration of local chromatin structure 
requiring an intact Y-box sequence in CFTR; 6) that immunocomplexes of CDP/cut
possess an associated histone deacetylase activity; 7) that the carboxyl region
of CDP/cut, responsible for the transcriptional repressor function, interacts
with the histone deacetylase, HDAC1. We propose that CFTR transcription may be
regulated through interactions with factors directing the modification of
chromatin and requires the conservation of the inverted CCAAT (Y-box) element of 
the CFTR promoter.

PMID: 10075672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Gene. 1998 Oct 23;221(2):267-77.

Repressor elements in the coding region of the human histone H4 gene interact
with the transcription factor CDP/cut.

Last TJ(1), Birnbaum M, van Wijnen AJ, Stein GS, Stein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Unversity of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worchester, MA 01655, USA.

The coding region of the human histone H4 gene FO108 undergoes dynamic changes in
chromatin structure that correlate with modifications in gene expression. Such
structural alterations generally reflect transcription factor interactions with
gene regulatory sequences. To test for regulatory elements within the coding
region, we performed transient transfection experiments in HeLa cells using
constructs with histone H4 sequences fused upstream of a heterologous thymidine
kinase promoter and CAT reporter gene. H4 gene sequences from -10 to +210
repressed transcription 4.8-fold. Further deletion and mutational analysis
delineated three repressor elements within this region. Using oligonucleotide
competition analysis and specific antibody recognition in electrophoretic
mobility shift assays, as well as methylation interference and DNase I
footprinting analyses, we have identified the CCAAT displacement protein
(CDP/cut) as the factor that interacts with these three repressor elements.
CDP/cut binding to these repressor sites is proliferation-specific and
cell-cycle-regulated, increasing in mid to late S phase. Our results indicate
that the proximal 200 nucleotides of the histone H4-coding region contain
transcriptional regulatory elements that may contribute to cell-cycle control of 
histone gene expression by interacting with repressor complexes containing
CDP/cut homeodomain transcription factors.

PMID: 9874597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jan;19(1):284-95.

Cux/CDP homeoprotein is a component of NF-muNR and represses the immunoglobulin
heavy chain intronic enhancer by antagonizing the bright transcription activator.

Wang Z(1), Goldstein A, Zong RT, Lin D, Neufeld EJ, Scheuermann RH, Tucker PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, The University 
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75235-9072, USA.

Nuclear matrix attachment regions (MARs) flanking the immunoglobulin heavy chain 
intronic enhancer (Emu) are the targets of the negative regulator, NF-muNR, found
in non-B and early pre-B cells. Expression library screening with NF-muNR binding
sites yielded a cDNA clone encoding an alternatively spliced form of the Cux/CDP 
homeodomain protein. Cux/CDP fulfills criteria required for NF-muNR identity. It 
is expressed in non-B and early pre-B cells but not mature B cells. It binds to
NF-muNR binding sites within Emu with appropriate differential affinities.
Antiserum specific for Cux/CDP recognizes a polypeptide of the predicted size in 
affinity-purified NF-muNR preparations and binds NF-muNR complexed with DNA.
Cotransfection with Cux/CDP represses the activity of Emu via the MAR sequences
in both B and non-B cells. Cux/CDP antagonizes the effects of the Bright
transcription activator at both the DNA binding and functional levels. We propose
that Cux/CDP regulates cell-type-restricted, differentiation stage-specific Emu
enhancer activity by interfering with the function of nuclear matrix-bound
transcription activators.

PMCID: PMC83886
PMID: 9858552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Genome Res. 1998 Oct;8(10):1060-73.

Large-scale sequencing of two regions in human chromosome 7q22: analysis of 650
kb of genomic sequence around the EPO and CUTL1 loci reveals 17 genes.

Glöckner G(1), Scherer S, Schattevoy R, Boright A, Weber J, Tsui LC, Rosenthal A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Analysis, Institute of Molecular Biotechnology (IMB),
07745 Jena, Germany.

We have sequenced and annotated two genomic regions located in the Giemsa
negative band q22 of human chromosome 7. The first region defined by the
erythropoietin (EPO) locus is 228 kb in length and contains 13 genes. Whereas 3
genes (GNB2, EPO, PCOLCE) were known previously on the mRNA level, we have been
able to identify 10 novel genes using a newly developed automatic annotation tool
RUMMAGE-DP, which comprises >26 different programs mainly for exon prediction,
homology searches, and compositional and repeat analysis. For precise annotation 
we have also resequenced ESTs identified to the region and assembled them to
build large cDNAs. In addition, we have investigated the differential splicing of
genes. Using these tools we annotated 4 of the 10 genes as a zonadhesin, a
transferrin homolog, a nucleoporin-like gene, and an actin gene. Two genes showed
weak similarity to an insulin-like receptor and a neuronal protein with a
leucine-rich amino-terminal domain. Four predicted genes (CDS1-CDS4) CDS that
have been confirmed on the mRNA level showed no similarity to known proteins and 
a potential function could not be assigned. The second region in 7q22 defined by 
the CUTL1 (CCAAT displacement protein and its splice variant) locus is 416 kb in 
length and contains three known genes, including PMSL12, APS, CUTL1, and a novel 
gene (CDS5). The CUTL1 locus, consisting of two splice variants (CDP and CASP),
occupies >300 kb. Based on the G, C profile an isochore switch can be defined
between the CUTL1 gene and the APS and PMSL12 genes.

PMCID: PMC310788
PMID: 9799793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 6;273(45):29838-46.

A nuclear matrix attachment region upstream of the T cell receptor beta gene
enhancer binds Cux/CDP and SATB1 and modulates enhancer-dependent reporter gene
expression but not endogenous gene expression.

Chattopadhyay S(1), Whitehurst CE, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

We have previously identified a DNase I-hypersensitive site in the T cell
receptor beta locus, designated HS1, that is located 400 base pairs upstream of
the transcriptional enhancer Ebeta and is induced during CD4(-)CD8(-) to
CD4(+)CD8(+) thymocyte differentiation. Using electrophoretic mobility shift
assays, we show that HS1 induction correlates with increased binding of two
nuclear factors, Cux/CDP and SATB1, to a 170-base pair DNA sequence within HS1.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that HS1 is a nuclear matrix attachment region,
referred to as MARbeta. These findings demonstrate that an analogous organization
of cis-regulatory elements in which a nuclear matrix attachment region is in
close proximity to an enhancer is conserved in the immunoglobulin and T cell
receptor loci. In addition, we show that MARbeta represses Ebeta-dependent
reporter gene expression in transient transfection assays. However, the targeted 
deletion of MARbeta from the endogenous locus does not change T cell receptor
beta gene transcription in developing T cells. These contrasting results suggest 
a potential pitfall of functional studies of nuclear matrix attachment regions
outside of their natural chromosomal context.

PMID: 9792700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. EMBO J. 1998 Aug 17;17(16):4680-94.

The mammalian Cut homeodomain protein functions as a cell-cycle-dependent
transcriptional repressor which downmodulates p21WAF1/CIP1/SDI1 in S phase.

Coqueret O(1), Bérubé G, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, Royal Victoria Hospital, Quebec, Canada.

Cut is a homeodomain transcription factor which has the unusual property of
containing several DNA-binding domains: three regions called Cut repeats and the 
Cut homeodomain. Genetic studies in Drosophila melanogaster indicate that cut
plays important roles in the determination and maintenance of cell-type
specificity. In the present study, we show that mammalian Cut proteins may yet
play another biological role, specifically in proliferating cells. We found that 
the binding of Cut to a consensus binding site varies during the cell cycle.
Binding was virtually undetectable in G0 and early G1, but became very strong as 
cells reached S phase. This was shown to result both from an increase in Cut
expression and dephosphorylation of the Cut homeodomain by the Cdc25A
phosphatase. We also show that the increase in Cut activity coincides with a
decrease in p21WAF1/CIP1/SDI1 mRNAs. In co-transfection experiments, Cut proteins
repressed p21WAF1/CIP1/SDI1 gene expression through binding to a sequence that
overlaps the TATA box. Moreover, p21WAF1/CIP1/SDI1 expression was repressed
equally well by either Cdc25A or Cut. Altogether, these results suggest a model
by which Cdc25A activates the Cut repressor which then downregulates
transcription of p21WAF1/CIP1/SDI1 in S phase. Thus, in addition to their role
during cellular differentiation, Cut proteins also serve as cell-cycle-dependent 
transcriptional factors in proliferating cells.

PMCID: PMC1170797
PMID: 9707427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Blood. 1998 Apr 1;91(7):2517-24.

Isolation and characterization of the cDNA for mouse neutrophil collagenase:
demonstration of shared negative regulatory pathways for neutrophil secondary
granule protein gene expression.

Lawson ND(1), Khanna-Gupta A, Berliner N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Section of Hematology, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

A characteristic of normal neutrophil maturation is the induction of secondary
granule protein (SGP) mRNA expression. Several leukemic human cell lines mimic
normal morphologic neutrophil differentiation but fail to express SGPs, such as
lactoferrin (LF) and neutrophil gelatinase (NG). In contrast, two murine cell
lines (32D C13 and MPRO) are able to differentiate into neutrophils and induce
expression of LF and NG. Therefore, to study the normal regulation and function
of these genes, the corresponding murine homologs must be isolated. Using cDNA
representational difference analysis (RDA) to compare a committed myeloid
progenitor cell line (EPRO) with the multipotent stem cell line from which it was
derived (EML), we isolated a fragment bearing homology to human neutrophil
collagenase (hNC). Here, we describe the cloning and characterization of a
full-length ( approximately 2 kb) clone that exhibits nearly 65% nucleotide and
73% amino acid identity to hNC. Ribonuclease protection analysis (RPA) of the
tissues and cell lines shows that mouse NC (mNC) is expressed only in cell lines 
exhibiting neutrophilic characteristics, further confirming its identity as the
mouse homolog of hNC. Furthermore, we have demonstrated a shared negative
regulatory pathway for this and other SGP genes. We have previously shown that
CCAAT displacement protein (CDP/cut) binds to a specific region of the LF
promoter, and overexpression of CDP blocks G-CSF-induced upregulation of LF gene 
expression in 32D C13 cells. We show here that in these cells, upregulation of
both NC and NG is also blocked. CDP is thus the first identified transcription
factor that is a candidate for mediating the shared regulation of neutrophil SGP 
protein genes.

PMID: 9516153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Cell Growth Differ. 1997 Dec;8(12):1329-38.

Positive and negative regulation of the human thymidine kinase promoter mediated 
by CCAAT binding transcription factors NF-Y/CBF, dbpA, and CDP/cut.

Kim EC(1), Lau JS, Rawlings S, Lee AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
California School of Medicine, Los Angeles 90033-0800, USA.

The proximal CCAAT element located 38 bp upstream of the transcription initiation
site contributes to the human thymidine kinase (htk) promoter activity, because
site-directed mutagenesis of a 10-bp region containing this CCAAT motif (TKC1)
reduced the promoter activity by 55%. Through binding site competitions and
antigenic cross-reactivity, the major factor that binds TKC1 from both HeLa and
hamster nuclear extracts is identified as NF-Y/CBF. In serum-stimulated cells,
the binding of NF-Y/CBF to TKC1 increased gradually, reaching a plateau at the S 
phase. In cell transfection assays, a dominant-negative mutant of NF-Y/CBF
inhibited the htk promoter in a dosage-dependent manner, providing direct
evidence that NF-Y/CBF is required for maximal htk promoter activity. Recently,
it has been demonstrated that the site occupied by NF-Y/CBF also binds the
serum-inducible dbpA and dpbB. We show here that recombinant dbpA interacts with 
the htk promoter, and overexpression of dbpA can stimulate htk promoter activity 
mediated through TCK1. In contrast, CDP/cut, the CCAAT displacement protein with 
known repressor property, binds the htk promoter through both the proximal and
distal CCAAT elements. Our discovery that CDP/cut binds the htk promoter
primarily in quiescent cells and that overexpression of CDP/cut inhibits htk
promoter activity provides an explanation for the reported dramatic increase in
htk promoter activity in serum-starved cells when both CCAAT elements were
mutated. Thus, a combination of suppression in quiescent cells and activation in 
serum-stimulated cells mediated through various CCAAT-binding proteins may
account in part for the induction of htk promoter activity as quiescent cells
reenter the cell cycle.

PMID: 9419421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Blood. 1997 Oct 1;90(7):2784-95.

CCAAT displacement protein (CDP/cut) recognizes a silencer element within the
lactoferrin gene promoter.

Khanna-Gupta A(1), Zibello T, Kolla S, Neufeld EJ, Berliner N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT 06510, USA.

Expression of neutrophil secondary granule protein (SGP) genes is coordinately
regulated at the transcriptional level, and is disrupted in specific granule
deficiency and leukemia. We analyzed the regulation of SGP gene expression by
luciferase reporter gene assays using the lactoferrin (LF) promoter. Reporter
plasmids were transiently transfected into non-LF-expressing hematopoietic cell
lines. Luciferase activity was detected from reporter plasmids containing
base-pair (bp) -387 to bp -726 of the LF promoter, but not in a -916-bp plasmid. 
Transfection of a -916-bp plasmid into a LF-expressing cell line resulted in
abrogation of the silencing effect. Sequence analysis of this region revealed
three eight-bp repetitive elements, the deletion of which restored wild-type
levels of luciferase activity to the -916-bp reporter plasmid. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assay and UV cross-linking analysis identified a protein of
approximately 180 kD that binds to this region in non-LF-expressing cells but not
in LF-expressing cells. This protein was identified to be the CCAAT displacement 
protein (CDP/cut). CDP/cut has been shown to downregulate expression of
gp91-phox, a gene expressed relatively early in the myeloid lineage. Our
observations suggest that the binding of CDP/cut to the LF silencer element
serves to suppress basal promoter activity of the LF gene in non-LF-expressing
cells. Furthermore, overexpression of CDP/cut in cultured myeloid stem cells
blocks LF expression upon granulocyte colony-stimulating factor-induced
neutrophil maturation without blocking phenotypic maturation. This block in LF
expression may be due, in part, to the persistence of CDP/cut binding to the LF
silencer element.

PMID: 9326246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Gene. 1997 Sep 15;197(1-2):73-81.

CASP, a novel, highly conserved alternative-splicing product of the CDP/cut/cux
gene, lacks cut-repeat and homeo DNA-binding domains, and interacts with
full-length CDP in vitro.

Lievens PM(1), Tufarelli C, Donady JJ, Stagg A, Neufeld EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Human CDP/cut and its murine counterpart, cux1/CDP are homeodomain repressor
proteins in the family of Drosophila Cut. Northern blot analysis reveals complex 
alternative splicing, including forms too small to encode the full 1505 amino
acid protein. We have characterized a CDP/cut alternatively spliced cDNA (CASP)
of 3.4 kb. Human CASP, a predicted 678 amino acid polypeptide, shares 400 amino
acids with CDP, but has an alternate N terminal exon of 20 aa, and the C-terminal
258 amino acids diverge from CDP/cut entirely. As the unique C-terminus of CASP
lacks the three 'cut-repeats' and homeodomain of CDP/cut, we predict it does not 
bind DNA. Murine CASP, 96% similar to human, shares these features. Database
searches identify homologs in chicken (86% identical to human CASP) and yeast
(29% identical to human). Murine CASP mRNA is ubiquitous in mouse tissues and in 
tissue-culture cell lines. We generated a specific antiserum against the unique
C-terminus of CASP, and used this reagent to demonstrate that CASP protein is
expressed as an approx. 80 kDa protein in human and murine cells. Co-translation 
of in vitro-translated CDP and CASP mRNA, followed by immunoprecipitation with
specific anti-CASP IgG, shows that CASP polypeptide can from a complex with CDP. 
Studies of the intron/exon structure of the murine cux/CDP/mCASP locus (>> 100
kb) reveal that the unique 3' exons of CASP are interposed between cut-repeats 2 
and 3 of the cux gene. We speculate that a primordial CASP-like gene captured a
cut-repeat-homeobox gene to give rise to the eukaryotic Cut/CDP family of
proteins.

PMID: 9332351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Sep;17(9):5275-87.

The matrix attachment region-binding protein SATB1 participates in negative
regulation of tissue-specific gene expression.

Liu J(1), Bramblett D, Zhu Q, Lozano M, Kobayashi R, Ross SR, Dudley JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology,
University of Texas at Austin, 78712, USA.

The nuclear matrix has been implicated in several cellular processes, including
DNA replication, transcription, and RNA processing. In particular,
transcriptional regulation is believed to be accomplished by binding of chromatin
loops to the nuclear matrix and by the concentration of specific transcription
factors near these matrix attachment regions (MARs). A number of MAR-binding
proteins have been identified, but few have been directly linked to
tissue-specific transcription. Recently, we have identified two cellular protein 
complexes (NBP and UBP) that bind to a region of the mouse mammary tumor virus
(MMTV) long terminal repeat (LTR) previously shown to contain at least two
negative regulatory elements (NREs) termed the promoter-proximal and
promoter-distal NREs. These NREs are absent from MMTV strains that cause T-cell
lymphomas instead of mammary carcinomas. We show here that NBP binds to a 22-bp
sequence containing an imperfect inverted repeat in the promoter-proximal NRE.
Previous data showed that a mutation (p924) within the inverted repeat elevated
basal transcription from the MMTV promoter and destabilized the binding of NBP,
but not UBP, to the proximal NRE. By using conventional and affinity methods to
purify NBP from rat thymic nuclear extracts, we obtained a single major protein
of 115 kDa that was identified by protease digestion and partial sequencing
analysis as the nuclear matrix-binding protein special AT-rich sequence-binding
protein 1 (SATB1). Antibody ablation, distamycin inhibition of binding,
renaturation and competition experiments, and tissue distribution data all
confirmed that the NBP complex contained SATB1. Similar types of experiments were
used to show that the UBP complex contained the homeodomain protein Cux/CDP that 
binds the MAR of the intronic heavy-chain immunoglobulin enhancer. By using the
p924 mutation within the MMTV LTR upstream of the chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase gene, we generated two strains of transgenic mice that had a
dramatic elevation of reporter gene expression in lymphoid tissues compared with 
reporter gene expression in mice expressing wild-type LTR constructs. Thus, the
924 mutation in the SATB1-binding site dramatically elevated MMTV transcription
in lymphoid tissues. These results and the ability of the proximal NRE in the
MMTV LTR to bind to the nuclear matrix clearly demonstrate the role of
MAR-binding proteins in tissue-specific gene regulation and in MMTV-induced
oncogenesis.

PMCID: PMC232378
PMID: 9271405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Oncogene. 1997 May 15;14(19):2355-65.

Loss of heterozygosity and reduced expression of the CUTL1 gene in uterine
leiomyomas.

Zeng WR(1), Scherer SW, Koutsilieris M, Huizenga JJ, Filteau F, Tsui LC, Nepveu
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Cytogenetic analyses has revealed deletions and/or rearrangments at several
chromosomal positions in approximately half of uterine leiomyomas. The most
frequent genetic alteration, deletion of 7q22, was found in approximately 35% of 
studied cases with cytogenetic abnormalities (128/366=35%). The same chromosomal 
band was also found to be deleted in a fraction of acute myeloid leukemias and
myelodysplastic syndromes. The frequent deletion of 7q22 in some tumors suggest
that a tumor suppressor gene may be located in this region. The human Cut-like
homeobox gene, CUTL1, is one of the genes localized to 7q22 and it was shown
previously to encode a transcriptional repressor that down-modulates the
expression of c-Myc. Activation of the c-Myc oncogenic potential has been shown
in many cancers to result from alterations in one or the other of its several
mechanisms of regulation. These observations led us to hypothesize that CUTL1
could act as a tumor suppressor gene. In the present study, we have identified
polymorphic markers within and directly adjacent to CUTL1 at 7q22 and
demonstrated that these markers are present in a commonly deleted region in seven
out of 50 uterine leiomyomas samples examined. Furthermore, Northern blot
analysis revealed that CUTL1 mRNA levels were reduced in eight tumors out of 13. 
These results suggest that CUTL1 may act as a tumor suppressor gene whose
inactivation could be of pathological importance in the etiology of uterine
leiomyomas.

PMID: 9178912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Biol Chem. 1997 Apr 25;272(17):11463-70.

An atypical homeodomain in SATB1 promotes specific recognition of the key
structural element in a matrix attachment region.

Dickinson LA(1), Dickinson CD, Kohwi-Shigematsu T.

Author information: 
(1)Burnham Institute, La Jolla Cancer Research Center, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

SATB1 is a cell type-specific nuclear matrix attachment region (MAR) DNA-binding 
protein, predominantly expressed in thymocytes. We identified an atypical
homeodomain and two Cut-like repeats in SATB1, in addition to the known
MAR-binding domain. The isolated MAR-binding domain recognizes a certain DNA
sequence context within MARs that is highly potentiated for base unpairing.
Unlike the MAR-binding domain, the homeodomain when isolated binds poorly and
with low specificity to DNA. However, the combined action of the MAR-binding
domain and the homeodomain allows SATB1 to specifically recognize the core
unwinding element within the base-unpairing region. The core unwinding element is
critical for MAR structure, since point mutations within this core abolish the
unwinding propensity of the MAR. The contribution of the homeodomain is abolished
by alanine substitutions of arginine 3 and arginine 5 in the N-terminal arm of
the homeodomain. Site-directed mutagenesis of the core unwinding element in the
3' MAR of the immunoglobulin heavy chain gene enhancer revealed the sequence
5'-(C/A)TAATA-3' to be essential for the increase in affinity mediated by the
homeodomain. SATB1 may regulate T-cell development and function at the level of
higher order chromatin structure through the critical DNA structural elements
within MARs.

PMID: 9111059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1997 Apr 10;1351(3):313-24.

Cux/CDP homeodomain protein binds to an enhancer in the rat c-mos locus and
represses its activity.

Higgy NA(1), Tarnasky HA, Valarché I, Nepveu A, van der Hoorn FA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

The c-mos gene is transcribed in male and female germ cells, in differentiating
myoblasts and in 3T3 cells from cell-specific promoters. We characterized the rat
testis promoter, which contains a TATA-box and one binding site for a
testis-specific transcription factor TTF-D, as well as a region which can act as 
enhancer, which is located approx. 2 kb upstream of the c-mos AUG start codon. It
binds three factors at sites I, II and III as determined in DNAse I footprint
assays. We demonstrated that a member of the NF-1/CTF family of transcription
factors binds site II. Here we report the cloning of the protein that binds to
enhancer site III. This protein is the rat homolog of human hCut/CDP, mouse
Cux/CDP and canine Clox. hCut/Cux/CDP/Clox (hereafter called Cux/CDP), a 160 kDa 
protein containing multiple repeats and a homeodomain, negatively regulates the
mammalian c-myc, gp91-phox and N-Cam genes. Using bacterially produced murine
GST-Cux fusion proteins and GST-Cux deletion mutants, we find that Cux repeat CR3
and the homeodomain are both required for efficient binding to enhancer site III.
Mouse lung and testis nuclear Cux/CDP bind to site III as determined in
electrophoretic gel mobility supershift assays using two different anti-hCut
specific monoclonal antibodies. Transfections of CAT constructs containing the
enhancer fragment linked to a minimal promoter demonstrated that Cux/CDP
represses c-mos enhancer activity.

PMID: 9130595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Virol. 1997 Mar;71(3):2013-22.

CCAAT displacement protein, a regulator of differentiation-specific gene
expression, binds a negative regulatory element within the 5' end of the human
papillomavirus type 6 long control region.

Pattison S(1), Skalnik DG, Roman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis 46202-5120, USA.

We have reported previously that a 636-bp fragment spanning the 5' two-thirds of 
the human papillomavirus type 6 (HPV6)-W50 long control region (LCR) functions as
a transcriptional silencer (A. Farr, S. Pattison, B.-S. Youn, and A. Roman, J.
Gen. Virol. 76:827-835, 1995). We have utilized nested deletion analyses to
implicate a 66-bp sequence which appears to be critical for this activity. A
comparison of the transcriptional regulatory activities of the LCRs of HPV6-W50
and HPV6b (which has a 94-bp deletion, resulting in the elimination of the 66-bp 
sequence) indicates that sequences within the 94-bp region negatively regulate
the activity of the intact HPV6 LCR. Two sequence-specific DNA-protein
interactions were visualized via electrophoretic mobility shift assays. One of
the binding events is mediated by the transcriptional repressor CCAAT
displacement protein (CDP), a factor which is active in undifferentiated cells
but inactive in terminally differentiated cells. This conclusion is based on the 
following three lines of evidence: (i) a consensus CDP binding site
oligonucleotide serves as a competitor in band shift assays, (ii) the band shift 
complex is not seen when a CDP-negative nuclear extract is used, and (iii)
anti-CDP antiserum specifically inhibits the binding. These studies identify a
DNA-protein interaction occurring within the 5' end of the LCR which may be
important in maintaining the tight link between keratinocyte differentiation and 
HPV gene expression.

PMCID: PMC191286
PMID: 9032333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Oct 15;93(21):11516-21.

CDP/cut is the DNA-binding subunit of histone gene transcription factor HiNF-D: a
mechanism for gene regulation at the G1/S phase cell cycle transition point
independent of transcription factor E2F.

van Wijnen AJ(1), van Gurp MF, de Ridder MC, Tufarelli C, Last TJ, Birnbaum M,
Vaughan PS, Giordano A, Krek W, Neufeld EJ, Stein JL, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester 01655, USA.

Transcription of the genes for the human histone proteins H4, H3, H2A, H2B, and
H1 is activated at the G1/S phase transition of the cell cycle. We have
previously shown that the promoter complex HiNF-D, which interacts with cell
cycle control elements in multiple histone genes, contains the key cell cycle
factors cyclin A, CDC2, and a retinoblastoma (pRB) protein-related protein.
However, an intrinsic DNA-binding subunit for HiNF-D was not identified. Many
genes that are up-regulated at the G1/S phase boundary are controlled by E2F, a
transcription factor that associates with cyclin-, cyclin-dependent kinase-, and 
pRB-related proteins. Using gel-shift immunoassays, DNase I protection, and
oligonucleotide competition analyses, we show that the homeodomain protein
CDP/cut, not E2F, is the DNA-binding subunit of the HiNF-D complex. The HiNF-D
(CDP/cut) complex with the H4 promoter is immunoreactive with antibodies against 
CDP/cut and pRB but not p107, whereas the CDP/cut complex with a nonhistone
promoter (gp91-phox) reacts only with CDP and p107 antibodies. Thus, CDP/cut
complexes at different gene promoters can associate with distinct pRB-related
proteins. Transient coexpression assays show that CDP/cut modulates H4 promoter
activity via the HiNF-D-binding site. Hence, DNA replication-dependent histone H4
genes are regulated by an E2F-independent mechanism involving a complex of
CDP/cut with cyclin A/CDC2/ RB-related proteins.

PMCID: PMC38089
PMID: 8876167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Oct;16(10):5346-57.

The human cut homeodomain protein can repress gene expression by two distinct
mechanisms: active repression and competition for binding site occupancy.

Mailly F(1), Bérubé G, Harada R, Mao PL, Phillips S, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, McGill University, Royal Victoria Hospital, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada.

By analogy with other homeodomain proteins conserved in evolution, mammalian Cut 
proteins are believed, as in Drosophila melanogaster, to play an important role
in determining cell type specificity in several tissues. At the molecular level, 
Cut proteins appear to serve as transcriptional repressors. In this study, we
have examined the mechanism by which the human Cut (hCut) protein down-regulates 
gene expression. The homeodomain and the three regions called Cut repeats are
evolutionarily conserved and were previously shown to function as DNA binding
domains. The carboxy-terminal region, although it does not show amino acid
sequence homology per se, in all cases is enriched in alanine and proline
residues, a distinctive feature of some transcriptional repression domains. Our
results reveal two distinct modes of repression: competition for binding site
occupancy and active repression. On one hand, the composite DNA binding domain
formed by Cut repeat 3 and the Cut homeodomain was shown to bind to CCAAT and Sp1
sites within the tk gene promoter and to reduce gene expression, presumably by
preventing activation by the corresponding transcription factors. On the other
hand, the carboxy-terminal region of mammalian Cut proteins was found to function
as an active repression domain in a distance-independent manner. We have further 
narrowed this activity to two subdomains that can independently repress activated
transcription. Finally, we present a model to illustrate the two mechanisms by
which Cut proteins repress gene expression.

PMCID: PMC231533
PMID: 8816446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Dev Biol. 1996 Aug 25;178(1):149-59.

Functional analysis of Drosophila and mammalian cut proteins in files.

Ludlow C(1), Choy R, Blochlinger K.

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington 98104, USA.

The cut locus acts as a bimodal switch controlling cell fate in the peripheral
nervous system of Drosophila and is also required for the development of the wing
margin. It encodes a protein, Cut, that contains an atypical homeodomain and
three copies of a new motif which can bind DNA in vitro. The human protein CDP
and the murine protein Cux have recently been isolated as DNA-binding activities 
and they are structurally related to Cut. We show that ectopic expression of Cut,
CDP, or Cux similarly affects embryonic sensory organ development and can rescue 
a wing scalloping mutant phenotype associated with loss of cut expression along
the prospective wing margins. This suggests that the function of Cut is
evolutionarily conserved.

PMID: 8812116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jul 26;271(30):18203-10.

CCAAT displacement protein competes with multiple transcriptional activators for 
binding to four sites in the proximal gp91phox promoter.

Luo W(1), Skalnik DG.

Author information: 
(1)Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Section of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana
46202-5225, USA.

CCAAT displacement protein (CDP) competes with transcriptional activating
proteins for binding to each of four elements within the myeloid-specific
gp91(phox) promoter. CDP exhibits the strongest affinity for a site centered at
-110 base pairs (bp) of the promoter and progressively weaker affinities for
three more distal binding sites. CDP binding to each site is down-regulated
during terminal phagocytic differentiation, coincident with induction of
gp91(phox) expression. Deletion of the high affinity CDP-binding site at -110 bp 
leads to inappropriate gp91(phox) promoter activity in HeLa, K562, and HEL cells.
An overlapping binding site for the CCAAT box-binding factor CP1 is required for 
derepressed promoter activity in HeLa and K562 cells, but is dispensable in HEL
cells, indicating that different cell types require distinct cis-elements for
gp91(phox) promoter activity. Derepressed gp91(phox) promoter activity is further
increased upon removal of a second CDP-binding site centered at -150 bp,
revealing that CDP represses gp91(phox) expression via multiple cis-elements. We 
present a model in which restriction of gp91(phox) expression to mature myeloid
cells involves competition between transcriptional activators and repressors for 
binding to multiple sites within the promoter.

PMID: 8663528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Biol Chem. 1995 May 26;270(21):12745-50.

Repressor activity of CCAAT displacement protein in HL-60 myeloid leukemia cells.

Lievens PM(1), Donady JJ, Tufarelli C, Neufeld EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Dana Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

CCAAT displacement protein (CDP)/cut is implicated in several systems as a
transcriptional repressor of developmentally regulated genes. In myeloid leukemia
cells, CDP/cut binding activity as assayed on the promoter of the
phagocyte-specific cytochrome heavy chain gene gp91-phox varies inversely with
expression of gp91-phox mRNA. We used two approaches to ascertain whether CDP/cut
serves as a repressor of gp91-phox gene expression. First, we used transient
transfection assays in 3T3 cells to demonstrate that the CDP/cut binding site
from the gp91-phox promoter acts as a negative regulatory element in artificial
promoter constructs. Second, we isolated a stable transformant of HL-60 myeloid
cells constitutively expressing transfected CDP/cut cDNA. Stable transformants
carrying expression vector alone or expressing CDP/cut mRNA were induced to
differentiate along the macrophage lineage with phorbol ester or along the
neutrophil lineage with dimethyl sulfoxide or retinoic acid/dimethylformamide.
Northern blot analysis was used to assess induction of mRNAs encoding gp91-phox, 
and the myeloid oxidase cytosolic components, p47 and p67. In the stable
transformant expressing transfected CDP/cut cDNA, gp91-phox induction was
selectively reduced, whereas morphologic differentiation and induction of mRNA
for myeloid oxidase components p47 and p67 were unaffected. These data provide
persuasive evidence that CDP/cut acts to repress the gp91-phox gene.

PMID: 7759529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Genomics. 1994 Nov 1;24(1):191-3.

Assignment of the human homologue of the Drosophila Cut homeobox gene (CUTL1) to 
band 7q22 by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Lemieux N(1), Zhang XX, Dufort D, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Pathologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Montréal,
Québec, Canada.

PMID: 7896281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jul 15;269(28):18453-62.

Isolation of two E-box binding factors that interact with the rat tyrosine
hydroxylase enhancer.

Yoon SO(1), Chikaraishi DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02111.

The enhancer of the rat tyrosine hydroxylase gene (TH) in PC8b cells is composed 
of the AP1 motif (TCATTCA, -205 to -199) and an overlapping 20-base pair dyad
symmetry element (TCAGAGGCAGGTGCCTGTGA, -201 to -182) whose core is an E-box. We 
have isolated two partial cDNA clones that encode factors which bind the TH-dyad.
One is rITF2 with a basic helix-loop-helix motif and the other is CDP2 with a
homeodomain. rITF2 is a rat homolog of human ITF2 (or E2-2), and CDP2 is a member
of a new family of homeoproteins defined by histidine as the 9th residue of the
recognition helix and by unique 64 amino acid repeats related to those of the
Drosophila cut gene. The binding affinity of CDP2 alone is relatively weak, but
it enhances the binding of rITF2 to the TH-dyad. In transfected F9 cells,
activation of a TH-driven reporter requires both rITF2 and CDP2, suggesting that 
the proteins may functionally interact. However, rITF2 and CDP2 are not
restricted to TH-expressing tissues; hence they may not be involved in the
tissue-specific expression of TH. In addition, CDP2 is phosphorylated in vitro
and in vivo.

PMID: 7913462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jan 21;269(3):2062-7.

Conserved cut repeats in the human cut homeodomain protein function as DNA
binding domains.

Harada R(1), Dufort D, Denis-Larose C, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, McGill University, Royal Victoria Hospital, Montreal, 
Québec, Canada.

Homeodomain-containing proteins are believed to function as sequence-specific DNA
binding proteins, regulating gene expression. Specificity of sequence recognition
is conferred by the homeodomain acting either alone or in conjunction with other 
conserved DNA binding domains as is the case for Pou domain and Paired domain
proteins. The recent isolation of cDNAs encoding mammalian homologues of the
Drosophila Cut homeodomain protein has revealed that the 72-amino acid Cut
Repeats are conserved in evolution. We have investigated the biochemical activity
of human Cut Repeats by expressing fusion proteins containing glutathione
S-transferase linked to various combinations of Cut Repeats and Cut homeodomain. 
We show by gel retardation and DNase footprinting assays that Cut Repeats can
function as DNA binding domains, either independently or in cooperation with the 
homeodomain. The binding affinity (KD) to a specific recognition site was
estimated to be 8 x 10(-9) M for Cut Repeat 3 and 4 x 10(-10) M for Cut Repeat 1.
When both Cut Repeat 3 and the Cut homeodomain were present in the fusion
protein, the binding affinity was increased to 4 x 10(-11) M. These results
define a novel class of proteins that contain in addition to the homeodomain a
second conserved protein domain, the Cut Repeats, that also function as a DNA
binding domain.

PMID: 7904999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Genomics. 1993 Mar;15(3):695-6.

Regional localization of the CCAAT displacement protein gene (CUTL1) to 7q22 by
analysis of somatic cell hybrids.

Scherer SW(1), Neufeld EJ, Lievens PM, Orkin SH, Kim J, Tsui LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.

PMID: 8468066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Nat Genet. 1992 Apr;1(1):50-5.

Human CCAAT displacement protein is homologous to the Drosophila homeoprotein,
cut.

Neufeld EJ(1), Skalnik DG, Lievens PM, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

Human CCAAT displacement protein (CDP), a putative repressor of developmentally
regulated gene expression, was purified from HeLa cells by DNA binding-site
affinity chromatography. cDNA encoding CDP was obtained by immunoscreening a
lambda gt11 library with antibody raised against purified protein. The deduced
primary amino acid sequence of CDP reveals remarkable homology to Drosophila cut 
with respect to the presence of a unique homeodomain and "cut repeats". As cut
participates in determination of cell fate in several tissues in Drosophila, the 
similarity predicts a broad role for CDP in mammalian development.

PMID: 1301999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


