
1. Acta Chim Slov. 2016;63(1):186-92.

Synthesis, Structure and Electrochemistry of Tetranuclear Oxygen-Centered
Copper(II) Clusters with Acetylacetone and Benz-pyrazole Hydrolyzed Derivatives
as Ligand.

Vafazadeh R, Willis AC.

Two copper(II) clusters Cu4OCl6(pyrazole)4, 1, and Cu4OBr6(Br-pyrazole)4, 2, have
been synthesized by reacting acetylacetone and benzohydrazide (1:1 ratio) with
CuX2 (X = Cl for 1 and X= Br for 2) in methanol solutions. The structures of both
clusters have been established by X-ray crystallography. The clusters contain
four Cu, one O, six µ2-X atoms, and four pyrazole ligands. The pyrazoles was
prepared in situ by the reaction of acetylacetone with benzohydrazide in methanol
under reflux. In 2, the methine hydrogens of the pyrazole ligands have been
replaced by bromine atoms. The four copper atoms encapsulate the central O atom
in a tetrahedral arrangement. All copper atoms are five-coordinate and have
similar coordination environments with slightly distorted trigonal bipyramidal
geometry. The cyclic voltammogram of the clusters 1 and 2 show a one-electron
quasi-reversible reduction wave in the region 0.485 to 0.731 V, and a
one-electron quasi-reversible oxidation wave in the region 0.767 to 0.898 V. In
1, one irreversible oxidative response is observed on the positive of side of the
voltammogram at 1.512 V and this can be assigned to Cu(II) to Cu(III) oxidation.

PMID: 26970804  [PubMed - in process]


2. Dalton Trans. 2015 Nov 28;44(44):19111-25. doi: 10.1039/c5dt03270a. Epub 2015 Oct
19.

Counter-ligand control of the electronic structure in dinuclear
copper-tetrakisguanidine complexes.

Ziesak A(1), Wesp T, Hübner O, Kaifer E, Wadepohl H, Himmel HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Anorganisch-Chemisches Institut, Ruprecht-Karls Universität Heidelberg, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 270, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
hans-jorg.himmel@aci.uni-heidelberg.de.

The redox-active GFA (Guanidino-Functionalized Aromatic compound)
1,4,5,8-tetrakis(tetramethylguanidino)-naphthalene (6) is used to synthesize new 
dinuclear copper complexes of the formula [6(CuX2)2] with different electronic
structures. With X = OAc, a dinuclear Cu(II) complex of the neutral GFA is
obtained (electronic structure [Cu(II)-GFA-Cu(II)], two unpaired electrons), and 
with X = Br a diamagnetic dinuclear Cu(I) complex of the dicationic GFA
(electronic structure [Cu(I)-GFA(2+)-Cu(I)], closed-shell singlet state). The
different electronic structures lead to significant differences in the optical,
structural and magnetic properties of the complexes. Furthermore, the complex
[6(CuI)2](2+) (electronic structure [Cu(I)-GFA(2+)-Cu(I)], closed-shell singlet
state) is synthesized by reaction of 6(2+) with two equivalents of CuI. Slow
decomposition of this complex in solution leads to the fluorescent dye
2,7-bis(dimethylamino)-1,3,6,8-tetraazapyrene. In an improved synthesis of this
tetraazapyrene, 6 is reacted with CuBr in the presence of dioxygen. Quantum
chemical calculations show that the addition of counter-ligands to the trigonal
planar Cu(I) atoms of [6(CuI)2](2+) favors or disfavors one of the electronic
structures, depending on the nature of the counter-ligand.

PMID: 26477859  [PubMed - in process]


3. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Oct 12;36(1):50-69. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00861-15.

Hepatic Long Intergenic Noncoding RNAs: High Promoter Conservation and Dynamic,
Sex-Dependent Transcriptional Regulation by Growth Hormone.

Melia T(1), Hao P(1), Yilmaz F(1), Waxman DJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology and
Bioinformatics Program, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology and
Bioinformatics Program, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA djw@bu.edu.

Long intergenic noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs) are increasingly recognized as key
chromatin regulators, yet few studies have characterized lincRNAs in a single
tissue under diverse conditions. Here, we analyzed 45 mouse liver RNA sequencing 
(RNA-Seq) data sets collected under diverse conditions to systematically
characterize 4,961 liver lincRNAs, 59% of them novel, with regard to gene
structures, species conservation, chromatin accessibility, transcription factor
binding, and epigenetic states. To investigate the potential for functionality,
we focused on the responses of the liver lincRNAs to growth hormone stimulation, 
which imparts clinically relevant sex differences to hepatic metabolism and liver
disease susceptibility. Sex-biased expression characterized 247 liver lincRNAs,
with many being nuclear RNA enriched and regulated by growth hormone. The
sex-biased lincRNA genes are enriched for nearby and correspondingly sex-biased
accessible chromatin regions, as well as sex-biased binding sites for growth
hormone-regulated transcriptional activators (STAT5, hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 
[HNF6], FOXA1, and FOXA2) and transcriptional repressors (CUX2 and BCL6).
Repression of female-specific lincRNAs in male liver, but not that of
male-specific lincRNAs in female liver, was associated with enrichment of
H3K27me3-associated inactive states and poised (bivalent) enhancer states.
Strikingly, we found that liver-specific lincRNA gene promoters are more highly
species conserved and have a significantly higher frequency of proximal binding
by liver transcription factors than liver-specific protein-coding gene promoters.
Orthologs for many liver lincRNAs were identified in one or more supraprimates,
including two rat lincRNAs showing the same growth hormone-regulated, sex-biased 
expression as their mouse counterparts. This integrative analysis of liver
lincRNA chromatin states, transcription factor occupancy, and growth hormone
regulation provides novel insights into the expression of sex-specific lincRNAs
and their potential for regulation of sex differences in liver physiology and
disease.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4702595 [Available on 2016-06-18]
PMID: 26459762  [PubMed - in process]


4. J Biol Chem. 2015 Sep 11;290(37):22520-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.651042. Epub
2015 Jul 28.

CUX2 protein functions as an accessory factor in the repair of oxidative DNA
damage.

Pal R(1), Ramdzan ZM(1), Kaur S(2), Duquette PM(3), Marcotte R(4), Leduy L(1),
Davoudi S(5), Lamarche-Vane N(3), Iulianella A(6), Nepveu A(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the Goodman Cancer Research Centre and. (2)From the Goodman Cancer
Research Centre and Departments of Biochemistry. (3)Anatomy and Cell Biology,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 1A3, Canada. (4)Princess Margaret Cancer 
Centre, University Health Network, Toronto M5G 1L7, Canada, and. (5)Departments
of Biochemistry. (6)Department of Medical Neuroscience, Dalhousie University,
Life Science Research Institute, Halifax B3H 4R2, Canada. (7)From the Goodman
Cancer Research Centre and Departments of Biochemistry, Medicine, Oncology, and
alain.nepveu@mcgill.ca.

CUX1 and CUX2 proteins are characterized by the presence of three highly similar 
regions called Cut repeats 1, 2, and 3. Although CUX1 is ubiquitously expressed, 
CUX2 plays an important role in the specification of neuronal cells and continues
to be expressed in postmitotic neurons. Cut repeats from the CUX1 protein were
recently shown to stimulate 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase 1 (OGG1), an enzyme that
removes oxidized purines from DNA and introduces a single strand break through
its apurinic/apyrimidinic lyase activity to initiate base excision repair. Here, 
we investigated whether CUX2 plays a similar role in the repair of oxidative DNA 
damage. Cux2 knockdown in embryonic cortical neurons increased levels of
oxidative DNA damage. In vitro, Cut repeats from CUX2 increased the binding of
OGG1 to 7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine-containing DNA and stimulated both the
glycosylase and apurinic/apyrimidinic lyase activities of OGG1. Genetic
inactivation in mouse embryo fibroblasts or CUX2 knockdown in HCC38 cells delayed
DNA repair and increased DNA damage. Conversely, ectopic expression of Cut
repeats from CUX2 accelerated DNA repair and reduced levels of oxidative DNA
damage. These results demonstrate that CUX2 functions as an accessory factor that
stimulates the repair of oxidative DNA damage. Neurons produce a high level of
reactive oxygen species because of their dependence on aerobic oxidation of
glucose as their source of energy. Our results suggest that the persistent
expression of CUX2 in postmitotic neurons contributes to the maintenance of
genome integrity through its stimulation of oxidative DNA damage repair.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4566227 [Available on 2016-09-11]
PMID: 26221032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Sep;29(9):1286-302. doi: 10.1210/me.2015-1028. Epub 2015 Jul
28.

Cross Talk Between GH-Regulated Transcription Factors HNF6 and CUX2 in Adult
Mouse Liver.

Conforto TL(1), Steinhardt GF 4th(1), Waxman DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology and
Bioinformatics Program, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215.

Hepatocyte-enriched nuclear factor (HNF)6 and CUX2 are GH and STAT5-regulated
homeobox transcription factors. CUX2 shows female-specific expression and
contributes to liver sex differences by repressing many male-biased genes and
inducing many female-biased genes, whereas HNF6 is expressed at similar levels in
male and female liver. In cell-based transfection studies, CUX2 inhibited HNF6
transcriptional regulation of the sex-specific gene promoters CYP2C11 and
CYP2C12, blocking HNF6 repression of CYP2C11 and HNF6 activation of CYP2C12.
These inhibitory actions of CUX2 can be explained by competition for HNF6 DNA
binding, as demonstrated by in vitro EMSA analysis and validated in vivo by
global analysis of the HNF6 cistrome. Approximately 40 000 HNF6-binding sites
were identified in mouse liver chromatin, including several thousand sites
showing significant sex differences in HNF6 binding. These sex-biased
HNF6-binding sites showed strong enrichment for correspondingly sex-biased DNase 
hypersensitive sites and for proximity to genes showing local sex-biased
chromatin marks and a corresponding sex-biased expression. Further, approximately
90% of the genome-wide binding sites for CUX2 were also bound by HNF6. These
HNF6/CUX2 common binding sites were enriched for genomic regions more accessible 
in male than in female mouse liver chromatin and showed strongest enrichment for 
male-biased genes, suggesting CUX2 displacement of HNF6 as a mechanism to explain
the observed CUX2 repression of male-biased genes in female liver. HNF6 binding
was sex independent at a majority of its binding sites, and HNF6 peaks were
frequently associated with cobinding by multiple other liver transcription
factors, consistent with HNF6 playing a global regulatory role in both male and
female liver.

PMCID: PMC4552435 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26218442  [PubMed - in process]


6. Inorg Chem. 2015 Jun 15;54(12):5624-33. doi: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.5b00795. Epub 
2015 Jun 4.

Synthesis and Reactions of 3d Metal Complexes with the Bulky Alkoxide Ligand
[OC(t)Bu2Ph].

Bellow JA(1), Yousif M(1), Fang D(1,)(2), Kratz EG(1), Cisneros GA(1), Groysman
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan 48202,
United States. (2)Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin 53706, United States.

Treatment of NiCl2(dme) and NiBr2(dme) (dme = dimethoxyethane) with 2 equiv of
LiOR (OR = OC(t)Bu2Ph) forms the distorted trigonal planar complexes
[NiLiX(OR)2(THF)2] (THF = tetrahydrofuran) 5 (X = Cl) and 6 (X = Br). The
reaction of CuX2 (X = Cl, Br) with 2 equiv of LiOR affords the Cu(I) product
Cu4(OR)4 (7). The same product can be obtained using the Cu(I) starting material 
CuCl. NMR studies indicated that the reduction of Cu(II) to Cu(I) is accompanied 
by the oxidation of the alkoxide RO(-) to form the alkoxy radical RO(), which
subsequently forms tert-butyl phenyl ketone by ß-scission. Treatment of compounds
1-4 ([M2Li2Cl2(OR)4], M = Cr-Co) with thallium hexafluorophosphate allowed the
isolation of the distorted tetrahedral complexes of the form M(OR)2(THF)2 for M =
Mn (8), Fe (9), and Co (10). Cyclic voltammetry performed on compounds 8-10
demonstrated irreversible oxidations for all complexes, with the iron complex 9
being the most reducing. Complex 9 shows a reactivity toward PhIO and Ph3SbS to
form the corresponding dinuclear iron(III) complexes Fe2(O)(OR)4(THF)2 (11) and
Fe2(S)(OR)4(THF)2 (12), respectively. X-ray structural studies were performed,
showing that the Fe-O-Fe angle for complex 11 is 176.4(1)° and that the Fe-S-Fe
angle for complex 12 is 164.83(3)°.

PMID: 26043187  [PubMed]


7. Org Biomol Chem. 2015 Jun 28;13(24):6690-3. doi: 10.1039/c5ob00520e.

CuX(2)-mediated oxybromination/aminochlorination of unsaturated amides: synthesis
of iminolactones and lactams.

Zhang ZQ(1), Liu F.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Translational Research and Therapy for
Neuro-Psycho-Diseases and Department of Medicinal Chemistry, College of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Soochow University, 199 Ren-Ai Road, Suzhou, Jiangsu
215123, People's Republic of China. fliu2@suda.edu.cn.

We report herein a CuX2-mediated halocyclization of <U+03B3>,d-unsaturated amides for
the synthesis of functionalized iminolactones and lactams respectively under mild
reaction conditions. Mechanism studies indicated that N-attack cyclization was
via a radical route while oxycyclization was via a nucleophilic attack on the
activated C=C bond.

PMID: 26007699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Neuron. 2015 May 20;86(4):1100-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.04.020.

Cux2-positive radial glial cells generate diverse subtypes of neocortical
projection neurons and macroglia.

Eckler MJ(1), Nguyen TD(2), McKenna WL(1), Fastow BL(1), Guo C(1), Rubenstein
JL(3), Chen B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA. (2)Department of Molecular, Cell and
Developmental Biology, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA;
Department of Biological Sciences, San Jose State University, San Jose, CA 95192,
USA. (3)Department of Psychiatry and Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 95158, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA. Electronic address: bchen@ucsc.edu.

We recently published genetic lineage-tracing experiments using the Fezf2 and
Cux2 loci. These experiments demonstrated that at both the clonal and population 
levels Fezf2(+) RGCs are multipotent and that at the population level Cux2(+)
RGCs are multipotent. Here, we extend our work on the lineages of Fezf2(+) and
Cux2(+) RGCs. Clonal analysis of E10.5 neocortical progenitors suggests that
most, if not all, Cux2(+) and Fezf2(+) RGCs generate diverse projection neuron
subtypes located throughout layers 2-6. These results support our previous
conclusion that both Fezf2(+) and Cux2(+) RGCs are multipotent neocortical
progenitors. This Matters Arising Response paper addresses the Gil-Sanz et al.
(2015) Matters Arising paper, published concurrently in Neuron.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4441766 [Available on 2016-05-20]
PMID: 25996137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Neuron. 2015 May 20;86(4):1091-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.04.019.

Lineage Tracing Using Cux2-Cre and Cux2-CreERT2 Mice.

Gil-Sanz C(1), Espinosa A(1), Fregoso SP(2), Bluske KK(1), Cunningham CL(1),
Martinez-Garay I(3), Zeng H(4), Franco SJ(5), Müller U(6).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience Department, Dorris Neuroscience Center,
The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (2)Graduate Program in
Cell Biology, Stem Cells and Development, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. (3)Department of Physiology, Anatomy, and
Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QX, UK. (4)Allen Institute for Brain 
Science, Seattle, WA 98103, USA. (5)Graduate Program in Cell Biology, Stem Cells 
and Development, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045,
USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
CO 80045, USA; Program of Pediatric Stem Cell Biology, Children's Hospital
Colorado, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. Electronic address: santos.franco@ucdenver.edu. 
(6)Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience Department, Dorris Neuroscience Center,
The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. Electronic address:
umueller@scripps.edu.

Using genetic fate-mapping with Cux2-Cre and Cux2-CreERT2 mice we demonstrated
that the neocortical ventricular zone (VZ) contains radial glial cells (RGCs)
with restricted fate potentials (Franco et al., 2012). Using the same mouse
lines, Guo et al. (2013) concluded that the neocortical VZ does not contain
lineage-restricted RGCs. We now show that the recombination pattern in
Cux2-Cre/CreERT2 mice depends on genetic background and breeding strategies. We
provide evidence that Guo et al. likely reached different conclusions because
they worked with transgenic sublines with drifted transgene expression patterns. 
In Cux2-Cre and Cux2-CreERT2 mice that recapitulate the endogenous Cux2
expression pattern, the vast majority of fate-mapped neurons express Satb2 but
not Ctip2, confirming that a restricted subset of all neocortical projection
neurons belongs to the Cux2 lineage. This Matters Arising paper is in response to
Guo et al. (2013), published in Neuron. See also the Matters Arising Response
paper by Eckler et al. (2015), published concurrently with this Matters Arising
in Neuron.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4455040 [Available on 2016-05-20]
PMID: 25996136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Inorg Chem. 2015 Mar 2;54(5):2117-27. doi: 10.1021/ic502367d. Epub 2015 Feb 9.

p-Rich s(2)P-heterocycles: bent <U+03B7>(1)-P- and µ(2)-P-coordinated
1,3-benzazaphosphole copper(I) halide complexes.

Ghalib M(1), Jones PG, Schulzke C, Sziebert D, Nyulászi L, Heinicke JW.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie - Anorganische Chemie, EMA-Universität Greifswald ,
17487 Greifswald, Germany.

The reaction of 1-neopentyl-1,3-benzazaphosphole 1 with CuCl, CuBr, or Cu(SMe2)Br
in THF at room temperature provides sparingly soluble
[Cu7(µ(2)-L6)(µ(2)-X7)](+)[CuX2](-) cluster complexes 2a,b (L indicates
coordinated 1, a X = Cl, b X = Br), with loosely bound THF, in high yields. The
conversions proceed via transient THF-soluble labile [(L2CuX)2] complexes.
Separation before complete conversion, combined with suitable conditions for
crystallization, allowed these intermediates to be trapped. Depending on the
reactant ratios, crystals of the clusters or of dimeric L2CuX complexes were
formed. The crystal structure analyses of 2a·4THF and the dimers 3b
[{Cu(<U+03B7>(1)-L)2(µ(2)-Br)}2], 4b [{Cu(µ(2)-L)(<U+03B7>(1)-L)(<U+03BA>Br)}2], 5a·2MeOH, and
5b·2MeOH [{Cu(µ(2)-L)(<U+03B7>(1)-L)(<U+03BA>X···HOMe)}2] generally display µ(2)-P- and/or
tilted <U+03B7>(1)-P-coordination, contrasting with the preference for the <U+03B7>(1)-P
in-plane coordination mode of phosphinine ligands in their copper(I) halide
complexes. DFT studies of geometry-optimized monomers LCuBr, L(CuBr)2, L2CuBr,
and the dimers 3b and 4b, calculated at the <U+03C9>B97xD/cc-PVDZ level, suggest that
weak competing interactions with the solvent THF and the entropy factor of the
dimerization result in lability and a subtle balance between the different
complexes in solution, whereas the particular coordination observed in the
crystals is attributable to conservation of the delocalized p-system in the
ligand. The HOMO of 4b is composed of Cu d orbitals and the p-type HOMO of the
bridging ligand. Interestingly, despite the rather short Cu···Cu interatomic
separation (2.726 <U+01FA>), no bond critical point could be located in 4b, indicating
the absence of weak cuprophilic interactions in this compound.

PMID: 25661753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Ann Rheum Dis. 2016 Apr;75(4):652-9. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2014-206191. Epub
2015 Feb 2.

Genome-wide association study of clinically defined gout identifies multiple risk
loci and its association with clinical subtypes.

Matsuo H(1), Yamamoto K(2), Nakaoka H(3), Nakayama A(4), Sakiyama M(5), Chiba
T(1), Takahashi A(6), Nakamura T(7), Nakashima H(8), Takada Y(9), Danjoh I(10),
Shimizu S(1), Abe J(1), Kawamura Y(1), Terashige S(1), Ogata H(1), Tatsukawa
S(1), Yin G(11), Okada R(12), Morita E(12), Naito M(12), Tokumasu A(13), Onoue
H(14), Iwaya K(15), Ito T(16), Takada T(17), Inoue K(18), Kato Y(19), Nakamura
Y(20), Sakurai Y(8), Suzuki H(17), Kanai Y(21), Hosoya T(22), Hamajima N(23),
Inoue I(3), Kubo M(24), Ichida K(25), Ooyama H(13), Shimizu T(26), Shinomiya
N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Physiology and Bio-Nano Medicine, National Defense
Medical College, Tokorozawa, Saitama, Japan. (2)Department of Medical Chemistry, 
Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, Fukuoka, Japan. (3)Division of
Human Genetics, Department of Integrated Genetics, National Institute of
Genetics, Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan. (4)Department of Integrative Physiology and
Bio-Nano Medicine, National Defense Medical College, Tokorozawa, Saitama, Japan
Medical Group, Headquarters, Iwo-to Air Base Group, Japan Air Self-Defense Force,
Tokyo, Japan. (5)Department of Integrative Physiology and Bio-Nano Medicine,
National Defense Medical College, Tokorozawa, Saitama, Japan Department of
Dermatology, National Defense Medical College, Tokorozawa, Saitama, Japan.
(6)Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, 
RIKEN, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan. (7)Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, Center 
for Integrative Medical Sciences, RIKEN, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan Laboratory for
Mathematics, National Defense Medical College, Tokorozawa, Saitama, Japan.
(8)Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, National Defense Medical 
College, Tokorozawa, Saitama, Japan. (9)The Central Research Institute, National 
Defense Medical College, Tokorozawa, Saitama, Japan. (10)Cell Engineering
Division, RIKEN BioResource Center, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan Department of
Integrative Genomics, Tohoku Medical Megabank Organization, Tohoku University,
Sendai, Miyagi, Japan. (11)Department of Preventive Medicine, Nagoya University
Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan Department of Nutritional
Sciences, Faculty of Health and Welfare, Seinan Jo Gakuin University, Fukuoka,
Japan. (12)Department of Preventive Medicine, Nagoya University Graduate School
of Medicine, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan. (13)Ryougoku East Gate Clinic, Tokyo, Japan.
(14)Department of Internal Medicine, National Defense Medical College,
Tokorozawa, Saitama, Japan. (15)Department of Pathology, National Defense Medical
College, Tokorozawa, Saitama, Japan. (16)Department of Internal Medicine,
Self-Defense Forces Central Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (17)Department of Pharmacy,
The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (18)Department of
Biopharmaceutics, School of Pharmacy, Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life
Sciences, Tokyo, Japan. (19)Faculty of Pharmacy, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa,
Ishikawa, Japan. (20)Cell Engineering Division, RIKEN BioResource Center,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. (21)Division of Bio-system Pharmacology, Department of
Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(22)Division of Kidney and Hypertension, Department of Internal Medicine, Jikei
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan Department of Pathophysiology and
Therapy in Chronic Kidney Disease, Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan. (23)Department of Healthcare Administration, Nagoya University Graduate
School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan. (24)Laboratory for Genotyping Development,
Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, RIKEN, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.
(25)Division of Kidney and Hypertension, Department of Internal Medicine, Jikei
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan Department of Pathophysiology, Tokyo 
University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, Tokyo, Japan. (26)Midorigaoka Hospital,
Osaka, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Gout, caused by hyperuricaemia, is a multifactorial disease. Although 
genome-wide association studies (GWASs) of gout have been reported, they included
self-reported gout cases in which clinical information was insufficient.
Therefore, the relationship between genetic variation and clinical subtypes of
gout remains unclear. Here, we first performed a GWAS of clinically defined gout 
cases only.
METHODS: A GWAS was conducted with 945 patients with clinically defined gout and 
1213 controls in a Japanese male population, followed by replication study of
1048 clinically defined cases and 1334 controls.
RESULTS: Five gout susceptibility loci were identified at the genome-wide
significance level (p<5.0×10(-8)), which contained well-known urate transporter
genes (ABCG2 and SLC2A9) and additional genes: rs1260326 (p=1.9×10(-12); OR=1.36)
of GCKR (a gene for glucose and lipid metabolism), rs2188380 (p=1.6×10(-23);
OR=1.75) of MYL2-CUX2 (genes associated with cholesterol and diabetes mellitus)
and rs4073582 (p=6.4×10(-9); OR=1.66) of CNIH-2 (a gene for regulation of
glutamate signalling). The latter two are identified as novel gout loci.
Furthermore, among the identified single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), we
demonstrated that the SNPs of ABCG2 and SLC2A9 were differentially associated
with types of gout and clinical parameters underlying specific subtypes (renal
underexcretion type and renal overload type). The effect of the risk allele of
each SNP on clinical parameters showed significant linear relationships with the 
ratio of the case-control ORs for two distinct types of gout (r=0.96
[p=4.8×10(-4)] for urate clearance and r=0.96 [p=5.0×10(-4)] for urinary urate
excretion).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide clues to better understand the pathogenesis of 
gout and will be useful for development of companion diagnostics.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 25646370  [PubMed - in process]


12. Hippocampus. 2015 Feb;25(2):253-67. doi: 10.1002/hipo.22370. Epub 2014 Oct 3.

Cux2 activity defines a subpopulation of perinatal neurogenic progenitors in the 
hippocampus.

Yamada M(1), Clark J, McClelland C, Capaldo E, Ray A, Iulianella A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University,
Life Science Research Institute, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

The hippocampus arises from the medial region of the subventricular (SVZ) within 
the telencephalon. It is one of two regions in the postnatal brain that harbors
neural progenitors (NPs) capable of giving rise to new neurons. Neurogenesis in
the hippocampus is restricted to the subgranular zone (SGZ) of the dentate gyrus 
(DG) where it contributes to the generation of granule cell layer (gcl) neurons. 
It is thought that SGZ progenitors are heterogeneous, differing in their
morphology, expression profiles, and developmental potential, however it is
currently unknown whether they display differences in their developmental origins
and cell fate-restriction in the DG. Here we demonstrate that Cux2 is a marker
for SGZ progenitors and nascent granule cell neurons in the perinatal brain. Cux2
was expressed in the presumptive hippocampal forming region of the embryonic
forebrain from E14.5 onwards. At fetal stages, Cux2 was expressed in
early-forming Prox1(+) granule cell neurons as well as the SVZ of the DG germinal
matrix. In the postnatal brain, Cux2 was expressed in several types of
progenitors in the SGZ of the DG, including Nestin/Sox2 double-positive radial
glia, Sox2(+) cells that lacked a radial glial process, DCX(+) neuroblasts, and
Calretinin-expressing nascent neurons. Another domain characterized by a low
level of Cux2 expression emerged in Calbindin(+) neurons of the developing DG
blades. We used Cux2-Cre mice in genetic fate-mapping studies and showed almost
exclusive labeling of Calbindin-positive gcl neurons, but not in any progenitor
cell types or astroglia. This suggests that Cux2(+) progenitors directly
differentiate into gcl neurons and do not self-renew. Interestingly,
developmental profiling of cell fate revealed an outside-in formation of gcl
neurons in the DG, likely reflecting the activity of Cux2 in the germinative
matrices during DG formation and maturation. However, DG morphogenesis proceeded 
largely normally in hypomorphic Cux2 mutants lacking Cux2 expression. Taken
together we conclude that Cux2 expression reflects hippocampal neurogenesis and
identifies non-self-renewing NPs in the SGZ.

© 2014 The Authors Hippocampus Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4312975
PMID: 25252086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Circulation. 2014 Oct 7;130(15):1225-35. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.009892. 
Epub 2014 Aug 14.

Integrating genetic, transcriptional, and functional analyses to identify 5 novel
genes for atrial fibrillation.

Sinner MF, Tucker NR, Lunetta KL, Ozaki K, Smith JG, Trompet S, Bis JC, Lin H,
Chung MK, Nielsen JB, Lubitz SA, Krijthe BP, Magnani JW, Ye J, Gollob MH, Tsunoda
T, Müller-Nurasyid M, Lichtner P, Peters A, Dolmatova E, Kubo M, Smith JD, Psaty 
BM, Smith NL, Jukema JW, Chasman DI, Albert CM, Ebana Y, Furukawa T, Macfarlane
PW, Harris TB, Darbar D, Dörr M, Holst AG, Svendsen JH, Hofman A, Uitterlinden
AG, Gudnason V, Isobe M, Malik R, Dichgans M, Rosand J, Van Wagoner DR;
METASTROKE Consortium; AFGen Consortium, Benjamin EJ, Milan DJ, Melander O,
Heckbert SR, Ford I, Liu Y, Barnard J, Olesen MS, Stricker BH, Tanaka T, Kääb S, 
Ellinor PT.

BACKGROUND: Atrial fibrillation (AF) affects >30 million individuals worldwide
and is associated with an increased risk of stroke, heart failure, and death. AF 
is highly heritable, yet the genetic basis for the arrhythmia remains
incompletely understood.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To identify new AF-related genes, we used a multifaceted
approach, combining large-scale genotyping in 2 ethnically distinct populations, 
cis-eQTL (expression quantitative trait loci) mapping, and functional validation.
Four novel loci were identified in individuals of European descent near the genes
NEURL (rs12415501; relative risk [RR]=1.18; 95% confidence interval [CI],
1.13-1.23; P=6.5×10(-16)), GJA1 (rs13216675; RR=1.10; 95% CI, 1.06-1.14;
P=2.2×10(-8)), TBX5 (rs10507248; RR=1.12; 95% CI, 1.08-1.16; P=5.7×10(-11)), and 
CAND2 (rs4642101; RR=1.10; 95% CI, 1.06-1.14; P=9.8×10(-9)). In Japanese, novel
loci were identified near NEURL (rs6584555; RR=1.32; 95% CI, 1.26-1.39;
P=2.0×10(-25)) and CUX2 (rs6490029; RR=1.12; 95% CI, 1.08-1.16; P=3.9×10(-9)).
The top single-nucleotide polymorphisms or their proxies were identified as
cis-eQTLs for the genes CAND2 (P=2.6×10(-19)), GJA1 (P=2.66×10(-6)), and TBX5
(P=1.36×10(-5)). Knockdown of the zebrafish orthologs of NEURL and CAND2 resulted
in prolongation of the atrial action potential duration (17% and 45%,
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified 5 novel loci for AF. Our results expand the
diversity of genetic pathways implicated in AF and provide novel molecular
targets for future biological and pharmacological investigation.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4190011
PMID: 25124494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 Feb;75(2):163-72. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22215. Epub 2014 Jul 30.

Cux1 and Cux2 selectively target basal and apical dendritic compartments of layer
II-III cortical neurons.

Cubelos B(1), Briz CG, Esteban-Ortega GM, Nieto M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular, Centro de Biología Molecular 'Severo
Ochoa', Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, UAM-CSIC, Nicolás Cabrera, 1, Madrid,
28049, Spain.

A number of recent reports implicate the differential regulation of apical and
basal dendrites in autism disorders and in the higher functions of the human
brain. They show that apical and basal dendrites are functionally specialized and
that mechanisms regulating their development have important consequences for
neuron function. The molecular identity of layer II-III neurons of the cerebral
cortex is determined by the overlapping expression of Cux1 and Cux2. We
previously showed that both Cux1 and Cux2 are necessary and nonredundant for
normal dendrite development of layer II-III neurons. Loss of function of either
gene reduced dendrite arbors, while overexpression increased dendritic complexity
and suggested additive functions. We herein characterize the function of Cux1 and
Cux2 in the development of apical and basal dendrites. By in vivo loss and gain
of function analysis, we show that while the expression level of either Cux1 or
Cux2 influences both apical and basal dendrites, they have distinct effects.
Changes in Cux1 result in a marked effect on the development of the basal
compartment whereas modulation of Cux2 has a stronger influence on the apical
compartment. These distinct effects of Cux genes might account for the functional
diversification of layer II-III neurons into different subpopulations, possibly
with distinct connectivity patterns and modes of neuron response. Our data
suggest that by their differential effects on basal and apical dendrites, Cux1
and Cux2 can promote the integration of layer II-III neurons in the intracortical
networks in highly specific ways.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25059644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Org Biomol Chem. 2014 Aug 7;12(29):5509-16. doi: 10.1039/c4ob01027b.

Synthesis and characterization of bisoxazolines- and pybox-copper(II) complexes
and their application in the coupling of a-carbonyls with functionalized amines.

Jia WG(1), Li DD, Dai YC, Zhang H, Yan LQ, Sheng EH, Wei Y, Mu XL, Huang KW.

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry and Materials Science, Center for Nano Science and
Technology, The Key Laboratory of Functional Molecular Solids, Ministry of
Education, Anhui Laboratory of Molecular-Based Materials, Anhui Normal
University, Wuhu, 241000, China. wgjiasy@mail.ahnu.edu.cn
shengeh@mail.ahnu.edu.cn.

Binuclear complexes [{(DMOX)CuCl}2(µ-Cl)2] (1), mononuclear complexes
[(DMOX)CuBr2] (2) (DMOX =
4,5-dihydro-2-(4,5-dihydro-4,4-dimethyloxazol-2-yl)-4,4-dimethyloxazole) and the 
pybox Cu(II) complex [(Dm-Pybox)CuBr2] (3) (Dm-Pybox =
2,6-bis[4',4'-dimethyloxazolin-2'-yl]pyridine) were obtained by reactions of CuX2
(X = Cl, Br) with DMOX and Dm-Pybox ligands, respectively. The molecular
structures of 1, 2 and 3 have been determined by single-crystal X-ray diffraction
analyses. The complexes 2 and 3 are efficient in catalyzing a-amination of
ketones and esters through a-bromo carbonyl intermediate. The procedures are
environmentally benign methods using molecular oxygen as an oxidant with water as
the only byproduct.

PMID: 24948178  [PubMed]


16. Front Syst Neurosci. 2014 May 23;8:98. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2014.00098. eCollection
2014.

Characterization of claustral neurons by comparative gene expression profiling
and dye-injection analyses.

Watakabe A(1), Ohsawa S(2), Ichinohe N(3), Rockland KS(4), Yamamori T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Brain Biology, National Institute for Basic Biology Okazaki, Japan
; Department of Basic Biology, The Graduate University for Advanced Studies
(Sokendai) Hayama, Japan. (2)Division of Brain Biology, National Institute for
Basic Biology Okazaki, Japan. (3)Department of Ultrastructural Research, National
Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, National Institute of Neuroscience Kodaira,
Japan. (4)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Boston University School of
Medicine Boston, MA, USA.

The identity of the claustrum as a part of cerebral cortex, and in particular of 
the adjacent insular cortex, has been investigated by connectivity features and
patterns of gene expression. In the present paper, we mapped the cortical and
claustral expression of several cortical genes in rodent and macaque monkey
brains (nurr1, latexin, cux2, and netrinG2) to further assess shared features
between cortex and claustrum. In mice, these genes were densely expressed in the 
claustrum, but very sparsely in the cortex and not present in the striatum. To
test whether the cortical vs. claustral cell types can be distinguished by
co-expression of these genes, we performed a panel of double ISH in mouse and
macaque brain. NetrinG2 and nurr1 genes were co-expressed across entire cortex
and claustrum, but cux2 and nurr1 were co-expressed only in the insular cortex
and claustrum. Latexin was expressed, in the macaque, only in the claustrum. The 
nurr1 (+) claustral neurons expressed VGluT1, a marker for cortical glutamatergic
cells and send cortical projections. Taken together, our data suggest a partial
commonality between claustral neurons and a subtype of cortical neurons in the
monkey brain. Moreover, in the embryonic (E110) macaque brain, many nurr1 (+)
neurons were scattered in the white matter between the claustrum and the insular 
cortex, possibly representing their migratory history. In a second set of
experiments, we injected Lucifer Yellow intracellularly in mouse and rat slices
to investigate whether dendrites of insular and claustral neurons can cross the
border of the two brain regions. Dendrites of claustral neurons did not invade
the overlying insular territory. In summary, gene expression profile of the
claustrum is similar to that of the neocortex, in both rodent and macaque brains,
but with modifications in density of expression and cellular co-localization of
specific genes.

PMCID: PMC4033163
PMID: 24904319  [PubMed]


17. J Org Chem. 2014 May 16;79(10):4704-11. doi: 10.1021/jo500377v. Epub 2014 May 5.

Transition metal-catalyzed cascade cyclization of aryldiynes to halogenated
benzo[b]naphtho[2,1-d]thiophene derivatives.

Chen CC(1), Chen CM, Wu MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, National Sun Yat-sen University , Kaohsiung 80424,
Taiwan.

Treatment of 2-(2-(2-(2-substituted ethynyl)phenyl)ethynyl)thioanisoles (1) with 
5 mol % of Ph3PAuCl/AgSbF6 and 2 equiv of NIS at refluxing CH2Cl2 gave
iodo-substituted benzo[b]naphtho[2,1-d]thiophene (6) in good yields. Chloro- and 
bromo-substituted benzo[b]naphtho[2,1-d]thiophene derivatives (8 and 9) were also
generated by treating compound 1 with 5 mol % of PdX2 and 3 equiv of CuX2 at
refluxing THF.

PMID: 24750047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Inorg Chem. 2014 Apr 21;53(8):4117-29. doi: 10.1021/ic5000974. Epub 2014 Apr 9.

Single-step substitution of all the a, ß-positions in pyrrole: choice of
binuclear versus multinuclear complex of the novel polydentate ligand.

Ghorai D(1), Mani G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology - Kharagpur ,
Kharagpur, West Bengal India 721 302.

The a and ß-positions of pyrrole were substituted with
3,5-dimethylpyrazolylmethyl groups in a single step that involved the reaction
between 2,5-dimethylaminomethylpyrrole and 3,5-dimethylpyrazole-1-carbinol,
affording 2,3,4,5-tetrakis(3,5-dimethylpyrazol-1-ylmethyl)pyrrole LH in 40%
yield. The coordination chemistry of this new polydentate ligand LH was explored 
by synthesizing several Pd(II), Cu(I), and Ag(I) complexes. When LH was used as a
neutral ligand with [Pd(COD)Cl2], AgBF4, and CuX (X = Cl and I), compartmental
type binuclear Pd(II) and Ag(I) complexes such as
[Pd2Cl4(µ-C4HN-2,3,4,5-(CH2Me2pz)4-N,N,N,N)] and
[Ag2(µ-C4HN-2,3,4,5-(CH2Me2pz)4-N,N,N,N)(CH3CN)2](2+)[BF4(-)]2 and cage-like
copper(I) complexes [Cu2(µ-X)(µ-C4HN-2,3,4,5-(CH2Me2pz)4-N,N,N,N)](+)[CuX2](-) (X
= Cl and I) containing a halide ion bridging in a bent fashion were obtained,
respectively. Conversely, when the same metal precursors were treated with LH in 
the presence of n-BuLi, the multinuclear complexes
[Pd2Cl3(µ-C4N-2,3,4,5-(CH2Me2pz)4-N,N,N,N,N)],
[(Cu2(µ-I){µ-C4N-2,3,4,5-(CH2Me2pz)4-N,N,N,N,N})2Cu](+)I(-), and
[Ag4(µ-C4N-2,3,4,5-(CH2Me2pz)4-N,N,N,N)2](2+)[BF4(-)]2 were obtained. In
addition, the treatment of LH with [Pd(OAc)2] gave the mononuclear complex,
[Pd(OAc)(C4N-2,3,4,5-(CH2Me2pz)4-N,N,N)]. The chloride analogue of this complex
was obtained by the reaction of LH with [Pd(COD)Cl2] in the presence of
triethylamine. The structures of all complexes were determined by single-crystal 
X-ray diffraction analyses, which revealed interesting structural features,
including pyrazole arms adopting different conformations with respect to the
pyrrole ring plane and linear two- and three-coordinated copper(I) and silver(I) 
atoms exhibiting weak interactions between the metal and the pyrrolic carbon
atoms and Ag(I)···Ag(I) interactions. The observed shorter metal pyrrolide
nitrogen (M-N) bond distances and the elongation of the C-C double and single
bond distances of the pyrrole ring in these complexes probably indicates the
presence of p-donation/p-back bonding between the metal and the pyrrole ring.
These multinuclear complexes are novel, and their formations are favored by the
multidentating nature of the ligand LH.

PMID: 24712755  [PubMed]


19. J Comp Neurol. 2014 Sep 1;522(13):3106-19. doi: 10.1002/cne.23572. Epub 2014 Apr 
8.

Inversion of layer-specific cadherin expression profiles and maintenance of
cytoarchitectonic areas in the allocortex of the reeler mutant mouse.

Stoya G(1), Redies C, Schmid-Hertel N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy, Friedrich Schiller University School of Medicine, Jena
University Hospital, 07743, Jena, Germany.

Cadherins are calcium-depending cell adhesion proteins that play critical roles
in brain morphogenesis and wiring. They provide an adhesive code for the
development of cortical layers, due to their homophilic interactions and their
restricted spatiotemporal expression patterns. In the adult organism, cadherins
are involved in the maintenance and plasticity of neuronal circuits that play a
role in learning. A well-known model for studying corticogenesis is the reeler
mouse model. Numerous investigations of neocortical development suggest that, in 
the reeler mutant mouse, the lack of the protein Reelin results in cell-type and 
region-dependent changes of the neocortical layers. To investigate in detail how 
layer formation and regionalization is perturbed in the phylogenetically older
archicortex of the adult reeler mutant mouse, we studied the expression of 11
different cadherins (Cdh4, Cdh7, Cdh8, Cdh11, Pcdh1, Pcdh7, Pcdh8, Pcdh9, Pcdh10,
Pcdh17, and Pcdh19) and of the transcription factors ER81 and Cux2 by in situ
hybridization in the (peri-)archicortex. All cadherins studied show a
layer-specific expression in the (peri-)archicortex of the wildtype brain. In the
archicortex of the reeler mutant, the cadherin-expressing cell layers are
dispersed in the radial dimension, whereas in the periarchicortex the superficial
and deep layers are inverted, both in the adult and during development. Possibly,
this inversion relates to the histoarchitectural division of the reeler
entorhinal cortex into an external and an internal zone. The regionalized,
gradient-like expression of the cadherins is preserved in the reeler mutant
mouse.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24591110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Dev Biol. 2014 Apr 1;388(1):35-47. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.01.026. Epub 2014
Feb 7.

Cux2 acts as a critical regulator for neurogenesis in the olfactory epithelium of
vertebrates.

Wittmann W(1), Iulianella A(2), Gunhaga L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Umeå Centre for Molecular Medicine, Umeå University, Building 6M 4th floor,
901 87 Umeå, Sweden. Electronic address: walter.wittmann@umu.se. (2)Department of
Medical Neuroscience, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada. Electronic address: 
angelo.iulianella@dal.ca. (3)Umeå Centre for Molecular Medicine, Umeå University,
Building 6M 4th floor, 901 87 Umeå, Sweden. Electronic address:
lena.gunhaga@umu.se.

Signaling pathways and transcription factors are crucial regulators of vertebrate
neurogenesis, exerting their function in a spatial and temporal manner. Despite
recent advances in our understanding of the molecular regulation of embryonic
neurogenesis, little is known regarding how different signaling pathways interact
to tightly regulate this process during the development of neuroepithelia. To
address this, we have investigated the events lying upstream and downstream of a 
key neurogenic factor, the Cut-like homeodomain transcription factor-2 (Cux2),
during embryonic neurogenesis in chick and mouse. By using the olfactory
epithelium as a model for neurogenesis we have analyzed mouse embryos deficient
in Cux2, as well as chick embryos exposed to Cux2 silencing (si) RNA or a Cux2
over-expression construct. We provide evidence that enhanced BMP activity
increases Cux2 expression and suppresses olfactory neurogenesis in the chick
olfactory epithelium. In addition, our results show that up-regulation of Cux2,
either BMP-induced or ectopically over-expressed, reduce Delta1 expression and
suppress proliferation. Interestingly, the loss of Cux2 activity, using mutant
mice or siRNA in chick, also diminishes neurogenesis, Notch activity and cell
proliferation in the olfactory epithelium. Our results suggest that controlled
low levels of Cux2 activity are necessary for proper Notch signaling, maintenance
of the proliferative pool and ongoing neurogenesis in the olfactory epithelium.
Thus, we demonstrate a novel conserved mechanism in vertebrates in which levels
of Cux2 activity play an important role for ongoing neurogenesis in the olfactory
epithelium.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24512687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Neuron. 2013 Dec 4;80(5):1167-74. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.09.037.

Fezf2 expression identifies a multipotent progenitor for neocortical projection
neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes.

Guo C(1), Eckler MJ, McKenna WL, McKinsey GL, Rubenstein JL, Chen B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2013 Dec 4;80(5):1103-5.

Progenitor cells in the cerebral cortex sequentially generate distinct classes of
projection neurons. Recent work suggests the cortex may contain intrinsically
fate-restricted progenitors marked by expression of Cux2. However, the
heterogeneity of the neocortical ventricular zone as well as the contribution of 
lineage-restricted progenitors to the overall cortical neurogenic program remains
unclear. Here, we utilize in vivo genetic fate mapping to demonstrate that
Fezf2-expressing radial glial cells (RGCs) exist throughout cortical development 
and sequentially generate all major projection neuron subtypes and glia.
Moreover, we show that the vast majority of CUX2<U+207A> cells in the VZ and SVZ are
migrating interneurons derived from the subcortical telencephalon. Examination of
the embryonic cortical progenitor population demonstrates that Cux2<U+207A> RGCs
generate both deep- and upper-layer projection neurons. These results identify
Fezf2<U+207A> radial glial cells as a multipotent neocortical progenitor and suggest
that the existence, and molecular identity, of laminar-fate-restricted RGCs
awaits further investigation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3857588
PMID: 24314728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Inorg Chem. 2013 Oct 7;52(19):11428-37. doi: 10.1021/ic401758w. Epub 2013 Sep 16.

Semiconductive and magnetic one-dimensional coordination polymers of Cu(II) with 
modified nucleobases.

Amo-Ochoa P(1), Castillo O, Gómez-García CJ, Hassanein K, Verma S, Kumar J,
Zamora F.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Inorgánica, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid , 28049
Madrid, Spain.

Four new copper(II) coordination complexes, obtained by reaction of CuX2 (X =
acetate or chloride) with thymine-1-acetic acid and uracil-1-propionic acid as
ligands, of formulas [Cu(TAcO)2(H2O)4]·4H2O (1), [Cu(TAcO)2(H2O)2]n (2),
[Cu3(TAcO)4(H2O)2(OH)2]n·4H2O (3), and [Cu3(UPrO)2Cl2(OH)2(H2O)2]n (4) (TAcOH =
thymine-1-acetic acid, UPrOH = uracil-1-propionic acid) are described. While 1 is
a discrete complex, 2-4 are one-dimensional coordination polymers. Complexes 2-4 
present dc conductivity values between 10(-6) and 10(-9) S/cm(-1). The magnetic
behavior of complex 2 is typical for almost isolated Cu(II) metal centers.
Moderate-weak antiferromagnetic interactions have been found in complex 3,
whereas a combination of strong and weak antiferromagnetic interactions have been
found in complex 4. Quantum computational calculations have been done to estimate
the individual "J" magnetic coupling constant for each superexchange pathway in
complexes 3 and 4. Compounds 2-4 are the first known examples of semiconductor
and magnetic coordination polymers containing nucleobases.

PMID: 24040754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Feb;35(2):322-30. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.08.005. Epub 2013 Sep 4.

Comparison of frailty of primary neurons, embryonic, and aging mouse cortical
layers.

Fugistier P(1), Vallet PG, Leuba G, Piotton F, Marin P, Bouras C, Savioz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.

Superficial layers I to III of the human cerebral cortex are more vulnerable
toward Aß peptides than deep layers V to VI in aging. Three models of layers were
used to investigate this pattern of frailty. First, primary neurons from E14 and 
E17 embryonic murine cortices, corresponding respectively to future deep and
superficial layers, were treated either with Aß(1-42), okadaic acid, or kainic
acid. Second, whole E14 and E17 embryonic cortices, and third, in vitro separated
deep and superficial layers of young and old C57BL/6J mice, were treated
identically. We observed that E14 and E17 neurons in culture were prone to death 
after the Aß and particularly the kainic acid treatment. This was also the case
for the superficial layers of the aged cortex, but not for the embryonic, the
young cortex, and the deep layers of the aged cortex. Thus, the aged superficial 
layers appeared to be preferentially vulnerable against Aß and kainic acid. This 
pattern of vulnerability corresponds to enhanced accumulation of senile plaques
in the superficial cortical layers with aging and Alzheimer's disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24011540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Chem Commun (Camb). 2013 Oct 14;49(80):9182-4. doi: 10.1039/c3cc45587d. Epub 2013
Aug 29.

Reversible supra-channel effects: 3D kagome structure and catalysis via a
molecular array of 1D coordination polymers.

Lee H(1), Noh TH, Jung OS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Pusan National University, Pusan 609-735, Korea.
oksjung@pusan.ac.kr.

Self-assembly of CuX2 (X(-) = ClO4(-) and BF4(-)) with
2,3-bis(nicotinoyloxy)naphthalene yields a 1D loop-chain skeleton. The
loop-chains form an ensemble constituting a unique 3D kagome-type structure with 
both hexagonal and trigonal supra-channels. The unprecedented supra-channel
effects on the catalytic oxidation of 3,5-di-tert-butylcatechol to
3,5-di-tert-butylbenzoquinone were investigated.

PMID: 23989602  [PubMed]


25. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Sep;33(18):3594-610. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00280-13. Epub 2013 Jul
8.

Genome-wide analysis of chromatin states reveals distinct mechanisms of
sex-dependent gene regulation in male and female mouse liver.

Sugathan A(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology and
Bioinformatics Program, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Chromatin state maps were developed to elucidate sex differences in chromatin
structure and their impact on sex-differential chromatin accessibility and
sex-biased gene expression in mouse liver. Genes in active, inactive, and poised 
chromatin states exhibited differential responsiveness to ligand-activated
nuclear receptors and distinct enrichments for functional gene categories.
Sex-biased genes were clustered by chromatin environments and mapped to
DNase-hypersensitive sites (DHS) classified by sex bias in chromatin
accessibility and enhancer modifications. Results were integrated with
genome-wide binding data for five transcription factors implicated in growth
hormone-regulated, sex-biased liver gene expression, leading to the following
findings. (i) Sex-biased DHS, but not sex-biased genes, are frequently
characterized by sex-differential chromatin states, indicating distal regulation.
(ii) Trimethylation of histone H3 at K27 (H3K27me3) is a major sex-biased
repressive mark at highly female-biased but not at highly male-biased genes.
(iii) FOXA factors are associated with sex-dependent chromatin opening at
male-biased but not female-biased regulatory sites. (iv) Sex-biased STAT5 binding
is enriched at sex-biased DHS marked as active enhancers and preferentially
targets sex-biased genes with sex-differences in local chromatin marks. (v) The
male-biased repressor BCL6 preferentially targets female-biased genes and
regulatory sites in a sex-independent chromatin state. (vi) CUX2, a
female-specific repressor of male-biased genes, also activates strongly
female-biased genes, in association with loss of H3K27me3 marks. Chromatin states
are thus a major determinant of sex-biased chromatin accessibility and gene
expression, with FOXA pioneer factors proposed to confer sex-dependent chromatin 
opening and STAT5, but not BCL6, regulating sex-biased genes by binding to sites 
in a sex-biased chromatin state.

PMCID: PMC3753870
PMID: 23836885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Cereb Cortex. 2014 May;24(5):1216-29. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs400. Epub 2013 Jan
2.

Zbtb20 defines a hippocampal neuronal identity through direct repression of genes
that control projection neuron development in the isocortex.

Nielsen JV(1), Thomassen M, Møllgård K, Noraberg J, Jensen NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology Research, Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Southern Denmark, DK-5000 Odense C, Denmark.

Hippocampal pyramidal neurons are important for encoding and retrieval of spatial
maps and episodic memories. While previous work has shown that Zbtb20 is a cell
fate determinant for CA1 pyramidal neurons, the regulatory mechanisms governing
this process are not known. In this study, we demonstrate that Zbtb20 binds to
genes that control neuronal subtype specification in the developing isocortex,
including Cux1, Cux2, Fezf2, Foxp2, Mef2c, Rorb, Satb2, Sox5, Tbr1, Tle4, and
Zfpm2. We show that Zbtb20 represses these genes during ectopic CA1 pyramidal
neuron development in transgenic mice. These data reveal a novel regulatory
mechanism by which Zbtb20 suppresses the acquisition of an isocortical fate
during archicortical neurogenesis to ensure commitment to a CA1 pyramidal neuron 
fate. We further show that the expression pattern of Zbtb20 is evolutionary
conserved in the fetal human hippocampus, where it is complementary to the
expression pattern of the Zbtb20 target gene Tbr1. Therefore, the disclosed
Zbtb20-mediated transcriptional repressor mechanism may be involved in
development of the human archicortex.

PMID: 23283686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;32(22):4611-27. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00886-12. Epub 2012 Sep 
10.

Impact of CUX2 on the female mouse liver transcriptome: activation of
female-biased genes and repression of male-biased genes.

Conforto TL(1), Zhang Y, Sherman J, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The growth hormone-regulated transcription factors STAT5 and BCL6 coordinately
regulate sex differences in mouse liver, primarily through effects in male liver,
where male-biased genes are upregulated and many female-biased genes are actively
repressed. Here we investigated whether CUX2, a highly female-specific liver
transcription factor, contributes to an analogous regulatory network in female
liver. Adenoviral overexpression of CUX2 in male liver induced 36% of
female-biased genes and repressed 35% of male-biased genes. In female liver, CUX2
small interfering RNA (siRNA) preferentially induced genes repressed by
adenovirus expressing CUX2 (adeno-CUX2) in male liver, and it preferentially
repressed genes induced by adeno-CUX2 in male liver. CUX2 binding in female liver
chromatin was enriched at sites of male-biased DNase hypersensitivity and at
genomic regions showing male-enriched STAT5 binding. CUX2 binding was also
enriched near genes repressed by adeno-CUX2 in male liver or induced by CUX2
siRNA in female liver but not at genes induced by adeno-CUX2, indicating that
CUX2 binding is preferentially associated with gene repression. Nevertheless,
direct CUX2 binding was seen at several highly female-specific genes that were
positively regulated by CUX2, including A1bg, Cyp2b9, Cyp3a44, Tox, and Trim24.
CUX2 expression and chromatin binding were high in immature male liver, where
repression of adult male-biased genes and expression of adult female-biased genes
are common, suggesting that the downregulation of CUX2 in male liver at puberty
contributes to the developmental changes establishing adult patterns of
sex-specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3486175
PMID: 22966202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Biol Sex Differ. 2012 Apr 4;3:9. doi: 10.1186/2042-6410-3-9.

Sex-specific mouse liver gene expression: genome-wide analysis of developmental
changes from pre-pubertal period to young adulthood.

Conforto TL(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, Boston, MA 02215, USA. djw@bu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Early liver development and the transcriptional transitions during
hepatogenesis are well characterized. However, gene expression changes during the
late postnatal/pre-pubertal to young adulthood period are less well understood,
especially with regards to sex-specific gene expression.
METHODS: Microarray analysis of male and female mouse liver was carried out at 3,
4, and 8 wk of age to elucidate developmental changes in gene expression from the
late postnatal/pre-pubertal period to young adulthood.
RESULTS: A large number of sex-biased and sex-independent genes showed
significant changes during this developmental period. Notably, sex-independent
genes involved in cell cycle, chromosome condensation, and DNA replication were
down regulated from 3 wk to 8 wk, while genes associated with metal ion binding, 
ion transport and kinase activity were up regulated. A majority of genes showing 
sex differential expression in adult liver did not display sex differences prior 
to puberty, at which time extensive changes in sex-specific gene expression were 
seen, primarily in males. Thus, in male liver, 76% of male-specific genes were up
regulated and 47% of female-specific genes were down regulated from 3 to 8 wk of 
age, whereas in female liver 67% of sex-specific genes showed no significant
change in expression. In both sexes, genes up regulated from 3 to 8 wk were
significantly enriched (p < E-76) in the set of genes positively regulated by the
liver transcription factor HNF4a, as determined in a liver-specific HNF4a
knockout mouse model, while genes down regulated during this developmental period
showed significant enrichment (p < E-65) for negative regulation by HNF4a.
Significant enrichment of the developmentally regulated genes in the set of genes
subject to positive and negative regulation by pituitary hormone was also
observed. Five sex-specific transcriptional regulators showed sex-specific
expression at 4 wk (male-specific Ihh; female-specific Cdx4, Cux2, Tox, and
Trim24) and may contribute to the developmental changes that lead to global
acquisition of liver sex-specificity by 8 wk of age.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, the observed changes in gene expression during postnatal
liver development reflect the deceleration of liver growth and the induction of
specialized liver functions, with widespread changes in sex-specific gene
expression primarily occurring in male liver.

PMCID: PMC3350426
PMID: 22475005  [PubMed]


29. Inorg Chem. 2012 Feb 20;51(4):2121-9. doi: 10.1021/ic201924q. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

Importance of halogen···halogen contacts for the structural and magnetic
properties of CuX2(pyrazine-N,N'-dioxide)(H2O)2 (X = Cl and Br).

Schlueter JA(1), Park H, Halder GJ, Armand WR, Dunmars C, Chapman KW, Manson JL, 
Singleton J, McDonald R, Plonczak A, Kang J, Lee C, Whangbo MH, Lancaster T,
Steele AJ, Franke I, Wright JD, Blundell SJ, Pratt FL, deGeorge J, Turnbull MM,
Landee CP.

Author information: 
(1)Materials Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois
60439, United States. JASchlueter@anl.gov

The structural and magnetic properties of the newly crystallized
CuX(2)(pyzO)(H(2)O)(2) (X = Cl, Br; pyzO = pyrazine-N,N'-dioxide) coordination
polymers are reported. These isostructural compounds crystallize in the
monoclinic space group C2/c with, at 150 K, a = 17.0515(7) Å, b = 5.5560(2) Å, c 
= 10.4254(5) Å, ß = 115.400(2)°, and V = 892.21(7) Å(3) for X = Cl and a =
17.3457(8) Å, b = 5.6766(3) Å, c = 10.6979(5) Å, ß = 115.593(2)°, and V =
950.01(8) Å(3) for X = Br. Their crystal structure is characterized by
one-dimensional chains of Cu(2+) ions linked through bidentate pyzO ligands.
These chains are joined together through OH···O hydrogen bonds between the water 
ligands and pyzO oxygen atoms and Cu-X···X-Cu contacts. Bulk magnetic
susceptibility measurements at ambient pressure show a broad maximum at 7 (Cl)
and 28 K (Br) that is indicative of short-range magnetic correlations. The
dominant spin exchange is the Cu-X···X-Cu supersuperexchange because the magnetic
orbital of the Cu(2+) ion is contained in the CuX(2)(H(2)O)(2) plane and the
X···X contact distances are short. The magnetic data were fitted to a Heisenberg 
1D uniform antiferromagnetic chain model with J(1D)/k(B) = -11.1(1) (Cl) and
-45.9(1) K (Br). Magnetization saturates at fields of 16.1(3) (Cl) and 66.7(5) T 
(Br), from which J(1D) is determined to be -11.5(2) (Cl) and -46.4(5) K (Br). For
the Br analog the pressure dependence of the magnetic susceptibility indicates a 
gradual increase in the magnitude of J(1D)/k(B) up to -51.2 K at 0.84 GPa,
suggesting a shortening of the Br···Br contact distance under pressure. At higher
pressure X-ray powder diffraction data indicates a structural phase transition at
~3.5 GPa. Muon-spin relaxation measurements indicate that CuCl(2)(pyzO)(H(2)O)(2)
is magnetically ordered with T(N) = 1.06(1) K, while the signature for long-range
magnetic order in CuBr(2)(pyzO)(H(2)O)(2) was much less definitive down to 0.26
K. The results for the CuX(2)(pyzO)(H(2)O)(2) complexes are compared to the
related CuX(2)(pyrazine) materials.

PMID: 22296451  [PubMed]


30. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Jul;20(7):801-5. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.3. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

1000 Genomes-based imputation identifies novel and refined associations for the
Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium phase 1 Data.

Huang J(1), Ellinghaus D, Franke A, Howie B, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK.

We hypothesize that imputation based on data from the 1000 Genomes Project can
identify novel association signals on a genome-wide scale due to the dense marker
map and the large number of haplotypes. To test the hypothesis, the Wellcome
Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC) Phase I genotype data were imputed using
1000 genomes as reference (20100804 EUR), and seven case/control association
studies were performed using imputed dosages. We observed two 'missed'
disease-associated variants that were undetectable by the original WTCCC
analysis, but were reported by later studies after the 2007 WTCCC publication.
One is within the IL2RA gene for association with type 1 diabetes and the other
in proximity with the CDKN2B gene for association with type 2 diabetes. We also
identified two refined associations. One is SNP rs11209026 in exon 9 of IL23R for
association with Crohn's disease, which is predicted to be probably damaging by
PolyPhen2. The other refined variant is in the CUX2 gene region for association
with type 1 diabetes, where the newly identified top SNP rs1265564 has an
association P-value of 1.68 × 10(-16). The new lead SNP for the two refined loci 
provides a more plausible explanation for the disease association. We
demonstrated that 1000 Genomes-based imputation could indeed identify both novel 
(in our case, 'missed' because they were detected and replicated by studies after
2007) and refined signals. We anticipate the findings derived from this study to 
provide timely information when individual groups and consortia are beginning to 
engage in 1000 genomes-based imputation.

PMCID: PMC3376268
PMID: 22293688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Dev Biol. 2011 Dec 1;360(1):77-86. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.09.007. Epub 2011
Sep 16.

The transcription factor Cux2 marks development of an A-delta sublineage of TrkA 
sensory neurons.

Bachy I(1), Franck MC, Li L, Abdo H, Pattyn A, Ernfors P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Medical Biochemistry and
Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

The developmental process and unique molecular identity between the many
different types of dorsal root ganglion (DRG) sensory neurons generated during
embryogenesis provide the cellular basis for the distinct perceptual modalities
of somatosensation. The mechanisms leading to the generation of different types
of nociceptive sensory neurons remain only partly understood. Here, we show that 
the transcription factor Cux2 is a novel marker of sensory neuron subpopulations 
of three main sublineages as defined by the expression of neurotrophic factor
receptors TrkA, TrkB and TrkC. In particular, it is expressed in a subpopulation 
of early TrkA(+) neurons that arise during the early, Ngn1-independent initiated 
neurogenesis in the DRG. Postnatally, Cux2 marks a specific subtype of A-delta
nociceptors as seen by expression of TrkA and NF200 but absence of TrpV1.
Analysis of Cux2 mutant mice shows that Cux2 is not required for specification of
Trk(+) neuronal subpopulations. However, Cux2 mutant mice are hypersensitive to
mechanical, but not to heat or cold stimuli, consistent with a requirement in the
process of specification of the mechanoreceptive neuron circuit. Hence, our
results show that Cux2 is expressed and may participate in development of a
specific subtype of myelinated TrkA(+) nociceptors.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21945863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Epilepsia. 2011 Oct;52(10):1928-37. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03246.x. Epub
2011 Aug 29.

Altered layer-specific gene expression in cortical samples from patients with
temporal lobe epilepsy.

Rossini L(1), Moroni RF, Tassi L, Watakabe A, Yamamori T, Spreafico R, Garbelli
R.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Epileptology and Experimental Neurophysiology Unit, IRCCS Foundation,
C. Besta Neurological Institute, Milan, Italy.

PURPOSE: Neuropathologic investigations frequently reveal the presence of
architectural cortical dysplasia in patients with temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE),
sometimes as an isolated finding but more commonly associated with hippocampal
sclerosis (HS) and white matter abnormalities. The histologic pattern and the
developmental origin of these alterations are not clear, and their diagnostic
criteria are poorly defined. The aim of this study was to investigate the
expression patterns of layer-specific genes in cortical specimens from patients
with TLE presenting different subtypes of cortical malformations in order to
elucidate the disorganization of the laminar architecture of such epileptogenic
abnormalities and provide evidence to enable a more objective neuropathologic
diagnosis.
METHODS: We analyzed the expression patterns of CUX2, RORBETA, ER81, NURR1, and
CTGF genes, respectively specific markers of layers II-III, IV, V, VI, and VIb,
in surgical samples by means of in situ hybridization and compared them with
those observed in control cortices. The pathologic samples included typical
architectural dysplasia (group 1); temporal lobe sclerosis, a variant of
architectural dysplasia (group 2); and white matter heterotopic neuronal
aggregates, namely small lentiform nodules (group 3). These abnormalities may
have been associated or not with HS.
KEY FINDINGS: All of the genes had a laminar expression pattern in normal
cortices, whereas groups 1 and 2 showed alterations mainly involving layers V and
VI, and highlighted by the altered distribution of ER81- and NURR1-positive
cells. The expression of ER81 and NURR1 genes was different among the groups, and
atypical coexpression of NURR1 and CUX2 mRNA was detected in the neurons making
up the small lentiform nodules.
SIGNIFICANCE: These findings indicate that defects in cortical organization
involving the deeper cortical neurons may be a common etiopathogenic mechanism in
group 1 and 2 cortical dysplasia, whether isolated or associated with HS, and
that developmental disorders may also be present in the white matter (group 3).
They also provide evidence that the layer-specific genes can be usefully used to 
investigate the neuropathology of human cortical dysplasia.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. © 2011 International League Against Epilepsy.

PMID: 21883179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Commun Integr Biol. 2010 Nov;3(6):483-6. doi: 10.4161/cib.3.6.12755. Epub 2010
Nov 1.

Intrinsic programs regulating dendrites and synapses in the upper layer neurons
of the cortex.

Cubelos B(1), Nieto M.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional de Biotecnología; CSIC; Campus de Cantoblanco; Madrid, Spain.

Dendrites and spines are key regulators of neuronal function often affected in
cognitive disorders. Neuronal subclasses are characterized by a wide range of
dendritic morphologies that aid their specific functions. However, how
subclass-specific dendritic trees arise during vertebrate development remains
largely unknown. We have recently reported that the restricted expression of Cux1
and Cux2 genes in the upper layers of the cerebral cortex determines the specific
morphology of dendrites and spines and the function of these neurons. Since Cux
genes are the vertebrate homologs of Drosophila Cut, which specifies the
dendritic morphologies of certain sensory neuron populations, our findings
suggest that mechanisms of dendrite differentiation are conserved between
Drosophila and mammals, which had yet to be demonstrated. Importantly, we found
that Cux genes not only modulate dendritic branching, but also dendritic spine
morphogenesis, the functional synapse and cognition. Dendritic spine
stabilization was partly mediated by direct repression of genes of the Xlr
family, previously implicated in cognitive defects in a model of Turner syndrome.
Hence, our work indicates that neuronal subclass specific determinants may
intrinsically affect synaptic activity beyond expected. The functions of Cux1 and
Cux2 were additive and complement each other to establish the final pattern of
the dendritic tree and the number and strength of the synapses. This work
unravels novel mechanisms of dendritogenesis and synaptogenesis and illustrates
how regulating dendritic structures contributes to the specialization of upper
layer neurons. It will be interesting to dissect how these mechanisms regulate
cortical activity, area specialization and cognitive functions.

PMCID: PMC3038044
PMID: 21331220  [PubMed]


34. Am J Clin Nutr. 2011 Apr;93(4):809-16. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.110.001776. Epub 2011
Jan 26.

Genome-wide association studies identify genetic loci related to alcohol
consumption in Korean men.

Baik I(1), Cho NH, Kim SH, Han BG, Shin C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Foods and Nutrition, College of Natural Sciences, Kookmin
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Comment in
    Am J Clin Nutr. 2011 Apr;93(4):681-3.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association (GWA) studies regarding the quantitative
trait of alcohol consumption are limited.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to explore genetic loci associated with
the amount of alcohol consumed.
DESIGN: We conducted a GWA study with discovery data on single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) for 1721 Korean male drinkers aged 40-69 y who were included
in an urban population-based cohort. Another sample that comprised 1113 male
drinkers who were from an independent cohort enrolled in a rural area served as a
resource for replication. At baseline (18 June 2001 through 29 January 2003),
members of both cohorts provided information on average daily alcohol
consumptions, and their DNA samples were collected for genotyping.
RESULTS: We tested 315,914 SNPs of discovery data by using multivariate linear
regression analysis adjusted for age and smoking, and 12 SNPs on chromosome 12q24
had genome-wide significant associations with alcohol consumption; adjusted P
values by using Bonferroni correction were 1.6 × 10(-5) through 5.8 × 10(-46). We
observed most SNPs in intronic regions and showed that the genes that harbor SNPs
were C12orf51, CCDC63, MYL2, OAS3, CUX2, and RPH3A. In particular, signals in or 
near C12orf51, CCDC63, and MYL2 were successfully replicated in the test for
317,951 SNPs; rs2074356 in C12orf51 was in high linkage disequilibrium with SNPs 
in ALDH2, but other SNPs were not.
CONCLUSIONS: In a GWA study, we identified loci and alleles highly associated
with alcohol consumption. The findings suggest the need for further
investigations on the genetic propensity for drinking excessive amounts of
alcohol.

PMID: 21270382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Neuroscience. 2011 Feb 23;175:380-93. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.11.061.
Epub 2010 Dec 3.

Development of cortical malformations in BCNU-treated rat, model of cortical
dysplasia.

Moroni RF(1), Cipelletti B, Inverardi F, Regondi MC, Spreafico R, Frassoni C.

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione I.R.C.C.S. Istituto Neurologico C. Besta, Via Celoria 11,20133
Milan, Italy.

Cortical dysplasia (CD) comprises a wide range of cerebral cortex alterations
ranging from severe brain malformations to local disruption of the cortical
structure. Most hypotheses focused on the role of embryonic/perinatal development
insults as the main cause for the majority of CD. Rats with prenatal exposure to 
BCNU (1-3-bis-chloroethyl-nitrosurea) represent an injury-based model and
reproduce many anatomical features seen in human patients with CD, such as
altered cortical layering and the presence of heterotopia and
dysmorphic/heterotopic neurons. With the aim to investigate the formation and
evolution of CD during development, we analysed the expression of a panel of
layer-specific genes (Nurr1, Er81, Ror-ß and Cux2, markers of layers VI, V, IV
and superficial layers, respectively) in BCNU-treated cortices from E17 to
postnatal day 14. By means of appropriate immunohistochemical markers, we also
analysed the structural organization of embryonic ventricular zone and of glial
and axonal fibres, substrates supporting radial and tangential migration,
respectively. The main results of the present study are: (i) the ventricular zone
appeared disorganized and the neuroependyma was partially disrupted; (ii) radial 
glia scaffold and tangential fibres were deeply disarranged, thus explaining the 
neuronal migration defects; (iii) cortical heterotopia were detectable by E19,
whereas periventricular heterotopia were detectable after birth; (iv) both
cortical and periventricular heterotopia showed a pseudo-laminar structure, with 
cells of the upper cortical layers in the core of the nodules and cells of layer 
IV and V at their border; (v) the distribution of GABAergic cells was altered
since the embryonic stages, as a consequence of the derangement of tangential
fibres. Our analysis sheds light on how a malformed cortex develops after a
temporally discrete environmental insult and adds additional knowledge on
specific aspects of the etiopathogenesis of CD.

Copyright Â© 2011 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21130845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Dev Dyn. 2011 Jan;240(1):96-107. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22496.

IgSF molecule MDGA1 is involved in radial migration and positioning of a subset
of cortical upper-layer neurons.

Ishikawa T(1), Gotoh N, Murayama C, Abe T, Iwashita M, Matsuzaki F, Suzuki T,
Yamamoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuroscience, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan.

Mdga1, encoding a GPI-anchored immunoglobulin superfamily molecule containing an 
MAM domain, is expressed by a specific subset of neurons, including layer II/III 
projection neurons, in the mouse neocortex. To investigate the function of Mdga1 
in corticogenesis, we generated Mdga1-deficient mice and backcrossed them to
obtain a congenic background. Gross anatomy of the Mdga1-deficient brain at
postnatal day (P) 14 showed no obvious phenotype. However, the migration of
Mdga1-mutant neurons to the superficial cortical plate was clearly delayed. Most 
Mdga1-mutant neurons reached the lower portion of the upper cortical layer by
embryonic day 18.5 and stayed there through P0. By P7, the location of the mutant
cells was the same as wild-type. The location of Cux2-expressing upper-layer
neurons in the cortical plate was largely unaffected. These observations
indicated that Mdga1 is involved in the migration and positioning of a subset of 
cortical neurons and suggested that the radial migration of upper-layer neurons
might be differentially regulated.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21104742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Gene Expr Patterns. 2010 Oct-Dec;10(7-8):351-60. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2010.08.002. 
Epub 2010 Aug 17.

Expression of two type II cadherins, Cdh12 and Cdh22 in the developing and adult 
mouse brain.

Mayer M(1), Bercsényi K, Géczi K, Szabó G, Lele Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Medicine, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest,
Hungary.

The expression of type II classic cadherins described so far displays a wide
range of partially overlapping patterns during mammalian central nervous system
development indicating their potential role during migratory and lamination
processes as well as axon guidance. Expression of a few members of this family
however, has not been characterized in detail. Here, we describe the
spatio-temporal mRNA distribution pattern of two such neglected members of this
family Cdh12 (also known as Br-cadherin) and Cdh22 (PB-cadherin) during mammalian
CNS development using RT-PCR and in situ hybridization. In addition, we
demonstrate the presence of Cdh12 and Cdh22 mRNA in specific and partially
overlapping groups of both excitatory and inhibitory neurons in various areas of 
the adult mouse CNS including the cerebellum, neocortex, hippocampus and in
different subcortical nuclei. Neocortical layer-specificity during development is
further characterized using double in situ hybridization with the layer-specific 
markers cux2 and ctip2. The specific and partially overlapping expression
patterns described here strongly suggest that these cadherins are likely to play 
a significant and quite possibly a partially redundant role during development
and in the adult function of the mouse CNS.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20723620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Neurosci. 2010 Aug 4;30(31):10563-74. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0776-10.2010.

A novel transient glutamatergic population migrating from the pallial-subpallial 
boundary contributes to neocortical development.

Teissier A(1), Griveau A, Vigier L, Piolot T, Borello U, Pierani A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique-Unité Mixte de Recherche 7592,
Institut Jacques Monod, Université Paris Diderot, 75205 Paris Cedex 13, France.

Erratum in
    J Neurosci. 2011 Aug 24;31(34):12385.

The generation of a precise number of neural cells and the determination of their
laminar fate are tightly controlled processes during development of the cerebral 
cortex. Using genetic tracing in mice, we have identified a population of
glutamatergic neurons generated by Dbx1-expressing progenitors at the
pallial-subpallial boundary predominantly at embryonic day 12.5 (E12.5) and
subsequent to Cajal-Retzius cells. We show that these neurons migrate
tangentially to populate the cortical plate (CP) at all rostrocaudal and
mediolateral levels by E14.5. At birth, they homogeneously populate cortical
areas and represent <5% of cortical cells. However, they are distributed into
neocortical layers according to their birthdates and express the corresponding
markers of glutamatergic differentiation (Tbr1, ER81, Cux2, Ctip2). Notably, this
population dies massively by apoptosis at the completion of corticogenesis and
represents 50% of dying neurons in the postnatal day 0 cortex. Specific genetic
ablation of these transient Dbx1-derived CP neurons leads to a 20% decrease in
neocortical cell numbers in perinatal animals. Our results show that a previously
unidentified transient population of glutamatergic neurons migrates from
extraneocortical regions over long distance from their generation site and
participates in neocortical radial growth in a non-cell-autonomous manner.

PMID: 20685999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Neuron. 2010 May 27;66(4):523-35. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.04.038.

Cux1 and Cux2 regulate dendritic branching, spine morphology, and synapses of the
upper layer neurons of the cortex.

Cubelos B(1), Sebastián-Serrano A, Beccari L, Calcagnotto ME, Cisneros E, Kim S, 
Dopazo A, Alvarez-Dolado M, Redondo JM, Bovolenta P, Walsh CA, Nieto M.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, CSIC, Darwin 3, Campus de Cantoblanco,
Madrid 28049, Spain.

Dendrite branching and spine formation determines the function of morphologically
distinct and specialized neuronal subclasses. However, little is known about the 
programs instructing specific branching patterns in vertebrate neurons and
whether such programs influence dendritic spines and synapses. Using knockout and
knockdown studies combined with morphological, molecular, and
electrophysiological analysis, we show that the homeobox Cux1 and Cux2 are
intrinsic and complementary regulators of dendrite branching, spine development, 
and synapse formation in layer II-III neurons of the cerebral cortex. Cux genes
control the number and maturation of dendritic spines partly through direct
regulation of the expression of Xlr3b and Xlr4b, chromatin remodeling genes
previously implicated in cognitive defects. Accordingly, abnormal dendrites and
synapses in Cux2(-/-) mice correlate with reduced synaptic function and defects
in working memory. These demonstrate critical roles of Cux in dendritogenesis and
highlight subclass-specific mechanisms of synapse regulation that contribute to
the establishment of cognitive circuits.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2894581
PMID: 20510857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Dev Neurobiol. 2010 Aug;70(9):659-78. doi: 10.1002/dneu.20804.

The rho GTPase Rac1 is required for proliferation and survival of progenitors in 
the developing forebrain.

Leone DP(1), Srinivasan K, Brakebusch C, McConnell SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

Progenitor cells in the ventricular zone (VZ) and subventricular zone (SVZ) of
the developing forebrain give rise to neurons and glial cells, and are
characterized by distinct morphologies and proliferative behaviors. The
mechanisms that distinguish VZ and SVZ progenitors are not well understood,
although the homeodomain transcription factor Cux2 and Cyclin D2, a core
component of the cell cycle machinery, are specifically involved in controlling
SVZ cell proliferation. Rho GTPases have been implicated in regulating the
proliferation, differentiation, and migration of many cell types, and one family 
member, Cdc42, affects the polarity and proliferation of radial glial cells in
the VZ. Here, we show that another family member, Rac1, is required for the
normal proliferation and differentiation of SVZ progenitors and for survival of
both VZ and SVZ progenitors. A forebrain-specific loss of Rac1 leads to an
SVZ-specific reduction in proliferation, a concomitant increase in cell cycle
exit, and premature differentiation. In Rac1 mutants, the SVZ and VZ can no
longer be delineated, but rather fuse to become a single compact zone of
intermingled cells. Cyclin D2 expression, which is normally expressed by both VZ 
and SVZ progenitors, is reduced in Rac1 mutants, suggesting that the mutant cells
differentiate precociously. Rac1-deficient mice can still generate SVZ-derived
upper layer neurons, indicating that Rac1 is not required for the acquisition of 
upper layer neuronal fates, but instead is needed for the normal regulation of
proliferation by progenitor cells in the SVZ.

(c) 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2929936
PMID: 20506362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Dev Dyn. 2010 Jun;239(6):1797-806. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22293.

Expression analysis of an evolutionarily conserved metallophosphodiesterase gene,
Mpped1, in the normal and beta-catenin-deficient malformed dorsal telencephalon.

Chen CM(1), Wang HY, You LR, Shang RL, Liu FC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences and Institute of Genome Sciences, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. cmchen@ym.edu.tw

We report the expression of the mouse Mpped1 in the telencephalon through
embryonic stages to adulthood. Using Northern blotting analysis and RNA in situ
hybridization (ISH), our data show that Mpped1 is specifically expressed in the
brain and is enriched in the cortical plate of the developing telencephalon.
Postnatally, the expression of Mpped1 is reduced in the cerebral cortex relative 
to its levels in the embryonic dorsal telencephalon. Also, Mpped1 expression is
sustained in the hippocampal CA1 region. Examination of the expression of Mpped1 
and other cortical layer markers by ISH in a malformed beta-catenin null dorsal
telencephalon show that the Mpped1-, Cux2-, and Rorbeta-expressing superficial
cortical layers are reduced and form patchy patterns, and the Tbr-1-expressing
deep-layer neurons are incorrectly located on superficial layers, indicative of a
migration defect of cortical neurons in the absence of beta-catenin.

PMID: 20503375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. PLoS One. 2010 May 11;5(5):e10596. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010596.

The transcription factor Cux1 regulates dendritic morphology of cortical
pyramidal neurons.

Li N(1), Zhao CT, Wang Y, Yuan XB.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Neurobiology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

In the murine cerebral cortex, mammalian homologues of the Cux family
transcription factors, Cux1 and Cux2, have been identified as restricted
molecular markers for the upper layer (II-IV) pyramidal neurons. However, their
functions in cortical development are largely unknown. Here we report that
increasing the intracellular level of Cux1, but not Cux2, reduced the dendritic
complexity of cultured cortical pyramidal neurons. Consistently, reducing the
expression of Cux1 promoted the dendritic arborization in these pyramidal
neurons. This effect required the existence of the DNA-binding domains, hence the
transcriptional passive repression activity of Cux1. Analysis of downstream
signals suggested that Cux1 regulates dendrite development primarily through
suppressing the expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27(Kip1),
and RhoA may mediate the regulation of dendritic complexity by Cux1 and p27.
Thus, Cux1 functions as a negative regulator of dendritic complexity for cortical
pyramidal neurons.

PMCID: PMC2868054
PMID: 20485671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Cereb Cortex. 2010 May;20(5):1071-81. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhp168. Epub 2009 Sep
2.

The subventricular zone is the developmental milestone of a 6-layered neocortex: 
comparisons in metatherian and eutherian mammals.

Cheung AF(1), Kondo S, Abdel-Mannan O, Chodroff RA, Sirey TM, Bluy LE, Webber N, 
DeProto J, Karlen SJ, Krubitzer L, Stolp HB, Saunders NR, Molnár Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford
OX1 3QX, UK.

The major lineages of mammals (Eutheria, Metatheria, and Monotremata) diverged
more than 100 million years ago and have undergone independent changes in the
neocortex. We found that adult South American gray short-tailed opossum
(Monodelphis domestica) and tammar wallaby (Macropus eugenii) possess a
significantly lower number of cerebral cortical neurons compared with the mouse
(Mus musculus). To determine whether the difference is reflected in the
development of the cortical germinal zones, the location of progenitor cell
divisions was examined in opossum, tammar wallaby, and rat. The basic pattern of 
the cell divisions was conserved, but the emergence of a distinctive band of
dividing cells in the subventricular zone (SVZ) occurred relatively later in the 
opossum (postnatal day [P14]) and the tammar wallaby (P40) than in rodents. The
planes of cell divisions in the ventricular zone (VZ) were similar in all
species, with comparable mRNA expression patterns of Brn2, Cux2, NeuroD6, Tbr2,
and Pax6 in opossum (P12 and P20) and mouse (embryonic day 15 and P0). In
conclusion, the marsupial neurodevelopmental program utilizes an organized SVZ,
as indicated by the presence of intermediate (or basal) progenitor cell divisions
and gene expression patterns, suggesting that the SVZ emerged prior to the
Eutherian-Metatherian split.

PMID: 19726493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Development. 2009 Jul;136(14):2329-34. doi: 10.1242/dev.032128.

Cux2 functions downstream of Notch signaling to regulate dorsal interneuron
formation in the spinal cord.

Iulianella A(1), Sharma M, Vanden Heuvel GB, Trainor PA.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 E. 50th Street, Kansas City, MO
64110, USA. ani@stowers.org

Obtaining the diversity of interneuron subtypes in their appropriate numbers
requires the orchestrated integration of progenitor proliferation with the
regulation of differentiation. Here we demonstrate through loss-of-function
studies in mice that the Cut homeodomain transcription factor Cux2 (Cutl2) plays 
an important role in regulating the formation of dorsal spinal cord interneurons.
Furthermore, we show that Notch regulates Cux2 expression. Although Notch
signaling can be inhibitory to the expression of proneural genes, it is also
required for interneuron formation during spinal cord development. Our findings
suggest that Cux2 might mediate some of the effects of Notch signaling on
interneuron formation. Together with the requirement for Cux2 in cell cycle
progression, our work highlights the mechanistic complexity in balancing neural
progenitor maintenance and differentiation during spinal cord neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2729345
PMID: 19542352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Neuroscience. 2009 Mar 17;159(2):682-91. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2008.12.064.
Epub 2009 Jan 10.

Expression of layer-specific markers in the adult neocortex of BCNU-Treated rat, 
a model of cortical dysplasia.

Moroni RF(1), Inverardi F, Regondi MC, Watakabe A, Yamamori T, Spreafico R,
Frassoni C.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Clinical Epileptology and Experimental Neurophysiology, Fondazione
I.R.C.C.S., Istituto Neurologico "C. Besta," Via Celoria 11, 20133 Milan, Italy.

The experimental model of cortical dysplasia (CD) obtained by administering
carmustine (1-3-bis-chloroethyl-nitrosurea [BCNU]) in pregnant rat uterus mimics 
the histopathological abnormalities observed in human CD patients: altered
cortical layering, and presence of heterotopia and dysmorphic/heterotopic
neurons. To investigate further the cortical layering disruption and the neuronal
composition of heterotopia in BCNU-exposed cortex, we analyzed the expression
pattern of the transcription factors Nurr1, Er81, Ror-beta, and Cux2
(respectively specific markers of layers VI, V, IV and superficial layers) in the
cortical areas of BCNU-treated rats by means of in situ hybridization, and
compared the findings with those observed in adult control rats. Combining in
situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry we also investigated the origin of
dysmorphic or heterotopic neurons. The main results of the present study are (i) 
the analysis of cortical layer thickness revealed that the cortical thinning in
the BCNU model was prevalently restricted to the superficial layers; (ii) in
cortical and periventricular heterotopia, the prevalent presence of superficial
layer neurons in the internal areas, and deeper layer neurons in a more
peripheral region, demonstrated a rudimentary pattern of laminar organization in 
nodule formation; and (iii) the Er81 signal in the dysmorphic and heterotopic
pyramidal neurons located in layers I/II showed that they belong to layer V.
These results shed light on the disorganization of the laminar architecture of
the BCNU model by providing correlations with normal cortical layering and
revealing the ontogenesis of heterotopia and heterotopic/dysmorphic neurons. They
also provide strong evidence of the usefulness of layer-specific markers in
investigating the neuropathology of CD, thus opening up the possibility of
expanding their application to human neuropathology.

PMID: 19174181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Org Chem. 2009 Feb 6;74(3):1130-4. doi: 10.1021/jo802051r.

CuX2-mediated halolactonization reaction of monoesters of 1,2-allenyl phosphonic 
acids and their Suzuki cross-coupling reaction.

Yu F(1), Lian X, Zhao J, Yu Y, Ma S.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Organometallic Chemistry, Shanghai Institute of
Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 354 Fenglin Lu, Shanghai 200032, 
People's Republic of China.

CuX(2)-mediated (X = Cl, Br) halolactonization of monoesters of 1,2-allenyl
phosphonic acids is presented. The reaction proceeded smoothly under the mild
condition for differently substituted allenic substrates giving the
4-halo-2,5-dihydro[1,2]oxaphosphole 2-oxides in good yields. The Suzuki
cross-coupling reaction of these bromides and even chlorides with organic boronic
acids under the catalysis of PdCl(2)(Sphos)(2) afforded
4-substituted-2,5-dihydro[1,2]oxaphosphole 2-oxides in moderate to good yields.

PMID: 19123848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Gene Expr Patterns. 2009 Feb;9(2):83-93. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2008.10.004. Epub
2008 Oct 25.

Expression of Leukaemia associated transcription factor Af9/Mllt3 in the cerebral
cortex of the mouse.

Vogel T(1), Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Georg-August-University Goettingen, Centre of Anatomy, Department of
Neuroanatomy, Kreuzbergring 36, 37075 Goettingen, Germany. tvogel1@gwdg.de

Mutations of leukaemia associated AF9/MLLT3 are implicated in neurodevelopmental 
diseases such as epilepsia and ataxia. This study shows for the first time, that 
murine Af9 is transcribed in various CNS structures including the subventricular 
zone (SVZ) of the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, cerebellar cortex, septum and
various thalamic structures, the choroid plexus, and the midbrain/hindbrain
boundary. Expression of Af9 in the SVZ overlaps with Svet1, Cux2, and partially
with Tbr2, confining its activity to the neurogenic compartment of the SVZ. In
contrast to Svet1 and Cux2 expression, Af9 transcription is not limited to upper 
layer neurons but is found in the entire cortical plate. As part of an extensive 
network of interacting proteins involved in epigenetic DNA modification, we could
show overlapping expression of Af9 with Af4/Aff1 and Fmr2/Aff2, two genes that
are also related to neurodevelopmental diseases, as well as with the highly
homologous Enl.

PMID: 19000783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Org Chem. 2008 Nov 21;73(22):9012-5. doi: 10.1021/jo801842g. Epub 2008 Oct 15.

An efficient route to 4-halophosphaisocoumarins via CuX2-mediated direct
halocyclization of 2-(1-alkynyl)phenylphosphonic acid diesters.

Peng AY(1), Hao F, Li B, Wang Z, Du Y.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry & Chemical Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, 135
Xingangxi Lu, Guangzhou, 510275, China. cespay@mail.sysu.edu.cn

A series of 4-halophosphaisocoumarins were synthesized via CuX2 (X = Br, Cl)
-mediated direct halocyclization of 2-(1-alkynyl)phenylphosphonic acid diesters
in dichloroethane with the addition of n-Bu4NX or/and AgI in good to excellent
yields. This reaction provides an efficient route to 4-halophosphaisocoumarins
and represents the first example of bromo- and chlorocyclization of unsaturated
phosphonic acid diesters.

PMID: 18855452  [PubMed]


49. Inorg Chem. 2008 Oct 20;47(20):9182-92. doi: 10.1021/ic8008706. Epub 2008 Sep 26.

Metal-metal communication in copper(II) complexes of cyclotetraphosphazene
ligands.

Ainscough EW(1), Brodie AM, Davidson RJ, Moubaraki B, Murray KS, Otter CA,
Waterland MR.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry-Institute of Fundamental Sciences, Massey University, Private Bag 11
222, Palmerston North, New Zealand 4442. e.ainscough@massey.ac.nz

Copper(II) chloride and bromide react with the pyridyloxy-substituted
cyclotetraphosphazene ligands, octakis(2-pyridyloxy)cyclotetraphosphazene (L(1)),
and octakis(4-methyl-2-pyridyloxy)cyclotetraphosphazene (L(2)), to form the
dimetallic complexes, [L(CuX2)2] (L = L(1), X = Br; L = L(2), X = Cl or Br), and 
[{L(1)(CuCl2)2}n]. Single crystal X-ray crystallography shows the complex
[{L(1)(CuCl2)2}n] to be a coordination polymer propagated by interligand
"Cu(mu-Cl)2Cu" bridges whereas [L(2)(CuCl2)2] forms discrete dimetallic
cyclotetraphosphazene-based moieties. The variable temperature magnetic
susceptibility data for [{L(1)(CuCl2)2}n] are consistent with a weak
antiferromagnetic exchange interaction between the copper(II) centers occurring
via the bridging chloride ions. [L(2)(CuCl2)2] and [L(CuBr2)2] (L = L(1) and
L(2)) exhibit normal Curie-like susceptibilities. The abstraction of a chloride
ion, using [Ag(MeCN)4](PF6), from each copper site in [L(2)(CuCl2)2], affords the
new complex, [L(2)(CuCl)2](PF6)2, in which the two copper(II) ions are separated 
by "N-P=N-P=N" phosphazene bridges. Electron spin resonance and variable
temperature magnetic measurements indicate the occurrence of weak
antiferromagnetic coupling between the unpaired electrons on the copper(II)
centers. Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations on the [L(2)(CuCl)2](2+)
dication and the related cyclotriphosphazene complex, [L(4)(CuCl2)2] (L(4) =
hexakis(4-methyl-2-pyridyloxy)cyclotriphosphazene), have identified
"electron-density-bridge" molecular orbitals which involve Cu 3d orbitals
overlapping with the non-bonding N-based molecular orbitals on the phosphazene
rings as the pathway for this interaction.

PMID: 18817378  [PubMed]


50. J Comp Neurol. 2008 Sep 1;510(1):79-99. doi: 10.1002/cne.21772.

Distinct molecular pathways for development of telencephalic interneuron subtypes
revealed through analysis of Lhx6 mutants.

Zhao Y(1), Flandin P, Long JE, Cuesta MD, Westphal H, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Here we analyze the role of the Lhx6 lim-homeobox transcription factor in
regulating the development of subsets of neocortical, hippocampal, and striatal
interneurons. An Lhx6 loss-of-function allele, which expresses placental alkaline
phosphatase (PLAP), allowed analysis of the development and fate of
Lhx6-expressing interneurons in mice lacking this homeobox transcription factor. 
There are Lhx6+;Dlx+ and Lhx6-;Dlx+ subtypes of tangentially migrating
interneurons. Most interneurons in Lhx6(PLAP/PLAP) mutants migrate to the cortex,
although less efficiently, and exhibit defects in populating the marginal zone
and superficial parts of the neocortical plate. By contrast, migration to
superficial parts of the hippocampus is not seriously affected. Furthermore,
whereas parvalbumin+ and somatostatin+ interneurons do not differentiate, NPY+
interneurons are present; we suggest that these NPY+ interneurons are derived
from the Lhx6-;Dlx+ subtype. Striatal interneurons show deficits distinct from
pallial interneurons, including a reduction in the NPY+ subtype. We provide
evidence that Lhx6 mediates these effects through promoting expression of
receptors that regulate interneuron migration (ErbB4, CXCR4, and CXCR7), and
through promoting the expression of transcription factors either known (Arx) or
implicated (bMaf, Cux2, and NPAS1) in controlling interneuron development.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2547494
PMID: 18613121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Dalton Trans. 2008 Apr 28;(16):2183-9. doi: 10.1039/b715995a. Epub 2008 Mar 6.

Syntheses, structures and magnetism of linear tri- and tetra-copper chains
containing anions of N,N'-bis(pyrimidine-2-yl)formamidine.

Chan ZK(1), Lin CH, Wang CC, Chen JD, Wang JC, Liu CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Chung-Yuan Christian University, Chung-Li, Taiwan,
ROC.

Reaction of Kpmf (pmf(-) = anion of N,N'-bis(pyrimidyl-2-yl)formamidine, Hpmf)
with divalent copper salt CuX2 afforded the linear trinuclear complexes of the
type [Cu3(pmf)4](X)2 (X = BF4, 1; NO3, 2; ClO4, 3), while reaction of Kpmf with
monovalent copper salt CuX gave the linear tetranuclear complexes of the type
Cu4(pmf)4X2 (X = Cl, 4; Br, 5). The copper atoms of complexes 1-5 are helically
bridged by four pmf(-) ligands, resulting in three different coordination modes
for the pmf(-) ligands. In complexes 1-3, one pmf(-) ligand adopts a new
coordination mode with the two amine nitrogen atoms chelating to the central
copper atom, while the other three feature chelation by one pyrimidyl and one
adjacent amine nitrogen atoms. The Cu(II)...Cu(II) distances are 2.729(2) and
2.825(2) A for 1, 2.762(1) and 2.832(1) A for 2 and 2.732(1) and 2.827(1) A for
3. In complexes 4 and 5, the pmf(-) ligands are coordinated to the copper atoms
in tetradentate fashion with each nitrogen atom coordinating to one Cu atom. The 
Cu...Cu distances are 2.580(1) and 2.549(1) A for 4 and 2.582(1) and 2.561(1) A
for 5. Antiferromagnetic interactions between the copper ions are observed with
calculated g and J values of 2.03(1) and -188(2) cm(-1) for 1, 2.09(1) and
-268(3) cm(-1) for 2, and 2.09(1) and -486(2) cm(-1) for 5. By comparing the
magnetic data it can be shown that the bonding mode of the pmf(-) ligand is one
of the important factors in determining the strengths of the Cu...Cu interactions
in linear trinuclear and tetranuclear copper complexes.

PMID: 18398544  [PubMed]


52. Development. 2008 Feb;135(4):729-41. doi: 10.1242/dev.013276.

Cux2 (Cutl2) integrates neural progenitor development with cell-cycle progression
during spinal cord neurogenesis.

Iulianella A(1), Sharma M, Durnin M, Vanden Heuvel GB, Trainor PA.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 E. 50th Street, Kansas City, MO
64110, USA.

Neurogenesis requires the coordination of neural progenitor proliferation and
differentiation with cell-cycle regulation. However, the mechanisms coordinating 
these distinct cellular activities are poorly understood. Here we demonstrate for
the first time that a Cut-like homeodomain transcription factor family member,
Cux2 (Cutl2), regulates cell-cycle progression and development of neural
progenitors. Cux2 loss-of-function mouse mutants exhibit smaller spinal cords
with deficits in neural progenitor development as well as in neuroblast and
interneuron differentiation. These defects correlate with reduced cell-cycle
progression of neural progenitors coupled with diminished Neurod and p27(Kip1)
activity. Conversely, in Cux2 gain-of-function transgenic mice, the spinal cord
is enlarged in association with enhanced neuroblast formation and neuronal
differentiation, particularly with respect to interneurons. Furthermore, Cux2
overexpression induces high levels of Neurod and p27(Kip1). Mechanistically, we
discovered through chromatin immunoprecipitation assays that Cux2 binds both the 
Neurod and p27(Kip1) promoters in vivo, indicating that these interactions are
direct. Our results therefore show that Cux2 functions at multiple levels during 
spinal cord neurogenesis. Cux2 initially influences cell-cycle progression in
neural progenitors but subsequently makes additional inputs through Neurod and
p27(Kip1) to regulate neuroblast formation, cell-cycle exit and cell-fate
determination. Thus our work defines novel roles for Cux2 as a transcription
factor that integrates cell-cycle progression with neural progenitor development 
during spinal cord neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3093760
PMID: 18223201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Org Lett. 2007 Aug 16;9(17):3413-6. Epub 2007 Jul 27.

Palladium-catalyzed carbonylative annulation reaction of
2-(1-alkynyl)benzenamines: selective synthesis of
3-(halomethylene)indolin-2-ones.

Tang S(1), Yu QF, Peng P, Li JH, Zhong P, Tang RY.

Author information: 
(1)Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100101, China.

A novel and selective palladium-catalyzed carbonylative annulation process for
the synthesis of 3-(halomethylene)indolin-2-ones was demonstrated. In the
presence of PdX2 and CuX2, 3-(halomethylene)indolin-2-ones were selectively
obtained from the carbonylative annulations of 2-(1-alkynyl)benzenamines with CO 
in moderate to good yields.

PMID: 17655317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Colloid Interface Sci. 2007 Sep 1;313(1):34-40. Epub 2007 May 24.

Preparation, characterization, and CuX2 and CoX2 (X=Cl-, Br-, ClO-4) adsorption
behavior of a polyhedral oligomer silsesquioxane functionalized with an organic
base.

Dias Filho NL(1), Marangoni F, Costa RM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Física e Química, UNESP-Universidade Estadual Paulista, Ilha
Solteira, SP, Brazil. nldias@dfq.feis.unesp.br

In this paper we report on the synthesis, characterization, and adsorption
properties of the first 3-amino-1,2,4-triazole-modified porous silsesquioxane
(ATPS). The isotherms of adsorption of MX(2) (M=Cu(II), Co(II); X=Cl(-), Br(-),
ClO(-)(4)) by ATPS were studied in ethanol and aqueous solutions at 298 K. The
results showed that there is a good fit between the experimental data and the
Langmuir isotherm. The adsorption capacity in both solvents followed the sequence
Cu(II)>>Co(II). The lowest adsorption for Co(II) should be related to the largest
hydration volume, which obstructs the adsorption capacity of the surface, and
consequently causes a decrease in the number of cations adsorbed. For the salts
with different anions the sequence was MCl(2)>MBr(2)>M(ClO(4))(2) in both
solvents. The low affinity for M(ClO(4))(2) toward the solid phase is a
consequence of the poorer coordination ability of the ClO(-)(4). Adsorptions from
ethanol solutions were higher than those from aqueous solutions due to the higher
polarity of water, which can more strongly solvate the solute and the basic sites
on the surface. The following adsorption capacities (in mmol g(-1)) were
determined: 0.24 (aq) and 0.84 (eth) for CuCl(2), 0.09 (aq) and 0.16 (eth) for
CuBr(2), and 0.08 (aq) and 0.11 (eth) for Cu(ClO(4))(2); 0.02 (aq) and 0.07 (eth)
for CoCl(2), 0.02 (aq) and 0.06 (eth) for CoBr(2), and 0.01 (aq) and 0.05 (eth)
for Co(ClO(4))(2).

PMID: 17531245  [PubMed]


55. Endocrinology. 2007 Jul;148(7):3327-37. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

Characterization of three growth hormone-responsive transcription factors
preferentially expressed in adult female liver.

Laz EV(1), Holloway MG, Chen CS, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, 5 Cummington Street, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Plasma GH profiles regulate the sexually dimorphic expression of cytochromes P450
and many other genes in rat and mouse liver; however, the proximal
transcriptional regulators of these genes are unknown. Presently, we characterize
three liver transcription factors that are expressed in adult female rat and
mouse liver at levels up to 16-fold [thymus high-mobility group box protein
(Tox)], 73-fold [tripartite motif-containing 24 (Trim24)/transcription initiation
factor-1alpha (TIF1alpha)], and 125-fold [cut-like 2 (Cutl2)/cut homeobox 2
(Cux2)] higher than in adult males, depending on the strain and species, with Tox
expression only detected in mice. In rats, these sex differences first emerged at
puberty, when the high prepubertal expression of Cutl2 and Trim24 was
extinguished in males but was further increased in females. Rat hepatic
expression of Cutl2 and Trim24 was abolished by hypophysectomy and, in the case
of Cutl2, was restored to near-female levels by continuous GH replacement. Cutl2 
and Trim24 were increased to female-like levels in livers of intact male rats and
mice treated with GH continuously (female GH pattern), whereas Tox expression
reached only about 40% of adult female levels. Expression of all three genes was 
also elevated to normal female levels or higher in male mice whose plasma GH
profile was feminized secondary to somatostatin gene disruption. Cutl2 and Trim24
both responded to GH infusion in mice within 10-24 h and Tox within 4 d, as
compared with at least 4-7 d required for the induced expression of several
continuous GH-regulated cytochromes P450 and other female-specific hepatic genes.
Cutl2, Trim24, and Tox were substantially up-regulated in livers of male mice
deficient in either of two transcription factors implicated in GH regulation of
liver sex specificity, namely, signal transducer and activator of transcription
5b (STAT5b) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha), with sex-specific
expression being substantially reduced or lost in mice deficient in either
nuclear factor. Cutl2 and Trim24 both display transcriptional repressor activity 
and could thus contribute to the loss of GH-regulated, male-specific liver gene
expression seen in male mice deficient in STAT5b or HNF4alpha. Binding sites for 
Cutl1, whose DNA-binding specificity is close to that of Cutl2, were
statistically overrepresented in STAT5b-dependent male-specific mouse genes,
lending support to this hypothesis.

PMCID: PMC2585771
PMID: 17412818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2007 Feb;61(1):3-19.

Molecular genetics of bipolar disorder and depression.

Kato T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Dynamics of Mental Disorders, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Wako, Saitama, Japan. kato@brain.riken.jp

In this review, all papers relevant to the molecular genetics of bipolar disorder
published from 2004 to the present (mid 2006) are reviewed, and major results on 
depression are summarized. Several candidate genes for schizophrenia may also be 
associated with bipolar disorder: G72, DISC1, NRG1, RGS4, NCAM1, DAO, GRM3, GRM4,
GRIN2B, MLC1, SYNGR1, and SLC12A6. Of these, association with G72 may be most
robust. However, G72 haplotypes and polymorphisms associated with bipolar
disorder are not consistent with each other. The positional candidate approach
showed an association between bipolar disorder and TRPM2 (21q22.3), GPR50 (Xq28),
Citron (12q24), CHMP1.5 (18p11.2), GCHI (14q22-24), MLC1 (22q13), GABRA5
(15q11-q13), BCR (22q11), CUX2, FLJ32356 (12q23-q24), and NAPG (18p11). Studies
that focused on mood disorder comorbid with somatic symptoms, suggested roles for
the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) 3644 mutation and the POLG mutation. From gene
expression analysis, PDLIM5, somatostatin, and the mtDNA 3243 mutation were found
to be related to bipolar disorder. Whereas most previous positive findings were
not supported by subsequent studies, DRD1 and IMPA2 have been implicated in
follow-up studies. Several candidate genes in the circadian rhythm pathway,
BmaL1, TIMELESS, and PERIOD3, are reported to be associated with bipolar
disorder. Linkage studies show many new linkage loci. In depression, the
previously reported positive finding of a gene-environmental interaction between 
HTTLPR (insertion/deletion polymorphism in the promoter of a serotonin
transporter) and stress was not replicated. Although the role of the TPH2
mutation in depression had drawn attention previously, this has not been
replicated either. Pharmacogenetic studies show a relationship between
antidepressant response and HTR2A or FKBP5. New technologies for comprehensive
genomic analysis have already been applied. HTTLPR and BDNF promoter
polymorphisms are now found to be more complex than previously thought, and
previous papers on these polymorphisms should be treated with caution. Finally,
this report addresses some possible causes for the lack of replication in this
field.

PMID: 17239033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Neurosci. 2006 Dec 20;26(51):13273-8.

Molecular interaction between projection neuron precursors and invading
interneurons via stromal-derived factor 1 (CXCL12)/CXCR4 signaling in the
cortical subventricular zone/intermediate zone.

Tiveron MC(1), Rossel M, Moepps B, Zhang YL, Seidenfaden R, Favor J, König N,
Cremer H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie du Développement de Marseille Luminy, Centre National de 
la Recherche Scientifique/Université de Mediterranée, 13288 Marseille, France.

Most cortical interneurons are generated in the subpallial ganglionic eminences
and migrate tangentially to their final destinations in the neocortex. Within the
cortex, interneurons follow mainly stereotype routes in the subventricular
zone/intermediate zone (SVZ/IZ) and in the marginal zone. It has been suggested
that interactions between invading interneurons and locally generated projection 
neurons are implicated in the temporal and spatial regulation of the invasion
process. However, so far experimental evidence for such interactions is lacking. 
We show here that the chemokine stromal-derived factor 1 (SDF-1; CXCL12) is
expressed in the main invasion route for cortical interneurons in the SVZ/IZ.
Most SDF-1-positive cells are proliferating and express the homeodomain
transcription factors Cux1 and Cux2. Using MASH-1 mutant mice in concert with the
interneuron marker DLX, we exclude that interneurons themselves produce the
chemokine in an autocrine manner. We conclude that the SDF-1-expressing cell
population represents the precursors of projection neurons during their
transition and amplification in the SVZ/IZ. Using mice lacking the SDF-1 receptor
CXCR4 or Pax6, we demonstrate that SDF-1 expression in the cortical SVZ/IZ is
essential for recognition of this pathway by interneurons. These results
represent the first evidence for a molecular interaction between precursors of
projection neurons and invading interneurons during corticogenesis.

PMID: 17182777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Chemistry. 2007;13(6):1842-50.

Mechanistic insights into stereoselective catalysis-the effects of counterions in
a CuII-bissulfoximine-catalyzed Diels-Alder reaction.

Bolm C(1), Martin M, Gescheidt G, Palivan C, Stanoeva T, Bertagnolli H, Feth M,
Schweiger A, Mitrikas G, Harmer J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Organische Chemie der RWTH Aachen, Landoltweg 1, 52056 Aachen,
Germany. Carsten.Bolm@oc.rwth-aachen.de

The initial steps of an enantioselective Diels-Alder reaction catalyzed by a
CuII-bissulfoximine complex were followed by EXAFS (EXAFS=extended X-ray
absorption fine structure), EPR (EPR=electron paramagnetic resonance)
spectroscopy (CW-EPR, FID-detected EPR, pulse ENDOR, HYSCORE; CW=continuous wave;
ENDOR=electron nuclear double resonance; HYSCORE=hyperfine sublevel correlation; 
FID=free induction decay), and UV-visible spectroscopy. The complexes formed
between the parent CuX2 (X=Cl-, Br-, TfO-, SbF6-) salts, the chiral
bissulfoximine ligand (S,S)-1, and N-(1-oxoprop-2-en-1-yl)oxazolidin-2-one (2) as
the substrate in CH2Cl2 were investigated in frozen and fluid solution. In all
cases, penta- or hexacoordinated CuII centers were established. The complexes
with counterions indicating high stereoselectivity (TfO- and SbF6-) reveal one
unique species in which substrate 2 binds to pseudoequatorial positions (via O
atoms), shifting the counterions to axial locations. On the other hand, those
lacking stereoselectivity (X=Cl- and Br-) form two species in which the parent
halogen anions remain at equatorial positions preventing the formation of
geometries compatible with those found for X=TfO- and SbF6-.

PMID: 17115464  [PubMed]


59. J Phys Chem B. 2005 Dec 8;109(48):22890-8.

On the quenching of MLCT(Re-->bpy) luminescence by Cu(II) species in Re(I)
polymer micelles.

Wolcan E(1), Alessandrini JL, Féliz MR.

Author information: 
(1)INIFTA, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Universidad Nacional de La Plata,
Casilla de Correo 16, Sucursal 4, (1900) La Plata, República Argentina.
ewolcan@inifta.unlp.edu.ar

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and dynamic light scattering (DLS) studies
on acetonitrile solutions of the polymer {[(vpy)2-vpyRe(CO)3bpy] CF3SO3}200
demonstrated that the Re(I) polymer molecules aggregate to form spherical
micelles of radius R = 156 nm. Coordination of Cu(II) species to the Re (I)
polymer causes a decrease in the micelle radius and a distortion from the
spherical shape. Besides, the coordination of Cu(II) species to the
{[(vpy)2-vpyRe(CO)3bpy] CF3SO3}200 polymer produces the quenching of the metal to
ligand charge transfer (MLCT) excited state by energy transfer processes that are
more efficient than those in the quenching of the monomer pyRe(CO)3bpy+
luminescence by Cu(II). Moreover, the kinetics of the quenching by Cu(II) do not 
follow a Stern-Volmer behavior. Conversely, the quenching of the MLCT
luminescence of the Re(I) polymer by the sacrificial electron donor 2,2',2'
'-nitrilotriethanol, TEOA, follows a Stern-Volmer kinetics. A comparison is made 
between the quenching by CuX2 (X = Cl or CF3SO3) and TEOA.

PMID: 16853982  [PubMed]


60. Cereb Cortex. 2006 Jul;16 Suppl 1:i82-8.

Cellular patterns of transcription factor expression in developing cortical
interneurons.

Cobos I(1), Long JE, Thwin MT, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94158-2611, USA.

Most gamma-aminobutyric acidergic interneurons in the neocortex and hippocampus
are derived from subpallial progenitors in the medial ganglionic eminence and
migrate tangentially to the pallium, where they differentiate into a diverse set 
of neuronal subtypes. Toward elucidating the mechanisms underlying the generation
of interneuron diversity, we have studied in mice the expression patterns in
differentiating and mature neocortical interneurons of 8 transcription factors,
including 6 homeobox (Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, Arx, Lhx6, Cux2), 1 basic
helix-loop-helix, (NPAS1), and 1 bZIP (MafB). Their patterns of expression change
during interneuron differentiation and show distinct distributions within
interneuron subpopulations in adult neocortex. This study is a first step to
define the combinatorial codes of transcription factors that participate in
regulating the specification and function of cortical interneuron subtypes.

PMID: 16766712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Jun 14;128(23):7416-7.

Highly selective C-H functionalization/halogenation of acetanilide.

Wan X(1), Ma Z, Li B, Zhang K, Cao S, Zhang S, Shi Z.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Peking University, Beijing
100871, China.

Highly regioselective C-H functionalization/halogenation of acetanilides to
produce ortho-haloacetanilides was catalyzed by Pd(OAc)2 and Cu(OAc) 2 with CuX2 
as the halogen source.

PMID: 16756276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Inorg Chem. 2006 Apr 17;45(8):3452-5.

Synthesis and characterization of rhenium-copper sulfide cluster complexes
[(Ph3P)2N][Re3(CuX)(mu3-S)4Cl6(PMe2Ph)3] (X = Cl, Br, I).

Iijima K(1), Sunaga T, Hirose M, Saito T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Kanagawa University, Hiratsuka,
Kanagawa 259-1293, Japan.

The reaction of a trinuclear rhenium sulfide cluster compound Re3S7Cl7 with
dimethylphenylphosphine and CuX2 (X = Cl or Br) or CuX (X = Cl, Br, or I) formed 
tetranuclear cluster complexes [(Ph3P)2N][Re3(CuX)(mu3-S)4Cl6(PMe2Ph)3] (X = Cl, 
Br, or I). Their solutions have the characteristic intense blue color with
visible spectral bands near 600 nm. Single-crystal X-ray structures show that
three mu-S atoms in the intermediate trinuclear rhenium complex coordinate to a
copper atom, forming elongated tetrahedral structures in which Re-Cu bonding
interaction is negligible (Re-Cu distances are 3.50 to approximately 3.54 A as
compared with Re-Re distances ranging from 2.69 to 2.81 A).

PMID: 16602806  [PubMed]


63. Inorg Chem. 2006 Apr 3;45(7):2925-41.

Dinuclear copper(II) complexes with {Cu2(mu-hydroxo)bis(mu-carboxylato)}+ cores
and their reactions with sugar phosphate esters: A substrate binding model of
fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase.

Kato M(1), Tanase T, Mikuriya M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Nara Women's University,
Kitauoya-higashi-machi, Nara 630-8285, Japan.

Reactions of CuX2.nH2O with the biscarboxylate ligand XDK (H2XDK =
m-xylenediamine bis(Kemp's triacid imide)) in the presence of N-donor auxiliary
ligands yielded a series of dicopper(II) complexes, [Cu2(mu-OH)(XDK)(L)2]X (L =
N,N,N',N'-tetramethylethylenediamine (tetmen), X = NO3 (1a), Cl (1b); L =
N,N,N'-trimethylethylenediamine (tmen), X = NO3 (2a), Cl (2b); L =2,2'-bipyridine
(bpy), X = NO3 (3); L = 1,10-phenanthroline (phen), X = NO3 (4); L =
4,4'-dimethyl-2,2'-bipyridine (Me2bpy), X = NO3 (5); L =
4-methyl-1,10-phenanthroline (Mephen), X = NO3 (6)). Complexes 1-6 were
characterized by X-ray crystallography (Cu...Cu = 3.1624(6)-3.2910(4) A), and the
electrochemical and magnetic properties were also examined. Complexes 3 and 4
readily reacted with diphenyl phosphoric acid (HDPP) or bis(4-nitrophenyl)
phosphoric acid (HBNPP) to give [Cu2(mu-phosphate)(XDK)(L)2]NO3 (L = bpy,
phosphate = DPP (11); L = phen, phosphate = DPP (12), BNPP (13)), where the
phsophate diester bridges the two copper ions in a mu-1,3-O,O' bidentate fashion 
(Cu...Cu = 4.268(3)-4.315(1) A). Complexes 4 and 6 with phen and Mephen have
proven to be good precursors to accommodate a series of sugar monophosphate
esters (Sugar-P) onto the biscarboxylate-bridged dicopper centers, yielding
[Cu2(mu-Sugar-P)(XDK)(L)2] (Sugar-P = alpha-D-Glc-1-P (23a and b), D-Glc-6-P (24a
and b), D-Man-6-P (25a), D-Fru-6-P (26a and b); L = phen (a), Mephen (b)) and
[Cu2(mu-Gly-n-P)(XDK)(Mephen)2] (Gly-n-P = glycerol n-phosphate; n = 2 (21), 3
(22)), where Glc, Man, and Fru are glucose, mannose, and fructose, respectively. 
The structure of [Cu2(mu-MNPP)(XDK)(phen)2(CH3OH)] (20) was characterized as a
reference compound (H2MNPP = 4-nitrophenyl phosphoric acid). Complexes 4 and 6
also reacted with d-fructose 1,6-bisphosphate (D-Fru-1,6-P2) to afford the
tetranuclear copper(II) complexes formulated as [Cu4(mu-D-Fru-1,6-P2)(XDK)2(L)4] 
(L = phen (27a), Mephen (27b)). The detailed structure of 27a was determined by
X-ray crystallography to involve two different tetranuclear complexes with alpha-
and beta-anomers of D-Fru-1,6-P2, [Cu4(mu-alpha-D-Fru-1,6-P2)(XDK)2(phen)4] and
[Cu4(mu-beta-D-Fru-1,6-P2)(XDK)2(phen)4], in which the D-Fru-1,6-P2 tetravalent
anion bridges the two [Cu2(XDK)(phen)2]2+ units through the C1 and C6 phosphate
groups in a mu-1,3-O,O' bidentate fashion (Cu...Cu = 4.042(2)-4.100(2) A).
Notably, the structure with alpha-D-Fru-1,6-P2 demonstrated the presence of a
strong hydrogen bond between the C2 hydroxyl group and the C1 phosphate oxygen
atom, which may support the previously proposed catalytic mechanism in the active
site of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase.

PMID: 16562948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Dalton Trans. 2005 May 5;(9):1743-6. Epub 2005 Mar 31.

Heteroleptic pyrimidine-2-olate and 4,4[prime or minute]-bipyridine copper(II)
layered metal-organic frameworks with swelling properties.

Barea E(1), Quiros M, Navarro JA, Salas JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Quimica Inorganica, Universidad de Granada, Av. Fuentenueva
S/N, E-18071 Granada, Spain.

One-pot reaction of CuX2 salts (X = NO3, Cl, ClO4, AcO, SO(4)/2),
2-Hydroxypyrimidine hydrochloride (2-Hpymo.HCl) and 4,4'-bipyridine (4,4'-bpy),
in H2O : ethanol : ammonia (20 : 10 : 5) solution, leads to isomorphous extended 
layered materials of type [Cu3(mu-OH)2(mu-Cl)2(mu-2-pymo)(mu-4,4'-bpy)3]nXn.mH2O 
(X = NO3 (1a), Cl (1b), ClO4 (1c), AcO (1d), SO(4)/2 (1e)). The single crystal
X-ray crystallographic analysis performed on species exemplifies that it is built
by 2D [Cu3(mu-OH)2(mu-Cl)2(mu-2-pymo)(mu-4,4'-bpy)3]n(n+) cationic sheets, which 
pack in a staggered fashion, with non coordinated NO3- anions and crystallisation
water molecules included in the interlayer voids. XRPD studies performed on the
species show a swelling response along the crystallographic a axis concomitant to
aliphatic alcohol inclusion. Additionally, we have also studied the magnetic
properties of , which show that its magnetic behaviour is dominated by the strong
antiferromagnetic interactions taking place in the Cu3(mu-OH)2(mu-Cl)2 trinuclear
cores.

PMID: 15852127  [PubMed]


65. Gene. 2005 Jan 3;344:273-85. Epub 2004 Dec 10.

Biochemical characterization of the mammalian Cux2 protein.

Gingras H(1), Cases O, Krasilnikova M, Bérubé G, Nepveu A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University Health Center, Canada; Department 
of Biochemistry, McGill University, Canada.

The CCAAT displacement protein (CDP) and cux (Cut homeobox) genes were originally
identified as the human and mouse orthologs of Drosophila melanogaster cut. More 
recently, vertebrates were found to possess a second cut orthologs that was
generated by gene duplication: Cux2. We report the initial biochemical
characterization of the Cux2 protein in tissue culture and in vitro. We generated
four polyclonal antibodies that were able to recognize the human and mouse Cux2
protein but displayed little or no cross-reactivity towards CDP1 and Cux1. The
expression of the Cux2 protein was convincingly detected in only one among 19
neuronal cell lines: the SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cell line. CDP/Cux proteins 
contain four DNA binding domains, three Cut repeat (CR1, CR2 and CR3) and one Cut
homeodomain (HD). Purified fusion proteins containing either CR1CR2, CR2CR3HD or 
CR3HD exhibited similar DNA binding specificities as the corresponding domains of
Cux1, but their DNA binding kinetics were much more rapid. Similarly, the
full-length Cux2 protein made rapid but transient interactions with DNA. We did
not observe an N-terminally processed Cux2 isoform equivalent to the Cux1 p110
isoform. Whereas Cux1 can function as a repressor or activator in a
promoter-specific manner, Cux2 functioned exclusively as a transcriptional
repressor in NIH3T3 cells. Overall, our results suggest that the Cux1 and Cux2
proteins carry distinct biochemical functions. Cux2 is able, like Cux1, to
perform the CCAAT-displacement activity. However, Cux2 is unlikely to execute
transcriptional regulatory functions that require stable interaction with DNA.

PMID: 15656993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Org Chem. 2005 Jan 21;70(2):477-9.

General and selective synthesis of (Z)-3-haloacrylates via palladium-catalyzed
carbonylation of terminal alkynes.

Li JH(1), Tang S, Xie YX.

Author information: 
(1)Contribution from the Key Laboratory of Chemical Biology & Traditional Chinese
Medicine Research, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan Normal
University, Changsha 410081, China. jhli@hunnu.edu.cn

Erratum in
    J Org Chem. 2011 Mar 4;76(5):1511.

A general and selective palladium-catalyzed carbonylation of terminal alkynes
method for the synthesis of (Z)-3-haloacrylates is presented. In the presence of 
a catalytic amount of PdX2 and 5 equiv of CuX2 (X=Cl and Br), terminal alkynes
were carbonylated to afford the corresponding (Z)-3-haloacrylates exclusively in 
moderate to good yields. The results showed that the effect of solvent had a
fundamental influence on the chemoselectivity and stereoselectivity of the
palladium-catalyzed carbonylation reaction.

PMID: 15651789  [PubMed]


67. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2005 Jan 5;132B(1):38-45.

Linkage disequilibrium mapping of bipolar affective disorder at 12q23-q24
provides evidence for association at CUX2 and FLJ32356.

Glaser B(1), Kirov G, Green E, Craddock N, Owen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychological Medicine, University of Wales College of Medicine,
Heath Park, Cardiff CF4 4XN, Wales, UK.

Chromosome 12q23-q24 has been implicated by several linkage studies as harboring 
a gene for bipolar affective disorder. We performed linkage disequilibrium (LD)
mapping with 17 microsatellite markers across a 1.6 Mb-wide segment forming the
central part of our narrowest linkage region. A significant signal (P = 0.0016)
was identified for one microsatellite marker in our UK Caucasian case-control
sample (347 cases, 374 controls). Genes, including regulatory elements, around
this marker were screened for mutations and the LD structure of the region
determined by genotyping 22 SNPs and insertion/deletion polymorphisms in 94
individuals. A set of 11 haplotype tagging (ht) SNPs was genotyped in our sample 
using a two-stage procedure. Two SNPs (rs3847953 and rs933399) and an
insertion/deletion with putative functional relevance (which are in high LD with 
each other and with the microsatellite marker) showed significant or nearly
significant association with bipolar disorder after Bonferroni-correction
(reaching nominal P values from P = 0.002 to P = 0.005). In a sample of 110 UK
Caucasian parent-offspring trios there was a trend for an over transmission in
the same direction that failed to meet conventional levels of statistical
significance. Our data provide evidence for association between bipolar mood
disorder and markers on chromosome 12q23-q24 but need replication in independent 
samples.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15389760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Dalton Trans. 2004 Jan 7;(1):59-64. Epub 2003 Nov 14.

Antisymmetric exchange in two tricopper(II) complexes containing a
[Cu3(micro3-OMe)]5+ core.

Liu X(1), de Miranda MP, McInnes EJ, Kilner CA, Halcrow MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Leeds, Woodhouse Lane, Leeds, UKLS2
9JT.

Reaction of CuX2(X-=Cl- or Br-) with 2 molar equivalents of
3[5]-(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)pyrazole (HpzMes) in MeOH in the presence of NaOH
yields [Cu3X(HpzMes)2(micro-pzMes)3(micro3-OMe)]X (X-=Cl- or Br-). Crystal
structures of these compounds show almost identical triangles of Cu(II) ions,
centred by a triply bridging methoxide ligand and with three edge-bridging
pyrazolide groups. The mesityl substituents on the bridging pyrazolide ligands
are arranged in HT, HH, TT fashion. chi(M)T for both compounds decreases steadily
with decreasing temperature, reaching 0.40 cm(3) mol(-1) K at 70 K before
decreasing further below 40 K. This low temperature behaviour could not be
interpreted using conventional superexchange Hamiltonians, but was reproduced by 
an alternative model that incorporated an additional antisymmetric exchange term.
This interpretation was confirmed by the Q-band EPR spectra of the two compounds.
NMR experiments show that the structures of these compounds are not retained in
solution, in contrast to other closely related tricopper compounds. These are the
first examples of triangular Cu(II) compounds bearing a [Cu3micro3-OR)]5+(R is
not equal to H) core motif, and the first triangular compounds showing
antisymmetric exchange to have been analysed by both susceptibility and EPR
measurements.

PMID: 15356742  [PubMed]


69. Cereb Cortex. 2004 Dec;14(12):1408-20. Epub 2004 Jul 6.

Dynamics of Cux2 expression suggests that an early pool of SVZ precursors is
fated to become upper cortical layer neurons.

Zimmer C(1), Tiveron MC, Bodmer R, Cremer H.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Institute of Marseille, NMDA, Campus de Luminy case 907,
13288 Marseille Cedex 9, France.

Projection neurons destined for the cortical plate are generated sequentially
from the proliferative ventricular and subventricular zones (VZ/SVZ) of the
pallium. However, the respective contribution of both proliferative zones to the 
generation of cortical plate neurons is better established in humans and
non-human primates than in rodents. We identified Cux2 as a new marker for murine
cortical subpopulations and used it to provide new insights to the development of
the mouse cortex. Cux2 is an orthologue of the Drosophila cut gene, which encodes
a homeodomain protein involved in neuronal specification. During cortical
development Cux2 identifies two subpopulations with different spatial origins,
migratory behaviours and phenotypic characteristics: (i) a population of
interneurons, which invades the pallium from the subpallium; and (ii) a neuronal 
population produced in the pallium around embryonic day 11.5, which divides in
the SVZ and accumulates in the intermediate zone (IZ). Subsequently, Cux2 is a
marker of upper cortical layers. Using different molecular markers and
Pax6-deficient mice, we provide data that suggest a relationship between the
early-determined Cux2-positive neuronal precursors in the SVZ/IZ and upper layer 
neurons. This suggests that laminar determination of upper cortical layer neurons
occurs during the earliest stages of corticogenesis.

PMID: 15238450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Gene Expr Patterns. 2003 Oct;3(5):571-7.

Dynamic expression of murine Cux2 in craniofacial, limb, urogenital and neuronal 
primordia.

Iulianella A(1), Vanden Heuvel G, Trainor P.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute For Medical Research, 1000E 50th Street, Kansas City, MO
64110, USA.

CDP/Cut homeodomain factors are a divergent group of transcriptional repressors
that are conserved during metazoan evolution. The cut locus of Drosophila is
required for external sensory organ development and dorso-ventral boundary
formation in the wing. In vertebrates, two CDP/Cut genes have been identified,
Cux1 and Cux2. While Cux1 is widely expressed in mouse embryos particularly in
the nephrogenic and urogenital systems, in contrast the early embryonic
expression of Cux2 has not been characterized. Here we describe the dynamic
profile of Cux2 during mouse embryogenesis. Cux2 expression becomes elaborated in
a number of tissues during organogenesis including the olfactory epithelium,
branchial arch and limb bud progress zones, roof plate, motor neurons, dorsal
root ganglia and urogenital tissues. The conservation of signaling pathways
between the branchial arches and limb buds is well documented and surprisingly
this can also be applied to the developing urogenital system. Cux2 expression
coincides with many tissue regions undergoing proliferative growth or cell
rearrangements, however some later expression domains also include sites of
programmed cell death. Cux2 is hypothesized to function as a transcriptional
regulator that inhibits terminal differentiation and cell cycle exit.

PMID: 12971989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Peripher Nerv Syst. 2002 Jun;7(2):87-95.

Mutation analysis of 12 candidate genes for distal hereditary motor neuropathy
type II (distal HMN II) linked to 12q24.3.

Irobi J(1), Nelis E, Verhoeven K, De Vriendt E, Dierick I, De Jonghe P, Van
Broeckhoven C, Timmerman V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for
Biotechnology (VIB), Born-Bunge Foundation (BBS), University of Antwerp,
Antwerpen, Belgium.

Distal hereditary motor neuropathies (distal HMNs) are characterized by
degeneration of anterior horn cells of the spinal cord resulting in muscle
weakness and atrophy. Distal HMN type II is genetically linked to chromosome
12q24.3 and located within a 13 cM region flanked by D12S86 and D12S340. We
previously excluded 5 positional and functional candidate genes for distal HMN
II. Here, we report the exclusion of 12 additional candidate genes localized
within the distal HMN II region; the genes include musashi (Drosophila) homolog 1
(MSI1), protein inhibitor of neuronal nitric oxide synthase (PIN), peripherin
(PRPH), tubulin alpha ubiquitous (K-ALPHA-1), tubulin alpha 3 (TUBA3), tubulin
alpha 6 (TUBA6), splicing factor arginine/serine-rich 9 (SFRS9), U5 snRNP 100 kd 
(U5- 100K), putative chemokine receptor, GTP-binding protein (HM74), MondoA, cut 
(Drosophila)-like homeobox 2 (CUX2) and ADP-ribosylation factor 3 (ARF3).

PMID: 12090300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc. 2002 Apr;58(6):1181-9.

Thermodynamics of ligand exchange reactions between
bis(dithiocarbamato)copper(II) and copper(II) salts. An EPR study.

Doicheva MA(1), Jeliazkova BG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Sofia, Bulgaria.

EPR spectroscopy was chosen to investigate the ligand exchange reactions between 
copper(II) bis(dithiocarbamate), Cu(dtc)2, and copper(II) salts which proceeds
with the formation of mixed-ligand complexes of the type Cu(dtc)X, where X = Cl, 
NO3, ClO4. Large concentrations of 1:1 mixed-ligand complexes of this type are
obtained as indicated by the EPR spectra of acetone, CHCl3/EtOH, CHCl3/i-PrOH,
CCl4/EtOH and CCl4/i-PrOH, solutions of Cu(dtc)2 and the appropriate copper(II)
salt CuCl2, Cu(NO3)2 or Cu(ClO4)2. Double integration of Cu(dtc)2 EPR signals
obtained at temperatures between 240 and 310 K affords the calculation of the
equilibrium constant (K) of the reaction: Cu(dtc)2 + CuX2 <==> 2 Cu(dtc)X in all 
solvents as a function of T. From the values of K the stability constant beta of 
the mixed-ligand complexes has been derived. The error associated with the
calculated stability constant is +/- 10%. Thermodynamic parameters (deltaH0,
deltaG0 and deltaS0) are determined from the temperature dependence of K as
measured by EPR spectroscopy.

PMID: 11993466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Am J Med Genet. 2001 Apr 8;105(3):295-300.

CUX2, a potential regulator of NCAM expression: genomic characterization and
analysis as a positional candidate susceptibility gene for bipolar disorder.

Jacobsen NJ(1), Elvidge G, Franks EK, O'Donovan MC, Craddock N, Owen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Neuropsychiatric Genetics Unit, Department of Psychological Medicine,
University of Wales College of Medicine, Heath Park, Cardiff, United Kingdom.

We have previously reported cosegregation of bipolar affective disorder and
Darier disease, a dominant skin disorder with a neuropsychiatric component. The
gene for Darier disease was mapped to chromosome 12q23-q24.1 and linkage studies 
have subsequently implicated this region as harboring a susceptibility gene for
bipolar affective disorder. We have genomically characterized the human homologue
of murine Cux-2, a neuronal-specific transcription factor potentially involved in
the regulation of neural cell adhesion molecule expression that maps to this
region. Also, in a panel of 15 unrelated bipolar patients from multiply affected 
families showing increased allele sharing at markers in the 12q23-q24.1 region,
we performed mutational screening of the CUX2 coding sequence, and 5'
untranslated region (5' UTR). Resulting sequence were analyzed in a large sample 
of bipolar patients (n = 218) and control subjects (n = 218). No evidence was
found for the involvement of variants within the CUX2 coding, or 5' UTR sequence 
in producing susceptibility to bipolar disorder.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11353453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Inorg Chem. 2000 Jan 24;39(2):226-34.

A Cu(II)-mediated C-H oxygenation of sterically hindered tripyridine ligands to
form triangular Cu(II)3 complexes.

Kodera M(1), Tachi Y, Kita T, Kobushi H, Sumi Y, Kano K, Shiro M, Koikawa M,
Tokii T, Ohba M, Okawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Science and Technology, Doshisha University,
Kyotanabe, Kyoto, Japan. mkodera@mail.doshisha.ac.jp

Two sterically hindered tris-pyridyl methane ligands,
tris(6-methyl-2-pyridyl)methane (L1) and bis(6-methyl-2-pyridyl)pyridylmethane
(L2), are newly synthesized. Under aerobic conditions, Ln (n = 1 or 2) reacts
with CuX2 (X = Cl or Br), oxygenated at the methine position to LnOH or LnOMe.
The former alcoholate ligand creates trinuclear Cu(II) complexes
[Cu3(X)(LnO)3](PF6)2 [(X, n) = (Br, 1) 1, (C1, 1) 2, (Br, 2) 3, or (C1, 2) 4] in 
which the alkoxide oxygen atoms bridge copper centers. The crystal structures of 
1-4 are presented along with their magnetic susceptibility data. The weak
antiferromagnetic coupling between the Cu(II) centers in this trinuclear
arrangement is due to weak interaction of the magnetic orbitals (dz2) which are
oriented along three alternate sides in a hexagon of the Cu3O3 core in 1-4. Under
anaerobic conditions, L1 reacts with CuBr2 to form a square pyramidal complex
[CuL1Br2] (9) with the ligand facially capping. [Cu(Br)2(L1OMe)] (10) was
obtained after the suspension of 9 in MeOH was stirred under air for 48 h. In the
presence of cyclohexene, 9 is converted to [Cu(Br)(L1)]m (m = 1 or 2) 5
quantitatively to give trans- 1,2-dibromocyclohexane, indicating that Br2 is
generated during the reaction. The FAB MS spectrum of [18O]-1 prepared by the
reaction of L1 with CuBr2 under 18O2 shows that the ligand of [18O]-1 is
L1(18O-.) L1(18OH), L1OCD3, and bis(6-methyl-2-pyridyl) ketone were obtained from
reaction of L1 with CuBr2 in CD3OD under 18O2. These results indicate that the
origins of the O atom in L1OH and L1OMe are O2 and MeOH, respectively. On the
basis of these results, a mechanism of the oxygenation of L1 in the present
system will be proposed.

PMID: 11272529  [PubMed]


75. Inorg Chem. 2001 Mar 26;40(7):1536-43.

Syntheses, crystal structures, magnetic properties, and EPR spectra of
tetranuclear copper(II) complexes featuring pairs of "roof-shaped" Cu2X2 dimers
with hydroxide, methoxide, and azide bridges.

Graham B(1), Hearn MT, Junk PC, Kepert CM, Mabbs FE, Moubaraki B, Murray KS,
Spiccia L.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry, PO Box 23, Monash University, Victoria 3800, Australia.

Hydroxo- and methoxo-bridged tetranuclear copper(II) complexes of the
tetramacrocyclic ligand 1,2,4,5-tetrakis(1,4,7-triazacyclonon-1-ylmethyl)benzene 
(Ldur), have been prepared from [Cu4Ldur(H2O)8](ClO4)8.9H2O (1). Addition of base
to an aqueous solution of 1 gave [Cu4Ldur(mu2-OH)4](ClO4)4 (2). Diffusion of MeOH
into a DMF solution of 2 produces [Cu4Ldur(mu2-OMe)4](ClO4)4.HClO4.2/3MeOH (3), a
complex which hydrolyzes on exposure to moisture regenerating 2. The structurally
related azido-bridged complex, [Cu4Ldur(mu2-N3)4](PF6)4.4H2O.6CH3CN (4), was
produced by reaction of Ldur with 4 molar equiv of Cu(OAc)2.H2O and NaN3 in the
presence of excess KPF6. Compounds 2-4 crystallize in the triclinic space group
P1 (No. 2) with a = 10.248(1) A, b = 12.130(2) A, c = 14.353(2) A, alpha =
82.23(1) degrees, beta = 80.79(1) degrees, gamma = 65.71(1) degrees, and Z = 1
for 2, a = 10.2985(4) A, b = 12.1182(4) A, c = 13.9705(3) A, alpha = 89.978(2)
degrees, beta = 82.038(2) degrees, gamma = 65.095(2) degrees, and Z = 1 for 3,
and a = 12.059(2) A, b = 12.554(2) A, c = 14.051(2) A, alpha = 91.85(1) degrees, 
beta = 98.22(1) degrees, gamma = 105.62(1) degrees, and Z = 1 for 4. The
complexes feature pairs of isolated dibridged copper(II) dimers with
"roof-shaped" Cu2(mu2-X)2 cores (X = OH-, OMe-, N3-), as indicated by the
dihedral angle between the two CuX2 planes (159 degrees for 2, 161 degrees for 3,
and 153 degrees for 4). This leads to Cu.Cu distances of 2.940(4) A for 2,
2.962(1) A for 3, and 3.006(5) A for 4. Variable-temperature magnetic
susceptibility measurements indicate weak antiferromagnetic coupling (J = -27
cm(-1)) for the hydroxo-bridged copper(II) centers in 2 and very strong
antiferromagnetic coupling (J = -269 cm(-1)) for the methoxo-bridged copper(II)
centers in 3. Pairs of copper(II) centers in 4 display the strongest
ferromagnetic interaction (J = 94 cm(-1)) reported thus far for
bis(mu2-1,1-azido)-bridged dicopper units. Spectral measurements on a neat
powdered sample of 4 at 33.9 GHz or 90 Ghz confirm the spin-triplet ground state 
for the azido-bridged copper(II) pairs.

PMID: 11261961  [PubMed]


76. Inorg Chem. 2001 Feb 12;40(4):710-4.

Construction of copper halide networks within layered perovskites. Syntheses and 
characterization of new low-temperature copper oxyhalides.

Kodenkandath TA(1), Kumbhar AS, Zhou WL, Wiley JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Advanced Materials Research Institute, University 
of New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana 70148-2820, USA.

The construction of two-dimensional (2D) copper halide networks within a variety 
of perovskite hosts by a low-temperature topochemical method is demonstrated. Ion
exchange between some layered perovskite oxides of the type A'[An - 1(M,M')nO3n +
1] (A' = alkali metal, H, NH4; A = alkaline earth, rare earth, or Bi; M,M' = Nb, 
Ta, Ti; n = 2, 3) with CuX2 (X = Cl, Br) results in the oxyhalides (CuX)[An -
1(M,M')nO3n + 1]. Rietveld refinements from X-ray powder diffraction data show
that the structures of these new copper oxyhalides contain edge-sharing CuO2X4
octahedra sandwiched between the M/M'O6 octahedra of the perovskite slabs. The
compounds are low-temperature phases that decompose well below 700 degrees C. The
copper oxyhalides exhibit antiferromagnetic ordering resulting from the magnetic 
exchange interactions within the planar Cu-X networks.

PMID: 11225113  [PubMed]


77. Development. 2000 Dec;127(23):5133-44.

Evidence that members of the Cut/Cux/CDP family may be involved in AER
positioning and polarizing activity during chick limb development.

Tavares AT(1), Tsukui T, Izpisúa Belmonte JC.

Author information: 
(1)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, Gene Expression Laboratory, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

In vertebrates, the apical ectodermal ridge (AER) is a specialized epithelium
localized at the dorsoventral boundary of the limb bud that regulates limb
outgrowth. In Drosophila, the wing margin is also a specialized region located at
the dorsoventral frontier of the wing imaginal disc. The wingless and Notch
pathways have been implicated in positioning both the wing margin and the AER.
One of the nuclear effectors of the Notch signal in the wing margin is the
transcription factor cut. Here we report the identification of two chick
homologues of the Cut/Cux/CDP family that are expressed in the developing limb
bud. Chick cux1 is expressed in the ectoderm outside the AER, as well as around
ridge-like structures induced by (&bgr;)-catenin, a downstream target of the Wnt 
pathway. cux1 overexpression in the chick limb results in scalloping of the AER
and limb truncations, suggesting that Cux1 may have a role in limiting the
position of the AER by preventing the ectodermal cells around it from
differentiating into AER cells. The second molecule of the Cut family identified 
in this study, cux2, is expressed in the pre-limb lateral plate mesoderm,
posterior limb bud and flank mesenchyme, a pattern reminiscent of the
distribution of polarizing activity. The polarizing activity is determined by the
ability of a certain region to induce digit duplications when grafted into the
anterior margin of a host limb bud. Several manipulations of the chick limb bud
show that cux2 expression is regulated by retinoic acid, Sonic hedgehog and the
posterior AER. These results suggest that Cux2 may have a role in generating or
mediating polarizing activity. Taking into account the probable involvement of
Cut/Cux/CDP molecules in cell cycle regulation and differentiation, our results
raise the hypothesis that chick Cux1 and Cux2 may act by modulating proliferation
versus differentiation in the limb ectoderm and polarizing activity regions,
respectively.

PMID: 11060239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Colloid Interface Sci. 1998 Oct 1;206(1):131-137.

Study of Copper Complexes Absorbed on a Silica Gel Surface Chemically Modified
with 5-Amino-1,3,4-thiadiazole-2-thiol.

Dias Filho NL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Física e Química, UNESP-Universidade Estadual Paulista, Av.
Brasil, 56-Centro, Ilha Solteira, SP, 15385-000, Brazil

The isotherms of adsorption of CuX2 (X = Cl-, Br-, ClO-4) by silica gel
chemically modified with 5-amino-1,3,4-thiadiazole-2-thiol were studied in
acetone and ethanol solutions, at 25 degreesC. The following equilibria constants
(in L mol-1) were determined: (a) CuCl2, 3.2 x 10(3) (ac), 2.5 x 10(3) (eth); (b)
CuBr2, 2.9 x 10(3) (ac), 2.3 x 10(3) (eth); (c) Cu(ClO4)2, 1.8 x 10(3) (ac), 1.2 
x 10(3) (eth); ac, acetone; eth, ethanol. The electron spin resonance spectra of 
the surface complexes indicated a tetragonal-distorted structure in the case of
lower degrees of metal loading on the chemically modified surface. The d-d
electronic transition spectra showed that for the ClO-4 complex, the peak of
absorption did not change for any degree of metal loading and for Cl- and Br-
complexes, the peak maxima shifted to higher energy with lower metal loadings.
Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9761636  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


