
1. Arch Oral Biol. 2016 Mar 8;67:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2016.03.001. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Long noncoding RNAs related to the odontogenic potential of dental mesenchymal
cells in mice.

Zheng Y(1), Jia L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Peking University School and
Hospital of Stomatology, Beijing 100081, China. (2)Department of Oral and
Maxillofacial Surgery, Peking University School and Hospital of Stomatology,
Beijing 100081, China; Central laboratory, Peking University School and Hospital 
of Stomatology, Beijing 100081, China. Electronic address:
jialingfei1984@sina.com.

OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study is to identify the lncRNAs that are
associated with the odontogenic potential in mouse dental mesenchymal cells.
DESIGN: The odontogenic potential of dental mesenchymal cells was found to be
lost in the course of in vitro culture, so the lncRNA profiles were subsequently 
compared between freshly-isolated and cultured dental mesenchymal cells using
RNA-sequencing. A co-expression analysis of differentially expressed lncRNAs and 
coding RNAs was performed to understand their potential functions. The expression
of several selected lncRNAs was also examined in developing tooth germs.
RESULTS: Compared with cultured dental mesenchymal cells, 108 lncRNAs were
upregulated and 36 lncRNAs were downregulated in freshly-isolated dental
mesenchymal cells. Coding genes correlated with the lncRNAs were mainly
associated with DNA and protein metabolic processes and cytoskeletal anchorage.
Meg3, Malat1, Xist, and Dlx1as were significantly downregulated in cultured
dental mesenchymal cells but were upregulated in odontogenic dental mesenchymal
tissues. Moreover, the levels of Dlx1as were negatively correlated with that of
Dlx1 in dental mesenchymal cells and dental mesenchymal tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: The lncRNA profiles of dental mesenchymal cells are significantly
changed during culturing, and the dysregulation of lncRNAs is associated with the
loss of odontogenic potential.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26986487  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Schizophr Res. 2016 Mar 10. pii: S0920-9964(16)30094-9. doi:
10.1016/j.schres.2016.03.001. [Epub ahead of print]

Altered expression of developmental regulators of parvalbumin and somatostatin
neurons in the prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia.

Volk DW(1), Edelson JR(2), Lewis DA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213,
United States. Electronic address: volkdw@upmc.edu. (2)Department of Psychiatry, 
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, United States. (3)Department of
Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, United States;
Department of Neuroscience, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213,
United States.

Dysfunction of prefrontal cortex (PFC) inhibitory neurons that express the
calcium-binding protein parvalbumin or the neuropeptide somatostatin in
schizophrenia may be related to disturbances in the migration, phenotypic
specification, and/or maturation of these neurons. These pre- and postnatal
developmental stages are regulated in a cell type-specific manner by various
transcription factors and co-activators, fibroblast growth factor receptors
(FgfR), and other molecular markers. Consequently, we used quantitative PCR to
quantify mRNA levels for these developmental regulators in the PFC of 62
schizophrenia subjects in whom parvalbumin and somatostatin neuron disturbances
were previously reported, and in antipsychotic-exposed monkeys. Relative to
unaffected comparison subjects, subjects with schizophrenia exhibited elevated
mRNA levels for 1) the transcription factor MafB, which is expressed by
parvalbumin and somatostatin neurons as they migrate from the medial ganglionic
eminence to the cortex, 2) the transcriptional coactivator PGC-1a, which is
expressed postnatally by parvalbumin neurons to maintain parvalbumin levels and
inhibitory function, and 3) FgfR1, which is required for the migration and
phenotypic specification of parvalbumin and somatostatin neurons. Elevations in
these markers were most prominent in younger schizophrenia subjects and were not 
present in antipsychotic-exposed monkeys. Finally, expression levels of other
important developmental regulators (i.e. Dlx1, Dlx5, Dlx6, SATB1, Sip1/Zeb2,
ST8SIA4, cMaf, Nkx6.2, and Arx) were not altered in schizophrenia. The
over-expression of a subset of molecular markers with distinct roles in the pre- 
and postnatal development of parvalbumin and somatostatin neurons might reflect
compensatory mechanisms to sustain the development of these neurons in the face
of other insults.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26972474  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Int J Dev Biol. 2016;60(1-2-3):21-28.

Bone morphogenetic protein 4 promotes craniofacial neural crest induction from
human pluripotent stem cells.

Mimura S(1), Suga M, Okada K, Kinehara M, Nikawa H, Furue MK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Cultures, National Institutes of Biomedical
Innovation, Health and Nutrition, Ibaraki, Osaka, Japan.

Neural crest (NC) cells are a group of cells located in the neural folds at the
boundary between the neural and epidermal ectoderm. Cranial NC cells migrate to
the branchial arches and give rise to the majority of the craniofacial region,
whereas trunk and tail NC cells contribute to the heart, enteric ganglia of the
gut, melanocytes, sympathetic ganglia, and adrenal chromaffin cells. Positional
information is indispensable for the regulation of cranial or trunk and tail NC
cells. However, the mechanisms underlying the regulation of positional
information during human NC induction have yet to be fully elucidated. In the
present study, supplementation of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) 4 in defined
serum-free culture conditions including fibroblast growth factor-2 and Wnt3a from
day 8 after NC specification induced the expression of cranial NC markers,
AP2alpha, MSX1, and DLX1, during NC cell differentiation from human pluripotent
stem cells. On the other hand, the proportion of cells expressing p75(NTR) or
HNK1 decreased compared with that of cells cultured without BMP4, whereas gene
expression analysis demonstrated that the expression levels of cranial
NC-associated genes increased in BMP4-treated NC cells. These BMP4-treated NC
cells were capable of differentiation into osteocytes and chondrocytes. The
results of the present study indicate that BMP4 regulates cranial positioning
during NC development.

PMID: 26934293  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Urol Oncol. 2016 Feb 5. pii: S1078-1439(15)00610-9. doi:
10.1016/j.urolonc.2015.12.014. [Epub ahead of print]

Stratification of aggressive prostate cancer from indolent disease-Prospective
controlled trial utilizing expression of 11 genes in apparently benign tissue.

Alinezhad S(1), Väänänen RM(2), Tallgrén T(2), Perez IM(3), Jambor I(4), Aronen
H(5), Kähkönen E(6), Ettala O(6), Syvänen K(6), Nees M(7), Kallajoki M(8), Taimen
P(8), Boström PJ(6), Pettersson K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland. Electronic
address: saeali@utu.fi. (2)Department of Biotechnology, University of Turku,
Turku, Finland. (3)Department of Information Technology, University of Turku,
Turku, Finland; Department of Diagnostic Radiology, University of Turku, Finland.
(4)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, University of Turku, Finland.
(5)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, University of Turku, Finland; Medical
Imaging Centre of Southwest Finland, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland.
(6)Department of Urology, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland. (7)Turku
Centre for Biotechnology and Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Institute of
Biomedicine, University of Turku, Turku, Finland. (8)Department of Pathology,
University of Turku and Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland.

BACKGROUND: The aim of the study was to evaluate the diagnostic power of
molecular markers in men with a clinical suspicion of prostate cancer (PCa) using
apparently benign areas as targeted by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
METHODS: In the study, 99 consecutive men with clinical suspicion of PCa in a
prospective controlled trial (IMPROD, NCT01864135) were included. In addition to 
12-core systematic and MRI-targeted biopsies, cores from normal-appearing
prostate areas, based on clinical examination, ultrasound, and biparametric
prostate MRI, were obtained. The RNA transcript levels of ACSM1, AMACR, CACNA1D, 
DLX1, KLK3, PCA3, PLA2G7, RHOU, SPINK1, SPON2, TMPRSS2-ERG, and TDRD1 were
measured with quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Of the 99 men, 69 were diagnosed with PCa, 31 with primary Gleason
pattern 3 and 38 with primary Gleason 4 or 5. TDRD1 messenger RNA (mRNA) levels
were 1.3 times higher (P = 0.029) and the presence of TMPRSS2-ERG mRNAs more
frequent in biopsies from men diagnosed with PCa (27/69, 39%) than in men without
(5/30, 16%) (P = 0.035). The 2 markers identified aggressive PCa defined as
Gleason sum=7 at biopsy: median TDRD1 mRNA level was 1.4 higher (P = 0.005) and
TMPRSS2-ERG expression more frequent (P<0.001) in high-grade cancer. A
multivariate analysis of mRNA expression of 11 candidate genes combined with
KLK3, serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA), percentage-free PSA, and prostate
volume improved the discrimination between aggressive and nonaggressive PCa (area
under the curve = 0.77) compared with the use of the candidate genes or clinical 
parameters alone. However, serum PSA, percentage-free PSA, and prostate volume
resulted in the best discrimination between non-organ-confined PCa (T3) from
organ-confined PCa (T2) and healthy prostate (area under the curve = 0.86).
CONCLUSIONS: Of the 11 studied genes, TDRD1 and TMPRSS2-ERG were able to
statistically significantly differentiate men with PCa from men without it as
single markers. However, a multivariate analysis using 15 features outperformed
each individual marker in identifying aggressive PCa.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26857646  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Cereb Cortex. 2015 Nov 29. pii: bhv297. [Epub ahead of print]

Impaired Interneuron Development after Foxg1 Disruption.

Yang Y(1), Shen W(1), Ni Y(1), Su Y(1), Yang Z(2), Zhao C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human Diseases, MOE, Department of
Anatomy and Neuroscience, School of Medicine, Southeast University, Nanjing
210009, China. (2)Institutes of Brain Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032,
China. (3)Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human Diseases, MOE,
Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, School of Medicine, Southeast University,
Nanjing 210009, China Center of Depression, Beijing Institute for Brain
Disorders, Beijing 100069, China.

Interneurons play pivotal roles in the modulation of cortical function; however, 
the mechanisms that control interneuron development remain unclear. This study
aimed to explore a new role for Foxg1 in interneuron development. By crossing
Foxg1(fl/fl) mice with a Dlx5/6-Cre line, we determined that conditional
disruption of Foxg1 in the subpallium results in defects in interneuron
development. In developing interneurons, the expression levels of several
receptors, including roundabout-1, Eph receptor A4, and C-X-C motif receptor 4/7,
were strongly downregulated, which led to migration defects after Foxg1 ablation.
The transcription factors Dlx1/2 and Mash1, which have been reported to be
involved in interneuron development, were significantly upregulated at the mRNA
levels. Foxg1 mutant cells developed shorter neurites and fewer branches and
displayed severe migration defects in vitro. Notably, Prox1, which is a
transcription factor that functions as a key regulator in the development of
excitatory neurons, was also dramatically upregulated at both the mRNA and
protein levels, suggesting that Prox1 is also important for interneuron
development. Our work demonstrates that Foxg1 may act as a critical upstream
regulator of Dlx1/2, Mash1, and Prox1 to control interneuron development. These
findings will further our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of
interneuron development.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26620267  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2016 Jan 5;371(1685):20150040. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2015.0040.

Loss of neurogenesis in Hydra leads to compensatory regulation of neurogenic and 
neurotransmission genes in epithelial cells.

Wenger Y(1), Buzgariu W(1), Galliot B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Evolution, Institute of Genetics and Genomics in
Geneva (IGe3), Faculty of Sciences, University of Geneva, 30 quai Ernest
Ansermet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. (2)Department of Genetics and Evolution,
Institute of Genetics and Genomics in Geneva (IGe3), Faculty of Sciences,
University of Geneva, 30 quai Ernest Ansermet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland
brigitte.galliot@unige.ch.

Hydra continuously differentiates a sophisticated nervous system made of
mechanosensory cells (nematocytes) and sensory-motor and ganglionic neurons from 
interstitial stem cells. However, this dynamic adult neurogenesis is dispensable 
for morphogenesis. Indeed animals depleted of their interstitial stem cells and
interstitial progenitors lose their active behaviours but maintain their
developmental fitness, and regenerate and bud when force-fed. To characterize the
impact of the loss of neurogenesis in Hydra, we first performed transcriptomic
profiling at five positions along the body axis. We found neurogenic genes
predominantly expressed along the central body column, which contains stem cells 
and progenitors, and neurotransmission genes predominantly expressed at the
extremities, where the nervous system is dense. Next, we performed
transcriptomics on animals depleted of their interstitial cells by hydroxyurea,
colchicine or heat-shock treatment. By crossing these results with
cell-type-specific transcriptomics, we identified epithelial genes up-regulated
upon loss of neurogenesis: transcription factors (Dlx, Dlx1, DMBX1/Manacle, Ets1,
Gli3, KLF11, LMX1A, ZNF436, Shox1), epitheliopeptides (Arminins, PW peptide),
neurosignalling components (CAMK1D, DDCl2, Inx1), ligand-ion channel receptors
(CHRNA1, NaC7), G-Protein Coupled Receptors and FMRFRL. Hence epitheliomuscular
cells seemingly enhance their sensing ability when neurogenesis is compromised.
This unsuspected plasticity might reflect the extended multifunctionality of
epithelial-like cells in early eumetazoan evolution.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4685579
PMID: 26598723  [PubMed - in process]


7. Transl Psychiatry. 2015 Nov 17;5:e679. doi: 10.1038/tp.2015.169.

Deciphering H3K4me3 broad domains associated with gene-regulatory networks and
conserved epigenomic landscapes in the human brain.

Dincer A(1,)(2,)(3), Gavin DP(4), Xu K(2), Zhang B(2), Dudley JT(2), Schadt
EE(2), Akbarian S(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. (2)Department of Genetics and Genomic
Sciences, Institute for Genomics and Multiscale Biology, Icahn School of Medicine
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. (3)Department of Neuroscience, Friedman Brain 
Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Chicago, IL, USA.

Regulators of the histone H3-trimethyl lysine-4 (H3K4me3) mark are significantly 
associated with the genetic risk architecture of common neurodevelopmental
disease, including schizophrenia and autism. Typical H3K4me3 is primarily
localized in the form of sharp peaks, extending in neuronal chromatin on average 
only across 500-1500 base pairs mostly in close proximity to annotated
transcription start sites. Here, through integrative computational analysis of
epigenomic and transcriptomic data based on next-generation sequencing, we
investigated H3K4me3 landscapes of sorted neuronal and non-neuronal nuclei in
human postmortem, non-human primate and mouse prefrontal cortex (PFC), and blood.
To explore whether H3K4me3 peak signals could also extend across much broader
domains, we examined broadest domain cell-type-specific H3K4me3 peaks in an
unbiased manner with an innovative approach on 41+12 ChIP-seq and RNA-seq data
sets. In PFC neurons, broadest H3K4me3 distribution ranged from 3.9 to 12<U+2009>kb,
with extremely broad peaks (~10<U+2009>kb or broader) related to synaptic function and
GABAergic signaling (DLX1, ELFN1, GAD1, IGSF9B and LINC00966). Broadest neuronal 
peaks showed distinct motif signatures and were centrally positioned in
prefrontal gene-regulatory Bayesian networks and sensitive to defective
neurodevelopment. Approximately 120 of the broadest H3K4me3 peaks in human PFC
neurons, including many genes related to glutamatergic and dopaminergic
signaling, were fully conserved in chimpanzee, macaque and mouse cortical
neurons. Exploration of spread and breadth of lysine methylation markings could
provide novel insights into epigenetic mechanism involved in neuropsychiatric
disease and neuronal genome evolution.

PMID: 26575220  [PubMed - in process]


8. J Neurochem. 2016 Feb;136(3):440-56. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13403. Epub 2015 Nov 13.

Regulation of neuronal migration, an emerging topic in autism spectrum disorders.

Reiner O(1), Karzbrun E(1), Kshirsagar A(1), Kaibuchi K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel. (2)Department of Cell Pharmacology, Nagoya University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Showa, Nagoya, Japan.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) encompass a group of neurodevelopmental diseases 
that demonstrate strong heritability, however, the inheritance is not simple and 
many genes have been associated with these disorders. ASD is regarded as a
neurodevelopmental disorder, and abnormalities at different developmental stages 
are part of the disease etiology. This review provides a general background on
neuronal migration during brain development and discusses recent advancements in 
the field connecting ASD and aberrant neuronal migration. We propose that
neuronal migration impairment may be an important common pathophysiology in
autism spectrum disorders (ASD). This review provides a general background on
neuronal migration during brain development and discusses recent advancements in 
the field connecting ASD and aberrant neuronal migration.

© 2015 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMID: 26485324  [PubMed - in process]


9. Mol Neuropsychiatry. 2015;1(3):125-144.

Characterization of a novel mutation in SLC1A1 associated with schizophrenia.

Afshari P(1), Myles-Worsley M(2), Cohen OS(2), Tiobech J(3), Faraone SV(4),
Byerley W(5), Middleton FA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience & Physiology, SUNY Upstate Medical University,
Syracuse, NY USA. (2)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, SUNY Upstate
Medical University, Syracuse, NY USA. (3)Palau Ministry of Health, Republic of
Palau. (4)Department of Neuroscience & Physiology, SUNY Upstate Medical
University, Syracuse, NY USA ; Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences,
SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY USA. (5)Department of Psychiatry,
University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA USA. (6)Department
of Neuroscience & Physiology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY USA ;
Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, SUNY Upstate Medical University, 
Syracuse, NY USA ; Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, SUNY Upstate
Medical University, Syracuse, NY USA.

We recently described a hemi-deletion on chromosome 9p24.2 at the SLC1A1 gene
lcous and its co-segregation with schizophrenia in an extended Palauan pedigree. 
This finding represents a point of convergence for several pathophysiological
models of schizophrenia. The present report sought to characterize the biological
consequences of this hemi-deletion. Dual luciferase assays demonstrated that the 
partially-deleted allele (lacking exon 1 and the native promoter) can drive
expression of a 5'-truncated SLC1A1 using sequence upstream of exon 2 as a
surrogate promoter. However, confocal microscopy and electrophysiological
recordings demonstrate that the 5'-truncated SLC1A1 lacks normal membrane
localization and glutamate transport ability. To identify downstream consequences
of the hemi-deletion we first used a themed qRT-PCR array to compare expression
of 84 GABA and glutamate genes in RNA from peripheral blood leukocytes in
deletion carriers (n=11) vs. non-carriers (n=8) as well as deletion carriers with
psychosis (n=5) vs. those without (n=3). Then, targeted RNA-Seq (TREx) was used
to quantify expression of 375 genes associated with neuropsychiatric disorders in
HEK293 cells subjected to either knockdown of SLC1A1 or overexpression of
full-length or 5'-truncated SLC1A1. Expression changes of several genes strongly 
implicated in schizophrenia pathophysiology were detected (e.g., SLC1A2, SLC1A3, 
SLC1A6, SLC7A11, GRIN2A, GRIA1, DLX1).

PMCID: PMC4568439
PMID: 26380821  [PubMed]


10. Development. 2015 Aug 1;142(15):2641-52. doi: 10.1242/dev.126318. Epub 2015 Jul
2.

Evf2 lncRNA/BRG1/DLX1 interactions reveal RNA-dependent inhibition of chromatin
remodeling.

Cajigas I(1), Leib DE(1), Cochrane J(2), Luo H(1), Swyter KR(1), Chen S(1), Clark
BS(1), Thompson J(3), Yates JR 3rd(3), Kingston RE(2), Kohtz JD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology and Department of Pediatrics, Stanley Manne Children's
Research Institute and Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Box 
204, 2430 N. Halsted, Chicago, IL 60614, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Biology,
Harvard University, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (3)The Scripps Research Institute, La 
Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (4)Developmental Biology and Department of Pediatrics,
Stanley Manne Children's Research Institute and Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Box 204, 2430 N. Halsted, Chicago, IL 60614, USA
j-kohtz@northwestern.edu.

Transcription-regulating long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have the potential to
control the site-specific expression of thousands of target genes. Previously, we
showed that Evf2, the first described ultraconserved lncRNA, increases the
association of transcriptional activators (DLX homeodomain proteins) with key DNA
enhancers but represses gene expression. In this report, mass spectrometry shows 
that the Evf2-DLX1 ribonucleoprotein (RNP) contains the SWI/SNF-related chromatin
remodelers Brahma-related gene 1 (BRG1, SMARCA4) and Brahma-associated factor
(BAF170, SMARCC2) in the developing mouse forebrain. Evf2 RNA colocalizes with
BRG1 in nuclear clouds and increases BRG1 association with key DNA regulatory
enhancers in the developing forebrain. While BRG1 directly interacts with DLX1
and Evf2 through distinct binding sites, Evf2 directly inhibits BRG1 ATPase and
chromatin remodeling activities. In vitro studies show that both RNA-BRG1 binding
and RNA inhibition of BRG1 ATPase/remodeling activity are promiscuous, suggesting
that context is a crucial factor in RNA-dependent chromatin remodeling
inhibition. Together, these experiments support a model in which RNAs convert an 
active enhancer to a repressed enhancer by directly inhibiting chromatin
remodeling activity, and address the apparent paradox of RNA-mediated
stabilization of transcriptional activators at enhancers with a repressive
outcome. The importance of BRG1/RNA and BRG1/homeodomain interactions in
neurodevelopmental disorders is underscored by the finding that mutations in
Coffin-Siris syndrome, a human intellectual disability disorder, localize to the 
BRG1 RNA-binding and DLX1-binding domains.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4529037 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26138476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Aug 1;24(15):4340-52. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv167. Epub 2015 May 
7.

DLX4 is associated with orofacial clefting and abnormal jaw development.

Wu D(1), Mandal S(1), Choi A(1), Anderson A(1), Prochazkova M(2), Perry H(3),
Gil-Da-Silva-Lopes VL(4), Lao R(5), Wan E(5), Tang PL(5), Kwok PY(6), Klein O(7),
Zhuan B(8), Slavotinek AM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (2)Division of Craniofacial Anomalies, Department of
Orofacial Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA,
USA, Laboratory of Transgenic Models of Diseases, Institute of Molecular Genetics
of the ASCR, v. v.i., Prague, Czech Republic, Program in Craniofacial Biology,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94114, USA.
(3)Division of Craniofacial Anomalies, Department of Orofacial Sciences,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. (4)Department of
Medical Genetics, University of Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. (5)Cardiovascular
Research Institute, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, USA
and. (6)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, USA and Institute for Human Genetics, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. (7)Department of Pediatrics,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA, Division
of Craniofacial Anomalies, Department of Orofacial Sciences, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA, Institute for Human Genetics, 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA, Program in
Craniofacial Biology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 
94114, USA. (8)Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine, Ministry of Education, School 
and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, China. (9)Department of
Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143,
USA, Institute for Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA, slavotia@ucsf.edu.

Cleft lip and/or palate (CL/P) are common structural birth defects in humans. We 
used exome sequencing to study a patient with bilateral CL/P and identified a
single nucleotide deletion in the patient and her similarly affected
sonc.546_546delG, predicting p.Gln183Argfs*57 in the Distal-less 4 (DLX4) gene. 
The sequence variant was absent from databases, predicted to be deleterious and
was verified by Sanger sequencing. In mammals, there are three Dlx homeobox
clusters with closely located gene pairs (Dlx1/Dlx2, Dlx3/Dlx4, Dlx5/Dlx6). In
situ hybridization showed that Dlx4 was expressed in the mesenchyme of the murine
palatal shelves at E12.5, prior to palate closure. Wild-type human DLX4, but not 
mutant DLX4_c.546delG, could activate two murine Dlx conserved regulatory
elements, implying that the mutation caused haploinsufficiency. We showed that
reduced DLX4 expression after short interfering RNA treatment in a human cell
line resulted in significant up-regulation of DLX3, DLX5 and DLX6, with reduced
expression of DLX2 and significant up-regulation of BMP4, although the increased 
BMP4 expression was demonstrated only in HeLa cells. We used antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides to target the orthologous Danio rerio gene, dlx4b, and found
reduced cranial size and abnormal cartilaginous elements. We sequenced DLX4 in
155 patients with non-syndromic CL/P and CP, but observed no sequence variants.
From the published literature, Dlx1/Dlx2 double homozygous null mice and Dlx5
homozygous null mice both have clefts of the secondary palate. This first finding
of a DLX4 mutation in a family with CL/P establishes DLX4 as a potential cause of
human clefts.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4492397 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25954033  [PubMed - in process]


12. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Jul 1;21(13):3061-70. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-3334.
Epub 2015 Mar 18.

Identification of a Candidate Gene Panel for the Early Diagnosis of Prostate
Cancer.

Leyten GH(1), Hessels D(2), Smit FP(2), Jannink SA(2), de Jong H(2), Melchers
WJ(3), Cornel EB(4), de Reijke TM(5), Vergunst H(6), Kil P(7), Knipscheer BC(8), 
Hulsbergen-van de Kaa CA(9), Mulders PF(1), van Oort IM(1), Schalken JA(10).

Author information: 
(1)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Department of Urology, Nijmegen,
the Netherlands. (2)Noviogendix, Department of Research and Development,
Nijmegen, the Netherlands. (3)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Department of Urology, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. Noviogendix, Department of
Research and Development, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. (4)ZGT Hospital, Department 
of Urology, Hengelo, the Netherlands. (5)AMC University Medical Centre,
Department of Urology, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (6)CWZ Hospital, Department of
Urology, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. (7)St Elisabeth Hospital, Department of
Urology, Tilburg, the Netherlands. (8)Scheper Hospital, Department of Urology,
Emmen, the Netherlands. (9)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Department
of Pathology, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. (10)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical 
Centre, Department of Urology, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. Noviogendix, Department
of Research and Development, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
jack.schalken@radboudumc.nl.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Urol. 2015 May;12(5):242.

PURPOSE: Serum PSA (sPSA) testing has led to the identification of patients with 
indolent prostate cancer, and inevitably overtreatment has become a concern.
Progensa PCA3 urine testing was shown to improve the diagnosis of prostate
cancer, but its diagnostic value for aggressive prostate cancer is limited.
Therefore, urinary biomarkers that can be used for prediction of Gleason score =7
prostate cancer in biopsies are urgently needed.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Using gene expression profiling data, 39 prostate cancer
biomarkers were identified. After quantitative PCR analysis on tissue specimens
and urinary sediments, eight promising biomarkers for the urinary detection of
prostate cancer were selected (ONECUT2, HOXC4, HOXC6, DLX1, TDRD1, NKAIN1,
MS4A8B, PPFIA2). The hypothesis that biomarker combinations improve the
diagnostic value for aggressive prostate cancer was tested on 358 urinary
sediments of an intention-to-treat cohort.
RESULTS: A urinary three-gene panel (HOXC6, TDRD1, and DLX1) had higher accuracy 
[area under the curve (AUC), 0.77; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.71-0.83] to
predict Gleason score =7 prostate cancer in biopsies compared with Progensa PCA3 
(AUC, 0.68; 95% CI, 0.62-0.75) or sPSA (AUC, 0.72; 95% CI, 0.65-0.78). Combining 
the three-gene panel with sPSA further improved the predictive accuracy (AUC,
0.81; 95% CI, 0.75-0.86). The accuracy of the three-gene predictive model was
maintained in subgroups with low sPSA concentrations.
CONCLUSIONS: The urinary three-gene panel (HOXC6, TDRD1, and DLX1) represents a
promising tool to identify patients with aggressive prostate cancer, also in
those with low sPSA values. The combination of the urinary three-gene panel with 
sPSA bears great potential for the early diagnosis of patients with clinically
significant prostate cancer.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25788493  [PubMed - in process]


13. Front Neuroanat. 2014 Dec 4;8:148. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2014.00148. eCollection
2014.

Activity-dependent expression of neuronal PAS domain-containing protein 4
(npas4a) in the developing zebrafish brain.

Klaric T(1), Lardelli M(1), Key B(2), Koblar S(3), Lewis M(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Biomedical Sciences, The University of Adelaide
Adelaide, SA, Australia. (2)School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of
Queensland Brisbane, QLD, Australia. (3)School of Medicine, The University of
Adelaide Adelaide, SA, Australia.

In rodents, the Npas4 gene has recently been identified as being an important
regulator of synaptic plasticity and memory. Homologs of Npas4 have been found in
invertebrate species though their functions appear to be too divergent for them
to be studied as a proxy for the mammalian proteins. The aim of this study,
therefore, was to ascertain the suitability of the zebrafish as a model organism 
for investigating the function of Npas4 genes. We show here that the expression
and regulation of the zebrafish Npas4 homolog, npas4a, is remarkably similar to
that of the rodent Npas4 genes. As in mammals, expression of the zebrafish npas4a
gene is restricted to the brain where it is up-regulated in response to neuronal 
activity. Furthermore, we also show that knockdown of npas4a during embryonic
development results in a number of forebrain-specific defects including increased
apoptosis and misexpression of the forebrain marker genes dlx1a and shha. Our
work demonstrates that the zebrafish is a suitable model organism for
investigating the role of the npas4a gene and one that is likely to provide
valuable insights into the function of the mammalian homologs. Furthermore, our
findings highlight a potential role for npas4a in forebrain development.

PMCID: PMC4255624
PMID: 25538572  [PubMed]


14. Arch Oral Biol. 2015 Feb;60(2):223-8. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2014.10.002.
Epub 2014 Oct 22.

DLX1 and MMP3 contribute to oral clefts with and without positive family history 
of cancer.

Sabóia TM(1), Reis MF(2), Martins ÂM(3), Romanos HF(1), Tannure PN(4), Granjeiro 
JM(5), Vieira AR(6), Antunes LS(7), Küchler EC(8), Costa MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry and Orthodontics, School of Dentistry,
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil. (2)Unit of Clinical Research,
Fluminense Federal University, Niterói, RJ, Brazil. (3)Department of Specific
Formation, School of Dentistry, Fluminense Federal University, Nova Friburgo, RJ,
Brazil. (4)Discipline of Pediatric Dentistry, School of Dentistry, Veiga de
Almeida University, RJ, Brazil. (5)Unit of Clinical Research, Fluminense Federal 
University, Niterói, RJ, Brazil; Bioengineering Program, National Institute of
Metrology, Quality and Technology (INMETRO), Duque de Caxias, RJ, Brazil.
(6)Department of Oral Biology and Center for Craniofacial and Dental Genetics,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; Department of Pediatric Dentistry,
School of Dental Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA;
Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Public Health, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; Clinical and Translational Science Institute,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (7)Unit of Clinical Research,
Fluminense Federal University, Niterói, RJ, Brazil; Department of Specific
Formation, School of Dentistry, Fluminense Federal University, Nova Friburgo, RJ,
Brazil. Electronic address: leonardoantunes@id.uff.br. (8)Department of Oral
Biology and Center for Craniofacial and Dental Genetics, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: It has been suggested that oral clefts and cancer share a common
genetic background. This study aimed to investigate the epidemiological and
molecular association between oral clefts and cancer.
METHODS: One hundred forty-eight nuclear families with oral clefts and 162
subjects with no birth defect were recruited. Data on self-reported family
history of cancer among first, second, and third degree relatives of each patient
were collected via a structured questionnaire. We also investigated the
association between polymorphisms in the genes AXIN2, BMP2, BMP4, BMP7, DLX1,
DLX2, and MMP3 and oral cleft with and without history of cancer. Markers in
these genes were genotyped using real time PCR. Chi-square and t-test were used
to assess the differences about self-reported family history of cancer between
oral cleft and non-cleft individuals. The transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) 
was used to analyze the distortion of the inheritance of alleles from parents to 
their affected offspring.
RESULTS: Families with oral clefts had an increased risk of having a family
history of cancer (p=0.01; odds ratio=1.79; 95% confidence interval, 1.07-1.87). 
TDT results showed an association between DLX1 and cleft lip and palate, in which
the A allele was undertransmited (p=0.022). For MMP3, G was undertransmited among
affected progeny (p=0.019) in cleft palate subgroup.
CONCLUSION: Oral clefts were associated with positive self-reported family
history of cancer and with variants in DLX1 and MMP3. The association between
oral clefts and cancer raises interesting possibilities to identify risk markers 
for cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25463899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Dev Biol. 2015 Jan 15;397(2):293-304. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.10.016. Epub 2014
Oct 29.

A gene expression map of the larval Xenopus laevis head reveals developmental
changes underlying the evolution of new skeletal elements.

Square T(1), Jandzik D(2), Cattell M(3), Coe A(3), Doherty J(3), Medeiros DM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Colorado,
Boulder, CO 80309, USA. Electronic address: Tyler.Square@Colorado.edu.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Colorado,
Boulder, CO 80309, USA; Department of Zoology, Faculty of Natural Sciences,
Comenius University in Bratislava, Bratislava, 84215, Slovakia. (3)Department of 
Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA.
(4)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Colorado,
Boulder, CO 80309, USA. Electronic address: Daniel.Medeiros@Colorado.edu.

The morphology of the vertebrate head skeleton is highly plastic, with the
number, size, shape, and position of its components varying dramatically between 
groups. While this evolutionary flexibility has been key to vertebrate success,
its developmental and genetic bases are poorly understood. The larval head
skeleton of the frog Xenopus laevis possesses a unique combination of ancestral
tetrapod features and anuran-specific novelties. We built a detailed gene
expression map of the head mesenchyme in X. laevis during early larval
development, focusing on transcription factor families with known functions in
vertebrate head skeleton development. This map was then compared to homologous
gene expression in zebrafish, mouse, and shark embryos to identify conserved and 
evolutionarily flexible aspects of vertebrate head skeleton development. While we
observed broad conservation of gene expression between X. laevis and other
gnathostomes, we also identified several divergent features that correlate to
lineage-specific novelties. We noted a conspicuous change in dlx1/2 and emx2
expression in the second pharyngeal arch, presaging the differentiation of the
reduced dorsal hyoid arch skeletal element typical of modern anamniote tetrapods.
In the first pharyngeal arch we observed a shift in the expression of the joint
inhibitor barx1, and new expression of the joint marker gdf5, shortly before
skeletal differentiation. This suggests that the anuran-specific infrarostral
cartilage evolved by partitioning of Meckel's cartilage with a new paired joint. 
Taken together, these comparisons support a model in which early patterning
mechanisms divide the vertebrate head mesenchyme into a highly conserved set of
skeletal precursor populations. While subtle changes in this early patterning
system can affect skeletal element size, they do not appear to underlie the
evolution of new joints or cartilages. In contrast, later expression of the genes
that regulate skeletal element differentiation can be clearly linked to the
evolution of novel skeletal elements. We posit that changes in the expression of 
downstream regulators of skeletal differentiation, like barx1 and gdf5, is one
mechanism by which head skeletal element number and articulation are altered
during evolution.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25446275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Neuron. 2014 Oct 22;84(2):311-23. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.10.016. Epub 2014
Oct 22.

Generation of human striatal neurons by microRNA-dependent direct conversion of
fibroblasts.

Victor MB(1), Richner M(2), Hermanstyne TO(3), Ransdell JL(3), Sobieski C(4),
Deng PY(5), Klyachko VA(5), Nerbonne JM(3), Yoo AS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine,
Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA; Program in Neuroscience, Washington University School
of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA. (2)Department of Developmental Biology, 
Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(3)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine,
Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA; Center for Cardiovascular Research, Washington
University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA. (4)Program in
Neuroscience, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110,
USA; Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint
Louis, MO 63110, USA. (5)Departments of Biomedical Engineering and Cell Biology
and Physiology, CIMED, Washington University, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(6)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine,
Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic address: yooa@wustl.edu.

The promise of using reprogrammed human neurons for disease modeling and
regenerative medicine relies on the ability to induce patient-derived neurons
with high efficiency and subtype specificity. We have previously shown that
ectopic expression of brain-enriched microRNAs (miRNAs), miR-9/9* and miR-124
(miR-9/9*-124), promoted direct conversion of human fibroblasts into neurons.
Here we show that coexpression of miR-9/9*-124 with transcription factors
enriched in the developing striatum, BCL11B (also known as CTIP2), DLX1, DLX2,
and MYT1L, can guide the conversion of human postnatal and adult fibroblasts into
an enriched population of neurons analogous to striatal medium spiny neurons
(MSNs). When transplanted in the mouse brain, the reprogrammed human cells
persisted in situ for over 6 months, exhibited membrane properties equivalent to 
native MSNs, and extended projections to the anatomical targets of MSNs. These
findings highlight the potential of exploiting the synergism between miR-9/9*-124
and transcription factors to generate specific neuronal subtypes.

PMCID: PMC4223654
PMID: 25374357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Elife. 2014 May 7;3:e02669. doi: 10.7554/eLife.02669.

Prospective identification of functionally distinct stem cells and
neurosphere-initiating cells in adult mouse forebrain.

Mich JK(1), Signer RA(1), Nakada D(2), Pineda A(1), Burgess RJ(1), Vue TY(3),
Johnson JE(3), Morrison SJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Research Institute, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, United
States. (2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, United States. (3)Department of Neuroscience, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, United States. (4)Department of
Pediatrics, Children's Research Institute, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, United States
sean.morrison@utsouthwestern.edu.

Neurosphere formation is commonly used as a surrogate for neural stem cell (NSC) 
function but the relationship between neurosphere-initiating cells (NICs) and
NSCs remains unclear. We prospectively identified, and isolated by flow
cytometry, adult mouse lateral ventricle subventricular zone (SVZ) NICs as
Glast(mid)EGFR(high)PlexinB2(high)CD24(-/low)O4/PSA-NCAM(-/low)Ter119/CD45(-)
(GEPCOT) cells. They were highly mitotic and short-lived in vivo based on
fate-mapping with Ascl1(CreERT2) and Dlx1(CreERT2). In contrast, pre-GEPCOT cells
were quiescent, expressed higher Glast, and lower EGFR and PlexinB2. Pre-GEPCOT
cells could not form neurospheres but expressed the stem cell markers
Slc1a3-CreER(T), GFAP-CreER(T2), Sox2(CreERT2), and Gli1(CreERT2) and were
long-lived in vivo. While GEPCOT NICs were ablated by temozolomide, pre-GEPCOT
cells survived and repopulated the SVZ. Conditional deletion of the Bmi-1
polycomb protein depleted pre-GEPCOT and GEPCOT cells, though pre-GEPCOT cells
were more dependent upon Bmi-1 for Cdkn2a (p16(Ink4a)) repression. Our data
distinguish quiescent NSCs from NICs and make it possible to study their
properties in vivo.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02669.001.

Copyright © 2014, Mich et al.

PMCID: PMC4038845
PMID: 24843006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Neuroscience. 2014 Jun 13;270:148-57. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.04.009.
Epub 2014 Apr 13.

Prenatal betamethasone does not affect glutamatergic or GABAergic neurogenesis in
preterm newborns.

Vose LR(1), Vinukonda G(1), Diamond D(1), Korumilli R(1), Hu F(1), Zia MT(1),
Hevner R(2), Ballabh P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, New York Medical College-Westchester Medical Center,
Valhalla, NY, United States. (2)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, United States. (3)Department of Pediatrics, New York
Medical College-Westchester Medical Center, Valhalla, NY, United States;
Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, New York Medical College-Westchester
Medical Center, Valhalla, NY, United States. Electronic address:
pballabh@msn.com.

Prenatal glucocorticoids (GCs) are routinely used for pregnant women in preterm
labor to prevent respiratory distress syndrome and intraventricular hemorrhage in
premature infants. However, the effect of antenatal GCs on neurogenesis in
preterm neonates remains elusive. Herein, we hypothesized that prenatal GCs might
suppress both glutamatergic and GABAergic neurogenesis in preterm rabbits and
that this treatment would induce distinct changes in the expression of
transcription factors regulating these developmental events. To test our
hypotheses, we treated pregnant rabbits with betamethasone at E27 and E28,
delivered the pups at E29 (term=32d), and assessed neurogenesis at birth and
postnatal day 3. We quantified radial glia (Sox2(+)) and intermediate progenitor 
cells (Tbr2(+)) in the dorsal cortical subventricular zone to assess
glutamatergic neuronal progenitors, and counted Nkx2.1(+) and Dlx2(+) cells in
the ganglionic eminence to evaluate GABAergic neurogenesis. In addition, we
assayed transcription factors regulating neurogenesis. We found that prenatal GCs
did not affect the densities of radial glia and intermediate progenitors of
glutamatergic or GABAergic neurons. The number of GABA(+) interneurons in the
ganglionic eminence was similar between the prenatal GC-treated pups compared to 
untreated controls. Moreover, the mRNA expression of transcription factors,
including Pax6, Ngn1/2, Emx1/2, Insm1, Dlx1, Nkx2.1, and Gsh2, were comparable
between the two groups. However, there was a transient elevation in Mash1 protein
in betamethasone-treated pups relative to controls at birth. These data suggest
that prenatal GC treatment does not significantly impact the balance of
glutamatergic and GABAergic neurogenesis in premature infants.

Copyright © 2014 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4044920
PMID: 24735821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 19;9(3):e91905. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091905. eCollection
2014.

A promising DNA methylation signature for the triage of high-risk human
papillomavirus DNA-positive women.

Hansel A(1), Steinbach D(1), Greinke C(1), Schmitz M(1), Eiselt J(1),
Scheungraber C(1), Gajda M(2), Hoyer H(3), Runnebaum IB(1), Dürst M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynaecology, Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany.
(2)Institute of Pathology, Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany. (3)IMSID,
Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany.

High-risk human papillomavirus (hrHPV)-DNA testing is frequently performed
parallel to cytology for the detection of high-grade dysplasia and cervical
cancer particularly in women above 30 years of age. Although highly sensitive,
hrHPV testing cannot distinguish between HPV-positive women with or without
clinically relevant lesions. However, in principle discrimination is possible on 
the basis of DNA methylation markers. In order to identify novel DNA regions
which allow an effective triage of hrHPV-positive cases, hypermethylated DNA
enriched from cervical cancers was compared with that from cervical scrapes of
HPV16-positive cases with no evidence for disease by CpG island microarray
hybridization. The most promising marker regions were validated by quantitative
methylation-specific PCR (qMSP) using DNA from archived cervical tissues and
cervical scrapes. The performance of these markers was then determined in an
independent set of 217 hrHPV-positive cervical scrapes from outpatients with
histopathological verification. A methylation signature comprising the 5' regions
of the genes DLX1, ITGA4, RXFP3, SOX17 and ZNF671 specific for CIN3 and cervical 
cancer (termed CIN3+) was identified and validated. A high detection rate of
CIN3+ was obtained if at least 2 of the 5 markers were methylated. In the
subsequent cross-sectional study all cervical carcinomas (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>19) and 56% (13/23)
of CIN3 were identified by this algorithm. Only 10% (11/105) of hrHPV-positive
women without histological evidence of cervical disease were scored positive by
the methylation assay. Of note is that the detection rate of CIN3 differed
between age groups. Eight of nine CIN3 were detected among women =30 years of age
but only five of fourteen among <30 year old group (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.03). The specificity
for CIN3+ in the older age group was 76.6% (95% CI 65.6-85.5%). Clinical
validation studies are required to determine the usefulness of these novel
markers for triage after primary hrHPV testing in a cervical cancer screening
setting.

PMCID: PMC3960142
PMID: 24647315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Neuron. 2014 Feb 5;81(3):574-87. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.11.024.

Olig1 function is required to repress dlx1/2 and interneuron production in
Mammalian brain.

Silbereis JC(1), Nobuta H(2), Tsai HH(2), Heine VM(3), McKinsey GL(4), Meijer
DH(5), Howard MA(6), Petryniak MA(7), Potter GB(7), Alberta JA(5), Baraban SC(6),
Stiles CD(5), Rubenstein JL(8), Rowitch DH(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Eli and Edythe Broad Institute for Stem Cell
Research and Regeneration Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Department of Neurosurgery, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Neuroscience Graduate Program,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA. (2)Department of
Pediatrics, Eli and Edythe Broad Institute for Stem Cell Research and
Regeneration Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94143, USA; Department of Neurosurgery, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD
20815, USA. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Eli and Edythe Broad Institute for Stem 
Cell Research and Regeneration Medicine, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Department of Neurosurgery, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (4)Neuroscience Graduate
Program, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA;
Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco,
CA 94143, USA. (5)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. (6)Department of Neurosurgery, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (7)Department of Pediatrics, Eli and
Edythe Broad Institute for Stem Cell Research and Regeneration Medicine,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (9)Department of Pediatrics, Eli and Edythe Broad
Institute for Stem Cell Research and Regeneration Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Department of
Neurosurgery, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143,
USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA. Electronic
address: rowitchd@peds.ucsf.edu.

Abnormal GABAergic interneuron density, and imbalance of excitatory versus
inhibitory tone, is thought to result in epilepsy, neurodevelopmental disorders, 
and psychiatric disease. Recent studies indicate that interneuron cortical
density is determined primarily by the size of the precursor pool in the
embryonic telencephalon. However, factors essential for regulating interneuron
allocation from telencephalic multipotent precursors are poorly understood. Here 
we report that Olig1 represses production of GABAergic interneurons throughout
the mouse brain. Olig1 deletion in mutant mice results in ectopic expression and 
upregulation of Dlx1/2 genes in the ventral medial ganglionic eminences and
adjacent regions of the septum, resulting in an ~30% increase in adult cortical
interneuron numbers. We show that Olig1 directly represses the Dlx1/2 I12b
intergenic enhancer and that Dlx1/2 functions genetically downstream of Olig1.
These findings establish Olig1 as an essential repressor of Dlx1/2 and
interneuron production in developing mammalian brain.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3979971
PMID: 24507192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 28;9(1):e86892. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086892. eCollection
2014.

Dlx1 and Rgs5 in the ductus arteriosus: vessel-specific genes identified by
transcriptional profiling of laser-capture microdissected endothelial and smooth 
muscle cells.

Bökenkamp R(1), van Brempt R(2), van Munsteren JC(3), van den Wijngaert I(4), de 
Hoogt R(4), Finos L(5), Goeman J(6), Groot AC(7), Poelmann RE(3), Blom NA(8),
DeRuiter MC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands ; Department of Intensive Care, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Intensive Care, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands ; Johnson and Johnson Pharmaceutical
Research and Development, Beerse, Belgium. (3)Department of Anatomy and
Embryology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (4)Johnson
and Johnson Pharmaceutical Research and Development, Beerse, Belgium.
(5)Department of Medical Statistics and Bioinformatics, Leiden University Medical
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (6)Biostatistics, Department for Health
Evidence, Radboud University Medical Center, Nimegen, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands ; Department of Cardiology, Leiden University Medical
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (8)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Closure of the ductus arteriosus (DA) is a crucial step in the transition from
fetal to postnatal life. Patent DA is one of the most common cardiovascular
anomalies in children with significant clinical consequences especially in
premature infants. We aimed to identify genes that specify the DA in the fetus
and differentiate it from the aorta. Comparative microarray analysis of
laser-captured microdissected endothelial (ECs) and vascular smooth muscle cells 
(SMCs) from the DA and aorta of fetal rats (embryonic day 18 and 21) identified
vessel-specific transcriptional profiles. We found a strong age-dependency of
gene expression. Among the genes that were upregulated in the DA the regulator of
the G-protein coupled receptor 5 (Rgs5) and the transcription factor distal-less 
homeobox 1 (Dlx1) exhibited the highest and most significant level of
differential expression. The aorta showed a significant preferential expression
of the Purkinje cell protein 4 (Pcp4) gene. The results of the microarray
analysis were validated by real-time quantitative PCR and immunohistochemistry.
Our study confirms vessel-specific transcriptional profiles in ECs and SMCs of
rat DA and aorta. Rgs5 and Dlx1 represent novel molecular targets for the
regulation of DA maturation and closure.

PMCID: PMC3904938
PMID: 24489801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Clin Chim Acta. 2014 Mar 20;430:129-33. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2014.01.002. Epub 2014
Jan 9.

A patient with five chromosomal rearrangements and a 2q31.1 microdeletion.

Wang T(1), Mao J(1), Liu MJ(1), Choy KW(2), Li HB(1), Cram DS(3), Li H(1), Chen
Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproduction and Genetics, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated
Suzhou Hospital, Suzhou 215002, China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; Joint Centre 
with Utrecht University-Genetic Core, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong, China. (3)Berry Genomics, Ltd., China. (4)Center for Reproduction and
Genetics, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated Suzhou Hospital, Suzhou 215002,
China. Electronic address: cyandzh@sohu.com.

BACKGROUND: Complex chromosomal rearrangements and chromosomal deletion and
duplication syndromes are commonly associated with abnormal clinical phenotypes. 
The 2q31.1 microdeletion syndrome is a rare cytogenetic event that leads to limb 
and multi-internal organ anomalies. In this study we investigated the genetic
basis of the physical and mental symptoms exhibited by a 4-year-old boy with a
suspected 2q31.1 deletion.
METHODS: Cytogenetic and molecular techniques including karyotyping, array-based 
comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) and real-time PCR were used to identify the nature and extent of
chromosome abnormalities in the patient.
RESULTS: A 3.6Mb interstitial microdeletion of 2q31.1 was identified in
association with complex balanced genomic structural rearrangements involving
chromosomes 2, 3, 6, 15 and 18. The 2q31.1 deletion resulted in the loss of one
copy of several known disease genes, including GAD1, DCAF17, SLC25A12 and ITGA6
associated with mental retardation and facial abnormalities and DLX1/DLX2
partially associated with limb abnormalities. Two additional genes, HOXD13 and
CHN1, required for normal limb and eye development that map immediately distal to
the 2q31.1 deletion had normal copy numbers, although CHN1 was found to express
at a lower level in patient's lymphocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: We speculated that the 2q31.1 deletion and/or translocation may have
a positional effect which reduces expression of HOXD13 and CHN1 causing
haplo-insufficiency, and in combination with the hemizygous expression of the
disease genes at 2q31.1, provides a plausible explanation for the diverse
clinical symptoms exhibited by the patient.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24412318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2013 Dec;35(6):607-10. doi:
10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.2013.06.004.

[Role of Dlx1 natural antisense transcript in mice brain development].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu Z(1), Zhao AN(1), Zhu LY(1), Yin B(1), Zhang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, CAMS and PUMC,
Beijing 100005, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the role of Dlx1as, a natural antisense transcript, in mice
brain development.
METHODS: Based on the bioinformatic and molecular biological findings, we
confirmed whether the Dlx1as has a poly-A tail. The temporal expressions of
Dlx1as and Dlx1 mRNA were determined by quantitative real-time PCR and the
spatial expressions of Dlx1as and Dlx1 mRNA were compared by using in situ
hybridization.
RESULTS: Dlx1as had a poly-A signal. Dlx1as's expression was at a high level
through a period of time in the embryo development, which was similar with Dlx1
mRNA in temporal but different in spatial.
CONCLUSIONS: Dlx1as is highly expressed in a certain period during mice brain
development, which spatially supplements the mRNA expression of D1x1. Therefore, 
it is supposed that Dlx1as influences the mice brain development by regulating
Dlx1 mRNA.

PMID: 24382236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 7;111(1):492-7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1307784111. 
Epub 2013 Dec 16.

Bidirectional homeostatic plasticity induced by interneuron cell death and
transplantation in vivo.

Howard MA(1), Rubenstein JL, Baraban SC.

Author information: 
(1)Epilepsy Research Laboratory, Department of Neurological Surgery and Nina
Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of Psychiatry,
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143.

Chronic changes in excitability and activity can induce homeostatic plasticity.
These perturbations may be associated with neurological disorders, particularly
those involving loss or dysfunction of GABA interneurons. In distal-less homeobox
1 (Dlx1(-/-)) mice with late-onset interneuron loss and reduced inhibition, we
observed both excitatory synaptic silencing and decreased intrinsic neuronal
excitability. These homeostatic changes do not fully restore normal circuit
function, because synaptic silencing results in enhanced potential for long-term 
potentiation and abnormal gamma oscillations. Transplanting medial ganglionic
eminence interneuron progenitors to introduce new GABAergic interneurons, we
demonstrate restoration of hippocampal function. Specifically, miniature
excitatory postsynaptic currents, input resistance, hippocampal long-term
potentiation, and gamma oscillations are all normalized. Thus, in vivo
homeostatic plasticity is a highly dynamic and bidirectional process that
responds to changes in inhibition.

PMCID: PMC3890856
PMID: 24344303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Eur J Neurosci. 2014 Feb;39(4):531-47. doi: 10.1111/ejn.12413. Epub 2013 Nov 15.

Dlx1 transcription factor regulates dendritic growth and postsynaptic
differentiation through inhibition of neuropilin-2 and PAK3 expression.

Dai X(1), Iwasaki H, Watanabe M, Okabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Dlx1, a member of the homeobox domain transcriptional factors, is expressed in a 
subset of interneurons and is involved in their differentiation. To understand
the roles of Dlx1 in dendritic and postsynaptic differentiation, we manipulated
Dlx1 expression in both excitatory pyramidal neurons and inhibitory interneurons 
in hippocampal culture. Exogenous expression of Dlx1 in pyramidal neurons, which 
lack endogenous Dlx1, resulted in reduced complexity of dendritic arborization.
This effect was dependent on the DNA-binding motif of Dlx1. Dlx1 overexpression
also induced prominent reduction of spine density, but with mild suppression in
the formation of postsynaptic densities. To confirm the roles of endogenous Dlx1,
we knocked down Dlx1 in interneurons and found enhanced dendritic growth. By
manipulating the expression of possible downstream effectors of Dlx1,
neuropilin-2 and p21-activated kinase 3, we provided evidence for the involvement
of these two signaling molecules in Dlx1-dependent regulation of dendritic
differentiation. Our experimental data support the idea that Dlx1 expression in
developing interneurons specifically suppresses two important downstream
regulators, leading to the characteristic morphology of Dlx1-expressing
interneurons with less branched dendrites and few dendritic spines.

© 2013 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24236816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Neurosci. 2013 Oct 23;33(43):16897-914. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1871-13.2013.

Soluble guanylate cyclase generation of cGMP regulates migration of MGE neurons.

Mandal S(1), Stanco A, Buys ES, Enikolopov G, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Neuroscience Program and the Nina Ireland Laboratory
of Developmental Neurobiology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94158-2324, Anesthesia Center for Critical Care Research,
Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, and Cold Spring Harbor Laboratories,
Laurel Hollow, New York 11791.

Here we have provided evidence that nitric oxide-cyclic GMP (NO-cGMP) signaling
regulates neurite length and migration of immature neurons derived from the
medial ganglionic eminence (MGE). Dlx1/2(-/-) and Lhx6(-/-) mouse mutants, which 
exhibit MGE interneuron migration defects, have reduced expression of the gene
encoding the a subunit of a soluble guanylate cyclase (Gucy1A3). Furthermore,
Dlx1/2(-/-) mouse mutants have reduced expression of NO synthase 1 (NOS1).
Gucy1A3(-/-) mice have a transient reduction in cortical interneuron number.
Pharmacological inhibition of soluble guanylate cyclase and NOS activity rapidly 
induces neurite retraction of MGE cells in vitro and in slice culture and
robustly inhibits cell migration from the MGE and caudal ganglionic eminence. We 
provide evidence that these cellular phenotypes are mediated by activation of the
Rho signaling pathway and inhibition of myosin light chain phosphatase activity.

PMCID: PMC3866415
PMID: 24155296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Development. 2013 Nov;140(21):4407-16. doi: 10.1242/dev.099390. Epub 2013 Oct 2.

Evf2 (Dlx6as) lncRNA regulates ultraconserved enhancer methylation and the
differential transcriptional control of adjacent genes.

Berghoff EG(1), Clark MF, Chen S, Cajigas I, Leib DE, Kohtz JD.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology and Department of Pediatrics, Lurie Children's Research 
Center, and Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Box 204, 2430
N. Halsted, Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

Several lines of evidence suggest that long non-coding RNA (lncRNA)-dependent
mechanisms regulate transcription and CpG DNA methylation. Whereas CpG island
methylation has been studied in detail, the significance of enhancer DNA
methylation and its relationship with lncRNAs is relatively unexplored. Previous 
experiments proposed that the ultraconserved lncRNA Evf2 represses transcription 
through Dlx6 antisense (Dlx6as) transcription and methyl-CpG binding protein
(MECP2) recruitment to the Dlx5/6 ultraconserved DNA regulatory enhancer
(Dlx5/6ei) in embryonic day 13.5 medial ganglionic eminence (E13.5 MGE). Here,
genetic epistasis experiments show that MECP2 transcriptional repression of Evf2 
and Dlx5, but not Dlx6, occurs through antagonism of DLX1/2 in E13.5 MGE.
Analysis of E13.5 MGE from mice lacking Evf2 and of partially rescued Evf2
transgenic mice shows that Evf2 prevents site-specific CpG DNA methylation of
Dlx5/6ei in trans, without altering Dlx5/6 expression. Dlx1/2 loss increases CpG 
DNA methylation, whereas Mecp2 loss does not affect Dlx5/6ei methylation. Based
on these studies, we propose a model in which Evf2 inhibits enhancer DNA
methylation, effectively modulating competition between the DLX1/2 activator and 
MECP2 repressor. Evf2 antisense transcription and Evf2-dependent balanced
recruitment of activator and repressor proteins enables differential
transcriptional control of adjacent genes with shared DNA regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC4007716
PMID: 24089468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cereb Cortex. 2015 Mar;25(3):631-45. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bht254. Epub 2013 Sep
18.

The early fetal development of human neocortical GABAergic interneurons.

Al-Jaberi N(1), Lindsay S(2), Sarma S(2), Bayatti N(3), Clowry GJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK. (2)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK. (3)Institute of Neuroscience
Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ,
UK Current address: Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience (SITraN), 
Department of Neuroscience, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2HQ, UK.
(4)Institute of Neuroscience.

GABAergic interneurons are crucial to controlling the excitability and
responsiveness of cortical circuitry. Their developmental origin may differ
between rodents and human. We have demonstrated the expression of 12 GABAergic
interneuron-associated genes in samples from human neocortex by quantitative
rtPCR from 8 to 12 postconceptional weeks (PCW) and shown a significant anterior 
to posterior expression gradient, confirmed by in situ hybridization or
immunohistochemistry for GAD1 and 2, DLX1, 2, and 5, ASCL1, OLIG2, and CALB2.
Following cortical plate (CP) formation from 8 to 9 PCW, a proportion of cells
were strongly stained for all these markers in the CP and presubplate. ASCL1 and 
DLX2 maintained high expression in the proliferative zones and showed extensive
immunofluorescent double-labeling with the cell division marker Ki-67.
CALB2-positive cells increased steadily in the SVZ/VZ from 10 PCW but were not
double-labeled with Ki-67. Expression of GABAergic genes was generally higher in 
the dorsal pallium than in the ganglionic eminences, with lower expression in the
intervening ventral pallium. It is widely accepted that the cortical
proliferative zones may generate CALB2-positive interneurons from mid-gestation; 
we now show that the anterior neocortical proliferative layers especially may be 
a rich source of interneurons in the early neocortex.

© The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4318531
PMID: 24047602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 28;8(6):e66278. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066278. Print 2013.

Differentially expressed androgen-regulated genes in androgen-sensitive tissues
reveal potential biomarkers of early prostate cancer.

Altintas DM(1), Allioli N, Decaussin M, de Bernard S, Ruffion A, Samarut J,
Vlaeminck-Guillem V.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon (IGFL), Université de Lyon, CNRS
UMR5242, INRA1288, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Lyon, France.

BACKGROUND: Several data favor androgen receptor implication in prostate cancer
initiation through the induction of several gene activation programs. The aim of 
the study is to identify potential biomarkers for early diagnosis of prostate
cancer (PCa) among androgen-regulated genes (ARG) and to evaluate comparative
expression of these genes in normal prostate and normal prostate-related
androgen-sensitive tissues that do not (or rarely) give rise to cancer.
METHODS: ARG were selected in non-neoplastic adult human prostatic epithelial
RWPE-1 cells stably expressing an exogenous human androgen receptor, using
RNA-microarrays and validation by qRT-PCR. Expression of 48 preselected genes was
quantified in tissue samples (seminal vesicles, prostate transitional zones and
prostate cancers, benign prostatic hypertrophy obtained from surgical specimens) 
using TaqMan® low-density arrays. The diagnostic performances of these potential 
biomarkers were compared to that of genes known to be associated with PCa (i.e.
PCA3 and DLX1).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: By crossing expression studies in 26 matched PCa and
normal prostate transitional zone samples, and 35 matched seminal vesicle and PCa
samples, 14 genes were identified. Similarly, 9 genes were overexpressed in 15
benign prostatic hypertrophy samples, as compared to PCa samples. Overall, we
selected 8 genes of interest to evaluate their diagnostic performances in
comparison with that of PCA3 and DLX1. Among them, 3 genes: CRYAB, KCNMA1 and
SDPR, were overexpressed in all 3 reference non-cancerous tissues. The areas
under ROC curves of these genes reached those of PCA3 (0.91) and DLX1 (0.94).
CONCLUSIONS: We identified ARG with reduced expression in PCa and with
significant diagnostic values for discriminating between cancerous and
non-cancerous prostatic tissues, similar that of PCA3. Given their expression
pattern, they could be considered as potentially protective against prostate
cancer. Moreover, they could be complementary to known genes overexpressed in PCa
and included along with them in multiplex diagnostic tools.

PMCID: PMC3696068
PMID: 23840433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Acta Neurobiol Exp (Wars). 2013;73(2):250-9.

Directed differentiation of umbilical cord blood stem cells into cortical
GABAergic neurons.

Ali H(1), Bayatti N, Lindsay S, Dashti AA, Al-Mulla F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences (MLS), Faculty of Allied Health
Sciences, Health Sciences Center, Kuwait Universiy, The State of Kuwait.
Hamad.ali@hsc.edu.kw

Umbilical cord blood contains a population of non-hematopoietic multipotent stem 
cells that are capable of neuronal differentiation in-vitro. These cells have
shown great potential as a therapeutic tool for central nervous system diseases
and disorders. However whether these cells are able to produce neurons with
similar developmental and functional characteristics to indigenous neurons within
the brain remains poorly investigated. In this study, we used purified umbilical 
cord blood non-hematopoietic stem cells to produced GABAergic neurons with
similar developmental and functional characteristics to cortical GABAergic
neurons. We analyzed the expression of transcription factors MASH1, DLX1 and DLX2
throughout the 24 days of a sequential neuronal induction protocol and found that
their expression patterns resembled those reported in the developing human
cortex. The derived neurons also expressed components of GABAergic
neurotransmission including GABA regulatory enzymes, GABA receptor subunits and
GABA transporters. Thus we have demonstrated that umbilical cord blood stem cells
are capable of producing cortical-like GABAergic neurons in vitro. This
highlights the potential of umbilical cord blood stem cells as a therapeutic tool
for neural injuries and disorders.

PMID: 23823986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Eur Arch Paediatr Dent. 2013 Dec;14(6):405-10. doi: 10.1007/s40368-013-0010-2.
Epub 2013 Apr 3.

Candidate gene studies in hypodontia suggest role for FGF3.

Vieira AR(1), D'Souza RN, Mues G, Deeley K, Hsin HY, Küchler EC, Meira R, Patir
A, Tannure PN, Lips A, Costa MC, Granjeiro JM, Seymen F, Modesto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Pittsburgh, 614 Salk Hall, Pittsburgh, PA, 15261, USA, arv11@pitt.edu.

INTRODUCTION: The majority of tooth agenesis cases are mild (hypodontia) and
typically not associated with the gene mutations linked to oligodontia. From
this, we hypothesise that most cases of tooth agenesis fit a polygenic mode of
inheritance, where several genes with small effects cause a variety of varying
phenotypes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, we looked at 18 not typically studied genes
in this condition, to ascertain their contribution to hypodontia. Our study
subjects consisted of 167 patients with hypodontia and their parents from two
cohorts (one from Brazil and one from Turkey). An additional 465 DNA samples (93 
cases with hypodontia and 372 controls without family history for tooth agenesis 
or oral clefts) from Brazil were also available for this study. Ninety-three
single nucleotide polymorphisms that maximally represent the linkage
disequilibrium structure of the genes for the 18 genes were selected and
genotyped using Taqman chemistry. Chi square was used to test if genotype
distributions were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, and 24 markers that were in
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and had allele frequencies higher than 5 % in a panel 
of 50 CEPH samples were further tested. Association between hypodontia and
genetic variants was tested with the transmission disequilibrium test within the 
programme Family-Based Association Test (FBAT) and by using Chi square and
Fisher's exact tests. Alpha at a level of 0.05 was used to report results.
RESULTS: Results suggest possible associations between several genes and
hypodontia in the three populations. In the Turkish cohort (n = 51
parent-affected child trios) the most significant results were as follows: FGF3
rs1893047, p = 0.08; GLI3 rs929387, p = 0.03; GLI3 haplotype rs929387-rs846266,
p = 0.002; and PAX9 rs2073242, p = 0.03. In the Brazilian cohort (n = 116
parent-affected child trios), the results were as follows: DLX1 rs788173,
p = 0.07; FGF3 rs12574452, p = 0.03; GLI2 rs1992901, p = 0.03; and PITX2
rs2595110, p = 0.01. The second Brazilian cohort also suggested that FGF3
(rs12574452, p = 0.01) is associated with hypodontia and added EDAR (rs17269487, 
p = 0.04), LHX6 (rs989798, p = 0.02), and MSX1 (rs12532, p = 0.003).
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that several genes are potentially associated
with hypodontia and their individual contributions may be modest. Hence, these
cases may not be explained by inactivating mutations such as many oligodontia
cases segregating in a Mendelian fashion but rather are influenced by one or more
susceptibility alleles in multiple small effect genes.

PMCID: PMC3732557
PMID: 23549991  [PubMed - in process]


32. Dev Biol. 2013 Apr 15;376(2):224-35. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.01.035. Epub 2013 
Feb 8.

Making sense of Dlx1 antisense RNA.

Kraus P(1), Sivakamasundari V, Lim SL, Xing X, Lipovich L, Lufkin T.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Developmental Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore 
138672, Singapore.

Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been recently recognized as a major class of 
regulators in mammalian systems. LncRNAs function by diverse and heterogeneous
mechanisms in gene regulation, and are key contributors to development,
neurological disorders, and cancer. This emerging importance of lncRNAs, along
with recent reports of a functional lncRNA encoded by the mouse Dlx5-Dlx6 locus, 
led us to interrogate the biological significance of another distal-less
antisense lncRNA, the previously uncharacterized Dlx1 antisense (Dlx1as)
transcript. We have functionally ablated this antisense RNA via a highly
customized gene targeting approach in vivo. Mice devoid of Dlx1as RNA are viable 
and fertile, and display a mild skeletal and neurological phenotype reminiscent
of a Dlx1 gain-of function phenotype, suggesting a role for this non-coding
antisense RNA in modulating Dlx1 transcript levels and stability. The reciprocal 
relationship between Dlx1as and Dlx1 places this sense-antisense pair into a
growing class of mammalian lncRNA-mRNA pairs characterized by inverse regulation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23415800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Neuron. 2013 Jan 9;77(1):83-98. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.11.035.

Dlx1&2-dependent expression of Zfhx1b (Sip1, Zeb2) regulates the fate switch
between cortical and striatal interneurons.

McKinsey GL(1), Lindtner S, Trzcinski B, Visel A, Pennacchio LA, Huylebroeck D,
Higashi Y, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Neuroscience Program, and the Nina Ireland
Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, University of California, San Francisco
(UCSF), San Francisco, CA 94158-2324, USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2013 Jan 9;77(1):1-3.
    Epilepsia. 2013 Jul;54(7):1331-2.

Mammalian pallial (cortical and hippocampal) and striatal interneurons are both
generated in the embryonic subpallium, including the medial ganglionic eminence
(MGE). Herein we demonstrate that the Zfhx1b (Sip1, Zeb2) zinc finger homeobox
gene is required in the MGE, directly downstream of Dlx1&2, to generate cortical 
interneurons that express Cxcr7, MafB, and cMaf. In its absence, Nkx2-1
expression is not repressed, and cells that ordinarily would become cortical
interneurons appear to transform toward a subtype of GABAergic striatal
interneurons. These results show that Zfhx1b is required to generate cortical
interneurons, and suggest a mechanism for the epilepsy observed in humans with
Zfhx1b mutations (Mowat-Wilson syndrome).

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3547499
PMID: 23312518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Comp Neurol. 2013 May 1;521(7):1561-84. doi: 10.1002/cne.23242.

Loss of Gsx1 and Gsx2 function rescues distinct phenotypes in Dlx1/2 mutants.

Wang B(1), Long JE, Flandin P, Pla R, Waclaw RR, Campbell K, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and the Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California
94158-2324, USA.

Mice lacking the Dlx1 and Dlx2 homeobox genes (Dlx1/2 mutants) have severe
deficits in subpallial differentiation, including overexpression of the Gsx1 and 
Gsx2 homeobox genes. To investigate whether Gsx overexpression contributes to the
Dlx1/2 mutant phenotypes, we made compound loss-of-function mutants. Eliminating 
Gsx2 function from the Dlx1/2 mutants rescued the increased expression of Ascl1
and Hes5 (Notch signaling mediators) and Olig2 (oligodendrogenesis mediator). In 
addition, Dlx1/2;Gsx2 mutants, like Dlx1/2;Ascl1 mutants, exacerbated the Gsx2
and Dlx1/2 patterning and differentiation phenotypes, particularly in the lateral
ganglionic eminence (LGE) caudal ganglionic eminence (CGE), and septum, including
loss of GAD1 expression. On the other hand, eliminating Gsx1 function from the
Dlx1/2 mutants (Dlx1/2;Gsx1 mutants) did not severely exacerbate their phenotype;
on the contrary, it resulted in a partial rescue of medial ganglionic eminence
(MGE) properties, including interneuron migration to the cortex. Thus, despite
their redundant properties, Gsx1 and -2 have distinct interactions with Dlx1 and 
-2. Gsx2 interaction is strongest in the LGE, CGE, and septum, whereas the Gsx1
interaction is strongest in the MGE. From these studies, and earlier studies, we 
present a model of the transcriptional network that regulates early steps of
subcortical development.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3615175
PMID: 23042297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Dev Dyn. 2012 Nov;241(11):1757-69. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23867. Epub 2012 Sep 28.

Cleft palate defect of Dlx1/2-/- mutant mice is caused by lack of vertical
outgrowth in the posterior palate.

Jeong J(1), Cesario J, Zhao Y, Burns L, Westphal H, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Science and Craniofacial Biology, New York University
College of Dentistry, New York, NY 10010, USA. jj78@nyu.edu

BACKGROUND: Mice lacking the activities of Dlx1 and Dlx2 (Dlx1/2-/-) exhibit
cleft palate, one of the most common human congenital defects, but the etiology
behind this phenotype has been unknown. Therefore, we analyzed the morphological,
cellular, and molecular changes caused by inactivation of Dlx1 and Dlx2 as
related to palate development.
RESULTS: Dlx1/2-/- mutants exhibited lack of vertical growth in the posterior
palate during the earliest stage of palatogenesis. We attributed this growth
deficiency to reduced cell proliferation. Expression of a cell cycle regulator
Ccnd1 was specifically down-regulated in the same region. Previous studies
established that the epithelial-mesenchymal signaling loop involving Shh, Bmp4,
and Fgf10 is important for cell proliferation and tissue growth during palate
development. This signaling loop was disrupted in Dlx1/2-/- palate.
Interestingly, however, the decreases in Ccnd1 expression and mitosis in
Dlx1/2-/- mutants were independent of this signaling loop. Finally, Dlx1/2
activity was required for normal expression of several transcription factor genes
whose mutation results in palate defects.
CONCLUSIONS: The functions of Dlx1 and Dlx2 are crucial for the initial formation
of the posterior palatal shelves, and that the Dlx genes lie upstream of multiple
signaling molecules and transcription factors important for later stages of
palatogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3988582
PMID: 22972697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Sep 4;109(36):14646-51. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1211591109. Epub 2012 Aug 20.

Specific deletion of NaV1.1 sodium channels in inhibitory interneurons causes
seizures and premature death in a mouse model of Dravet syndrome.

Cheah CS(1), Yu FH, Westenbroek RE, Kalume FK, Oakley JC, Potter GB, Rubenstein
JL, Catterall WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in the brain sodium channel Na(V)1.1
cause Dravet syndrome (DS), a pharmacoresistant infantile-onset epilepsy syndrome
with comorbidities of cognitive impairment and premature death. Previous studies 
using a mouse model of DS revealed reduced sodium currents and impaired
excitability in GABAergic interneurons in the hippocampus, leading to the
hypothesis that impaired excitability of GABAergic inhibitory neurons is the
cause of epilepsy and premature death in DS. However, other classes of GABAergic 
interneurons are less impaired, so the direct cause of hyperexcitability,
epilepsy, and premature death has remained unresolved. We generated a floxed
Scn1a mouse line and used the Cre-Lox method driven by an enhancer from the
Dlx1,2 locus for conditional deletion of Scn1a in forebrain GABAergic neurons.
Immunocytochemical studies demonstrated selective loss of Na(V)1.1 channels in
GABAergic interneurons in cerebral cortex and hippocampus. Mice with this
deletion died prematurely following generalized tonic-clonic seizures, and they
were equally susceptible to thermal induction of seizures as mice with global
deletion of Scn1a. Evidently, loss of Na(V)1.1 channels in forebrain GABAergic
neurons is both necessary and sufficient to cause epilepsy and premature death in
DS.

PMCID: PMC3437823
PMID: 22908258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Nov 20;21(17):3069-80. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0155. Epub 2012
Oct 4.

A stable cranial neural crest cell line from mouse.

Ishii M(1), Arias AC, Liu L, Chen YB, Bronner ME, Maxson RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, USC/Norris Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Cranial neural crest cells give rise to ectomesenchymal derivatives such as
cranial bones, cartilage, smooth muscle, dentin, as well as melanocytes, corneal 
endothelial cells, and neurons and glial cells of the peripheral nervous system. 
Previous studies have suggested that although multipotent stem-like cells may
exist during the course of cranial neural crest development, they are transient, 
undergoing lineage restriction early in embryonic development. We have developed 
culture conditions that allow cranial neural crest cells to be grown as
multipotent stem-like cells. With these methods, we obtained 2 independent cell
lines, O9-1 and i10-1, which were derived from mass cultures of Wnt1-Cre;
R26R-GFP-expressing cells. These cell lines can be propagated and passaged
indefinitely, and can differentiate into osteoblasts, chondrocytes, smooth muscle
cells, and glial cells. Whole-genome expression profiling of O9-1 cells revealed 
that this line stably expresses stem cell markers (CD44, Sca-1, and Bmi1) and
neural crest markers (AP-2a, Twist1, Sox9, Myc, Ets1, Dlx1, Dlx2, Crabp1, Epha2, 
and Itgb1). O9-1 cells are capable of contributing to cranial mesenchymal
(osteoblast and smooth muscle) neural crest fates when injected into E13.5 mouse 
cranial tissue explants and chicken embryos. These results suggest that O9-1
cells represent multipotent mesenchymal cranial neural crest cells. The O9-1 cell
line should serve as a useful tool for investigating the molecular properties of 
differentiating cranial neural crest cells.

PMCID: PMC3495126
PMID: 22889333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Biol Psychiatry. 2012 Nov 1;72(9):725-33. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.06.021.
Epub 2012 Jul 25.

Higher gamma-aminobutyric acid neuron density in the white matter of orbital
frontal cortex in schizophrenia.

Joshi D(1), Fung SJ, Rothwell A, Weickert CS.

Author information: 
(1)Schizophrenia Research Institute, Sydney, Australia. d.joshi@neura.edu.au

Comment in
    Biol Psychiatry. 2012 Nov 1;72(9):712-3.

BACKGROUND: In the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), reduced gray matter volume and
reduced glutamic acid decarboxylase 67kDa isoform (GAD67) messenger (m)RNA are
found in schizophrenia; however, how these alterations relate to developmental
pathology of interneurons is unclear. The present study therefore aimed to
determine if increased interstitial white matter neuron (IWMN) density exists in 
the OFC; whether gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic neuron density in OFC white 
matter was altered; and how IWMN density may be related to an early-expressed
inhibitory neuron marker, Dlx1, in OFC gray matter in schizophrenia.
METHODS: IWMN densities were determined (38 schizophrenia and 38 control
subjects) for neuronal nuclear antigen (NeuN+) and 65/67 kDa isoform of glutamic 
acid decarboxylase immunopositive (GAD65/67+) neurons. In situ hybridization was 
performed to determine Dlx1 and GAD67 mRNA expression in the OFC gray matter.
RESULTS: NeuN and GAD65/67 immunopositive cell density was significantly
increased in the superficial white matter in schizophrenia. Gray matter Dlx1 and 
GAD67 mRNA expression were reduced in schizophrenia. Dlx1 mRNA levels were
negatively correlated with GAD65/67 IWMN density.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides evidence that pathology of IWMNs in schizophrenia
includes GABAergic interneurons and that increased IWMN density may be related to
GABAergic deficits in the overlying gray matter. These findings provide evidence 
at the cellular level that the OFC is a site of pathology in schizophrenia and
support the hypothesis that inappropriate migration of cortical inhibitory
interneurons occurs in schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2012 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 22841514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Aug 21;109(34):13829-34. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1205909109. Epub 2012 Jul 2.

Chronic reduction in inhibition reduces receptive field size in mouse auditory
cortex.

Seybold BA(1), Stanco A, Cho KK, Potter GB, Kim C, Sohal VS, Rubenstein JL,
Schreiner CE.

Author information: 
(1)Coleman Memorial Laboratory, Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
bryan.seybold@ucsf.edu

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Aug 21;109(34):13473-4.

Inhibitory interneurons regulate the responses of cortical circuits. In auditory 
cortical areas, inhibition from these neurons narrows spectral tuning and shapes 
response dynamics. Acute disruptions of inhibition expand spectral receptive
fields. However, the effects of long-term perturbations of inhibitory circuitry
on auditory cortical responses are unknown. We ablated ~30% of dendrite-targeting
cortical inhibitory interneurons after the critical period by studying mice with 
a conditional deletion of Dlx1. Following the loss of interneurons, baseline
firing rates rose and tone-evoked responses became less sparse in auditory
cortex. However, contrary to acute blockades of inhibition, the sizes of spectral
receptive fields were reduced, demonstrating both higher thresholds and narrower 
bandwidths. Furthermore, long-latency responses at the edge of the receptive
field were absent. On the basis of changes in response dynamics, the mechanism
for the reduction in receptive field size appears to be a compensatory loss of
cortico-cortically (CC) driven responses. Our findings suggest chronic conditions
that feature changes in inhibitory circuitry are not likely to be well modeled by
acute network manipulations, and compensation may be a critical component of
chronic neuronal conditions.

PMCID: PMC3427089
PMID: 22753490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Neurosci. 2012 Jun 13;32(24):8219-30. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1344-12.2012.

The Rb/E2F pathway modulates neurogenesis through direct regulation of the
Dlx1/Dlx2 bigene cluster.

Ghanem N(1), Andrusiak MG, Svoboda D, Al Lafi SM, Julian LM, McClellan KA, De
Repentigny Y, Kothary R, Ekker M, Blais A, Park DS, Slack RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada.

During brain morphogenesis, the mechanisms through which the cell cycle machinery
integrates with differentiation signals remain elusive. Here we show that the
Rb/E2F pathway regulates key aspects of differentiation and migration through
direct control of the Dlx1 and Dlx2 homeodomain proteins, required for
interneuron specification. Rb deficiency results in a dramatic reduction of Dlx1 
and Dlx2 gene expression manifested by loss of interneuron subtypes and severe
migration defects in the mouse brain. The Rb/E2F pathway modulates Dlx1/Dlx2
regulation through direct interaction with a Dlx forebrain-specific enhancer,
I12b, and the Dlx1/Dlx2 proximal promoter regions, through repressor E2F sites
both in vitro and in vivo. In the absence of Rb, we demonstrate that repressor
E2Fs inhibit Dlx transcription at the Dlx1/Dlx2 promoters and Dlx1/2-I12b
enhancer to suppress differentiation. Our findings support a model whereby the
cell cycle machinery not only controls cell division but also modulates neuronal 
differentiation and migration through direct regulation of the Dlx1/Dlx2 bigene
cluster during embryonic development.

PMID: 22699903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Anat. 2013 Jan;222(1):41-55. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2012.01505.x. Epub 2012
Apr 16.

Developmental and evolutionary significance of the mandibular arch and
prechordal/premandibular cranium in vertebrates: revising the heterotopy scenario
of gnathostome jaw evolution.

Kuratani S(1), Adachi N, Wada N, Oisi Y, Sugahara F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Evolutionary Morphology, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan. saizo@cdb.riken.jp

The cephalic neural crest produces streams of migrating cells that populate
pharyngeal arches and a more rostral, premandibular domain, to give rise to an
extensive ectomesenchyme in the embryonic vertebrate head. The crest cells
forming the trigeminal stream are the major source of the craniofacial skeleton; 
however, there is no clear distinction between the mandibular arch and the
premandibular domain in this ectomesenchyme. The question regarding the evolution
of the gnathostome jaw is, in part, a question about the differentiation of the
mandibular arch, the rostralmost component of the pharynx, and in part a question
about the developmental fate of the premandibular domain. We address the
developmental definition of the mandibular arch in connection with the
developmental origin of the trabeculae, paired cartilaginous elements generally
believed to develop in the premandibular domain, and also of enigmatic
cartilaginous elements called polar cartilages. Based on comparative embryology, 
we propose that the mandibular arch ectomesenchyme in gnathostomes can be defined
as a Dlx1-positive domain, and that the polar cartilages, which develop from the 
Dlx1-negative premandibular ectomesenchyme, would represent merely posterior
parts of the trabeculae. We also show, in the lamprey embryo, early migration of 
mandibular arch mesenchyme into the premandibular domain, and propose an updated 
version of the heterotopy theory on the origin of the jaw.

© 2012 The Authors. Journal of Anatomy © 2012 Anatomical Society.

PMCID: PMC3552414
PMID: 22500853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2012;723:685-91. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-0631-0_87.

Roles of homeobox genes in retinal ganglion cell differentiation and axonal
guidance.

Zhang Q(1), Eisenstat DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Cell Science, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, MB, Canada, R3E 0V9.

In this review, we have described four major families of homeobox genes which
play important roles in RGC differentiation as well as axonal pathfinding. The
mechanism underlying how these HD TFs affect axonal pathfinding is not entirely
known. One possibility is that the downstream targets directly regulated by these
HD TF are responsible for axonal guidance. Examples of this are the repression of
EphB1 by Isl2, and Vax1/Vax2 regulation of EphB2/EphB3 expression. The roles of
Dlx homeobox genes in RGC axonal guidance have not yet been reported. However, in
the mouse telencephalon, Dlx1 and Dlx2 promote the tangential migration of
GABAergic interneurons by repressing axonal growth (Cobos et al. 2007) and
inhibiting Neuropilin-2 expression (Le et al. 2007). It is possible that the
genetic program defining RGC identity also encodes a unique "sensory" network for
their axons, determining how and where RGC axons respond to guidance cues en
route to CNS targets.

PMID: 22183394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Aug 10;21(12):2239-51. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0607. Epub 2012
Jan 26.

Helios transcription factor expression depends on Gsx2 and Dlx1&2 function in
developing striatal matrix neurons.

Martín-Ibáñez R(1), Crespo E, Esgleas M, Urban N, Wang B, Waclaw R, Georgopoulos 
K, Martínez S, Campbell K, Vicario-Abejón C, Alberch J, Chan S, Kastner P,
Rubenstein JL, Canals JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Immunology and Neuroscience, and Cell Therapy
Program, Faculty of Medicine, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i
Sunyer-IDIBAPS, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Development of the nervous system is finely regulated by consecutive expression
of cell-specific transcription factors. Here we show that Helios, a member of the
Ikaros transcription factor family, is expressed in ectodermal and
neuroectodermal-derived tissues. During embryonic development, Helios is
expressed by several brain structures including the lateral ganglionic eminence
(LGE, the striatal anlage); the cingulated, insular and retrosplenial cortex; the
hippocampus; and the accessory olfactory bulb. Moreover, Helios is also expressed
by Purkinje neurons during postnatal cerebellar development. Within the LGE,
Helios expression follows a dynamic spatio-temporal pattern starting at embryonic
stages (E14.5), peaking at E18.5, and completely disappearing during postnatal
development. Helios is expressed by a small population of nestin-positive neural 
progenitor cells located in the subventricular zone as well as by a larger
population of immature neurons distributed throughout the mantle zone. In the
later, Helios is preferentially expressed in the matrix compartment, where it
colocalizes with Bcl11b and Foxp1, well-known markers of striatal projection
neurons. In addition, we observed that Helios expression is not detected in
Dlx1/2 and Gsx2 null mutants, while its expression is maintained in Ascl1
mutants. These findings allow us to introduce a new transcription factor in the
cascade of events that take part of striatal development postulating the
existence of at least 4 different neural progenitors in the LGE. An
Ascl1-independent but Gsx2- & Dlx1/2-dependent precursor will express Helios
defining a new lineage for a subset of matrix striatal neurons.

PMCID: PMC3411368
PMID: 22142223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Morphologie. 2011 Dec;95(311):132-41. doi: 10.1016/j.morpho.2011.07.116. Epub
2011 Nov 17.

[Immunohistochemical study of Dlx1 and Msx1 expression during cephalic
development of Dumbo and Wistar rats. Correlation with morphological data].

[Article in French]

Louryan S(1), Vanmuylder N, Choa-Duterre M, Jacobs R, Remacle C, Rooze M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'anatomie, biomécanique et organogenèse, faculté de médecine,
ULB, route de Lennik, 808, CP 619, 1070 Bruxelles, Belgique. Slouryan@ulb.ac.be

The Dumbo rat is characterized by a short snout, low ears and relative hypoplasia
of maxillar and zygomatic bones. It corresponds to an autosomal recessive
genotype. Previous study demonstrated a global deficit of Dlx1 and Msx1 genes
expression in comparison to Wistar embryos as considered as control animals. We
performed a histological study of cephalic development of Dumbo rats compared to 
Wistar embryos and an immunohistochemical analysis of Dlx1 and Msx1 protein
expression during cephalogenesis. Our data indicate that the pattern of
expression of both genes is similar in both strains, but that quantitative
differences in gene expression can be the result of delayed organogenesis in
Dumbo rat in comparison to Wistar. Some data about gene expressions are discussed
at the light of the postulated function of Dlx1 and Msx1 in cephalic development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22099937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. BMC Evol Biol. 2011 Oct 18;11:307. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-11-307.

The homology of odontodes in gnathostomes: insights from Dlx gene expression in
the dogfish, Scyliorhinus canicula.

Debiais-Thibaud M(1), Oulion S, Bourrat F, Laurenti P, Casane D, Borday-Birraux
V.

Author information: 
(1)Evolution des familles multigéniques, Laboratoire Evolution Génome et
Spéciation, UPR CNRS, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

BACKGROUND: Teeth and tooth-like structures, together named odontodes, are
repeated organs thought to share a common evolutionary origin. These structures
can be found in gnathostomes at different locations along the body: oral teeth in
the jaws, teeth and denticles in the oral-pharyngeal cavity, and dermal denticles
on elasmobranch skin. We, and other colleagues, had previously shown that teeth
in any location were serially homologous because: i) pharyngeal and oral teeth
develop through a common developmental module; and ii) the expression patterns of
the Dlx genes during odontogenesis were highly divergent between species but
almost identical between oral and pharyngeal dentitions within the same species. 
Here we examine Dlx gene expression in oral teeth and dermal denticles in order
to test the hypothesis of serial homology between these odontodes.
RESULTS: We present a detailed comparison of the first developing teeth and
dermal denticles (caudal primary scales) of the dogfish (Scyliorhinus canicula)
and show that both odontodes develop through identical stages that correspond to 
the common stages of oral and pharyngeal odontogenesis. We identified six Dlx
paralogs in the dogfish and found that three showed strong transcription in teeth
and dermal denticles (Dlx3, Dlx4 and Dlx5) whereas a weak expression was detected
for Dlx1 in dermal denticles and teeth, and for Dlx2 in dermal denticles. Very
few differences in Dlx expression patterns could be detected between tooth and
dermal denticle development, except for the absence of Dlx2 expression in teeth.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our histological and expression data strongly
suggest that teeth and dermal denticles develop from the same developmental
module and under the control of the same set of Dlx genes. Teeth and dermal
denticles should therefore be considered as serial homologs developing through
the initiation of a common gene regulatory network (GRN) at several body
locations. This mechanism of heterotopy supports the 'inside and out' model that 
has been recently proposed for odontode evolution.

PMCID: PMC3217942
PMID: 22008058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. BMC Res Notes. 2011 Sep 26;4:370. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-4-370.

Unveiling novel genes upregulated by both rhBMP2 and rhBMP7 during early
osteoblastic transdifferentiation of C2C12 cells.

Bustos-Valenzuela JC(1), Fujita A, Halcsik E, Granjeiro JM, Sogayar MC.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Institute, Department of Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Therapy
Centre (NUCEL), University of São Paulo, Avenida Prof, Lineu Prestes, 748 Bloco
9S, São Paulo, SP 05508-000, Brazil. mcsoga@iq.usp.br.

FINDINGS: We set out to analyse the gene expression profile of pre-osteoblastic
C2C12 cells during osteodifferentiation induced by both rhBMP2 and rhBMP7 using
DNA microarrays. Induced and repressed genes were intercepted, resulting in 1,318
induced genes and 704 repressed genes by both rhBMP2 and rhBMP7. We selected and 
validated, by RT-qPCR, 24 genes which were upregulated by rhBMP2 and rhBMP7; of
these, 13 are related to transcription (Runx2, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, Id1, Id2, Id3,
Fkhr1, Osx, Hoxc8, Glis1, Glis3 and Cfdp1), four are associated with cell
signalling pathways (Lrp6, Dvl1, Ecsit and PKCd) and seven are associated with
the extracellular matrix (Ltbp2, Grn, Postn, Plod1, BMP1, Htra1 and IGFBP-rP10). 
The novel identified genes include: Hoxc8, Glis1, Glis3, Ecsit, PKCd, LrP6, Dvl1,
Grn, BMP1, Ltbp2, Plod1, Htra1 and IGFBP-rP10.
BACKGROUND: BMPs (bone morphogenetic proteins) are members of the TGFß
(transforming growth factor-ß) super-family of proteins, which regulate growth
and differentiation of different cell types in various tissues, and play a
critical role in the differentiation of mesenchymal cells into osteoblasts. In
particular, rhBMP2 and rhBMP7 promote osteoinduction in vitro and in vivo, and
both proteins are therapeutically applied in orthopaedics and dentistry.
CONCLUSION: Using DNA microarrays and RT-qPCR, we identified both previously
known and novel genes which are upregulated by rhBMP2 and rhBMP7 during the onset
of osteoblastic transdifferentiation of pre-myoblastic C2C12 cells. Subsequent
studies of these genes in C2C12 and mesenchymal or pre-osteoblastic cells should 
reveal more details about their role during this type of cellular differentiation
induced by BMP2 or BMP7. These studies are relevant to better understanding the
molecular mechanisms underlying osteoblastic differentiation and bone repair.

PMCID: PMC3196718
PMID: 21943021  [PubMed]


47. Dev Neurobiol. 2012 Jun;72(6):805-20. doi: 10.1002/dneu.20977.

Isolation of a novel rat neural progenitor clone that expresses Dlx family
transcription factors and gives rise to functional GABAergic neurons in culture.

Li H(1), Hader AT, Han YR, Wong JA, Babiarz J, Ricupero CL, Godfrey SB, Corradi
JP, Fennell M, Hart RP, Plummer MR, Grumet M.

Author information: 
(1)W.M. Keck Center for Collaborative Neuroscience, Rutgers Stem Cell Research
Center, Rutgers, State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey
08854-8082, USA. hedongli2009@gmail.com

Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) ergic interneurons are lost in conditions
including epilepsy and central nervous system injury, but there are few culture
models available to study their function. Toward the goal of obtaining renewable 
sources of GABAergic neurons, we used the molecular profile of a functionally
incomplete GABAergic precursor clone to screen 17 new clones isolated from GFP(+)
rat E14.5 cortex and ganglionic eminence (GE) that were generated by viral
introduction of v-myc. The clones grow as neurospheres in medium with FGF2, and
after withdrawal of FGF2, they exhibit varying patterns of differentiation.
Transcriptional profiling and quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) indicated that one clone (GE6) expresses high levels of mRNAs
encoding Dlx1, 2, 5, and 6, glutamate decarboxylases, and presynaptic proteins
including neuropeptide Y and somatostatin. Protein expression confirmed that GE6 
is a progenitor with restricted differentiation giving rise mostly to neurons
with GABAergic markers. In cocultures with hippocampal neurons, GE6 neurons
became electrically excitable and received both inhibitory and excitatory
synapses. After withdrawal of FGF2 in cultures of GE6 alone, neurons matured to
express ßIII-tubulin, and staining for synaptophysin and vesicular GABA
transporter were robust after 1-2 weeks of differentiation. GE6 neurons also
became electrically excitable and displayed synaptic activity, but synaptic
currents were carried by chloride and were blocked by bicuculline. The results
suggest that the GE6 clone, which is ventrally derived from the GE, resembles
GABAergic interneuron progenitors that migrate into the developing forebrain.
This is the first report of a relatively stable fetal clone that can be
differentiated into GABAergic interneurons with functional synapses.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3968925
PMID: 21913335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Neuroscience. 2011 Nov 10;195:9-20. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.08.015. Epub
2011 Aug 12.

Brn-3b inhibits generation of amacrine cells by binding to and negatively
regulating DLX1/2 in developing retina.

Feng L(1), Eisenstat DD, Chiba S, Ishizaki Y, Gan L, Shibasaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

During retinogenesis, the basic helix-loop-helix proneural gene math5 (atoh7)
initiates the generation of the first-born neurons, retinal ganglion cells
(RGCs), by activating a network of RGC transcription factors, including Brn-3b
(POU4F2). Herein, we show that the expression of DLX1 and DLX2 is significantly
down-regulated in math5-null retina but is markedly increased in Brn-3b-null
retina. Interestingly, Brn-3b interacts with DLX1 through its homeodomain, and
this interaction represses DLX1 activity. Retrovirus-mediated mis-expression of
DLX1 or DLX2 dramatically increases the number of amacrine/bipolar cells and
concurrently reduces rod photoreceptors. Conversely, combined ectopic expression 
of Brn-3b with DLX1 or DLX2 promotes the production of RGCs and inhibits amacrine
cell differentiation. Thus, DLX1/2 play an essential role in cell fate selection 
between amacrine and RGCs. Brn-3b suppresses the role of DLX1/2 through physical 
interaction and biases the competent precursors toward RGC fates.

Copyright © 2011 IBRO. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21875655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2011 Nov;29(7):681-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2011.06.005.
Epub 2011 Jun 23.

Activity of dlx5a/dlx6a regulatory elements during zebrafish GABAergic neuron
development.

Yu M(1), Xi Y, Pollack J, Debiais-Thibaud M, Macdonald RB, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Advanced Research in Environmental Genomics (CAREG), Department of 
Biology, University of Ottawa, ON, Canada.

During vertebrate forebrain formation, Dlx homeobox genes play essential roles in
the differentiation, migration and survival of subpallial precursor cells that
will later give rise to diverse subtypes of <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-expressing
neurons, including inhibitory cortical interneurons in mammals. They also
participate in the regulation of the Gad genes encoding the enzymes necessary for
GABA synthesis. In mice, at least four cis-regulatory elements (CREs) control Dlx
expression in the telencephalon and diencephalon: URE2 and I12b in the Dlx1/Dlx2 
bigene cluster, and I56i and I56ii in the Dlx5/Dlx6 bigene cluster. However,
little is known so far with respect to the function of orthologous dlx genes and 
their regulatory elements during zebrafish GABAergic neuron development. To
investigate whether similar dlx-mediated pathways exist in the early developing
zebrafish forebrain, we generated independent lines of transgenic zebrafish
carrying two distinct GFP reporter constructs driven by a ß-globin minimal
promoter: one containing a ~1.4kb dlx5a/dlx6a intergenic sequence (encompassing
I56i and I56ii) and one with a ~1.1kb fragment containing only the I56i CRE,
respectively. The expression patterns of these two transgenes were compared with 
that obtained with another construct containing the ~1.4kb dlx5a/dlx6a intergenic
sequence and driven by a ~3.5kb dlx6a 5'-flanking fragment. Our comparative
analysis showed that GFP expression of the three transgene is largely overlapping
throughout the ventral forebrain. Intriguingly, the dlx6a 5'-flanking fragment
has a major impact on transgene expression in the mesencephalic tectum.
Furthermore, comparison of transgene expression between the ~1.4kb and ~1.1kb
intergenic fragments did not show any specific spatial expression conferred by
I56ii. Almost all GFP-expressing cells in the transgenic zebrafish are
GABA-positive and also express various GABAergic interneuron markers. Together,
our data suggest that zebrafish dlx5a/dlx6a intergenic CREs may be involved in a 
conserved genetic pathway necessary for proper dlx expression during zebrafish
GABAergic neuron development.

Copyright © 2011 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21723936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Cereb Cortex. 2012 Mar;22(3):493-508. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhr057. Epub 2011 Jun
10.

Influence of a subtype of inhibitory interneuron on stimulus-specific responses
in visual cortex.

Mao R(1), Schummers J, Knoblich U, Lacey CJ, Van Wart A, Cobos I, Kim C,
Huguenard JR, Rubenstein JL, Sur M.

Author information: 
(1)Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
rmao@stanford.edu

Inhibition modulates receptive field properties and integrative responses of
neurons in cortical circuits. The contribution of specific interneuron classes to
cortical circuits and emergent responses is unknown. Here, we examined neuronal
responses in primary visual cortex (V1) of adult Dlx1(-/-) mice, which have a
selective reduction in cortical dendrite-targeting interneurons (DTIs) that
express calretinin, neuropeptide Y, and somatostatin. The V1 neurons examined in 
Dlx1(-/-) mice have reduced orientation selectivity and altered firing rates,
with elevated late responses, suggesting that local inhibition at dendrites has a
specific role in modulating neuronal computations. We did not detect overt
changes in the physiological properties of thalamic relay neurons and features of
thalamocortical projections, such as retinotopic maps and eye-specific inputs, in
the mutant mice, suggesting that the defects are cortical in origin. These
experimental results are well explained by a computational model that integrates 
broad tuning from dendrite-targeting and narrower tuning from soma-targeting
interneuron subclasses. Our findings suggest a key role for DTIs in the
fine-tuning of stimulus-specific cortical responses.

PMCID: PMC3278313
PMID: 21666125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 May;155A(5):1152-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33942. Epub 2011
Apr 11.

Somatic/gonadal mosaicism in a syndromic form of ectrodactyly, including eye
abnormalities, documented through array-based comparative genomic hybridization.

Filho AB(1), Souza J, Faucz FR, Sotomaior VS, Dupont B, Bartel F, Rodriguez R,
Schwartz CE, Skinner C, Alliman S, Raskin S.

Author information: 
(1)Group for Advanced Molecular Investigation, Graduate Program in Health
Sciences, Center for Biological and Health Sciences, Pontifícia Universidade
Católica do Parana, Curitiba, PR, Brazil.

Split hand/foot malformation (SHFM) is characterized by underdeveloped or absent 
central digital rays, clefts of hands and feet, and variable syndactyly of the
remaining digits. SHFM is a heterogeneous condition caused by abnormalities at
one of multiple loci, including SHFM1 (SHFM1 at 7q21-q22), SHFM2 (Xq26), SHFM3
(FBXW4/DACTYLIN at 10q24), SHFM4 (TP63 at 3q27), and SHFM5 (DLX1 and DLX 2 at
2q31). SHFM3 is unique in that it is caused by submicroscopic tandem chromosome
duplications of FBXW4/DACTYLIN. In order to show that array-based comparative
genomic hybridization should be considered an essential aspect of the genetic
analysis of patients with SHFM, we report on a family with two brothers who have 
ectrodactyly. Interestingly, both also have ocular abnormalities. Their sister
and both parents are healthy. DNA of all five family members was analyzed using
oligonucleotide-based DNA microarray and quantitative PCR. The two affected
brothers were found to have a small duplication of approximately 539 kb at
10q24.32. The patients' sister and father do not have the microduplication, but
qPCR showed that mother's DNA carries the duplication in 20% of blood
lymphocytes. In this family, two children were affected with ectrodactyly having 
a duplication over the SHFM3 locus. The mother, who shows no clinical features of
ectrodacytyly, is a mosaic for the same duplication. Therefore, we demonstrate
that somatic/gonadal mosaicism is a mechanism that gives rise to SHFM. We also
suggest that ocular abnormalities may be part of the clinical description of
SHFM3.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21485001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Nature. 2011 Apr 21;472(7343):351-5. doi: 10.1038/nature09865. Epub 2011 Apr 3.

Neuronal activity is required for the development of specific cortical
interneuron subtypes.

De Marco García NV(1), Karayannis T, Fishell G.

Author information: 
(1)Smilow Neuroscience Program, Departments of Cell Biology and Neural Science,
New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, New York 10016, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2011 Jun;12(6):308.

Electrical activity has been shown to regulate development in a variety of
species and in various structures, including the retina, spinal cord and cortex. 
Within the mammalian cortex specifically, the development of dendrites and
commissural axons in pyramidal cells is activity-dependent. However, little is
known about the developmental role of activity in the other major cortical
population of neurons, the GABA-producing interneurons. These neurons are
morphologically and functionally heterogeneous and efforts over the past decade
have focused on determining the mechanisms that contribute to this diversity. It 
was recently discovered that 30% of all cortical interneurons arise from a
relatively novel source within the ventral telencephalon, the caudal ganglionic
eminence (CGE). Owing to their late birth date, these interneurons populate the
cortex only after the majority of other interneurons and pyramidal cells are
already in place and have started to functionally integrate. Here we demonstrate 
in mice that for CGE-derived reelin (Re)-positive and calretinin (Cr)-positive
(but not vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP)-positive) interneurons, activity is 
essential before postnatal day 3 for correct migration, and that after postnatal 
day 3, glutamate-mediated activity controls the development of their axons and
dendrites. Furthermore, we show that the engulfment and cell motility 1 gene
(Elmo1), a target of the transcription factor distal-less homeobox 1 (Dlx1), is
selectively expressed in Re(+) and Cr(+) interneurons and is both necessary and
sufficient for activity-dependent interneuron migration. Our findings reveal a
selective requirement for activity in shaping the cortical integration of
specific neuronal subtypes.

PMCID: PMC3641515
PMID: 21460837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Comp Neurol. 2011 Aug 15;519(12):2320-34. doi: 10.1002/cne.22618.

Dlx6 regulates molecular properties of the striatum and central nucleus of the
amygdala.

Wang B(1), Lufkin T, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and the Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California
94158-2324, USA.

We describe here the prenatal telencephalic expression of Dlx6 RNA and
ß-galactosidase driven from a mutant Dlx6 locus. The mutant Dlx6 allele, which we
believe is either a null or severe hypomorph, has an IRES-lacZ-neomycin
resistance cassette inserted into the Dlx6 homeobox coding sequence (Dlx6(LacZ)
). We compared expression from the Dlx6-lacZ (Dlx6(LacZ) ) allele in
heterozygotes (Dlx6(LacZ/+) ), with the expression of Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5 and Dlx6
RNA. Like these wild-type alleles, Dlx6(LacZ) is expressed in the developing
ganglionic eminences, and their derivatives. Unlike the other Dlx genes, Dlx6 and
Dlx6(LacZ) expression is not readily observed in tangentially migrating
interneurons. In addition to Dlx6's expression at later stages of differentiation
of many basal ganglia nuclei, it shows particularly robust expression in the
central nucleus of the amygdala. Histological analysis of Dlx6 mutants
(Dlx6(LacZ/LacZ) ) shows that this homeobox transcription factor is required for 
molecular properties of the striatum, nucleus accumbens, olfactory tubercle, and 
central nucleus of the amygdala. For instance, we observed reduced of Golf, RXR<U+03B3>,
and Tiam2 expression in the striatum, and reduced Dlx5 expression in the central 
nucleus of the amygdala. RNA expression array analysis of the E18.5 striatum was 
useful in identifying the transcription factors that are expressed in this
tissue, but did not identify major changes in gene expression in the
Dlx6(LacZ/LacZ) mutant.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4019376
PMID: 21452241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Stem Cells. 2011 Mar;29(3):462-73. doi: 10.1002/stem.587.

A targeted NKX2.1 human embryonic stem cell reporter line enables identification 
of human basal forebrain derivatives.

Goulburn AL(1), Alden D, Davis RP, Micallef SJ, Ng ES, Yu QC, Lim SM, Soh CL,
Elliott DA, Hatzistavrou T, Bourke J, Watmuff B, Lang RJ, Haynes JM, Pouton CW,
Giudice A, Trounson AO, Anderson SA, Stanley EG, Elefanty AG.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Immunology and Stem Cell Laboratories, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia.

We have used homologous recombination in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) to
insert sequences encoding green fluorescent protein (GFP) into the NKX2.1 locus, 
a gene required for normal development of the basal forebrain. Generation of
NKX2.1-GFP(+) cells was dependent on the concentration, timing, and duration of
retinoic acid treatment during differentiation. NKX2.1-GFP(+) progenitors
expressed genes characteristic of the basal forebrain, including SHH, DLX1, LHX6,
and OLIG2. Time course analysis revealed that NKX2.1-GFP(+) cells could
upregulate FOXG1 expression, implying the existence of a novel pathway for the
generation of telencephalic neural derivatives. Further maturation of
NKX2.1-GFP(+) cells gave rise to <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid-, tyrosine hydroxylase-, and
somatostatin-expressing neurons as well as to platelet-derived growth factor
receptor a-positive oligodendrocyte precursors. These studies highlight the
diversity of cell types that can be generated from human NKX2.1(+) progenitors
and demonstrate the utility of NKX2.1(GFP/w) hESCs for investigating human
forebrain development and neuronal differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21425409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Haematologica. 2011 Jun;96(6):820-8. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.031179. Epub 2011
Feb 28.

Up-regulation of homeodomain genes, DLX1 and DLX2, by FLT3 signaling.

Starkova J(1), Gadgil S, Qiu YH, Zhang N, Hermanova I, Kornblau SM, Drabkin HA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, SC, USA. julia.starkova@lfmotol.cuni.cz

BACKGROUND: Activating mutations in fms-like tyrosine kinase-3 (FLT3) are
frequent in acute myeloid leukemia and represent both a poor prognostic feature
and a therapeutic target. We have identified a previously unrecognized downstream
effect of FLT3 activation, namely up-regulation of the homeodomain genes, DLX1
and DLX2.
DESIGN AND METHODS: MV4;11 cells with FLT3-internal tandem duplication mutation, 
RS4;11 cells with wild-type FLT3 and blasts from patients with acute myeloid
leukemia were used to pursue the relation between FLT3, DLX1/2 and transforming
growth factor-ß (TGFß). Real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction, western blot and reverse-phase protein array were performed to
detect changes in gene and protein expression. RNA interference and MTS assays
were used to study the interaction of PKC412, FLT3 inhibitor and TGFß1.
RESULTS: A direct relationship between FLT3 activity and DLX1/2 expression was
revealed by both inhibition and up-regulation of FLT3 signaling in MV4;11 and
RS4;11 cell lines, respectively, in isolated blast cells from patients with acute
myeloid leukemia, and in reverse-phase protein array assays of samples from
patients with acute myeloid leukemia. Mechanistically, the link between FLT3 and 
DLX1 expression appears to involve MAPK signaling through the ERK and JNK
pathways. To determine whether elevated DLX1 had a functional consequence, we
explored the reported inhibition by DLX1 on TGFß/Smad signaling. Indeed, TGFß
responses were blunted by FLT3 activation in a DLX1-dependent manner and FLT3
inhibition resulted in a time-dependent increase in nuclear phospho-Smad2.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that alterations in DLX1/2 contribute to the 
biological consequences of FLT3 activation.

PMCID: PMC3105643
PMID: 21357706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Neurophysiol. 2011 May;105(5):1984-91. doi: 10.1152/jn.00056.2011. Epub 2011
Feb 16.

Deletion of Dlx1 results in reduced glutamatergic input to hippocampal
interneurons.

Jones DL(1), Howard MA, Stanco A, Rubenstein JL, Baraban SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San Francisco,
Box 0112, 513 Parnassus Ave., San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Dlx transcription factors are important in the differentiation of GABAergic
interneurons. In mice lacking Dlx1, early steps in interneuron development appear
normal. Beginning at ~ 1 mo of age, primarily dendrite-innervating interneuron
subtypes begin to undergo apoptosis in Dlx1(-/-) mice; this is accompanied by a
reduction in GABAergic transmission and late-onset epilepsy. The reported
reduction of synaptic inhibition is greater than might be expected given that
interneuron loss is relatively modest in Dlx1(-/-) mice. Here we report that
voltage-clamp recordings of CA1 interneurons in hippocampal slices prepared from 
Dlx1(-/-) animals older than postnatal day 30 (>P30) revealed a significant
reduction in excitatory postsynaptic current (EPSC) amplitude. No changes in
EPSCs onto interneurons were observed in cells recorded from younger animals
(P9-12). Current-clamp recordings from interneurons at these early postnatal ages
showed that interneurons in Dlx1(-/-) mutants were immature and more excitable,
although membrane properties normalized by P30. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase dUTP-mediated nick-end labeling, caspase-3, and NeuN staining did not
reveal frank cell damage or loss in area CA3 of hippocampal sections from adult
Dlx1(-/-) mice. Delayed interneuron maturation may lead to interneuron
hyperexcitability, followed by a compensatory reduction in the strength of
excitatory transmission onto interneurons. This reduced excitation onto surviving
interneurons, coupled with the loss of a significant fraction of GABAergic inputs
to excitatory neurons starting at P30, may underlie cortical dysrhythmia and
seizures previously observed in adult Dlx1(-/-) mice.

PMCID: PMC3094166
PMID: 21325686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2011 Mar;156(2):233-9. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.31148. Epub 2010 Dec 16.

Common genetic variation in the GAD1 gene and the entire family of DLX homeobox
genes and autism spectrum disorders.

Chang SC(1), Pauls DL, Lange C, Sasanfar R, Santangelo SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Biological and positional evidence supports the involvement of the GAD1 and
distal-less homeobox genes (DLXs) in the etiology of autism. We investigated 42
single nucleotide polymorphisms in these genes as risk factors for autism
spectrum disorders (ASD) in a large family-based association study of 715 nuclear
families. No single marker showed significant association after correction for
multiple testing. A rare haplotype in the DLX1 promoter was associated with ASD
(P-value<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001). Given the importance of rare variants to the etiology of
autism revealed in recent studies, the observed rare haplotype may be relevant to
future investigations. Our observations, when taken together with previous
findings, suggest that common genetic variation in the GAD1 and DLX genes is
unlikely to play a critical role in ASD susceptibility.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3088769
PMID: 21302352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Birth Defects Res B Dev Reprod Toxicol. 2011 Feb;92(1):77-81. doi:
10.1002/bdrb.20284. Epub 2011 Jan 19.

Early genetic control of craniofacial development is affected by the in vitro
exposure of rat embryos to the fungicide triadimefon.

Di Renzo F(1), Rossi F, Prati M, Giavini E, Menegola E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Università di Milano, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Previous published experiments reported that in vitro exposure of
postimplantation rat embryos to the triazole fungicide triadimefon (FON) resulted
in specific abnormalities at the branchial apparatus and that the sensitive
period is restricted to the first 24 hr of culture and is associated with the
abnormal expression of TGF family genes (some of a large panel of genes regulated
by retinoic acid (RA) and involved in branchial arch morphogenesis). The aim of
this study is the determination of the sensitive window to FON-induced
abnormalities during in vitro development and the evaluation of the expression of
some genes controlled by RA and involved in early branchial arch morphogenesis
(Gsc, Msx1, Msx2, Dlx1, Dlx2, Shh, Patched (the main Shh receptor)).
METHODS: Rat embryos were exposed in vitro to the FON under condition known to be
able to induce 100% of abnormal embryos (250<U+2009> µM) at different stages and
examined after 48 hr of culture. The sensitive window for FON-induced
abnormalities was during the hours E9 h8.00 PM-E10 h8.00 AM. To evaluate the
expression of selected genes, embryos exposed during the sensitive stages were
processed to perform quantitative PCR after 18 and 24 hr of culture.
RESULTS: FON was able to affect the expression of some genes in a stage-specific 
manner: earlier embryos were characterized by the downregulation of Msx2 and Gsc,
later embryos showed the downregulation of Gsc, Shh, and Patched. The obtained
data suggest that FON-induced abnormalities are mediated, at least in part,
through the imbalance of the expression of RA-related signals.

© 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21254369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Cereb Cortex. 2011 Aug;21(8):1771-82. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhq245. Epub 2010 Dec
7.

Multiple origins of human neocortical interneurons are supported by distinct
expression of transcription factors.

Jakovcevski I(1), Mayer N, Zecevic N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Connecticut Health Center,
Farmington, CT 06030, USA.

Cortical <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic interneurons in rodents originate mainly
in ventrally positioned ganglionic eminences (GEs), but their origin in primates 
is still debated. We studied human fetal forebrains during the first half of
gestation (5-23 gestational weeks, gw) for the expression of ventral
transcription factors, Nkx2.1, Dlx1,2, Lhx6, and Mash1, important for development
of neocortical interneurons. In embryonic (5-8 gw) human forebrain, these factors
were expressed in the GE but also dorsally in the neocortical
ventricular/subventricular zones (VZ/SVZ). Furthermore, their expression was
retained in cells of all fetal cortical layers up to midgestation (20 gw). Nkx2.1
continued to be expressed not only in the GE but also in a subpopulation of
neocortical interneurons. Moreover, proliferation marker Ki67 revealed that
calretinin(+), Mash1(+), and Nkx2.1(+) cells proliferate in the neocortical
VZ/SVZ at midgestation. At least some of the Mash1(+) progenitors in the
neocortical SVZ could be colabeled with GABA, whereas others were oligodendrocyte
progenitors, indicating a link between the 2 lineages. Taken together, these
results suggest the existence of several categories of dorsal interneuronal
progenitors in the human neocortical VZ/SVZ, in addition to ventrally derived
cortical interneurons described in rodents. These human-specific developmental
events may underlie human brain's higher complexity and capacity to process
information.

PMCID: PMC3138511
PMID: 21139075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Aug;38(6):3805-20. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0496-1. Epub 2010
Nov 24.

Analyses of porcine public SNPs in coding-gene regions by re-sequencing and
phenotypic association studies.

Li X(1), Kim SW, Do KT, Ha YK, Lee YM, Yoon SH, Kim HB, Kim JJ, Choi BH, Kim KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju,
Chungbuk, 361-763, South Korea.

The Porcine SNP database has a huge number of SNPs, but these SNPs are mostly
found by computer data-mining procedures and have not been well characterized. We
re-sequenced 1,439 porcine public SNPs from four commercial pig breeds and one
Korean domestic breed (Korean Native pig, KNP) by using two DNA pools from eight 
unrelated animals in each breed. These SNPs were from 419 protein-coding genes
covering the 18 autosomes, and the re-sequencing in breeds confirmed 690 public
SNPs (47.9%) and 226 novel mutations (173 SNPs and 53 insertions/deletions).
Thus, totally, 916 variations were found from our study. Of the 916 variations,
148 SNPs (16.2%) were found across all the five breeds, and 199 SNPs (21.7%) were
breed specific polymorphisms. According to the SNP locations in the gene
sequences, these 916 variations were categorized into 802 non-coding SNPs (785 in
intron, 17 in 3'-UTR) and 114 coding SNPs (86 synonymous SNPs, 28 non-synonymous 
SNPs). The nucleotide substitution analyses for these SNPs revealed that 70.2%
were from transitions, 20.0% from transversions, and the remaining 5.79% were
deletions or insertions. Subsequently, we genotyped 261 SNPs from 180 genes in an
experimental KNP × Landrace F2 cross by the Sequenom MassARRAY system. A total of
33 traits including growth, carcass composition and meat quality were analyzed
for the phenotypic association tests using the 132 SNPs in 108 genes with minor
allele frequency (MAF)>0.2. The association results showed that five marker-trait
combinations were significant at the 5% experiment-wise level (ADCK4 for rear
leg, MYH3 for rear leg, Hunter B, Loin weight and Shearforce) and four at the 10%
experiment-wise level (DHX38 for average daily gain at live weight, LGALS9 for
crude lipid, NGEF for front leg and LIFR for pH at 24 h). In addition, 49 SNPs in
44 genes showing significant association with the traits were detected at the 1% 
comparison-wise level. A large number of genes that function as enzymes,
transcription factors or signalling molecules were considered as genetic markers 
for pig growth (RNF103, TSPAN31, DHX38, ABCF1, ABCC10, SCD5, KIAA0999 and
FKBP10), muscling (HSPA5, PTPRM, NUP88, ADCK4, PLOD1, DLX1 and GRM8), fatness
(PTGIS, IDH3B, RYR2 and NOL4) and meat quality traits (DUSP4, LIFR, NGEF, EWSR1, 
ACTN2, PLXND1, DLX3, LGALS9, ENO3, EPRS, TRIM29, EHMT2, RBM42, SESN2 and RAB4B). 
The SNPs or genes reported here may be beneficial to future marker assisted
selection breeding in pigs.

PMID: 21107721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Med Genet. 2011 Feb;48(2):98-104. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2010.079491. Epub 2010 Nov
10.

2q31.1 microdeletion syndrome: redefining the associated clinical phenotype.

Dimitrov B(1), Balikova I, de Ravel T, Van Esch H, De Smedt M, Baten E, Vermeesch
JR, Bradinova I, Simeonov E, Devriendt K, Fryns JP, Debeer P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

INTRODUCTION: The clinical phenotype of the chromosome 2q31 deletion syndrome
consists of limb anomalies ranging from monodactylous ectrodactyly, brachydactyly
and syndactyly to camptodactyly. Additional internal organ anomalies-for example,
heart defects, ocular anomalies-may be present. Hemizygosity for HOXD13 and EVX2 
genes was thought to cause the observed skeletal defects. Recently, based on the 
phenotype of patients with overlapping 2q31 interstitial deletions, a new SHFM5
locus was proposed, proximal to the HOXD cluster, between EVX2 and marker D2S294.
DLX1 and DLX2 haploinsufficiency was suggested as the most plausible explanation 
for the observed SHFM-like limb anomalies in these cases.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Five unique, interstitial 2q31 deletion patients were
selected to further characterise the 2q31 region and to establish a
genotype/phenotype correlation map. The size of the deletions was delineated with
a chromosome 2 specific tiling path bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) array. 
The clinical and molecular data for this group of patients were compared to
others in the literature. A common locus for the observed skeletal anomalies,
including the HOXD genes and surrounding regulatory sequences, was delineated.
These results correlate with recently published studies in animal models. In
addition, a critical region for the facial gestalt of the 2q31.1 microdeletion
syndrome was delineated.
CONCLUSIONS: These results reinforce the hypothesis that the variable skeletal
phenotype in 2q31 deletion patients is a result of hemizygosity for the HOXD
genes and that the 2q31.1 microdeletion syndrome is a well defined and clinically
recognisable phenotype.

PMID: 21068127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. BMC Evol Biol. 2010 May 26;10:157. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-157.

Functional conservation of a forebrain enhancer from the elephant shark
(Callorhinchus milii ) in zebrafish and mice.

MacDonald RB(1), Debiais-Thibaud M, Martin K, Poitras L, Tay BH, Venkatesh B,
Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Research in Environmental Genomics, Department of Biology,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, K1N 6N5, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The phylogenetic position of the elephant shark (Callorhinchus milii 
) is particularly relevant to study the evolution of genes and gene regulation in
vertebrates. Here we examine the evolution of Dlx homeobox gene regulation during
vertebrate embryonic development with a particular focus on the forebrain. We
first identified the elephant shark sequence orthologous to the URE2 cis
-regulatory element of the mouse Dlx1/Dlx2 locus (herein named CmURE2). We then
conducted a comparative study of the sequence and enhancer activity of CmURE2
with that of orthologous regulatory sequences from zebrafish and mouse.
RESULTS: The CmURE2 sequence shows a high percentage of identity with its mouse
and zebrafish counterparts but is overall more similar to mouse URE2 (MmURE2)
than to zebrafish URE2 (DrURE2). In transgenic zebrafish and mouse embryos,
CmURE2 displayed enhancer activity in the forebrain that overlapped with that of 
DrURE2 and MmURE2. However, we detected notable differences in the activity of
the three sequences in the diencephalon. Outside of the forebrain, CmURE2 shows
enhancer activity in areas such as the pharyngeal arches and dorsal root ganglia 
where its' counterparts are also active.
CONCLUSIONS: Our transgenic assays show that part of the URE2 enhancer activity
is conserved throughout jawed vertebrates but also that new characteristics have 
evolved in the different groups. Our study demonstrates that the elephant shark
is a useful outgroup to study the evolution of regulatory mechanisms in
vertebrates and to address how changes in the sequence of cis -regulatory
elements translate into changes in their regulatory activity.

PMCID: PMC2891724
PMID: 20504318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Epigenetics. 2010 Aug 16;5(6):499-508. Epub 2010 Aug 16.

Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling of chronic lymphocytic leukemia allows
identification of epigenetically repressed molecular pathways with clinical
impact.

Tong WG(1), Wierda WG, Lin E, Kuang SQ, Bekele BN, Estrov Z, Wei Y, Yang H,
Keating MJ, Garcia-Manero G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA.

We performed a genome-wide analysis of aberrant DNA methylation in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) using methylated CpG island amplification (MCA)
coupled with a promoter microarray. We identified 280 potential targets of
aberrant DNA methylation in CLL. These genes were located more frequently in
chromosomes 19 (16%, p=0.001), 16 (11%, p=0.001), 17 (10%, p=0.02) and 11 (9%,
p=0.02) and could be grouped in several functional networks. Methylation status
was confirmed for 22 of these genes (SOX11, DLX1, FAM62C, SOX14, RSPO1, ADCY5,
HAND2,SPOCK, MLL, ING1, PRIMA1, BCL11B, LTBP2, BNC1, NR2F2, SALL1, GALGT2, LHX1, 
DLX4, KLK10, TFAP2 and APP) in 78 CLL patients by pyrosequencing. As a proof of
principle, we analyzed the expression of 2 genes, PRIMA1 and APP, in primary
cells and of GALGT2, TFAP2C and PRIMA1 in leukemia cells. There was an inverse
association between methylation and gene expression. This could be reversed by
treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine in cell lines. Treatment in a clinical
trial with 5-azacitidine resulted in decreased methylation of LINE, DLX4 and
SALL1 in the peripheral blood B-cells of patients with CLL. IgVH mutational
status or ZAP-70 expression were not associated with specific methylation
profiles. By multivariate analysis, methylation of LINE and APP was associated
with shorter overall survival (p = 0.045 and 0.0035, respectively). This study
demonstrates that aberrant DNA methylation is common and has potential prognostic
and therapeutic value in CLL.

PMCID: PMC3322493
PMID: 20484983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 28;5(4):e10392. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010392.

Expression of the Rap1 guanine nucleotide exchange factor, MR-GEF, is altered in 
individuals with bipolar disorder.

Bithell A(1), Hsu T, Kandanearatchi A, Landau S, Everall IP, Tsuang MT, Chana G, 
Williams BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College 
London, London, United Kingdom.

In the rodent forebrain GABAergic neurons are generated from progenitor cells
that express the transcription factors Dlx1 and Dlx2. The Rap-1 guanine
nucleotide exchange factor, MR-GEF, is turned on by many of these developing
GABAergic neurons. Expression of both Dlx1/2 and MR-GEF is retained in both adult
mouse and human forebrain where, in human, decreased Dlx1 expression has been
associated with psychosis. Using in situ hybridization studies we show that
MR-GEF expression is significantly down-regulated in the forebrain of Dlx1/2
double mutant mice suggesting that MR-GEF and Dlx1/2 form part of a common
signalling pathway during GABAergic neuronal development. We therefore compared
MR-GEF expression by in situ hybridization in individuals with major psychiatric 
disorders (schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, major depression) and control
individuals. We observed a significant positive correlation between layers II and
IV of the dorso-lateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) in the percentage of MR-GEF
expressing neurons in individuals with bipolar disorder, but not in individuals
with schizophrenia, major depressive disorder or in controls. Since MR-GEF
encodes a Rap1 GEF able to activate G-protein signalling, we suggest that changes
in MR-GEF expression could potentially influence neurotransmission.

PMCID: PMC2861006
PMID: 20436929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Neurosci. 2010 Apr 14;30(15):5334-45. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5963-09.2010.

Dlx5 and Dlx6 regulate the development of parvalbumin-expressing cortical
interneurons.

Wang Y(1), Dye CA, Sohal V, Long JE, Estrada RC, Roztocil T, Lufkin T, Deisseroth
K, Baraban SC, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California 
94158, USA. Yanling.wang@ucsf.edu

Dlx5 and Dlx6 homeobox genes are expressed in developing and mature cortical
interneurons. Simultaneous deletion of Dlx5 and 6 results in exencephaly of the
anterior brain; despite this defect, prenatal basal ganglia differentiation
appeared largely intact, while tangential migration of Lhx6(+) and Mafb(+)
interneurons to the cortex was reduced and disordered. The migration deficits
were associated with reduced CXCR4 expression. Transplantation of mutant immature
interneurons into a wild-type brain demonstrated that loss of either Dlx5 or
Dlx5&6 preferentially reduced the number of mature parvalbumin(+) interneurons;
those parvalbumin(+) interneurons that were present had increased dendritic
branching. Dlx5/6(+/-) mice, which appear normal histologically, show spontaneous
electrographic seizures and reduced power of gamma oscillations. Thus, Dlx5&6
appeared to be required for development and function of somal innervating
(parvalbumin(+)) neocortical interneurons. This contrasts with Dlx1, whose
function is required for dendrite innervating (calretinin(+), somatostatin(+),
and neuropeptide Y(+)) interneurons (Cobos et al., 2005).

PMCID: PMC2919857
PMID: 20392955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Neurodev Disord. 2010 Mar;2(1):48-60. Epub 2009 Nov 27.

Role for TGF-beta superfamily signaling in telencephalic GABAergic neuron
development.

Maira M, Long JE, Lee AY, Rubenstein JL, Stifani S.

Signaling mechanisms mediated by the Transforming Growth Factor-beta (TGF-beta)
superfamily regulate a variety of developmental processes. Here we show that
components of both bone morphogenetic protein/growth differentiation factor and
TGF-beta/activin/Nodal branches of TGF-beta superfamily signaling are expressed
in the developing subpallium. Furthermore, Smad proteins, transcriptional
effectors of TGF-beta signaling, are co-expressed and physically interact in the 
basal ganglia with Dlx homeodomain transcription factors, which are critical
regulators of the differentiation, migration and survival of telencephalic
GABAergic neurons. We also show that Dlx and Smad proteins localize to
promoters/enhancers of a number of common telencephalic genes in vivo and that
Smad proteins co-activate transcription with Dlx family members, except with
certain mutated human DLX proteins identified in autistic individuals. In
agreement with these observations, expression of dominant-negative Smads in the
developing basal ganglia phenocopies the cell migration defects observed in
Dlx1/2-deficient mice. Together, these results suggest that TGF-beta superfamily 
signaling plays a role in telencephalic GABAergic neuron development through
functional interactions with Dlx transcription factors. ELECTRONIC SUPPLEMENTARY 
MATERIAL: The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s11689-009-9035-6)
contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

PMCID: PMC2834772
PMID: 20339443  [PubMed]


67. Cancer Res. 2010 Apr 1;70(7):2718-27. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3631. Epub
2010 Mar 16.

CpG island hypermethylation in human astrocytomas.

Wu X(1), Rauch TA, Zhong X, Bennett WP, Latif F, Krex D, Pfeifer GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, 
Duarte, CA, USA.

Astrocytomas are common and lethal human brain tumors. We have analyzed the
methylation status of over 28,000 CpG islands and 18,000 promoters in normal
human brain and in astrocytomas of various grades using the methylated CpG island
recovery assay. We identified 6,000 to 7,000 methylated CpG islands in normal
human brain. Approximately 5% of the promoter-associated CpG islands in the
normal brain are methylated. Promoter CpG island methylation is inversely
correlated whereas intragenic methylation is directly correlated with gene
expression levels in brain tissue. In astrocytomas, several hundred CpG islands
undergo specific hypermethylation relative to normal brain with 428 methylation
peaks common to more than 25% of the tumors. Genes involved in brain development 
and neuronal differentiation, such as BMP4, POU4F3, GDNF, OTX2, NEFM, CNTN4, OTP,
SIM1, FYN, EN1, CHAT, GSX2, NKX6-1, PAX6, RAX, and DLX2, were strongly enriched
among genes frequently methylated in tumors. There was an overrepresentation of
homeobox genes and 31% of the most commonly methylated genes represent targets of
the Polycomb complex. We identified several chromosomal loci in which many
(sometimes more than 20) consecutive CpG islands were hypermethylated in tumors. 
Seven such loci were near homeobox genes, including the HOXC and HOXD clusters,
and the BARHL2, DLX1, and PITX2 genes. Two other clusters of hypermethylated
islands were at sequences of recent gene duplication events. Our analysis offers 
mechanistic insights into brain neoplasia suggesting that methylation of the
genes involved in neuronal differentiation, in cooperation with other oncogenic
events, may shift the balance from regulated differentiation towards
gliomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC2848870
PMID: 20233874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Jun;223(3):779-87. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22095.

Dlx homeobox gene family expression in osteoclasts.

Lézot F(1), Thomas BL, Blin-Wakkach C, Castaneda B, Bolanos A, Hotton D, Sharpe
PT, Heymann D, Carles GF, Grigoriadis AE, Berdal A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR 872, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France.
frederic.lezot@crc.jussieu.fr

Skeletal growth and homeostasis require the finely orchestrated secretion of
mineralized tissue matrices by highly specialized cells, balanced with their
degradation by osteoclasts. Time- and site-specific expression of Dlx and Msx
homeobox genes in the cells secreting these matrices have been identified as
important elements in the regulation of skeletal morphology. Such specific
expression patterns have also been reported in osteoclasts for Msx genes. The aim
of the present study was to establish the expression patterns of Dlx genes in
osteoclasts and identify their function in regulating skeletal morphology. The
expression patterns of all Dlx genes were examined during the whole
osteoclastogenesis using different in vitro models. The results revealed that
Dlx1 and Dlx2 are the only Dlx family members with a possible function in
osteoclastogenesis as well as in mature osteoclasts. Dlx5 and Dlx6 were detected 
in the cultures but appear to be markers of monocytes and their derivatives. In
vivo, Dlx2 expression in osteoclasts was examined using a Dlx2/LacZ transgenic
mouse. Dlx2 is expressed in a subpopulation of osteoclasts in association with
tooth, brain, nerve, and bone marrow volumetric growths. Altogether the present
data suggest a role for Dlx2 in regulation of skeletal morphogenesis via
functions within osteoclasts.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20205208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Mol Syndromol. 2010;1(5):262-271. Epub 2011 May 18.

Refinement of the Region for Split Hand/Foot Malformation 5 on 2q31.1.

Theisen A(1), Rosenfeld JA, Shane K, McBride KL, Atkin JF, Gaba C, Hoo J,
Kurczynski TW, Schnur RE, Coffey LB, Zackai EH, Schimmenti L, Friedman N,
Zabukovec M, Ball S, Pagon R, Lucas A, Brasington CK, Spence JE, Sparks S, Banks 
V, Smith W, Friedberg T, Wyatt PR, Aust M, Tervo R, Crowley A, Skidmore D, Lamb
AN, Ravnan B, Sahoo T, Schultz R, Torchia BS, Sgro M, Chitayat D, Shaffer LG.

Author information: 
(1)Signature Genomic Laboratories, Spokane, Wash.

Background: Deletions that encompass 2q31.1 have been proposed as a microdeletion
syndrome with common clinical features, including intellectual
disability/developmental delay, microcephaly, cleft palate, growth delay, and
hand/foot anomalies. In addition, several genes within this region have been
proposed as candidates for split hand-foot malformation 5 (SHFM5). Methods: To
delineate the genotype-phenotype correlation between deletions of this region, we
identified 14 individuals with deletions at 2q31.1 detected by microarray
analysis for physical and developmental disabilities. Results: All subjects for
whom detailed clinical records were available had neurological deficits of
varying degree. Seven subjects with deletions encompassing the HOXD cluster had
hand/foot anomalies of varying severity, including syndactyly, brachydactyly, and
ectrodactyly. Of 7 subjects with deletions proximal to the HOXD cluster, 5 of
which encompassed DLX1/DLX2, none had clinically significant hand/foot anomalies.
In contrast to previous reports, the individuals in our study did not display a
characteristic gestalt of dysmorphic facial features. Conclusion: The absence of 
hand/foot anomalies in any of the individuals with deletions of DLX1/DLX2 but not
the HOXD cluster supports the hypothesis that haploinsufficiency of the HOXD
cluster, rather than DLX1/DLX2, accounts for the skeletal abnormalities in
subjects with 2q31.1 microdeletions.

PMCID: PMC3214950
PMID: 22140379  [PubMed]


70. Arch Oral Biol. 2010 Feb;55(2):108-14. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2009.12.002.

Expression of Wnt5a in tooth germs and the related signal transduction analysis.

Peng L(1), Dong G, Xu P, Ren LB, Wang CL, Aragon M, Zhou XD, Ye L.

Author information: 
(1)West China Hospital of Stomatology, China.

OBJECTIVE: Wnt5a is generally considered a non-canonical Wnt family member and
plays an important role in the development of several tissues through regulation 
of cell fate, proliferation, migration, polarity and death. This study
investigates its expression mode in human tooth development and the involved cell
signal transduction pathways, as they remain unclear.
DESIGN: The expression of Wnt5a was analyzed by immunohistochemistry method.
Recombinant adenovirus encoding full-length Wnt5a cDNA was constructed to
investigate four cell signal pathways and nine dentinogenesis nuclear
transcription factors in response to Wnt5a in human dental papilla cells (HDPCs).
RESULTS: Immunostaining revealed that Wnt5a was expressed in enamel epithelium
cells from the bud stage, and in odontoblast layers and dental papilla tissues
from early bell stage of human tooth development onward. Western blot analysis
indicated that p42/44 MAPK, p38 MAPK, JNK and AKT signal pathways could be
phosphorylated by WNT5A. RT-PCR analysis showed that Wnt5a increased the
expression of DLX1, DLX2, LEF1, MSX2, PAX9 and RUNX2 mRNA, but decreased BARX1
and PITX2 mRNA.
CONCLUSIONS: It was concluded that WNT5A is expressed in human tooth development,
and that p42/44 MAPK, p38 MAPK, JNK and AKT signal pathways and DLX1, DLX2, LEF1,
MSX2, PAX9, RUNX2 could be activated by Wnt5a.

Crown Copyright 2009. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20034610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Jan;152A(1):111-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33164.

Ectodermal dysplasia-like syndrome with mental retardation due to contiguous gene
deletion: further clinical and molecular delineation of del(2q32) syndrome.

Rifai L(1), Port-Lis M, Tabet AC, Bailleul-Forestier I, Benzacken B, Drunat S,
Kuzbari S, Passemard S, Verloes A, Aboura A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, AP-HP-Robert DEBRE University Hospital, Paris,
France.

We report on a patient with an interstitial deletion of the long arm of
chromosome 2 at 2q31.2q33.2. She had prenatal and postnatal growth retardation,
microcephaly, facial dysmorphism, cleft palate, camptodactyly, bilateral talipes 
equinovarus, severe intellectual disability, and ectodermal anomalies. She showed
thin, atrophic skin, sparse, brittle, slowly growing hair, oligodontia with
abnormally shaped teeth, normal sweating, and normal fingernails, consistent with
a diagnosis of ectodermal dysplasia. Array CGH analysis (Agilent 44K) showed the 
deletion to span 26 Mb, between cytogenetic bands 2q31.2 and 2q33. The deletion
leads to hemizygosity for the HOXD cluster and its regulatory elements,
COL3A1/COL5A2, GTF3C3, CASP8, CASP10, and SABT2 could perhaps interfere with long
range control of DLX1 and DLX2 expression. This girl confirms the existence of a 
clinically recognizable 2q32 microdeletion syndrome, as recently delineated by
Van Buggenhout et al. and confirms a novel putative locus for ectodermal
dysplasia on chromosome 2q31q33. We recommend considering cytogenetic and/or
molecular screening for del(2q32) in patients with developmental disability and
ectodermal dysplasia-like phenotype, including thin skin, oligodontia, dysplastic
teeth, and sparse hair.

PMID: 20034071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Comp Neurol. 2010 Feb 1;518(3):329-51. doi: 10.1002/cne.22215.

Ikaros-1 couples cell cycle arrest of late striatal precursors with neurogenesis 
of enkephalinergic neurons.

Martín-Ibáñez R(1), Crespo E, Urbán N, Sergent-Tanguy S, Herranz C, Jaumot M,
Valiente M, Long JE, Pineda JR, Andreu C, Rubenstein JL, Marín O, Georgopoulos K,
Mengod G, Fariñas I, Bachs O, Alberch J, Canals JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Biologia Cellular, Immunologia i Neurociències, Facultat de
Medicina, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi I Sunyer (IDIBAPS),
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

During central nervous system development, several transcription factors regulate
the differentiation of progenitor cells to postmitotic neurons. Here we describe 
a novel role for Ikaros-1 in the generation of late-born striatal neurons. Our
results show that Ikaros-1 is expressed in the boundary of the striatal germinal 
zone (GZ)/mantle zone (MZ), where it induces cell cycle arrest of neural
progenitors by up-regulation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor (CDKi)
p21(Cip1/Waf1). This effect is coupled with the neuronal differentiation of late 
precursors, which in turn is critical for the second wave of striatal
neurogenesis that gives rise to matrix neurons. Consistently, Ikaros(-/-) mice
had fewer striatal projecting neurons and, in particular, enkephalin
(ENK)-positive neurons. In addition, overexpression of Ikaros-1 in primary
striatal cultures increases the number of calbindin- and ENK-positive neurons.
Our results also show that Ikaros-1 acts downstream of the Dlx family of
transcription factors, insofar as its expression is lost in Dlx1/2 double
knockout mice. However, we demonstrate that Ikaros-1 and Ebf-1 independently
regulate the final determination of the two populations of striatal projection
neurons of the matrix compartment, ENK- and substance P-positive neurons. In
conclusion, our findings identify Ikaros-1 as a modulator of cell cycle exit of
neural progenitors that gives rise to the neurogenesis of ENK-positive striatal
neurons.

PMID: 19950118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Neurodev Disord. 2009 Sep;1(3):224-36. doi: 10.1007/s11689-009-9025-8. Epub
2009 Jul 11.

Reduced conditioned fear response in mice that lack Dlx1 and show
subtype-specific loss of interneurons.

Mao R, Page DT, Merzlyak I, Kim C, Tecott LH, Janak PH, Rubenstein JL, Sur M.

The inhibitory GABAergic system has been implicated in multiple neuropsychiatric 
diseases such as schizophrenia and autism. The Dlx homeobox transcription factor 
family is essential for development and function of GABAergic interneurons. Mice 
lacking the Dlx1 gene have postnatal subtype-specific loss of interneurons and
reduced IPSCs in their cortex and hippocampus. To ascertain consequences of these
changes in the GABAergic system, we performed a battery of behavioral assays on
the Dlx1 mutant mice, including zero maze, open field, locomotor activity, food
intake, rotarod, tail suspension, fear conditioning assays (context and trace),
prepulse inhibition, and working memory related tasks (spontaneous alteration
task and spatial working memory task). Dlx1 mutant mice displayed elevated
activity levels in open field, locomotor activity, and tail suspension tests.
These mice also showed deficits in contextual and trace fear conditioning, and
possibly in prepulse inhibition. Their learning deficits were not global, as the 
mutant mice did not differ from the wild-type controls in tests of working
memory. Our findings demonstrate a critical role for the Dlx1 gene, and likely
the subclasses of interneurons that are affected by the lack of this gene, in
behavioral inhibition and associative fear learning. These observations support
the involvement of particular components of the GABAergic system in specific
behavioral phenotypes related to complex neuropsychiatric diseases.ELECTRONIC
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL: The online version of this article
(doi:10.1007/s11689-009-9025-8) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.

PMCID: PMC2758250
PMID: 19816534  [PubMed]


74. J Comp Neurol. 2009 Nov 1;517(1):37-50. doi: 10.1002/cne.22132.

Arcuate nucleus expression of NKX2.1 and DLX and lineages expressing these
transcription factors in neuropeptide Y(+), proopiomelanocortin(+), and tyrosine 
hydroxylase(+) neurons in neonatal and adult mice.

Yee CL(1), Wang Y, Anderson S, Ekker M, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, University of
California San Francisco, Genetics and Development, San Francisco, California
94158-2611, USA.

Despite its small size, the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus has a critical
role in regulating energy homeostasis. We have begun to define genetic approaches
to express genes in specific cell types within the developing arcuate nucleus, to
allow precise molecular perturbations of these cells. Furthermore, our analysis
aims to contribute to defining the transcriptional networks that regulate the
development of function of the arcuate neurons. Here, we define the neuronal
cells types within the arcuate that express Nkx2.1 and Dlx homeobox genes. In
addition, we used mice expressing Cre recombinase from the Dlx5/6 intergenic
enhancer (Dlx5/6i) and from the Nkx2.1 locus to follow the fate of embryonic
cells expressing these genes within the arcuate nucleus. We demonstrate that
NKX2.1(+) cells and their lineages are broadly expressed in arcuate neurons
[gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)(+), neuropeptide Y (NPY)(+), proopiomelanocortin 
(POMC)(+), tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)(+)] and glia (tanycytes). On the other hand,
DLX(+) cells and their lineages mark only GABA(+) and TH(+) (dopaminergic)
neurons, and Dlx1(-/-) mutants have fewer TH(+) neurons. These results have
implications for the genetic control of arcuate development and function and for 
the utility of the Nkx2.1-Cre and Dlx5/6i-Cre mouse lines to alter gene
expression in the developing arcuate.

PMCID: PMC3021751
PMID: 19711380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Mol Syst Biol. 2009;5:291. doi: 10.1038/msb.2009.46. Epub 2009 Jul 28.

The organization of the transcriptional network in specific neuronal classes.

Winden KD(1), Oldham MC, Mirnics K, Ebert PJ, Swan CH, Levitt P, Rubenstein JL,
Horvath S, Geschwind DH.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Program for Neuroscience, University of California Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Genome-wide expression profiling has aided the understanding of the molecular
basis of neuronal diversity, but achieving broad functional insight remains a
considerable challenge. Here, we perform the first systems-level analysis of
microarray data from single neuronal populations using weighted gene
co-expression network analysis to examine how neuronal transcriptome organization
relates to neuronal function and diversity. We systematically validate network
predictions using published proteomic and genomic data. Several network modules
of co-expressed genes correspond to interneuron development programs, in which
the hub genes are known to be critical for interneuron specification. Other
co-expression modules relate to fundamental cellular functions, such as energy
production, firing rate, trafficking, and synapses, suggesting that fundamental
aspects of neuronal diversity are produced by quantitative variation in basic
metabolic processes. We identify two transcriptionally distinct mitochondrial
modules and demonstrate that one corresponds to mitochondria enriched in neuronal
processes and synapses, whereas the other represents a population restricted to
the soma. Finally, we show that galectin-1 is a new interneuron marker, and we
validate network predictions in vivo using Rgs4 and Dlx1/2 knockout mice. These
analyses provide a basis for understanding how specific aspects of neuronal
phenotypic diversity are organized at the transcriptional level.

PMCID: PMC2724976
PMID: 19638972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Cereb Cortex. 2009 Jul;19 Suppl 1:i96-106. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhp045. Epub 2009 
Apr 22.

Dlx1&2 and Mash1 transcription factors control MGE and CGE patterning and
differentiation through parallel and overlapping pathways.

Long JE(1), Cobos I, Potter GB, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and the Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94158-2324, USA.

Here we define the expression of approximately 100 transcription factors (TFs) in
progenitors and neurons of the developing mouse medial and caudal ganglionic
eminences, anlage of the basal ganglia and pallial interneurons. We have begun to
elucidate the transcriptional hierarchy of these genes with respect to the Dlx
homeodomain genes, which are essential for differentiation of most
gamma-aminobutyric acidergic projection neurons of the basal ganglia. This
analysis identified Dlx-dependent and Dlx-independent pathways. The
Dlx-independent pathway depends in part on the function of the Mash1 basic
helix-loop-helix (b-HLH) TF. These analyses define core transcriptional
components that differentially specify the identity and differentiation of the
globus pallidus, basal telencephalon, and pallial interneurons.

PMCID: PMC2693539
PMID: 19386638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Genet Mol Biol. 2009 Apr;32(2):399-404. doi: 10.1590/S1415-47572009005000041.
Epub 2009 May 1.

Expression of Msx1 and Dlx1 during Dumbo rat head development: Correlation with
morphological features.

Katerji S(1), Vanmuylder N, Svoboda M, Rooze M, Louryan S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Anatomy and Embryology, Faculté de Médecine, Université Libre de
Bruxelles, Brussels Belgium.

The Dumbo rat possesses some characteristics that evoke several human syndromes, 
such as Treacher-Collins: shortness of the maxillary, zygomatic and mandibular
bones, and low position of the ears. Knowing that many homeobox genes are
candidates in craniofacial development, we investigated the involvement of the
Msx1 and Dlx1 genes in the Dumbo phenotype with the aim of understanding their
possible role in abnormal craniofacial morphogenesis and examining the
possibility of using Dumbo rat as an experimental model for understanding
abnormal craniofacial development. We studied the expression of these genes
during craniofacial morphogenesis by RT-PCR method. We used Dumbo embryos at E12 
and E14 and included the Wistar strain as a control. Semi-quantitative PCR
analysis demonstrated that Msx1 and Dlx1 are expressed differently between Dumbo 
and Wistar rats, indicating that their low expression may underly the Dumbo
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3036941
PMID: 21637698  [PubMed]


78. Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal. 2009 Feb 1;14(2):E69-72.

Multiple dens invaginatus, mulberry molar and conical teeth. Case report and
genetic considerations.

Sedano HO(1), Ocampo-Acosta F, Naranjo-Corona RI, Torres-Arellano ME.

Author information: 
(1)University of Minnesota, Minnesota, USA. hsedano@dentistry.ucla.edu

Dens in dente, also known as dens invaginatus and dilated compound odontoma, is a
malformation that can occur on primary, permanent, or supernumerary teeth that is
characterized by a deep invagination of the surface of a crown or root covered
with enamel. This abnormality in tooth morphology generally affect the maxillary 
lateral incisors but several cases of multiple dens invaginatus have been
reported in the literature. A 15 year-old female patient is reported here
presenting five dens invaginatus: four in the permanent mandibular incisors and
one in the permanent, maxillary left central incisor, additionally the following 
dental findings were observed: a permanent mandibular left mulberry molar,
molarization of some premolars, several microdontic conoid teeth, retention of
five primary teeth, absence of several permanent teeth germs, a macrodontic molar
with abnormal roots and several periapical radiolucencies associated to the dens 
invaginatus. There was no family history of similar dental findings to those
observed in the patient. There are several genes that participate in the
development of teeth, of those, the following five genes could be implicated as
responsible or co-participators for some of the dental anomalies present in this 
patient: MSX1 (Muscle segment homeobox 1), DLX1 & DLX2 (Distal-less homeobox 1 & 
2 genes), PAX9 (Paired box gene) and PITX2 (Pituitary homeobox transciption
factor 2).

PMID: 19179952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Comp Neurol. 2009 Feb 1;512(4):556-72. doi: 10.1002/cne.21854.

Dlx1&2 and Mash1 transcription factors control striatal patterning and
differentiation through parallel and overlapping pathways.

Long JE(1), Swan C, Liang WS, Cobos I, Potter GB, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and the Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California
94158-2324, USA.

Here we define the expression of approximately 100 transcription factors in
progenitors and neurons of the developing basal ganglia. We have begun to
elucidate the transcriptional hierarchy of these genes with respect to the Dlx
homeodomain genes, which are essential for differentiation of most GABAergic
projection neurons of the basal ganglia. This analysis identified Dlx-dependent
and Dlx-independent pathways. The Dlx-independent pathway depends in part on the 
function of the Mash1 b-HLH transcription factor. These analyses define core
transcriptional components that differentially specify the identity and
differentiation of the striatum, nucleus accumbens, and septum.

2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2761428
PMID: 19030180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2009 Feb;40(2):167-86. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2008.10.003. Epub
2008 Nov 1.

Generation of Cre-transgenic mice using Dlx1/Dlx2 enhancers and their
characterization in GABAergic interneurons.

Potter GB(1), Petryniak MA, Shevchenko E, McKinsey GL, Ekker M, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94158-2611, USA. gregory.potter@ucsf.edu

DLX1 and DLX2 transcription factors are necessary for forebrain GABAergic neuron 
differentiation, migration, and survival. We generated transgenic mice that
express Cre-recombinase under the control of two ultra-conserved DNA elements
near the Dlx1 and 2 locus termed I12b and URE2. We show that Cre-recombinase is
active in a "Dlx-pattern" in the embryonic forebrain of transgenic mice. I12b-Cre
is more active than URE2-Cre in the medial ganglionic eminences and its
derivatives. Fate-mapping of EGFP+ cells in adult Cre;Z/EG animals demonstrated
that GABAergic neurons, but not glia, are labeled. Most NPY+, nNOS+,
parvalbumin+, and somatostatin+ cells are marked by I12b-Cre in the cortex and
hippocampus, while 25-40% of these interneuron subtypes are labeled by URE2-Cre. 
Labeling of neurons generated between E12.5 to E15.5 indicated differences in
birth-dates of EGFP+ cells that populate the olfactory bulb, hippocampus, and
cortex. Finally, we provide the first in vivo evidence that both I12b and URE2
are direct targets of DLX2 and require Dlx1 and Dlx2 expression for proper
activity.

PMCID: PMC2693920
PMID: 19026749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Dec 1;17(23):3740-60. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn271. Epub 2008 Sep 
16.

Identification of Arx transcriptional targets in the developing basal forebrain.

Fulp CT(1), Cho G, Marsh ED, Nasrallah IM, Labosky PA, Golden JA.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Group, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Mutations in the aristaless-related homeobox (ARX) gene are associated with
multiple neurologic disorders in humans. Studies in mice indicate Arx plays a
role in neuronal progenitor proliferation and development of the cerebral cortex,
thalamus, hippocampus, striatum, and olfactory bulbs. Specific defects associated
with Arx loss of function include abnormal interneuron migration and subtype
differentiation. How disruptions in ARX result in human disease and how loss of
Arx in mice results in these phenotypes remains poorly understood. To gain
insight into the biological functions of Arx, we performed a genome-wide
expression screen to identify transcriptional changes within the subpallium in
the absence of Arx. We have identified 84 genes whose expression was dysregulated
in the absence of Arx. This population was enriched in genes involved in cell
migration, axonal guidance, neurogenesis, and regulation of transcription and
includes genes implicated in autism, epilepsy, and mental retardation; all
features recognized in patients with ARX mutations. Additionally, we found Arx
directly repressed three of the identified transcription factors: Lmo1, Ebf3 and 
Shox2. To further understand how the identified genes are involved in neural
development, we used gene set enrichment algorithms to compare the Arx gene
regulatory network (GRN) to the Dlx1/2 GRN and interneuron transcriptome. These
analyses identified a subset of genes in the Arx GRN that are shared with that of
the Dlx1/2 GRN and that are enriched in the interneuron transcriptome. These data
indicate Arx plays multiple roles in forebrain development, both dependent and
independent of Dlx1/2, and thus provides further insights into the understanding 
of the mechanisms underlying the pathology of mental retardation and epilepsy
phenotypes resulting from ARX mutations.

PMCID: PMC2581427
PMID: 18799476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Feb;17(2):228-35. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.148. Epub 2008 Aug
27.

The DLX1and DLX2 genes and susceptibility to autism spectrum disorders.

Liu X(1), Novosedlik N, Wang A, Hudson ML, Cohen IL, Chudley AE, Forster-Gibson
CJ, Lewis SM, Holden JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.

An imbalance between excitation and inhibition in the cerebral cortex has been
suggested as a possible etiology of autism. The DLX genes encode
homeodomain-containing transcription factors controlling the generation of
GABAergic cortical interneurons. The DLX1 and DLX2 genes lie head-to-head in
2q32, a region associated with autism susceptibility. We investigated 6 Tag SNPs 
within the DLX1/2 genes in two cohorts of multiplex (MPX) and one of simplex
(SPX) families for association with autism. Family-based association tests showed
strong association with five of the SNPs. The common alleles of rs743605 and
rs4519482 were significantly associated with autism (P<0.012) in the first sample
of 138 MPX families, with the latter remaining significant after correction for
multiple testing (P(cor)=0.0046). Findings in a second sample of 169 MPX families
not only confirmed the association at rs4519482 (P=0.034) but also showed strong 
allelic association of the common alleles at rs788172, rs788173 and rs813720
(P(cor)=0.0003-0.04). In the combined MPX families, the common alleles were all
significantly associated with autism (P(cor)=0.0005-0.016). The GGGTG haplotype
was over transmitted in the two MPX cohorts and the combined samples
[P(cor)<0.05: P(cor)=0.00007 for the combined MPX families, Odds Ratio: 1.75 (95%
CI: 1.33-2.30)]. Further testing in 306 SPX families replicated the association
at rs4519482 (P=0.033) and the over transmission of the haplotype GGGTG (P=0.012)
although P-values were not significant after correction for multiple testing. The
findings support the presence of two functional polymorphisms, one in or near
each of the DLX genes that increase susceptibility to, or cause, autism in MPX
families where there is a greater genetic component for these conditions.

PMCID: PMC2986060
PMID: 18728693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2008 Nov;39(3):324-34. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2008.07.015. Epub
2008 Jul 30.

Progenitors from the postnatal forebrain subventricular zone differentiate into
cerebellar-like interneurons and cerebellar-specific astrocytes upon
transplantation.

Milosevic A(1), Noctor SC, Martinez-Cerdeno V, Kriegstein AR, Goldman JE.

Author information: 
(1)GENSAT Project, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA.
amilosevic@rockefeller.edu

Forebrain subventricular zone (SVZ) progenitor cells give rise to glia and
olfactory bulb interneurons during early postnatal life in rats. We investigated 
the potential of SVZ cells to alter their fate by transplanting them into a
heterotypic neurogenic and gliogenic environment-the cerebellum. Transplanted
cells were examined 1 to 7 weeks and 6 months post transplantation. Forebrain
progenitors populated the cerebellum and differentiated into oligodendrocytes,
cerebellar-specific Bergmann glia and velate astrocytes, and neurons. The
transplanted cells that differentiated into neurons maintained an interneuronal
fate: they were GABA-positive, expressed interneuronal markers, such as
calretinin, and exhibited membrane properties that are characteristic of
interneurons. However, the transplanted interneurons lost the expression of the
olfactory bulb transcription factors Tbr2 and Dlx1, and acquired a
cerebellar-like morphology. Forebrain SVZ progenitors thus have the potential to 
adapt to a new environment and integrate into diverse regions, and may be a
useful tool in transplantation strategies.

PMCID: PMC2593080
PMID: 18718868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Dev Biol. 2008 Oct 15;322(2):415-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.07.029. Epub 2008 
Jul 31.

Characterization of a distinct subpopulation of striatal projection neurons
expressing the Dlx genes in the basal ganglia through the activity of the I56ii
enhancer.

Ghanem N(1), Yu M, Poitras L, Rubenstein JL, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Research in Environmental Genomics (CAREG), Department of 
Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.

Regulation of region-specific neuronal differentiation and migration in the
embryonic forebrain is a complex mechanism that involves a variety of
transcription factors such as the Dlx genes. At least four cis-acting regulatory 
elements (CREs) are responsible for the Dlx transcriptional regulation in the
subcortical telencephalon and the rostral diencephalon. These include I12b and
URE2 in the Dlx1/2 bigene cluster, and, I56i and I56ii in the Dlx5/6 cluster. We 
previously reported that URE2, I12b, and I56i, mark different progenitor cell
populations in the ganglionic eminences as well as different subtypes of adult
cortical interneurons. Here, we carried out a detailed spatial and temporal
analysis of the I56ii CRE activity in the developing telencephalon between E10.5 
and E15.5, and compared its activity with the other three Dlx CREs using lacZ
reporter genes in transgenic mice. We show that I56ii marks distinct group(s) of 
neurons located in the superficial mantle of the LGE and MGE between E11.5 and
E13.5. The I56ii-positive cells are Dlx- and GABA-immunoreactive. However, unlike
the other CREs, I56ii does not label interneuron progenitors in the basal
ganglia, nor tangentially migrating cells to the cortex at E13.5. Instead,
I56ii-positive cells mark a subpopulation(s) of post-mitotic projection neurons
that tangentially migrate from the LGE to the deep mantle of the MGE and reside
between the subventricular zone and the globus pallidus during midgestation. The 
majority of these neurons express the striatal markers Meis2 and Islet1.
Moreover, both Meis2 and Islet1 activate transcription of a reporter gene
containing the I56ii sequence in co-transfection assays, indicating that these
transcriptional factors may be potential upstream modulators of the Dlx genes in 
vivo.

PMID: 18706405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Development. 2008 Sep;135(17):2905-16. doi: 10.1242/dev.019778.

Dlx genes pattern mammalian jaw primordium by regulating both lower jaw-specific 
and upper jaw-specific genetic programs.

Jeong J(1), Li X, McEvilly RJ, Rosenfeld MG, Lufkin T, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, University of California San Francisco, 1550 4th street, San
Francisco, CA 94158, USA. juhee.jeong@ucsf.edu

Dlx transcription factors are implicated in patterning the mammalian jaw, based
on their nested expression patterns in the first branchial arch (primordium for
jaw) and mutant phenotypes; inactivation of Dlx1 and Dlx2 (Dlx1/2-/-) causes
defects in the upper jaw, whereas Dlx5/6(-/-) results in homeotic transformation 
of the lower jaw into upper jaw. Therefore, the 'Dlx codes' appear to regionalize
the jaw primordium such that Dlx1/2 regulate upper jaw development, while Dlx5/6 
confer the lower jaw fate. Towards identifying the genetic pathways downstream of
Dlx5/6, we compared the gene expression profiles of the wild-type and Dlx5/6(-/-)
mouse mandibular arch (prospective lower jaw). We identified 20 previously
unrecognized Dlx5/6-downstream genes, of which 12 were downregulated and 8
upregulated in the mutant. We found a Dlx-regulated transcriptional enhancer in
close proximity to Gbx2, one of the Dlx5/6-downstream genes, strongly suggesting 
that Gbx2 is a direct target of Dlx5/6. We also showed that Pou3f3 is normally
expressed in the maxillary (prospective upper jaw) but not mandibular arch, is
upregulated in the mandibular arch of Dlx5/6(-/-), and is essential for formation
of some of the maxillary arch-derived skeleton. A comparative analysis of the
morphological and molecular phenotypes of various Dlx single and double mutants
revealed that Dlx1, 2, 5 and 6 act both partially redundantly and
antagonistically to direct differential expression of downstream genes in each
domain of the first branchial arch. We propose a new model for Dlx-mediated
mammalian jaw patterning.

PMID: 18697905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Aug 5;105(31):10877-82. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0805205105. Epub 2008 Jul 29.

Distal-less homeobox transcription factors regulate development and maturation of
natural killer cells.

Sunwoo JB(1), Kim S, Yang L, Naik T, Higuchi DA, Rubenstein JL, Yokoyama WM.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Division, Department of Medicine, and Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Natural killer (NK) cells constitute a subpopulation of lymphocytes that develop 
from precursors in the bone marrow (BM), but the transcriptional regulation of
their development and maturation is only beginning to be understood, in part due 
to their relatively rare abundance, especially of developmental subsets. Using a 
mouse model in which NK cells are arrested at an immature stage of development,
and a gene expression profiling approach, we uncovered transient normal NK cell
expression of a homeobox transcription factor (TF) family, called Distal-less
(Dlx), which had been primarily implicated in murine CNS, craniofacial, limb, and
skin development. Our studies demonstrate that Dlx1, Dlx2, and Dlx3 are
transiently expressed in immature Mac-1(lo) NK cells within the BM, with Dlx3
being the predominantly expressed member. These genes are expressed in a
temporally regulated pattern with overlapping waves of expression, and they
display functional redundancy. Expression is extinguished in fully mature splenic
NK cells, and persistent expression of Dlx genes leads to functionally immature
NK cells arrested at the Mac-1(lo) stage. Whereas conventional splenic NK cells
develop but are arrested at an immature stage, there appears to be a complete
failure to develop CD127(+) thymic NK cells when Dlx genes are persistently
expressed. We also observed that T and B cells fail to develop in the context of 
persistent Dlx1 expression. Thus, these studies indicate that Dlx TFs play a
functional role in lymphocyte development.

PMCID: PMC2504821
PMID: 18664585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Genome Res. 2008 Sep;18(9):1433-45. doi: 10.1101/gr.078378.108. Epub 2008 Jun 18.

Long noncoding RNAs in mouse embryonic stem cell pluripotency and
differentiation.

Dinger ME(1), Amaral PP, Mercer TR, Pang KC, Bruce SJ, Gardiner BB,
Askarian-Amiri ME, Ru K, Soldà G, Simons C, Sunkin SM, Crowe ML, Grimmond SM,
Perkins AC, Mattick JS.

Author information: 
(1)ARC Special Research Centre for Functional and Applied Genomics, Institute for
Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St Lucia QLD 4072, Australia.

The transcriptional networks that regulate embryonic stem (ES) cell pluripotency 
and lineage specification are the subject of considerable attention. To date such
studies have focused almost exclusively on protein-coding transcripts. However,
recent transcriptome analyses show that the mammalian genome contains thousands
of long noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs), many of which appear to be expressed in a
developmentally regulated manner. The functions of these remain untested. To
identify ncRNAs involved in ES cell biology, we used a custom-designed microarray
to examine the expression profiles of mouse ES cells differentiating as embryoid 
bodies (EBs) over a 16-d time course. We identified 945 ncRNAs expressed during
EB differentiation, of which 174 were differentially expressed, many correlating 
with pluripotency or specific differentiation events. Candidate ncRNAs were
identified for further characterization by an integrated examination of
expression profiles, genomic context, chromatin state, and promoter analysis.
Many ncRNAs showed coordinated expression with genomically associated
developmental genes, such as Dlx1, Dlx4, Gata6, and Ecsit. We examined two novel 
developmentally regulated ncRNAs, Evx1as and Hoxb5/6as, which are derived from
homeotic loci and share similar expression patterns and localization in mouse
embryos with their associated protein-coding genes. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation, we provide evidence that both ncRNAs are associated with
trimethylated H3K4 histones and histone methyltransferase MLL1, suggesting a role
in epigenetic regulation of homeotic loci during ES cell differentiation. Taken
together, our data indicate that long ncRNAs are likely to be important in
processes directing pluripotency and alternative differentiation programs, in
some cases through engagement of the epigenetic machinery.

PMCID: PMC2527704
PMID: 18562676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Neurosci. 2008 Apr 9;28(15):3966-75. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5625-07.2008.

The distinct temporal origins of olfactory bulb interneuron subtypes.

Batista-Brito R(1), Close J, Machold R, Fishell G.

Author information: 
(1)Smilow Neuroscience Program and Department of Cell Biology, New York
University Medical Center, New York, New York 10016, USA.

Comment in
    J Neurosci. 2008 Aug 13;28(33):8145-7.

Olfactory bulb (OB) interneurons are a heterogeneous population produced
beginning in embryogenesis and continuing through adulthood. Understanding how
this diversity arises will provide insight into how OB microcircuitry is
established as well as adult neurogenesis. Particular spatial domains have been
shown to contribute specific interneuron subtypes. However, the temporal profile 
by which OB interneuron subtypes are produced is unknown. Using inducible genetic
fate mapping of Dlx1/2 precursors, we analyzed the production of seven OB
interneuron subtypes and found that the generation of each subpopulation has a
unique temporal signature. Within the glomerular layer, the production of
tyrosine hydroxylase-positive interneurons is maximal during early embryogenesis 
and decreases thereafter. In contrast, the generation of calbindin interneurons
is maximal during late embryogenesis and declines postnatally, whereas calretinin
(CR) cell production is low during embryogenesis and increases postnatally.
Parvalbumin interneurons within the external plexiform layer are produced only
perinatally, whereas the generation of 5T4-positive granule cells in the mitral
cell layer does not change significantly over time. CR-positive granule cells are
not produced at early embryonic time points, but constitute a large percentage of
the granule cells born after birth. Blanes cells in contrast are produced in
greatest number during embryogenesis. Together we provide the first comprehensive
analysis of the temporal generation of OB interneuron subtypes and demonstrate
that the timing by which these populations are produced is tightly orchestrated.

PMCID: PMC2505353
PMID: 18400896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008 Oct 5;147B(7):1089-100. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.30726.

Association analysis of schizophrenia on 18 genes involved in neuronal migration:
MDGA1 as a new susceptibility gene.

Kähler AK(1), Djurovic S, Kulle B, Jönsson EG, Agartz I, Hall H, Opjordsmoen S,
Jakobsen KD, Hansen T, Melle I, Werge T, Steen VM, Andreassen OA.

Author information: 
(1)TOP Project, Institute of Psychiatry, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
a.k.kahler@medisin.uio.no

Several lines of evidence support the theory of schizophrenia (SZ) being a
neurodevelopmental disorder. The structural, cytoarchitectural and functional
brain abnormalities reported in patients with SZ, might be due to aberrant
neuronal migration, since the final position of neurons affects neuronal
function, morphology, and formation of synaptic connections. We have investigated
the putative association between SZ and gene variants engaged in the neuronal
migration process, by performing an association study on 839 cases and 1,473
controls of Scandinavian origin. Using a gene-wide approach, tagSNPs in 18
candidate genes have been genotyped, with gene products involved in the
neuron-to-glial cell adhesion, interactions with the DISC1 protein and/or
rearrangements of the cytoskeleton. Of the 289 markers tested, 19 markers located
in genes MDGA1, RELN, ITGA3, DLX1, SPARCL1, and ASTN1, attained nominal
significant P-values (P < 0.05) in either a genotypic or allelic association
test. All of these genes, except transcription factor DLX1, are involved in the
adhesion between neurons and radial glial cells. Eight markers obtained nominal
significance in both tests, and were located in intronic or 3'UTR regions of
adhesion molecule MDGA1 and previously reported SZ candidate RELN. The most
significant result was attained for MDGA1 SNP rs9462341 (unadjusted association
results: genotypic P = 0.00095; allelic P = 0.010). Several haplotypes within
MDGA1, RELN, ITGA3, and ENAH were nominally significant. Further studies in
independent samples are needed, including upcoming genome wide association study 
results, but our data suggest that MDGA1 is a new SZ susceptibility gene, and
that altered neuronal migration is involved in SZ pathology.

PMID: 18384059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Cell Physiol. 2008 Sep;216(3):688-97. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21448.

Physiological implications of DLX homeoproteins in enamel formation.

Lézot F(1), Thomas B, Greene SR, Hotton D, Yuan ZA, Castaneda B, Bolaños A, Depew
M, Sharpe P, Gibson CW, Berdal A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR 872, Paris, F-75006 France. frederic.lezot@crc.jussieu.fr

Tooth development is a complex process including successive stages of initiation,
morphogenesis, and histogenesis. The role of the Dlx family of homeobox genes
during the early stages of tooth development has been widely analyzed, while
little data has been reported on their role in dental histogenesis. The
expression pattern of Dlx2 has been described in the mouse incisor; an inverse
linear relationship exists between the level of Dlx2 expression and enamel
thickness, suggesting a role for Dlx2 in regulation of ameloblast differentiation
and activity. In vitro data have revealed that DLX homeoproteins are able to
regulate the expression of matrix proteins such as osteocalcin. The aim of the
present study was to analyze the expression and function of Dlx genes during
amelogenesis. Analysis of Dlx2/LacZ transgenic reporter mice, Dlx2 and Dlx1/Dlx2 
null mutant mice, identified spatial variations in Dlx2 expression within molar
tooth germs and suggests a role for Dlx2 in the organization of preameloblastic
cells as a palisade in the labial region of molars. Later, during the secretory
and maturation stages of amelogenesis, the expression pattern in molars was found
to be similar to that described in incisors. The expression patterns of the other
Dlx genes were examined in incisors and compared to Dlx2. Within the ameloblasts 
Dlx3 and Dlx6 are expressed constantly throughout presecretory, secretory, and
maturation stages; during the secretory phase when Dlx2 is transitorily switched 
off, Dlx1 expression is upregulated. These data suggest a role for DLX
homeoproteins in the morphological control of enamel. Sequence analysis of the
amelogenin gene promoter revealed five potential responsive elements for DLX
proteins that are shown to be functional for DLX2. Regulation of amelogenin in
ameloblasts may be one method by which DLX homeoproteins may control enamel
formation. To conclude, this study establishes supplementary functions of Dlx
family members during tooth development: the participation in establishment of
dental epithelial functional organization and the control of enamel morphogenesis
via regulation of amelogenin expression.

PMID: 18366088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Twin Res Hum Genet. 2008 Feb;11(1):1-11. doi: 10.1375/twin.11.1.1.

Epigenetics of personality traits: an illustrative study of identical twins
discordant for risk-taking behavior.

Kaminsky Z(1), Petronis A, Wang SC, Levine B, Ghaffar O, Floden D, Feinstein A.

Author information: 
(1)The Krembil Family Epigenetics Laboratory, Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

DNA methylation differences between identical twins could account for phenotypic 
twin discordance of behavioral traits and diseases. High throughput epigenomic
microarray profiling can be a strategy of choice for identification of epigenetic
differences in phenotypically different monozygotic (MZ) twins. Epigenomic
profiling of a pair of MZ twins with quantified measures of psychometric
discordance identified several DNA methylation differences, some of which may
have developmental and behavioral implications and are consistent with the
contrasting psychometric profiles of the twins. In particular, differential
methylation of CpG islands proximal to the homeobox DLX1 gene could modulate
stress responses and risk taking behavior, and deserve further attention as a
potential marker of aversion to danger. The epigenetic difference detected at
DLX1 of approximately 1.2 fold change was used to evaluate experimental design
issues such as the required numbers of technical replicates. It also enabled us
to estimate the power this technique would have to detect a functionally relevant
epigenetic difference given a range of 1 to 50 twin pairs. We found that use of
epigenomic microarray profiling in a relatively small number (15-25) of
phenotypically discordant twin pairs has sufficient power to detect 1.2 fold
epigenetic changes.

PMID: 18251670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Orthod Craniofac Res. 2008 Feb;11(1):24-31. doi:
10.1111/j.1601-6343.2008.00410.x.

Investigating the etiology of multiple tooth agenesis in three sisters with
severe oligodontia.

Swinnen S(1), Bailleul-Forestier I, Arte S, Nieminen P, Devriendt K, Carels C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, School of Dentistry, Oral Pathology and
Maxillofacial Surgery, Catholic University Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

OBJECTIVES: To describe the dentofacial phenotypes of three sisters with severe
non-syndromic oligodontia, to report on the mutation analysis in three genes,
previously shown to cause various phenotypes of non-syndromic oligodontia and in 
two other suspected genes. Based on the phenotypes in the pedigree of this
family, the different possible patterns of transmission are discussed.
METHODS: Anamnestic data and a panoramic radiograph were taken to study the
phenotype of the three sisters and their first-degree relatives. Blood samples
were also taken to obtain their karyotypes and DNA samples. Mutational screening 
was performed for the MSX1, PAX9, AXIN2, DLX1 and DLX2 genes.
RESULTS: The probands' pedigree showed evidence for a recessive or multifactorial
inheritance pattern. Normal chromosomal karyotypes were found and - despite the
severe oligodontia present in all three sisters - no mutation appeared to be
present in the five genes studied so far in these patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In the three sisters reported, their common oligodontia phenotype is
not caused by mutations in the coding regions of MSX1, PAX9, AXIN2, DLX1 or DLX2 
genes, but genetic factors most probably play a role as all three sisters were
affected. Environmental and epigenetic factors as well as genes regulating
odontogenesis need further in vivo and in vitro investigation to explain the
phenotypic heterogeneity and to increase our understanding of the odontogenic
processes.

PMID: 18199077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Feb;36(3):872-84. Epub 2007 Dec 17.

Dlx2 homeobox gene transcriptional regulation of Trkb neurotrophin receptor
expression during mouse retinal development.

de Melo J(1), Zhou QP, Zhang Q, Zhang S, Fonseca M, Wigle JT, Eisenstat DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Cell Science, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

Dlx homeobox genes are first expressed in embryonic retina at E11.5. The
Dlx1/Dlx2 null retina has a reduced ganglion cell layer (GCL), with loss of
late-born differentiated retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) due to increased
apoptosis. TrkB signaling is proposed to regulate the dynamics of RGC apoptosis
throughout development. DLX2 expression markedly precedes the onset of TrkB
expression in the GCL; TrkB co-expression with Dlx2 and RGC markers is
well-established by E13.5. In the Dlx1/Dlx2 null retina, TrkB expression is
significantly reduced by E16.5. We demonstrated that DLX2 binds to a specific
region of the TrkB promoter in retinal neuroepithelium during embryogenesis. In
vitro confirmation and the functional consequences of DLX2 binding to this TrkB
regulatory region support TrkB as a Dlx2 transcriptional target. Furthermore,
ectopic Dlx2 expression in retinal explants activates TrkB expression and Dlx2
knockdown in primary retinal cultures results in reduced TrkB expression. RGC
differentiation and survival require the coordinated expression of transcription 
factors. This study establishes a direct transcriptional relationship between a
homeodomain protein involved in RGC differentiation and a neurotrophin receptor
implicated in RGC survival. Signaling mediated by TrkB may contribute to survival
of late-born RGCs whose terminal differentiation is regulated by Dlx gene
function.

PMCID: PMC2241891
PMID: 18086710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Brain. 2007 Sep;130(Pt 9):2267-76.

Developmental lineage of cell types in cortical dysplasia with balloon cells.

Lamparello P(1), Baybis M, Pollard J, Hol EM, Eisenstat DD, Aronica E, Crino PB.

Author information: 
(1)PENN Epilepsy Center and Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania
Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Focal cortical dysplasia type IIB with Ballon cells is a developmental
malformation of the cerebral cortex highly associated with epilepsy. As a
strategy to define the embryonic origin and neurochemical phenotype of cells in
this disease, we probed specimens (n = 10) resected during epilepsy surgery with 
a panel of 13 antibodies recognizing proteins associated with (i) specific
progenitor cell types including brain lipid binding protein (BLBP), collapsin
response mediator protein 4 (CRMP4), Dlx1, Dlx2, GFAPdelta, MASH1, Otx1, Pax6,
vimentin and phosphorylated vimentin and (ii) excitatory or inhibitory
neurochemical phenotypes such as the vesicular glutamate transporters-1 and 2
(VGLUT-1, VGLUT-2), or the vesicular GABA transporter (VGAT). Balloon cells and
large dysplastic neurons in all specimens expressed Otx1, phospho-vimentin, Pax6 
and BLBP, proteins normally expressed by cells in the embryonic ventricular zone.
A subpopulation of balloon cells expressed MASH-1 also expressed in the
ventricular zone. Most balloon cells and dysplastic neurons were VGLUT2
immunoreactive, whereas none expressed Dlx1 or Dlx2, markers for inhibitory cells
derived from the medial ganglionic eminence and few expressed VGAT, found in
GABAergic interneurons. Otx1 mRNA expression and Dlx1 mRNA absence was confirmed 
by single cell RT-PCR. A subpopulation of balloon cells was labelled with CRMP4
and GFAPdelta, markers specific for newly generated cells derived from the adult 
subventricular zone. Detection of Otx1, phospho-vimentin, Pax6 and BLBP
expression but absence of Dlx1/Dlx2 expression suggests that balloon cells and
dysplastic neurons derive from radial glial cells in the telencephalic
ventricular zone and not the medial ganglionic eminence. VGLUT expression argues 
that dysplastic neurons may be glutamatergic. CRMP-4 and GFAPdelta expression
suggests that new cells may arrive in focal cortical dysplasia, perhaps deriving 
in part from the subventricular zone. These findings provide a developmental
lineage model in which balloon cells and dysplastic neurons are derived from
radial glial progenitor cells.

PMID: 17711980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Neuron. 2007 Aug 2;55(3):417-33.

Dlx1 and Dlx2 control neuronal versus oligodendroglial cell fate acquisition in
the developing forebrain.

Petryniak MA(1), Potter GB, Rowitch DH, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94158-2611, USA.

Progenitors within the ventral telencephalon can generate GABAergic neurons and
oligodendrocytes, but regulation of the neuron-glial switch is poorly understood.
We investigated the combinatorial expression and function of Dlx1&2, Olig2, and
Mash1 transcription factors in the ventral telencephalon. We show that Dlx
homeobox transcription factors, required for GABAergic interneuron production,
repress oligodendrocyte precursor cell (OPC) formation by acting on a common
progenitor to determine neuronal versus oligodendroglial cell fate acquisition.
We demonstrate that Dlx1&2 negatively regulate Olig2-dependant OPC formation and 
that Mash1 promotes OPC formation by restricting the number of Dlx+ progenitors. 
Progenitors transplanted from Dlx1&2 mutant ventral telencephalon into newborn
wild-type mice do not produce neurons but differentiate into myelinating
oligodendrocytes that survive into adulthood. Our results identify another role
for Dlx genes as modulators of neuron versus oligodendrocyte development in the
ventral embryonic forebrain.

PMCID: PMC2039927
PMID: 17678855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Neuron. 2007 Jun 21;54(6):873-88.

Dlx transcription factors promote migration through repression of axon and
dendrite growth.

Cobos I(1), Borello U, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158,
USA. inma.cobos@ucsf.edu

Comment in
    Neuron. 2007 Jun 21;54(6):845-7.

In the mouse telencephalon, Dlx homeobox transcription factors are essential for 
the tangential migration of subpallial-derived GABAergic interneurons to
neocortex. However, the mechanisms underlying this process are poorly understood.
Here, we demonstrate that Dlx1/2 has a central role in restraining neurite growth
of subpallial-derived immature interneurons at a stage when they migrate
tangentially to cortex. In Dlx1-/-;Dlx2-/- mutants, neurite length is increased
and cells fail to migrate. In Dlx1-/-;Dlx2+/- mutants, while the tangential
migration of immature interneurons appears normal, they develop dendritic and
axonal processes with increased length and decreased branching, and have deficits
in their neocortical laminar positions. Thus, Dlx1/2 is required for coordinating
programs of neurite maturation and migration. In this regard, we provide genetic 
evidence that in immature interneurons Dlx1/2 repression of the p21-activated
serine/threonine kinase PAK3, a downstream effector of the Rho family of GTPases,
is critical in restraining neurite growth and promoting tangential migration.

PMID: 17582329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Neuron. 2007 Jun 21;54(6):845-7.

Cortical interneurons refuse to follow the PAK.

Guillemot F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical Research,
Mill Hill, NW71AA London, UK. fguille@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

Comment on
    Neuron. 2007 Jun 21;54(6):873-88.

The tangential migration of GABAergic interneurons to the cortex requires the
activity of several transcription factors, but the mechanisms involved have
remained elusive. In this issue of Neuron, Rubenstein and colleagues demonstrate 
that the homeobox proteins Dlx1 and Dlx2 promote interneuron migration in part by
preventing the premature expression of PAK3, a serine/threonine kinase that is
later involved in neurite outgrowth and other aspects of interneuron maturation.

PMID: 17582322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Neurosci. 2007 May 9;27(19):5012-22.

Distinct cis-regulatory elements from the Dlx1/Dlx2 locus mark different
progenitor cell populations in the ganglionic eminences and different subtypes of
adult cortical interneurons.

Ghanem N(1), Yu M, Long J, Hatch G, Rubenstein JL, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Advanced Research in Environmental Genomics, Department of Biology,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1N 6N5.

Distinct subtypes of cortical GABAergic interneurons provide inhibitory signals
that are indispensable for neural network function. The Dlx homeobox genes have a
central role in regulating their development and function. We have characterized 
the activity of three cis-regulatory sequences involved in forebrain expression
of vertebrate Dlx genes: upstream regulatory element 2 (URE2), I12b, and I56i.
The three regulatory elements display regional and temporal differences in their 
activities within the lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE), medial ganglionic
eminence (MGE), and caudal ganglionic eminence (CGE) and label distinct
populations of tangentially migrating neurons at embryonic day 12.5 (E12.5) and
E13.5. We provide evidence that the dorsomedial and ventral MGE are distinct
sources of tangentially migrating neurons during midgestation. In the adult
cortex, URE2 and I12b/I56i are differentially expressed in parvalbumin-,
calretinin-, neuropeptide Y-, and neuronal nitric oxide synthase-positive
interneurons; I12b and I56i were specifically active in somatostatin-, vasoactive
intestinal peptide-, and calbindin-positive interneurons. These data suggest that
interneuron subtypes use distinct combinations of Dlx1/Dlx2 enhancers from the
time they are specified through adulthood.

PMID: 17494687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Development. 2007 May;134(9):1755-65. Epub 2007 Apr 4.

The proneural determinant MASH1 regulates forebrain Dlx1/2 expression through the
I12b intergenic enhancer.

Poitras L(1), Ghanem N, Hatch G, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Research in Environmental Genomics (CAREG Department of
Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Establishment of neuronal networks is an extremely complex process involving the 
interaction of a diversity of neuronal cells. During mammalian development, these
highly organized networks are formed through the differentiation of multipotent
neuronal progenitors into multiple neuronal cell lineages. In the developing
forebrain of mammals, the combined function of the Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5 and Dlx6
homeobox genes is necessary for the differentiation of the GABAergic interneurons
born in the ventricular and subventricular zones of the ventral telencephalon, as
well as for the migration of these neurons to the hippocampus, cerebral cortex
and olfactory bulbs. The 437 bp I12b enhancer sequence in the intergenic region
of the Dlx1/2 bigene cluster is involved in the forebrain regulation of Dlx1/2.
Using DNase I footprinting, we identified six regions of I12b potentially bound
by transcription factors. Mutagenesis of each binding site affected the
expression of reporter constructs in transgenic mice. However, the effects of
impairing protein-DNA interactions were not uniform across the forebrain Dlx1/2
expression domains, suggesting that distinct regulatory interactions are taking
place in the different populations of neuronal precursors. Analyses of
protein-DNA interactions provide evidence of a direct role for MASH1 in Dlx1/2
regulation in the forebrain. DLX proteins play a crucial role in the maintenance 
of their own expression, as shown by transgenic and co-transfection experiments. 
These studies suggest that the seemingly continuous domains of Dlx gene
expression in the telencephalon and diencephalon are in fact the combination of
distinct cell populations within which different genetic regulatory interactions 
take place.

PMID: 17409112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Neurosci. 2007 Mar 21;27(12):3230-43.

Dlx-dependent and -independent regulation of olfactory bulb interneuron
differentiation.

Long JE(1), Garel S, Alvarez-Dolado M, Yoshikawa K, Osumi N, Alvarez-Buylla A,
Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, University of
California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Olfactory bulb interneuron development is a complex multistep process that
involves cell specification in the ventral telencephalon, tangential migration
into the olfactory bulb, and local neuronal maturation. Although several
transcription factors have been implicated in this process, how or when they act 
remains to be elucidated. Here we explore the mechanisms that result in olfactory
bulb interneuron defects in Dlx1&2-/- (distal-less homeobox 1 and 2) and Mash1-/-
(mammalian achaete-schute homolog 1) mutants. We provide evidence that Dlx1&2 and
Mash1 regulate parallel molecular pathways that are required for the generation
of these cells, thereby providing new insights into the mechanisms underlying
olfactory bulb development. The analysis also defined distinct anatomical zones
related to olfactory bulb development. Finally we show that Dlx1&2 are required
for promoting tangential migration to the olfactory bulb, potentially via
regulating the expression of ErbB4 (v-erb-a erythroblastic leukemia viral
oncogene homolog 4), Robo2 (roundabout homolog 2), Slit1 (slit homolog 1), and
PK2 (prokineticin 2), which have all been shown to play essential roles in this
migration.

PMID: 17376983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jun 29;282(26):19071-81. Epub 2007 Jan 26.

Dlx homeobox genes promote cortical interneuron migration from the basal
forebrain by direct repression of the semaphorin receptor neuropilin-2.

Le TN(1), Du G, Fonseca M, Zhou QP, Wigle JT, Eisenstat DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, Manitoba Institute of Cell
Biology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba R3E 0V9, Canada.

Dlx homeobox genes play an important role in vertebrate forebrain development.
Dlx1/Dlx2 null mice die at birth with an abnormal cortical phenotype, including
impaired differentiation and migration of GABAergic interneurons to the
neocortex. However, the molecular basis for these defects downstream of loss of
Dlx1/Dlx2 function is unknown. Neuropilin-2 (NRP-2) is a receptor for Class III
semaphorins, which inhibit neuronal migration. Herein, we show that Neuropilin-2 
is a specific DLX1 and DLX2 transcriptional target by applying chromatin
immunoprecipitation to embryonic forebrain tissues. Both homeobox proteins
repress Nrp-2 expression in vitro, confirming the functional significance of DLX 
binding. Furthermore, the homeodomain of DLX1 and DLX2 is necessary for DNA
binding and this binding is essential for Dlx repression of Nrp-2 expression. Of 
importance, there is up-regulated and aberrant expression of NRP-2 in the
forebrains of Dlx1/Dlx2 null mice. This is the first report that DLX1 or DLX2 can
function as transcriptional repressors. Our data show that DLX proteins
specifically mediate the repression of Neuropilin-2 in the developing forebrain. 
As well, our results support the hypothesis that down-regulation of Neuropilin-2 
expression may facilitate tangential interneuron migration from the basal
forebrain.

PMID: 17259176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Brain Res. 2007 Apr 6;1140:75-83. Epub 2006 Sep 22.

Abnormal laminar position and dendrite development of interneurons in the reeler 
forebrain.

Yabut O(1), Renfro A, Niu S, Swann JW, Marín O, D'Arcangelo G.

Author information: 
(1)The Cain Foundation Laboratories, Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The majority of cortical and hippocampal interneurons originate in the
subcortical telencephalon and migrate tangentially into pallial regions before
settling in various cortical layers. The molecular cues that regulate final
positioning of specific interneurons in cortical structures have not yet been
identified. The positioning of radially migrating principal neurons of the cortex
and hippocampus depends upon Reelin, an extracellular protein expressed near the 
pial surface during embryonic development that is absent in reeler mutant mice.
To determine whether the layer specification of interneurons, like that of
principal neurons, requires Reelin, we crossed reeler with transgenic mice that
contain Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP)-expressing Inhibitory Neurons (GINs).
These neurons express basal forebrain markers Dlx1/2 in normal and reeler mice.
In normal mice, GINs express Reelin and are localized to specific layers of the
cortex and hippocampus. In reeler mutant mice, we show that GINs migrate normally
into the pallium, but fail to acquire proper layer position. Double labeling
experiments indicate that the neurochemical profile of these interneurons is not 
generally altered in reeler mice. However, the extension of their cellular
processes is abnormal. Quantitative analysis of GINs in the cortex revealed that 
they are hypertrophic, bearing longer neuritic branches than normal. Thus, the
lack of Reelin signaling results in abnormal positioning and altered morphology
of forebrain interneurons.

PMID: 16996039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cancer Res. 2006 Aug 15;66(16):7939-47.

MIRA-assisted microarray analysis, a new technology for the determination of DNA 
methylation patterns, identifies frequent methylation of homeodomain-containing
genes in lung cancer cells.

Rauch T(1), Li H, Wu X, Pfeifer GP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte,
CA 91010, USA.

We present a straightforward and comprehensive approach for DNA methylation
analysis in mammalian genomes. The methylated-CpG island recovery assay (MIRA),
which is based on the high affinity of the MBD2/MBD3L1 complex for methylated
DNA, has been used to detect cell type-dependent differences in DNA methylation
on a microarray platform. The procedure has been verified and applied to identify
a series of novel candidate lung tumor suppressor genes and potential DNA
methylation markers that contain methylated CpG islands. One gene of particular
interest was DLEC1, located at a commonly deleted area on chromosome 3p22-p21.3, 
which was frequently methylated in primary lung cancers and melanomas. Among the 
identified methylated genes, homeodomain-containing genes were unusually frequent
(11 of the top 50 hits) and were targeted on different chromosomes. These genes
included LHX2, LHX4, PAX7, HOXB13, LBX1, SIX2, HOXD3, DLX1, HOXD1, ONECUT2, and
PAX9. The data show that MIRA-assisted microarray analysis has a low
false-positive rate and has the capacity to catalogue methylated CpG islands on a
genome-wide basis. The results support the hypothesis that cancer-associated DNA 
methylation events do not occur randomly throughout the genome but at least some 
are targeted by specific mechanisms.

PMID: 16912168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Cereb Cortex. 2006 Jul;16 Suppl 1:i82-8.

Cellular patterns of transcription factor expression in developing cortical
interneurons.

Cobos I(1), Long JE, Thwin MT, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94158-2611, USA.

Most gamma-aminobutyric acidergic interneurons in the neocortex and hippocampus
are derived from subpallial progenitors in the medial ganglionic eminence and
migrate tangentially to the pallium, where they differentiate into a diverse set 
of neuronal subtypes. Toward elucidating the mechanisms underlying the generation
of interneuron diversity, we have studied in mice the expression patterns in
differentiating and mature neocortical interneurons of 8 transcription factors,
including 6 homeobox (Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, Arx, Lhx6, Cux2), 1 basic
helix-loop-helix, (NPAS1), and 1 bZIP (MafB). Their patterns of expression change
during interneuron differentiation and show distinct distributions within
interneuron subpopulations in adult neocortex. This study is a first step to
define the combinatorial codes of transcription factors that participate in
regulating the specification and function of cortical interneuron subtypes.

PMID: 16766712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Neuroscience. 2006;139(4):1355-67. Epub 2006 Mar 31.

Transcription factor protein expression patterns by neural or neuronal progenitor
cells of adult monkey subventricular zone.

Tonchev AB(1), Yamashima T, Sawamoto K, Okano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Restorative Neurosurgery, Division of Neuroscience, Kanazawa
University Graduate School of Medical Science, Japan.

The anterior subventricular zone of the adult mammalian brain contains progenitor
cells which are upregulated after cerebral ischemia. We have previously reported 
that while a part of the progenitors residing in adult monkey anterior
subventricular zone travels to the olfactory bulb, many of these cells sustain
location in the anterior subventricular zone for months after injury, exhibiting 
a phenotype of either neural or neuronal precursors. Here we show that ischemia
increased the numbers of anterior subventricular zone progenitor cells expressing
developmentally regulated transcription factors including Pax6 (paired-box 6),
Emx2 (empty spiracles-homeobox 2), Sox 1-3 (sex determining region Y-box 1-3),
Ngn1 (neurogenin 1), Dlx1,5 (distalless-homeobox 1,5), Olig1,3 (oligodendrocyte
lineage gene 1,3) and Nkx2.2 (Nk-box 2.2), as compared with control brains.
Analysis of transcription factor protein expression by sustained neural or
neuronal precursors in anterior subventricular zone revealed that these two cell 
types were positive for characteristic sets of transcription factors. The
proteins Pax6, Emx2, Sox2,3 and Olig1 were predominantly localized to dividing
neural precursors while the factors Sox1, Ngn1, Dlx1,5, Olig2 and Nkx2.2 were
mainly expressed by neuronal precursors. Further, differences between monkeys and
non-primate mammals emerged, related to expression patterns of Pax6, Olig2 and
Dlx2. Our results suggest that a complex network of developmental signals might
be involved in the specification of primate progenitor cells.

PMID: 16580139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Evol Dev. 2006 Mar-Apr;8(2):130-41.

Expression of Dlx genes during the development of the zebrafish pharyngeal
dentition: evolutionary implications.

Borday-Birraux V(1), Van der Heyden C, Debiais-Thibaud M, Verreijdt L, Stock DW, 
Huysseune A, Sire JY.

Author information: 
(1)PGE UPR 9034, CNRS, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

In order to investigate similarities and differences in genetic control of
development among teeth within and between species, we determined the expression 
pattern of all eight Dlx genes of the zebrafish during development of the
pharyngeal dentition and compared these data with that reported for mouse molar
tooth development. We found that (i) dlx1a and dlx6a are not expressed in teeth, 
in contrast to their murine orthologs, Dlx1 and Dlx6; (ii) the expression of the 
six other zebrafish Dlx genes overlaps in time and space, particularly during
early morphogenesis; (iii) teeth in different locations and generations within
the zebrafish dentition differ in the number of genes expressed; (iv) expression 
similarities and differences between zebrafish Dlx genes do not clearly follow
phylogenetic and linkage relationships; and (v) similarities and differences
exist in the expression of zebrafish and mouse Dlx orthologs. Taken together,
these results indicate that the Dlx gene family, despite having been involved in 
vertebrate tooth development for over 400 million years, has undergone extensive 
diversification of expression of individual genes both within and between
dentitions. The latter type of difference may reflect the highly specialized
dentition of the mouse relative to that of the zebrafish, and/or genome
duplication in the zebrafish lineage facilitating a redistribution of Dlx gene
function during odontogenesis.

PMID: 16509892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Int J Dev Biol. 2006;50(1):71-5.

Dlx3 is expressed in the ventral forebrain of chicken embryos: implications for
the evolution of the Dlx gene family.

Zhu H(1), Bendall AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Ontario,
Canada.

The archetypal genomic arrangement of vertebrate Dlx genes is as three bigene
clusters (Dlx1/2, Dlx3/4, Dlx5/6). Phylogenetic sequence analysis of mouse and
zebrafish Dlx clusters supports the notion that the Dlx3/4 cluster is more
derived and the absence of expression of either Dlx3 or Dlx4 in the central
nervous system, as reported to date, is consistent with this. Together, these
observations have prompted a model in which cis-regulatory elements, responsible 
for directing Dlx gene transcription in the forebrain, were lost from the Dlx3/4 
bigene cluster prior to the divergence of tetrapods from fish. Here, we describe 
Dlx3 expression in the forebrain of chicken embryos; this constitutes the first
documented evidence of expression of either Dlx3 or Dlx4 in the central nervous
system of a vertebrate. Our observations have implications for models of the
evolutionary history of the Dlx gene family, for the genomic organization of Dlx 
genes in birds and for functional redundancy of Dlx gene function during avian
forebrain development.

PMID: 16323080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Anat. 2005 Nov;207(5):501-61.

Reassessing the Dlx code: the genetic regulation of branchial arch skeletal
pattern and development.

Depew MJ(1), Simpson CA, Morasso M, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, King's College London, Guy's Hospital,
London, UK. michael.depew@kcl.ac.uk

The branchial arches are meristic vertebrate structures, being metameric both
between each other within the rostrocaudal series along the ventrocephalic
surface of the embryonic head and within each individual arch: thus, just as each
branchial arch must acquire a unique identity along the rostrocaudal axis, each
structure within the proximodistal axis of an arch must also acquire a unique
identity. It is believed that regional specification of metameric structures is
controlled by the nested expression of related genes resulting in a regional
code, a principal that is though to be demonstrated by the regulation of
rostrocaudal axis development in animals exerted by the nested HOM-C/Hox homeobox
genes. The nested expression pattern of the Dlx genes within the murine branchial
arch ectomesenchyme has more recently led to the proposal of a Dlx code for the
regional specification along the proximodistal axis of the branchial arches (i.e.
it establishes intra-arch identity). This review re-examines this hypothesis, and
presents new work on an allelic series of Dlx loss-of-function mouse mutants that
includes various combinations of Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx3, Dlx5 and Dlx6. Although we
confirm fundamental aspects of the hypothesis, we further report a number of
novel findings. First, contrary to initial reports, Dlx1, Dlx2 and Dlx1/2
heterozygotes exhibit alterations of branchial arch structures and Dlx2-/- and
Dlx1/2-/- mutants have slight alterations of structures derived from the distal
portions of their branchial arches. Second, we present evidence for a role for
murine Dlx3 in the development of the branchial arches. Third, analysis of
compound Dlx mutants reveals four grades of mandibular arch transformations and
that the genetic interactions of cis first-order (e.g. Dlx5 and Dlx6), trans
second-order (e.g. Dlx5 and Dlx2) and trans third-order paralogues (e.g. Dlx5 and
Dlx1) result in significant and distinct morphological differences in mandibular 
arch development. We conclude by integrating functions of the Dlx genes within
the context of a hypothesized general mechanism for the establishment of pattern 
and polarity in the first branchial arch of gnathostomes that includes regionally
secreted growth factors such as Fgf8 and Bmp and other transcription factors such
as Msx1, and is consistent both with the structure of the conserved gnathostome
jaw bauplan and the elaboration of this bauplan to meet organismal end-point
designs.

PMCID: PMC1571560
PMID: 16313391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. BMC Genet. 2005 Nov 2;6:52.

Analysis of four DLX homeobox genes in autistic probands.

Hamilton SP(1), Woo JM, Carlson EJ, Ghanem N, Ekker M, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
steveh@lppi.ucsf.edu

BACKGROUND: Linkage studies in autism have identified susceptibility loci on
chromosomes 2q and 7q, regions containing the DLX1/2 and DLX5/6 bigene clusters. 
The DLX genes encode homeodomain transcription factors that control craniofacial 
patterning and differentiation and survival of forebrain inhibitory neurons. We
investigated the role that sequence variants in DLX genes play in autism by
in-depth resequencing of these genes in 161 autism probands from the AGRE
collection.
RESULTS: Sequencing of exons, exon/intron boundaries and known enhancers of DLX1,
2, 5 and 6 identified several nonsynonymous variants in DLX2 and DLX5 and a
variant in a DLX5/6 intragenic enhancer. The nonsynonymous variants were detected
in 4 of 95 families from which samples were sequenced. Two of these four SNPs
were not observed in 378 undiagnosed samples from North American populations,
while the remaining 2 were seen in one sample each.
CONCLUSION: Segregation of these variants in pedigrees did not generally support 
a contribution to autism susceptibility by these genes, although functional
analyses may provide insight into the biological understanding of these important
proteins.

PMCID: PMC1310613
PMID: 16266434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Nat Neurosci. 2005 Aug;8(8):979-81.

Beyond migration: Dlx1 regulates interneuron differentiation.

Wonders C, Anderson S.

Comment on
    Nat Neurosci. 2005 Aug;8(8):1059-68.

PMID: 16047023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Nat Neurosci. 2005 Aug;8(8):1059-68. Epub 2005 Jul 10.

Mice lacking Dlx1 show subtype-specific loss of interneurons, reduced inhibition 
and epilepsy.

Cobos I(1), Calcagnotto ME, Vilaythong AJ, Thwin MT, Noebels JL, Baraban SC,
Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California
94158, USA. icobos@itsa.ucsf.edu

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2005 Aug;8(8):979-81.

Dlx homeodomain transcription factors are essential during embryonic development 
for the production of forebrain GABAergic interneurons. Here we show that Dlx1 is
also required for regulating the functional longevity of cortical and hippocampal
interneurons in the adult brain. We demonstrate preferential Dlx1 expression in a
subset of cortical and hippocampal interneurons which, in postnatal Dlx1 mutants,
show a time-dependent reduction in number. This reduction preferentially affects 
calretinin(+) (bipolar cells) and somatostatin(+) subtypes (for example, bitufted
cells), whereas parvalbumin(+) subpopulations (basket cells and chandelier cells)
seem to be unaffected. Cell transplantation analysis demonstrates that
interneuron loss reflects cell-autonomous functions of Dlx1. The decrease in the 
number of interneurons was associated with a reduction of GABA-mediated
inhibitory postsynaptic current in neocortex and hippocampus in vitro and
cortical dysrhythmia in vivo. Dlx1 mutant mice show generalized electrographic
seizures and histological evidence of seizure-induced reorganization, linking the
Dlx1 mutation to delayed-onset epilepsy associated with interneuron loss.

PMID: 16007083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Cell Physiol. 2005 Nov;205(2):202-10.

cAMP induced modifications of HOX D gene expression in prostate cells allow the
identification of a chromosomal area involved in vivo with neuroendocrine
differentiation of human advanced prostate cancers.

Cantile M(1), Kisslinger A, Cindolo L, Schiavo G, D'Antò V, Franco R, Altieri V, 
Gallo A, Villacci A, Tramontano D, Cillo C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medical, Federico II University
Medical School, Naples, Italy.

The acquisition of epithelial-neuroendocrine differentiation (ND) is a
peculiarity of human advanced, androgen-independent, prostate cancers. The HOX
genes are a network of transcription factors controlling embryonal development
and playing an important role in crucial adult eukaryotic cell functions. The
molecular organization of this 39-gene network is unique in the genome and
probably acts by regulating phenotype cell identity. The expression patterns of
the HOX gene network in human prostate cell phenotypes, representing different
stages of prostate physiology and prostate cancer progression, make it possible
to discriminate between different human prostate cell lines and to identify loci 
and paralogous groups harboring the HOX genes mostly involved in prostate
organogenesis and cancerogenesis. Exposure of prostate epithelial phenotypes to
cAMP alters the expression of lumbo-sacral HOX D genes located on the chromosomal
region 2q31-33 where the cAMP effector genes CREB1, CREB2, and cAMP-GEFII are
present. Interestingly, this same chromosomal area harbors: (i) a global
cis-regulatory DNA control region able to coordinate the expression of HOX D and 
contiguous phylogenetically unrelated genes; (ii) a prostate specific ncRNA gene 
associated with high-risk prostate cancer (PCGEM1); (iii) a series of
neurogenic-related genes involved with epithelial-neuronal cell conversion. We
report the expression of neurexin 1, Neuro D1, dlx1, and dlx2 in untreated and
cAMP treated epithelial prostate cells. The in vivo expression of Neuro D1 in
human advanced prostate cancers correlate with the state of tumor differentiation
as measured by Gleason score. Thus, we suggest that the chromosomal area 2q 31-33
might be involved in the epithelial-ND characteristic of human advanced prostate 
cancers.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15895411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 13;280(19):19156-65. Epub 2005 Mar 1.

Developmental regulation of gonadotropin-releasing hormone gene expression by the
MSX and DLX homeodomain protein families.

Givens ML(1), Rave-Harel N, Goonewardena VD, Kurotani R, Berdy SE, Swan CH,
Rubenstein JL, Robert B, Mellon PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, California 92093-0674, USA.

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) is the central regulator of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, controlling sexual maturation and fertility 
in diverse species from fish to humans. GnRH gene expression is limited to a
discrete population of neurons that migrate through the nasal region into the
hypothalamus during embryonic development. The GnRH regulatory region contains
four conserved homeodomain binding sites (ATTA) that are essential for basal
promoter activity and cell-specific expression of the GnRH gene. MSX and DLX are 
members of the Antennapedia class of non-Hox homeodomain transcription factors
that regulate gene expression and influence development of the craniofacial
structures and anterior forebrain. Here, we report that expression patterns of
the Msx and Dlx families of homeodomain transcription factors largely coincide
with the migratory route of GnRH neurons and co-express with GnRH in neurons
during embryonic development. In addition, MSX and DLX family members bind
directly to the ATTA consensus sequences and regulate transcriptional activity of
the GnRH promoter. Finally, mice lacking MSX1 or DLX1 and 2 show altered numbers 
of GnRH-expressing cells in regions where these factors likely function. These
findings strongly support a role for MSX and DLX in contributing to
spatiotemporal regulation of GnRH transcription during development.

PMCID: PMC2932481
PMID: 15743757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Comp Neurol. 2005 Mar 14;483(3):292-303.

The vertebrate ortholog of Aristaless is regulated by Dlx genes in the developing
forebrain.

Cobos I(1), Broccoli V, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California
94158-2611, USA.

The Dlx transcription factors have a central role in controlling the development 
of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic neurons in the forebrain. However, little
is known about how they control the properties of GABAergic neurons. One
candidate is the Aristaless (Arx) homeobox gene, which lies genetically
downstream of the fly Dlx gene (Distal-less, Dll). The expression of Arx in the
mouse forebrain includes Dlx-expressing territories, such us the ventral
thalamus, parts of the hypothalamus, and the ganglionic eminences and their
derivatives in the subpallial telencephalon, and is expressed, as with the Dlx
genes, in cortical GABAergic neurons. By using gain-of-function and
loss-of-function assays in mouse and chicken embryos, we show that the Dlx genes 
have a conserved role in regulating the expression of Arx in the forebrain of
vertebrates. Ectopic expression of Dlx genes with electroporation in brain slices
from mouse embryos and in the neural tube of chick embryos shows that Dlx genes
are sufficient to induce Arx ectopically. Moreover, we provide evidence that the 
Dlx genes exert a functionally relevant role in regulating Arx in vivo, as shown 
by the severe reduction in the expression of Arx in Dlx1/2 double-knockout mice. 
Therefore, our results suggest evolutionarily conserved functions of Dlx genes in
regulating Arx expression between Drosophila and vertebrates.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15682394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Comp Neurol. 2005 Feb 28;483(1):48-65.

Dlx gene expression during chick inner ear development.

Brown ST(1), Wang J, Groves AK.

Author information: 
(1)Gonda Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, House Ear Institute, Los
Angeles, California 90057-1922, USA.

Members of the Dlx gene family play essential roles in the development of the
zebrafish and mouse inner ear, but little is known regarding Dlx genes and avian 
inner ear development. We have examined the inner ear expression patterns of
Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx3, Dlx5, and Dlx6 during the first 7 days of chicken embryonic
development. Dlx1 and Dlx2 expression was seen only in nonneuronal cells of the
cochleovestibular ganglion and nerves from stage 21 to stage 32. Dlx3 marks the
otic placode beginning at stage 9 and becomes limited to epithelium adjacent to
the hindbrain as invagination of the placode begins. Dlx3 expression then
resolves to the dorsal otocyst and gradually becomes limited to the endolymphatic
sac by stage 30. Dlx5 and Dlx6 expression in the developing inner ear is first
seen at stages 12 and 13, respectively, in the rim of the otic pit, before
spreading throughout the dorsal otocyst. As morphogenesis proceeds, Dlx5 and Dlx6
expression is seen throughout the forming semicircular canals and endolymphatic
structures. During later stages, both genes are seen to mark the distal surface
of the forming canals and display expression complementary to that of BMP4 in the
vestibular sensory regions. Dlx5 expression is also seen in the lagena macula and
the cochlear and vestibular nerves by stage 30. These findings suggest important 
roles for Dlx genes in the vestibular and neural development of the avian inner
ear.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15672396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Development. 2005 Jan;132(2):311-22. Epub 2004 Dec 16.

Dlx1 and Dlx2 function is necessary for terminal differentiation and survival of 
late-born retinal ganglion cells in the developing mouse retina.

de Melo J(1), Du G, Fonseca M, Gillespie LA, Turk WJ, Rubenstein JL, Eisenstat
DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Cell Science, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, R3E 3J7, Canada.

Dlx homeobox genes, the vertebrate homologs of Distal-less, play important roles 
in the development of the vertebrate forebrain, craniofacial structures and
limbs. Members of the Dlx gene family are also expressed in retinal ganglion
cells (RGC), amacrine and horizontal cells of the developing and postnatal
retina. Expression begins at embryonic day 12.5 and is maintained until late
embryogenesis for Dlx1, while Dlx2 expression extends to adulthood. We have
assessed the retinal phenotype of the Dlx1/Dlx2 double knockout mouse, which dies
at birth. The Dlx1/2 null retina displays a reduced ganglion cell layer (GCL),
with loss of differentiated RGCs due to increased apoptosis, and corresponding
thinning of the optic nerve. Ectopic expression of Crx, the cone and rod
photoreceptor homeobox gene, in the GCL and neuroblastic layers of the mutants
may signify altered cell fate of uncommitted RGC progenitors. However, amacrine
and horizontal cell differentiation is relatively unaffected in the Dlx1/2 null
retina. Herein, we propose a model whereby early-born RGCs are Dlx1 and Dlx2
independent, but Dlx function is necessary for terminal differentiation of
late-born RGC progenitors.

PMID: 15604100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Dev Dyn. 2004 Nov;231(3):614-20.

Identification and characterization of a novel transcript down-regulated in
Dlx1/Dlx2 and up-regulated in Pax6 mutant telencephalon.

Faedo A(1), Quinn JC, Stoney P, Long JE, Dye C, Zollo M, Rubenstein JL, Price DJ,
Bulfone A.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Research Institute, Dibit, H.S. Raffaele, Via Olgettina 58, 20132
Milan, Italy.

By using a custom-made array containing cDNAs preferentially expressed in the
mouse embryonic telencephalon (Porteus et al. [1992] Brain Res Mol Brain Res
12:7-22; and Alessandro Bulfone, unpublished data), we studied the gene
expression profile of the Dlx1/Dlx2(-/-) subpallium and Pax6(-/-) pallium. We
identified a transcript corresponding to Unigene Cluster Mm.94021 and rat Evf-1, 
which is down-regulated in the Dlx1/Dlx2(-/-) subpallium and up-regulated in the 
Pax6(-/-) pallium. Here, we report the expression pattern of this transcript,
designated mouse Evf1 (mEvf1), in the prenatal forebrain of wild-type,
Dlx1/Dlx2(-/-) and Pax6(-/-) mice using RNA in situ hybridization and reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. In the wild-type forebrain mEvf1
expression is restricted to the ventral thalamus, hypothalamus, and subpallial
telencephalon (caudal, lateral, and medial ganglionic eminences and septal
primordia), whereas it is down-regulated in the Dlx1/Dlx2(-/-) subpallium (mainly
in caudal, lateral, and medial ganglionic eminences), and up-regulated in the
Pax6(-/-) lateral and ventral pallium at embryonic day 12.5 and in the dorsal,
lateral, and ventral pallium at embryonic day 14.5.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15376329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Comp Neurol. 2004 Sep 6;477(1):55-80.

Expression of regulatory genes during differentiation of thalamic nuclei in mouse
and monkey.

Jones EG(1), Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience, University of California, Davis, Davis, California
95616, USA. ejones@ucdavis.edu

Expression patterns of genes implicated in development of the thalamus were
examined in mice and monkeys, using in situ hybridization with RNA probes
complementary to Cad6, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, Gbx2, Id2, and Lef1 cDNAs. Expression
patterns were related to the evolving cytoarchitecture in mice at birth (P0) and 
in adulthood, and in fetal monkeys early and late in the period of gestation when
thalamic nuclei are becoming histologically differentiated out of a series of
pronuclear masses. At the earlier developmental stage, each gene was expressed in
a pattern that appeared to be pronucleus-specific and maintained a
nucleus-specific pattern into adulthood, with the possible exception of Gbx2.
Each gene displayed a unique expression pattern in the dorsal thalamus, ventral
thalamus, and epithalamus, and no gene was expressed throughout all three
divisions or in every nucleus of a division. With the exception of Dlx2, whose
expression disappeared at the later time point, all continued to be expressed
into adulthood at higher levels and with identical patterns. Despite late
appearance of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic cells in the dorsal lateral
geniculate nucleus of mice, no Dlx genes, which promote formation of a GABAergic 
phenotype elsewhere, were detected in dorsal thalamus. Each thalamic nucleus was 
distinguished by expression of a combination of genes, and homologous nuclei in
mouse and monkey exhibited the same combination. The presence of a centre médian 
nucleus and four pulvinar nuclei in monkeys was marked by patterns of expression 
not found in mice. The centre médian nucleus was marked by high expression of
Id2, which was expressed only weakly in very few nuclei of mice.

PMID: 15281080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Dev Biol. 2004 Apr 15;268(2):532-45.

Intergenic enhancers with distinct activities regulate Dlx gene expression in the
mesenchyme of the branchial arches.

Park BK(1), Sperber SM, Choudhury A, Ghanem N, Hatch GT, Sharpe PT, Thomas BL,
Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Health Research Institute at the Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, ON, Canada
K1Y 4E9.

The vertebrate Dlx genes, generally organized as tail-to-tail bigene clusters,
are expressed in the branchial arch epithelium and mesenchyme with nested
proximodistal expression implicating a code that underlies the fates of jaws.
Little is known of the regulatory architecture that is responsible for Dlx gene
expression in developing arches. We have identified two distinct cis-acting
regulatory sequences, I12a and I56i, in the intergenic regions of the Dlx1/2 and 
Dlx5/6 clusters that act as enhancers in the arch mesenchyme. LacZ transgene
expression containing I12a is restricted to a subset of Dlx-expressing
ectomesenchyme in the first arch. The I56i enhancer is active in a broader domain
in the first arch mesenchyme. Expression of transgenes containing either the I12a
or the I56i enhancers is dependent on the presence of epithelium between the
onset of their expression at E9-10 until independence at E11. Both enhancers
positively respond to FGF8 and FGF9; however, the responses of the reporter
transgenes were limited to their normal domain of expression. BMP4 had a negative
effect on expression of both transgenes and counteracted the effects of FGF8.
Furthermore, bosentan, a pharmacological inhibitor of Endothelin-1 signaling
caused a loss of I56i-lacZ expression in the most distal aspects of the
expression domain, corresponding to the area of Dlx-6 expression previously shown
to be under the control of Endothelin-1. Thus, the combinatorial branchial arch
expression of Dlx genes is achieved through interactions between signaling
pathways and intrinsic cellular factors. I56i drives the entire expression of
Dlx5/6 in the first arch and contains necessary sequences for regulation by at
least three separate pathways, whereas I12a only replicates a small domain of
endogenous expression, regulated in part by BMP-4 and FGF-8.

PMID: 15063187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 May;4(3):315-20.

Expression of Dlx and Lhx family homeobox genes in fetal thymus and thymocytes.

Woodside KJ(1), Shen H, Muntzel C, Daller JA, Sommers CL, Love PE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Building 6B, Room
2B-210, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892-2780, USA.

Homeobox genes comprise a nearly ubiquitous and highly conserved superfamily of
developmental regulatory genes that encode transcription factors involved in the 
determination of axis and tissue identity. While homeobox gene expression has
been well characterized in a variety of embryonic tissues, their expression has
not been extensively studied in lymphoid progenitor cells or in sites of
lymphogenesis. To examine homeobox gene expression in the developing thymus, we
screened an embryonic day 13.5 thymus cDNA library by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) using degenerate oligonucleotides within the highly conserved homeodomain
region of eight homeobox gene families. The resulting PCR products were then
cloned and sequenced. Transcripts for multiple Dlx family members and Lhx2 were
repeatedly detected in this screen. Screening of embryonic day 16.5 and adult
murine thymus and Thy1+ thymocytes was performed for selected members of these
homeobox gene families. Transcripts encoding Lhx2, Lhx3, and Lhx9, as well as
Dlx1 and Dlx2 were detected in both thymus and purified thymocytes. Dlx1 is a
member of the distal-less homeobox gene family that has been shown to regulate
embryonic craniofacial development. Significantly, Dlx1 is expressed in the third
branchial arch, which contributes to the thymus. Although Dlx1 knockout mice did 
not display any obvious developmental defects in thymus or thymocyte development,
the expression of these homeobox genes in neural crest derivatives suggests a
possible role in cell migration and development that may overlap with other
homeobox genes.

PMID: 15053981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Neurosci. 2004 Mar 17;24(11):2612-22.

Origins of cortical interneuron subtypes.

Xu Q(1), Cobos I, De La Cruz E, Rubenstein JL, Anderson SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New
York, New York 10021, USA.

Cerebral cortical functions are conducted by two general classes of neurons:
glutamatergic projection neurons and GABAergic interneurons. Distinct interneuron
subtypes serve distinct roles in modulating cortical activity and can be
differentially affected in cortical diseases, but little is known about the
mechanisms for generating their diversity. Recent evidence suggests that many
cortical interneurons originate within the subcortical telencephalon and then
migrate tangentially into the overlying cortex. To test the hypothesis that
distinct interneuron subtypes are derived from distinct telencephalic
subdivisions, we have used an in vitro assay to assess the developmental
potential of subregions of the telencephalic proliferative zone (PZ) to give rise
to neurochemically defined interneuron subgroups. PZ cells from GFP+ donor mouse 
embryos were transplanted onto neonatal cortical feeder cells and assessed for
their ability to generate specific interneuron subtypes. Our results suggest that
the parvalbumin- and the somatostatin-expressing interneuron subgroups originate 
primarily within the medial ganglionic eminence (MGE) of the subcortical
telencephalon, whereas the calretinin-expressing interneurons appear to derive
mainly from the caudal ganglionic eminence (CGE). These results are supported by 
findings from primary cultures of cortex from Nkx2.1 mutants, in which normal MGE
fails to form but in which the CGE is less affected. In these cultures,
parvalbumin- and somatostatin-expressing cells are absent, although
calretinin-expressing interneurons are present. Interestingly,
calretinin-expressing bipolar interneurons were nearly absent from cortical
cultures of Dlx1/2 mutants. By establishing spatial differences in the origins of
interneuron subtypes, these studies lay the groundwork for elucidating the
molecular bases for their distinct differentiation pathways.

PMID: 15028753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2004 Jan;25(1):153-61.

Defective neuronogenesis in the absence of Dlx5.

Perera M(1), Merlo GR, Verardo S, Paleari L, Corte G, Levi G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Biologia dello Sviluppo, Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul 
Cancro-IST, 16132 Genova, Italy.

Dlx genes play an important role in the control of the development of the central
nervous system (CNS). Single or compound inactivation of Dlx1, Dlx2, or Dlx5 in
the mouse causes defects of neuronal migration and differentiation. Dlx5, in
particular, is essential for the correct development of the olfactory system.
Targeted inactivation of Dlx1 and Dlx2 in the mouse results in abnormal neuronal 
differentiation in the embryonic subcortical forebrain and is associated to the
loss of Dlx5 and Dlx6 expression. So far, however, it has been impossible to
investigate the role of Dlx genes on late neurogenesis, as their inactivation
leads to perinatal death. We have now generated cultures of neural stem cells
(NSCs) derived from embryonic and newborn Dlx5-null mice, and we have compared
their capacity to differentiate in vitro to that of equivalent cells derived from
normal littermates. We show here that in the absence of Dlx5, NSCs derived from
newborn animals have a severely reduced capacity to generate neurons. This is not
the case for cells derived from E12.5 embryos. Forced expression of Dlx5 in
cultures of newborn mutant NSCs fully restores their neuronogenic potential. Our 
data suggest that Dlx5 is essential for secondary (postnatal) neuronogenesis.

PMID: 14962748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Feb 9;32(3):884-92. Print 2004.

Identification of a direct Dlx homeodomain target in the developing mouse
forebrain and retina by optimization of chromatin immunoprecipitation.

Zhou QP(1), Le TN, Qiu X, Spencer V, de Melo J, Du G, Plews M, Fonseca M, Sun JM,
Davie JR, Eisenstat DD.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, 675 McDermot Avenue, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada.

Understanding homeobox gene specificity and function has been hampered by the
lack of proven direct transcriptional targets during development. Dlx genes are
expressed in the developing forebrain, retina, craniofacial structures and limbs.
Dlx1/Dlx2 double knockout mice die at birth with multiple defects including
abnormal forebrain development and decreased Dlx5 and Dlx6 expression. We have
successfully applied chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) to identify a direct
transcriptional target of DLX homeoproteins from embryonic tissues in vivo. We
optimized cross-linking conditions to enrich for protein-DNA complexes, then
using specific high affinity DLX antibodies captured immunoenriched DLX genomic
DNA transcriptional targets. DLX homeobox proteins bind differentially to the
Dlx5/Dlx6 intergenic enhancer in newborn retina (DLX2) and embryonic striatum
(DLX1, DLX2) in situ. Reporter gene assays demonstrated the functional
significance of the binding of DLX proteins to this regulatory element, confirmed
in vitro by electrophoretic mobility shift assays, using tissue extracts or
recombinant DLX proteins. ChIP provides the best approach to identify direct Dlx 
homeoprotein targets from developing tissues in situ. The use of this technology 
will advance our understanding of Dlx gene function in the vertebrate in vivo and
can be applied to examine targets of other homeobox genes and other classes of
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC373381
PMID: 14769946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Dec 23;100(26):15577-82. Epub 2003 Dec 11.

Homeoprotein DLX-1 interacts with Smad4 and blocks a signaling pathway from
activin A in hematopoietic cells.

Chiba S(1), Takeshita K, Imai Y, Kumano K, Kurokawa M, Masuda S, Shimizu K,
Nakamura S, Ruddle FH, Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biology and Human Genetics, Yale University, New Haven, CT
06520-8103, USA. schiba-tky@umin.ac.jp

In the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) superfamily, activin A,
TGF-beta1, and bone morphogenic protein 4 (BMP-4) have various effects on
hematopoiesis, including early mesodermo-hematogenesis. After these cytokines
bind to their respective receptor, a regulatory Smad is phosphorylated and
becomes associated with Smad4, the common Smad, and the resulting complex
translocates to the nucleus to regulate transcription. DLX1 is the product of a
member of the distal-less homeobox gene family, which is known to have important 
roles in embryogenesis, particularly in craniofacial development, and in
GABAergic neurogenesis. DLX1 has been reported to be temporally and spatially
coexpressed with BMP-4 during embryogenesis in selected contexts. We report here 
that, in addition to the previously reported regions/cells, DLX1 is expressed in 
hematopoietic cells in a lineage-dependent manner and that DLX1 interacts with
Smad4 through its homeodomain. We show that it blocks multiple signals from
TGF-beta superfamily cytokines such as activin A, TGF-beta1, and BMP-4, including
differentiation of a hematopoietic cell line by activin A. Taken together, these 
data suggest that DLX1 may function as a regulator of multiple signals from
TGF-beta superfamily members in broad biological contexts during blood
production.

PMCID: PMC307610
PMID: 14671321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Mol Psychiatry. 2003 Nov;8(11):916-24.

Screening of nine candidate genes for autism on chromosome 2q reveals rare
nonsynonymous variants in the cAMP-GEFII gene.

Bacchelli E(1), Blasi F, Biondolillo M, Lamb JA, Bonora E, Barnby G, Parr J,
Beyer KS, Klauck SM, Poustka A, Bailey AJ, Monaco AP, Maestrini E; International 
Molecular Genetic Study of Autism Consortium (IMGSAC).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Evoluzionistica Sperimentale, University of Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy.

The results from several genome scans indicate that chromosome 2q21-q33 is likely
to contain an autism susceptibility locus. We studied the potential contribution 
of nine positional and functional candidate genes: TBR-1; GAD1; DLX1; DLX2;
cAMP-GEFII; CHN1; ATF2; HOXD1 and NEUROD1. Screening these genes for DNA variants
and association analysis using intragenic single nucleotide polymorphisms did not
provide evidence for a major role in the aetiology of autism. Four rare
nonsynonymous variants were identified, however, in the cAMP-GEFII gene. These
variants were present in five families, where they segregate with the autistic
phenotype, and were not observed in control individuals. The significance of
these variants is unclear, as their low frequency in IMGSAC families does not
account for the relatively strong linkage signal at the 2q locus. Further studies
are needed to clarify the contribution of cAMP-GEFII gene variants to autism
susceptibility.

PMID: 14593429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2003 Sep;60(9):869-74.

Decreased thalamic expression of the homeobox gene DLX1 in psychosis.

Kromkamp M(1), Uylings HB, Smidt MP, Hellemons AJ, Burbach JP, Kahn RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Rudolf Magnus Institute for Neurosciences,
University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

CONTEXT: A shared vulnerability to develop psychosis can be related to
abnormalities in thalamic circuits in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder and
could be a genetic link between these disorders. Homeobox genes involved in
development and differentiation of the brain could play an important role in
these disorders.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether patients with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder 
have different thalamic expression patterns of 2 homeobox genes, DLX1 and SHOX2
(alias OG12X or SHOT) compared with psychiatric and nonpsychiatric control
subjects.
DESIGN: Postmortem sections containing the thalamic mediodorsal nucleus were
subjected to in situ hybridization with mouse Dlx1 and human SHOX2 RNA probes.
The number of both DLX1- and SHOX2-positive neurons relative to Nissl-stained
neurons was estimated in systematic randomly sampled volume probes. Patients
Fifteen patients with schizophrenia, 15 with bipolar disorder with or without
history of psychosis, 15 with major depressive disorder, and 15 nonpsychiatric
controls from the Stanley Foundation Brain Bank.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Relative numbers of DLX1- and SHOX2-positive neurons in
patients with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder with history of psychosis
compared with psychiatric and nonpsychiatric controls.
RESULTS: Patients with a history of psychosis showed significantly decreased
relative numbers of DLX1-positive neurons compared with patients without history 
of psychosis and nonpsychiatric controls (P =.02), whereas no differences could
be found in relative numbers of SHOX2-positive neurons (P>.15). Results were
obtained blind to diagnosis, symptoms, or any other variable except hemisphere.
CONCLUSION: Decreased thalamic expression of DLX1 in schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder with psychosis suggests shared genetic deficits in expression of this
homeobox gene.

PMID: 12963668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Struct Funct Genomics. 2003;3(1-4):151-9.

The role of gene duplication in the evolution and function of the vertebrate
Dlx/distal-less bigene clusters.

Sumiyama K(1), Irvine SQ, Ruddle FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
PO Box 208103, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

The Dlx gene family controls developmental patterning principally in the
pharyngeal and cranial regions. We review the structure and function of these
genes in the vertebrates and relate these properties to their evolution. We
particularly focus on the Dlx3-7 bigene cluster which we postulate to be more
derived phylogenetically and functionally than the other two bigene clusters,
Dlx1-2 and Dlx5-6. We stress the transcriptional control of the Dlx3-7 bigene
cluster, and postulate its control by Dlx1-2.

PMID: 12836694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2003 May;23(1):107-20.

Dlx transcription factors regulate differentiation of dopaminergic neurons of the
ventral thalamus.

Andrews GL(1), Yun K, Rubenstein JL, Mastick GS.

Author information: 
(1)Biology and Biochemistry Departments, Cell and Molecular Biology Graduate
Program, University of Nevada, Reno 89557, USA.

Recent studies have provided many lines of evidence that specific homeodomain
factors act to regulate differentiation into specific neuron types. However,
these studies have mainly focused on the caudal CNS, while in the forebrain, the 
regulation of neuron specification remains relatively unknown. To investigate the
genetic regulatory networks that control neuron differentiation in the forebrain,
we have analyzed the expression patterns and functions of DLX homeodomain factors
in the ventral thalamus of early mouse embryos. During initial neurogenesis
(E9.5-E10.5), DLX(+) cells are the first progenitors to make terminal divisions
and differentiate as neurons. We have defined a set of regulatory genes
coexpressed with DLX, in both progenitors (PAX6 and MASH1) and in the
differentiating neurons (PAX6, along with a combination of LIM-type homeodomain
factors, including ISL1, Lhx1/Lim1, and Lhx5/Lim2). These initial neurons express
tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), and become the PAX6-expressing A13 dopaminergic
neurons of the zona incerta. To test for DLX function, the initial
differentiation of the ventral thalamic neurons was examined in embryos mutant
for Dlx1 and Dlx2. Dlx1/2 double homozygous mutants formed ventral thalamic
neurons, but these neurons lacked PAX6, ISL1, and TH expression. These data
suggest that DLX genes act as forebrain-specific factors linking general
neuron-inducing signals to region-specific neuron differentiation programs.

PMID: 12799141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Comp Neurol. 2003 Jun 23;461(2):187-204.

Dlx1, Dlx2, Pax6, Brn3b, and Chx10 homeobox gene expression defines the retinal
ganglion and inner nuclear layers of the developing and adult mouse retina.

de Melo J(1), Qiu X, Du G, Cristante L, Eisenstat DD.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba
R3E 0V9, Canada.

Distal-less homeobox genes are expressed in the developing forebrain. We assessed
Dlx gene expression in the developing and adult mouse retina. Dlx1 and Dlx2 are
detected in retinal neuroprogenitors by embryonic day (E) 12.5 (Eisenstat et al. 
[1999] J. Comp. Neurol. 217-237). At E13.5, the expression of four homeodomain
proteins, DLX2, BRN3b, PAX6, and CHX10, define distinct yet overlapping domains
in the retinal neuroepithelium. By postnatal day (P) 0, DLX2 is expressed in the 
neuroblastic layer and the ganglion cell layer (GCL) consisting of ganglion and
displaced amacrine cells. DLX1 expression resembles DLX2 to P0 but decreases
postnatally. In the adult, DLX2 is localized to ganglion, amacrine, and
horizontal cells as determined by coexpression with retinal cell-specific
markers. There is coincident expression of DLX2 with gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA), glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD)65, and GAD67 in the inner nuclear layer
(INL) and GCL. In the adult, DLX2 is coexpressed with BRN3b in ganglion cells;
PAX6 in amacrine, horizontal, and ganglion cells; and Chx10 in some bipolar
cells. We predict that a combinatorial code of these homeobox genes and others
specify retinal cell fate. Our results support a possible role for Dlx1 and Dlx2 
in inner retinal development and in the terminal differentiation and/or
maintenance of INL interneurons and ganglion cells in the adult. The correlation 
of DLX2 with GABA expression in the mouse retina closely mirrors the relationship
of DLX2 to GABAergic neuronal differentiation in the embryonic forebrain,
including neocortex, olfactory bulb and hippocampus, signifying a conservation of
function of Dlx genes in the developing central nervous system.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12724837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Genome Res. 2003 Apr;13(4):533-43.

Regulatory roles of conserved intergenic domains in vertebrate Dlx bigene
clusters.

Ghanem N(1), Jarinova O, Amores A, Long Q, Hatch G, Park BK, Rubenstein JL, Ekker
M.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Health Research Institute and Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1Y 4E9.

Dlx homeobox genes of vertebrates are generally arranged as three bigene clusters
on distinct chromosomes. The Dlx1/Dlx2, Dlx5/Dlx6, and Dlx3/Dlx7 clusters likely 
originate from duplications of an ancestral Dlx gene pair. Overlaps in expression
are often observed between genes from the different clusters. To determine if the
overlaps are a result of the conservation of enhancer sequences between
paralogous clusters, we compared the Dlx1/2 and the Dlx5/Dlx6 intergenic regions 
from human, mouse, zebrafish, and from two pufferfish, Spheroides nephelus and
Takifugu rubripes. Conservation between all five vertebrates is limited to four
sequences, two in Dlx1/Dlx2 and two in Dlx5/Dlx6. These noncoding sequences are
>75% identical over a few hundred base pairs, even in distant vertebrates.
However, when compared to each other, the four intergenic sequences show a much
more limited similarity. Each intergenic sequence acts as an enhancer when tested
in transgenic animals. Three of them are active in the forebrain with overlapping
patterns despite their limited sequence similarity. The lack of sequence
similarity between paralogous intergenic regions and the high degree of sequence 
conservation of orthologous enhancers suggest a rapid divergence of Dlx
intergenic regions early in chordate/vertebrate evolution followed by fixation of
cis-acting regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC430168
PMID: 12670995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Apr 1;100(7):4030-4. Epub 2003 Mar 17.

Regulation of Dlx3 gene expression in visceral arches by evolutionarily conserved
enhancer elements.

Sumiyama K(1), Ruddle FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06511, USA.

The mammalian Distal-less (Dlx) clusters (Dlx1-2, Dlx5-6, and Dlx3-7) have a
nested expression pattern in developing visceral (branchial) arches. Genetic
regulatory mechanisms controlling Dlx spatial expression within the visceral
arches have not yet been defined. Here we show that an enhancer in the Dlx3-7
cluster can regulate the visceral arch specific expression pattern of the Dlx3
gene. We have used a 79-kb transgene construct containing the entire Dlx3-7
bigene cluster with a LacZ reporter inserted in frame in the first exon of the
Dlx3 gene. Visceral arch expression is absent when a 4-kb element located within 
the Dlx3-7 intergenic region is deleted. A 245-bp element (I37-2) whose DNA
sequence is highly conserved between human and mouse located within the
4kb-deleted region can drive visceral arch expression when fused to a hsp68-lacZ 
reporter transgene construct. Reporter expression is detected in 9.5 and 10.5
days postcoitum transgenic embryos in a manner consistent with the endogenous
Dlx3 expression pattern in the mesenchyme of the first and second visceral
arches. Thus the I37-2 element is both necessary and sufficient for Dlx3
expression. The I37-2 element contains several putative binding sites for several
transcription factors including Dlx and other homeodomain proteins within the
evolutionarily conserved region. Significantly, the I37-2 element shows a
sequence-match including a Dlx binding site to a cis-element in the Dlx5-6
intermediate region designated mI56i [Zerucha, T., Stuhmer, T., Hatch, G., Park, 
B. K., Long, Q., Yu, G., Gambarotta, A., Schultz, J. R., Rubenstein, J. L. &
Ekker, M. (2000) J. Neurosci. 20, 709-721], despite distant phylogenetic
relationship between these clusters. Our results provide evidence for a concerted
role for DLX auto- and cross-regulation in the establishment of a nested
expression pattern for Dlx3-7 and Dlx5-6 clusters within the visceral arches.

PMCID: PMC153042
PMID: 12642674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Development. 2002 Dec;129(24):5621-34.

The early topography of thalamocortical projections is shifted in Ebf1 and Dlx1/2
mutant mice.

Garel S(1), Yun K, Grosschedl R, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143-0984,
USA.

The prevailing model to explain the formation of topographic projections in the
nervous system stipulates that this process is governed by information located
within the projecting and targeted structures. In mammals, different thalamic
nuclei establish highly ordered projections with specific neocortical domains and
the mechanisms controlling the initial topography of these projections remain to 
be characterized. To address this issue, we examined Ebf1(-/-) embryos in which a
subset of thalamic axons does not reach the neocortex. We show that the
projections that do form between thalamic nuclei and neocortical domains have a
shifted topography, in the absence of regionalization defects in the thalamus or 
neocortex. This shift is first detected inside the basal ganglia, a structure on 
the path of thalamic axons, and which develops abnormally in Ebf1(-/-) embryos. A
similar shift in the topography of thalamocortical axons inside the basal ganglia
and neocortex was observed in Dlx1/2(-/-) embryos, which also have an abnormal
basal ganglia development. Furthermore, Dlx1 and Dlx2 are not expressed in the
dorsal thalamus or in cortical projections neurons. Thus, our study shows that:
(1) different thalamic nuclei do not establish projections independently of each 
other; (2) a shift in thalamocortical topography can occur in the absence of
major regionalization defects in the dorsal thalamus and neocortex; and (3) the
basal ganglia may contain decision points for thalamic axons' pathfinding and
topographic organization. These observations suggest that the topography of
thalamocortical projections is not strictly determined by cues located within the
neocortex and may be regulated by the relative positioning of thalamic axons
inside the basal ganglia.

PMID: 12421703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Development. 2002 Nov;129(21):5029-40.

Modulation of the notch signaling by Mash1 and Dlx1/2 regulates sequential
specification and differentiation of progenitor cell types in the subcortical
telencephalon.

Yun K(1), Fischman S, Johnson J, Hrabe de Angelis M, Weinmaster G, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, LPPI, University of California, San Francisco, 401 Parnassus, Box
0984, 94143-0984, USA.

Notch signaling has a central role in cell fate specification and
differentiation. We provide evidence that the Mash1 (bHLH) and Dlx1 and Dlx2
(homeobox) transcription factors have complementary roles in regulating Notch
signaling, which in turn mediates the temporal control of subcortical
telencephalic neurogenesis in mice. We defined progressively more mature
subcortical progenitors (P1, P2 and P3) through their combinatorial expression of
MASH1 and DLX2, as well as the expression of proliferative and postmitotic cell
markers at E10.5-E11.5. In the absence of Mash1, Notch signaling is greatly
reduced and 'early' VZ progenitors (P1 and P2) precociously acquire SVZ
progenitor (P3) properties. Comparing the molecular phenotypes of the delta-like 
1 and Mash1 mutants, suggests that Mash1 regulates early neurogenesis through
Notch-and Delta-dependent and -independent mechanisms. While Mash1 is required
for early neurogenesis (E10.5), Dlx1 and Dlx2 are required to downregulate Notch 
signaling during specification and differentiation steps of 'late' progenitors
(P3). We suggest that alternate cell fate choices in the developing telencephalon
are controlled by coordinated functions of bHLH and homeobox transcription
factors through their differential affects on Notch signaling.

PMID: 12397111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Nature. 2002 Jun 6;417(6889):645-9.

Origin of GABAergic neurons in the human neocortex.

Letinic K(1), Zoncu R, Rakic P.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, Section of Neurobiology, New Haven,
Connecticut 06510, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2002 Jun 6;417(6889):605-6.

The mammalian neocortex contains two major classes of neurons, projection and
local circuit neurons. Projection neurons contain the excitatory neurotransmitter
glutamate, while local circuit neurons are inhibitory, containing GABA. The
complex function of neocortical circuitry depends on the number and diversity of 
GABAergic (gamma-aminobutyric-acid-releasing) local circuit neurons. Using
retroviral labelling in organotypic slice cultures of the embryonic human
forebrain, we demonstrate the existence of two distinct lineages of neocortical
GABAergic neurons. One lineage expresses Dlx1/2 and Mash1 transcription factors, 
represents 65% of neocortical GABAergic neurons in humans, and originates from
Mash1-expressing progenitors of the neocortical ventricular and subventricular
zone of the dorsal forebrain. The second lineage, characterized by the expression
of Dlx1/2 but not Mash1, forms around 35% of the GABAergic neurons and originates
from the ganglionic eminence of the ventral forebrain. We suggest that
modifications in the expression pattern of transcription factors in the forebrain
may underlie species-specific programmes for the generation of neocortical local 
circuit neurons and that distinct lineages of cortical interneurons may be
differentially affected in genetic and acquired diseases of the human brain.

PMID: 12050665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Development. 2002 Jan;129(1):245-52.

Ectopic expression of the Dlx genes induces glutamic acid decarboxylase and Dlx
expression.

Stühmer T(1), Anderson SA, Ekker M, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, LPPI, University of California at San Francisco, 401 Parnassus
Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143-0984, USA.

The expression of the Dlx homeobox genes is closely associated with neurons that 
express gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in the embryonic rostral forebrain. To
test whether the Dlx genes are sufficient to induce some aspects of the phenotype
of GABAergic neurons, we adapted the electroporation method to ectopically
express DLX proteins in slice cultures of the mouse embryonic cerebral cortex.
This approach showed that ectopic expression of Dlx2 and Dlx5 induced the
expression of glutamic acid decarboxylases (GADs), the enzymes that synthesize
GABA. We also used this method to show cross-regulation between different Dlx
family members. We find that Dlx2 can induce Dlx5 expression, and that Dlx1, Dlx2
and Dlx5 can induce expression from a Dlx5/6-lacZ enhancer/"reporter construct.

PMID: 11782417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Neurosci. 2001 Nov 15;21(22):8854-62.

Multipotent stem cells from the mouse basal forebrain contribute GABAergic
neurons and oligodendrocytes to the cerebral cortex during embryogenesis.

He W(1), Ingraham C, Rising L, Goderie S, Temple S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuropharmacology and Neuroscience, Albany Medical College, Albany,
New York 12208, USA.

During CNS development, cell migrations play an important role, adding to the
cellular complexity of different regions. Earlier studies have shown a robust
migration of cells from basal forebrain into the overlying dorsal forebrain
during the embryonic period. These immigrant cells include GABAergic neurons that
populate the cerebral cortex and hippocampus. In this study we have examined the 
fate of other basal forebrain cells that migrate into the dorsal forebrain,
identifying basal cells using an antibody that recognizes both early (dlx1/2) and
late (dlx 5/6) members of the dlx homeobox gene family. We found that a
subpopulation of cortical and hippocampal oligodendrocytes are also
ventral-derived. We traced the origin of these cells to basal multipotent stem
cells capable of generating both GABAergic neurons and oligodendrocytes. A clonal
analysis showed that basal forebrain stem cells produce significantly more
GABAergic neurons than dorsal forebrain stem cells from the same embryonic age.
Moreover, stem cell clones from basal forebrain are significantly more likely to 
contain both GABAergic neurons and oligodendrocytes than those from dorsal. This 
indicates that forebrain stem cells are regionally specified. Whereas dlx
expression was not detected within basal stem cells growing in culture, these
cells produced dlx-positive products that are capable of migration. These data
indicate that the developing cerebral cortex incorporates both neuronal and glial
products of basal forebrain and suggest that these immigrant cells arise from a
common progenitor, a dlx-negative basal forebrain stem cell.

PMID: 11698597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Nat Neurosci. 2001 Sep;4(9):931-6.

Telencephalic origin of human thalamic GABAergic neurons.

Letinic K(1), Rakic P.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, Section of Neurobiology, New Haven,
Connecticut 06510, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2001 Sep;4(9):860-2.

In non-primate mammalian species, telencephalic and diencephalic neurons
originate from their respective local proliferative zones. Using vital dye
labeling in organotypic slice cultures, we show that in human brain, a contingent
of neurons from the ganglionic eminence of the telencephalon migrate to the
dorsal thalamic association nuclei of the diencephalon. These neurons rely on
homotypic-neurophilic guidance during their migration, are GABAergic, and express
Dlx1/2 homeodomain-containing proteins. Similar experiments in a non-human
primate and in rodent embryos did not reveal a similar migratory pathway.
Migration assays demonstrated that the human dorsal thalamus attracts
telencephalic cells, an effect not observed in the mouse, in which such migration
is inhibited by chemorepulsive cues. These data suggest that modifications in the
pattern of migratory guidance cues in the forebrain may underlie the appearance
of a new migratory pathway and thus contribute to the evolutionary expansion of
the thalamic association nuclei in the human.

PMID: 11528425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Exp Zool. 2001 Apr 15;291(1):68-84.

Isolation of Dlx and Emx gene cognates in an agnathan species, Lampetra japonica,
and their expression patterns during embryonic and larval development: conserved 
and diversified regulatory patterns of homeobox genes in vertebrate head
evolution.

Myojin M(1), Ueki T, Sugahara F, Murakami Y, Shigetani Y, Aizawa S, Hirano S,
Kuratani S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Okayama University Faculty of Science, Okayama, Japan.

Agnathan cognates of vertebrate homeobox genes, Emx and Dlx, were isolated from
embryonic cDNA of a Japanese marine lamprey, Lampetra japonica. Analyses of amino
acid sequences indicated that the Dlx cognate was closely related to the common
ancestor of gnathostome Dlx1 and Dlx6 groups and termed LjDlx1/6. Southern blot
analyses could not rule out the possibility that L. japonica possesses more than 
one paralog for both LjDlx1/6 and LjEmx, the lamprey cognate of Emx. Expression
of LjDlx1/6 was regulated spatially as well as developmentally, and its
transcripts were mainly found in the craniofacial and pharyngeal mesenchyme and
in the forebrain. The expression pattern of LjEmx changed dramatically during
embryogenesis; expression was seen initially in the entire neural tube and
mesoderm, which were secondarily downregulated, and secondarily in cranial nerve 
ganglia and in the craniofacial mesenchyme. No specific expression of LjEmx was
seen in the telencephalon. Comparisons of Dlx and Otx gene expression patterns
suggested a shared neuromeric pattern of the vertebrate brain. Absence of Emx
expression implied that the patterning of the lamprey telencephalon is not based 
on the tripartite plan that has been presumed in gnathostomes. Expression domains
of LjDlx1/6 in the upper lip and of LjEmx in the craniofacial mesenchyme were
peculiar features that have not been known in gnathostomes. Such differences in
expression pattern may underlie distinct morphogenetic pathway of the mandibular 
arch between the agnathans and gnathostomes.

PMID: 11335917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Dev Biol. 2001 Mar 15;231(2):410-9.

Formation of the middle ear: recent progress on the developmental and molecular
mechanisms.

Mallo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Stübeweg 51, Freiburg, D-79108, Germany. mallo@immunobio.mpg.de

The middle ear allows animals to hear while moving in an aerial medium. It is
composed of a cavity harbouring a chain of three ossicles that transmit
vibrations produced by airborne sound in the tympanic membrane into the inner
ear, where they are converted into neural impulses. The middle ear develops in
the branchial arches, and this requires sequential interactions between the
epithelia and the underlying mesenchyme. Gene-inactivation experiments have
identified genes required for the formation of different middle ear components.
Some encode for signalling molecules, including Endothelin1 and Fgf8, probable
mediators of epithelial-mesenchymal interactions. Other genes, including Eya1,
Prx1, Hoxa1, Hoxa2, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, and Gsc, are most likely involved in
patterning and morphogenetic processes in the neural crest-derived mesenchyme.
Mechanisms controlling formation of a functional tympanic membrane are also
discussed. Basically, the tympanic ring, which serves as support for the tympanic
membrane, directs invagination of the first pharyngeal cleft ectoderm to form the
external acoustic meatus (EAM), which provides the outer layer of the membrane.
Gsc and Prx1 are essential for tympanic ring development. While invaginating, the
EAM controls skeletogenesis in the underlying mesenchyme to form the manubrium of
the malleus, the link between the membrane and the middle ear ossicles.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11237469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Neuron. 2000 Dec;28(3):727-40.

Cell migration from the ganglionic eminences is required for the development of
hippocampal GABAergic interneurons.

Pleasure SJ(1), Anderson S, Hevner R, Bagri A, Marin O, Lowenstein DH, Rubenstein
JL.

Author information: 
(1)Neurodevelopmental Disorders Laboratory, Department of Neurology, University
of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

GABAergic interneurons have major roles in hippocampal function and dysfunction. 
Here we provide evidence that, in mice, virtually all of these cells originate
from progenitors in the basal telencephalon. Immature interneurons tangentially
migrate from the basal telencephalon through the neocortex to take up their final
positions in the hippocampus. Disrupting differentiation in the embryonic basal
telencephalon (lateral and medial ganglionic eminences) through loss of Dlx1/2
homeobox function blocks the migration of virtually all GABAergic interneurons to
the hippocampus. On the other hand, disrupting specification of the medial
ganglionic eminence through loss of Nkx2.1 homeobox function depletes the
hippocampus of a distinct subset of hippocampal interneurons. Loss of hippocampal
interneurons does not appear to have major effects on the early development of
hippocampal projection neurons nor on the pathfinding of afferrent tracts.

PMID: 11163262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Dev Biol. 2000 Dec 1;228(1):73-85.

Ectodermally derived FGF8 defines the maxillomandibular region in the early chick
embryo: epithelial-mesenchymal interactions in the specification of the
craniofacial ectomesenchyme.

Shigetani Y(1), Nobusada Y, Kuratani S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Okayama University Faculty of Science, 3-1-1
Tsushimanaka, Okayama, 700-8530, Japan.

The most rostral cephalic crest cells in the chick embryo first populate
ubiquitously in the rostroventral head. Before the influx of crest cells, the
ventral head ectoderm expresses Fgf8 in two domains that correspond to the future
mandibular arch. Bmp4 is expressed rostral and caudal to these domains. The
rostral part of the Bmp4 domain develops into the rostral end of the maxillary
process that corresponds to the transition between the maxillomandibular and
premandibular regions. Thus, the distribution patterns of FGF8 and BMP4 appear to
foreshadow the maxillomandibular region in the head ectoderm. In the
ectomesenchyme of the pharyngula embryo, expression patterns of some homeobox
genes overlap the distribution of their upstream growth factors. Dlx1 and Barx1, 
the targets of FGF8, are expressed in the mandibular ectomesenchyme, and Msx1,
the target of BMP4, in its distal regions. Ectopic applications of FGF8 lead to
shifted expression of the target genes as well as repatterning of the
craniofacial primordia and of the trigeminal nerve branches. Focal injection of a
lipophilic dye, DiI, showed that this shift was at least in part due to the
posterior transformation of the original premandibular ectomesenchyme into the
mandible, caused by the changed distribution of FGF8 that defines the mandibular 
region. We conclude that FGF8 in the early ectoderm defines the maxillomandibular
region of the prepharyngula embryo, through epithelial-mesenchymal interactions
and subsequent upregulation of homeobox genes in the local mesenchyme. BMP4 in
the ventral ectoderm appears to limit the anterior expression of Fgf8. Ectopic
application of BMP4 consistently diminished part of the mandibular arch.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11087627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Exp Zool. 2000 Oct 15;288(3):235-41.

Differential expression of orthologous Dlx genes in zebrafish and mice:
implications for the evolution of the Dlx homeobox gene family.

Quint E(1), Zerucha T, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Loeb Health Research Institute at the Ottawa Hospital, Ontario, Canada.

Dlx homeobox genes of vertebrates are often organised as physically linked pairs 
in which the two genes are transcribed convergently (tail-to-tail arrangement).
Three such Dlx pairs have been found in mouse, human, and zebrafish and are
thought to have originated from the duplication of an ancestral gene pair. These 
pairs include Dlx1/Dlx2, Dlx7/Dlx3, and Dlx6/Dlx5 (the zebrafish orthologue of
Dlx5 is named dlx4). Expression patterns of physically linked Dlx genes overlap
extensively. Furthermore, orthologous Dlx genes often show highly similar
expression patterns. We analysed Dlx expression during the gastrula and early
somitogenesis of the mouse and zebrafish. It was found that expression of the
mouse Dlx6 gene takes place in the rostral ectoderm and presumptive olfactory and
otic placodes with patterns similar to the previously reported expression of the 
physically linked Dlx5 gene. However, we observed only very weak expression of
the mouse Dlx3 gene at the same stage. This contrasts with the expression of dlx 
genes in zebrafish where dlx3 and dlx7, but not dlx4 and dlx6 are expressed
during gastrulation in the rostral ectoderm and presumptive placodes. Thus, Dlx
expression patterns at early stages are better conserved between paralogous pairs
of physically linked genes than between orthologous pairs. This suggests that
early expression of Dlx genes existed prior to the duplications that led to the
multiple pairs of physically linked genes but was differentially conserved in
different paralogs in zebrafish and mice.

PMID: 11069141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Int J Dev Biol. 2000;44(6):619-26.

Multiple functions of Dlx genes.

Merlo GR(1), Zerega B, Paleari L, Trombino S, Mantero S, Levi G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Morphogenesis, National Cancer Institute-IST, Genova, 
Italy.

Dlx genes comprise a highly conserved family of homeobox genes homologous to the 
distal-less (Dll) gene of Drosophila. They are thought to act as transcription
factors. All Dlx genes are expressed in spatially and temporally restricted
patterns in craniofacial primordia, basal telencephalon and diencephalon, and in 
distal regions of extending appendages, including the limb and the genital bud.
Most of them are expressed during morphogenesis of sensory organs and during
migration of neural crest cells and interneurons. In addition, Dlx5 and Dlx6 are 
expressed in differentiating osteoblasts. Gene targeting of Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx3 and 
Dlx5 in the mouse germ-line has revealed functions in craniofacial patterning,
sensory organ morphogenesis, osteogenesis and placental formation. However, no
effect on limb development has yet been revealed from gene inactivation studies. 
A role for these genes in limb development is however suggested by the linkage of
the Split Foot/Hand Malformation human syndrome to a region containing DLX5 and
DLX6. As for most transcription factors, these genes seem to have multiple
functions at different stages of development or in different tissues and cell
types.

PMID: 11061425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2000;90(1-2):151-3.

Clustering of two fragile sites and seven homeobox genes in human chromosome
region 2q31-->q32.1.

Limongi MZ(1), Pelliccia F, Gaddini L, Rocchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica e Biologia Molecolare, Università La Sapienza, Roma, 
Italia.

In this study we have used FISH to examine the relationship between a group of
homeobox genes, namely DLX1/DLX2, EVX2 and four HOXD genes (10, 11, 12, 13), that
map to region q31 on chromosome 2, and the FRA2G and FRA2H fragile sites located 
at 2q31 and 2q32.1 respectively. Our results indicate that these homeobox genes
lie between the two fragile regions.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 11060466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Neurosci. 2000 Aug 15;20(16):6063-76.

Origin and molecular specification of striatal interneurons.

Marin O(1), Anderson SA, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, Langley Porter Psychiatric Institute, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143-0984, USA.

The striatum, the largest component of the basal ganglia, contains projection
neurons and interneurons. Whereas there is considerable agreement that the
lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE) is the origin of striatal projection neurons,
less is known about the origin of striatal interneurons. Using focal injections
of retrovirus into the ventral telencephalon in vitro, we demonstrate that most
striatal interneurons tangentially migrate from the medial ganglionic eminence
(MGE) or the adjacent preoptic/anterior entopeduncular areas (POa/AEP) and
express the NKX2.1 homeodomain protein. Although the majority of striatal
interneurons (cholinergic, calretinin(+), and parvalbumin(+)) maintain the
expression of NKX2.1 into adulthood, most of the interneurons expressing
somatostatin (SOM), neuropeptide Y (NPY), and neural nitric oxide synthase (NOS) 
appear to downregulate the expression of NKX2.1 as they exit the neuroepithelium.
Analysis of striatal development in mice lacking Nkx2.1 suggests that this gene
is required for the specification of nearly all striatal interneurons. Similar
analysis of mice lacking the Mash1 basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) or both the Dlx1
and Dlx2 homeodomain transcription factors demonstrates that these genes are
required for the differentiation of striatal interneurons. Mash1 mutants
primarily have a reduction in early-born striatal interneurons, whereas Dlx1/2
mutants primarily have reduced numbers of late-born striatal interneurons. We
also present evidence implicating the Lhx6 and Lhx7 LIM-homeobox genes in the
development of distinct interneuron subtypes. Finally, we hypothesize that,
within the MGE, radially migrating cells generally become projection neurons,
whereas tangentially migrating cells mainly form interneurons of the striatum and
cerebral cortex.

PMID: 10934256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Neurosci. 2000 Jan 15;20(2):709-21.

A highly conserved enhancer in the Dlx5/Dlx6 intergenic region is the site of
cross-regulatory interactions between Dlx genes in the embryonic forebrain.

Zerucha T(1), Stühmer T, Hatch G, Park BK, Long Q, Yu G, Gambarotta A, Schultz
JR, Rubenstein JL, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Loeb Health Research Institute at the Ottawa Hospital and Department of
Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1Y 4E9, Canada.

Four Dlx homeobox genes, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, and Dlx6 are expressed in the same
primordia of the mouse forebrain with temporally overlapping patterns. The four
genes are organized as two tail-to-tail pairs, Dlx1/Dlx2 and Dlx5/Dlx6, a genomic
arrangement conserved in distantly related vertebrates like zebrafish. The
Dlx5/Dlx6 intergenic region contains two sequences of a few hundred base pairs,
remarkably well conserved between mouse and zebrafish. Reporter transgenes
containing these two sequences are expressed in the forebrain of transgenic mice 
and zebrafish with patterns highly similar to endogenous Dlx5 and Dlx6
expression. The activity of the transgene is drastically reduced in mouse mutants
lacking both Dlx1 and Dlx2, consistent with the decrease in endogenous Dlx5 and
Dlx6 expression. These results suggest that cross-regulation by Dlx proteins,
mediated by the intergenic sequences, is essential for Dlx5 and Dlx6 expression
in the forebrain. This hypothesis is supported by cotransfection and DNA-protein 
binding experiments. We propose that the Dlx genes are part of a highly conserved
developmental pathway that regulates forebrain development.

PMID: 10632600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Development. 2000 Jan;127(2):217-24.

Independent regulation of Dlx2 expression in the epithelium and mesenchyme of the
first branchial arch.

Thomas BL(1), Liu JK, Rubenstein JL, Sharpe PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, GKT Dental Institute, King's College, 
University of London, London, SE1 9RT, UK. bthomas@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

Dlx2, a member of the distal-less gene family, is expressed in the first
branchial arch, prior to the initiation of tooth development, in distinct,
non-overlapping domains in the mesenchyme and the epithelium. In the mesenchyme
Dlx2 is expressed proximally, whereas in oral epithelium it is expressed
distally. Dlx2 has been shown to be involved in the patterning of the murine
dentition, since loss of function of Dlx1 and Dlx2 results in early failure of
development of upper molar teeth. We have investigated the regulation of Dlx2
expression to determine how the early epithelial and mesenchymal expression
boundaries are maintained, to help to understand the role of these distinct
expression domains in patterning of the dentition. Transgenic mice produced with 
a lacZ reporter construct, containing 3.8 kb upstream sequence of Dlx2, led to
the mapping of regulatory regions driving epithelial but not mesenchymal
expression in the first branchial arch. We show that the epithelial expression of
Dlx2 is regulated by planar signalling by BMP4, which is coexpressed in distal
oral epithelium. Mesenchymal expression is regulated by a different mechanism
involving FGF8, which is expressed in the overlying epithelium. FGF8 also
inhibits expression of Dlx2 in the epithelium by a signalling pathway that
requires the mesenchyme. Thus, the signalling molecules BMP4 and FGF8 provide the
mechanism for maintaining the strict epithelial and mesenchymal expression
domains of Dlx2 in the first arch.

PMID: 10603340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Am J Med Genet. 1999 Sep 3;86(1):75-81.

Two cases with interstitial deletions of chromosome 2 and sex reversal in one.

Slavotinek A(1), Schwarz C, Getty JF, Stecko O, Goodman F, Kingston H.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Medical Genetics, St Mary's Hospital, Manchester,
United Kingdom.

We present two children with de novo interstitial deletions of the long arm of
chromosome 2 (karyotypes 46,XY, del(2)(q31.1q31.3) and 46,XY, del(2)(q24.3q31.3),
respectively). The first child had severe learning difficulties, growth
retardation, unilateral ptosis, small palpebral fissures, a cleft uvula, and
bilateral cutaneous syndactyly of the second and third toes. Despite her male
karyotype, she had female external genitalia with hypoplasia of the clitoris and 
labia minora. This is the first reported case of feminization of the external
genitalia in a genotypic male with an interstitial deletion of chromosome 2q31
and adds to the growing amount of evidence for a gene involved in sex
determination in this chromosome region. The second child had severe mental and
growth retardation, ptosis, down-slanting palpebral fissures, low-set ears,
micrognathia, finger camptodactyly, and brachysyndactyly of the second to fifth
toes. The clinical manifestations associated with deletions of 2q31 to 2q33 are
similar to those found with proximal deletions at 2q24 to 2q31 and of band 2q24, 
suggesting that the phenotype may result from haploinsufficiency for one or more 
genes located at 2q31. Microsatellite marker studies showed that both children
had paternally derived deletions that included the HOXD gene cluster and the
EVX2, DLX1, and DLX2 genes known to be important in limb development.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10440834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Development. 1999 Sep;126(17):3831-46.

Dlx5 regulates regional development of the branchial arches and sensory capsules.

Depew MJ(1), Liu JK, Long JE, Presley R, Meneses JJ, Pedersen RA, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Center for Neurobiology
and Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry and Programs in Neuroscience,
Developmental Biology, Oral Biology and Biomedical Sciences, University of
California at San Fran.

We report the generation and analysis of mice homozygous for a targeted deletion 
of the Dlx5 homeobox gene. Dlx5 mutant mice have multiple defects in craniofacial
structures, including their ears, noses, mandibles and calvaria, and die shortly 
after birth. A subset (28%) exhibit exencephaly. Ectodermal expression of Dlx5 is
required for the development of olfactory and otic placode-derived epithelia and 
surrounding capsules. The nasal capsules are hypoplastic (e.g. lacking
turbinates) and, in most cases, the right side is more severely affected than the
left. Dorsal otic vesicle derivatives (e. g. semicircular canals and
endolymphatic duct) and the surrounding capsule, are more severely affected than 
ventral (cochlear) structures. Dlx5 is also required in mandibular arch
ectomesenchyme, as the proximal mandibular arch skeleton is dysmorphic. Dlx5 may 
control craniofacial development in part through the regulation of the goosecoid 
homeobox gene. goosecoid expression is greatly reduced in Dlx5 mutants, and both 
goosecoid and Dlx5 mutants share a number of similar craniofacial malformations. 
Dlx5 may perform a general role in skeletal differentiation, as exemplified by
hypomineralization within the calvaria. The distinct focal defects within the
branchial arches of the Dlx1, Dlx2 and Dlx5 mutants, along with the nested
expression of their RNAs, support a model in which these genes have both
redundant and unique functions in the regulation of regional patterning of the
craniofacial ectomesenchyme.

PMID: 10433912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Development. 1998 Nov;125(21):4325-33.

FGFs and BMP4 induce both Msx1-independent and Msx1-dependent signaling pathways 
in early tooth development.

Bei M(1), Maas R.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham & Women's Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. maas@rascal.med.harvard.edu.

During early tooth development, multiple signaling molecules are expressed in the
dental lamina epithelium and induce the dental mesenchyme. One signal, BMP4, has 
been shown to induce morphologic changes in dental mesenchyme and mesenchymal
gene expression via Msx1, but BMP4 cannot substitute for all the inductive
functions of the dental epithelium. To investigate the role of FGFs during early 
tooth development, we examined the expression of epithelial and mesenchymal Fgfs 
in wild-type and Msx1 mutant tooth germs and tested the ability of FGFs to induce
Fgf3 and Bmp4 expression in wild-type and Msx1 mutant dental mesenchymal
explants. Fgf8 expression is preserved in Msx1 mutant epithelium while that of
Fgf3 is not detected in Msx1 mutant dental mesenchyme. Moreover, dental
epithelium as well as beads soaked in FGF1, FGF2 or FGF8 induce Fgf3 expression
in dental mesenchyme in an Msx1-dependent manner. These results indicate that,
like BMP4, FGF8 constitutes an epithelial inductive signal capable of inducing
the expression of downstream signaling molecules in dental mesenchyme via Msx1.
However, the BMP4 and FGF8 signaling pathways are distinct. BMP4 cannot induce
Fgf3 nor can FGFs induce Bmp4 expression in dental mesenchyme, even though both
signaling molecules can induce Msx1 and Msx1 is necessary for Fgf3 and Bmp4
expression in dental mesenchyme. In addition, we have investigated the effects of
FGFs and BMP4 on the distal-less homeobox genes Dlx1 and Dlx2 and we have
clarified the relationship between Msx and Dlx gene function in the developing
tooth. Dlx1,Dlx2 double mutants exhibit a lamina stage arrest in maxillary molar 
tooth development (Thomas B. L., Tucker A. S., Qiu M. , Ferguson C. A.,
Hardcastle Z., Rubenstein J. L. R. and Sharpe P. T. (1997) Development 124,
4811-4818). Although the maintenance of molar mesenchymal Dlx2 expression at the 
bud stage is Msx1-dependent, both the maintenance of Dlx1 expression and the
initial activation of mesenchymal Dlx1 and Dlx2 expression during the lamina
stage are not. Moreover, in contrast to the tooth bud stage arrest observed in
Msx1 mutants, Msx1,Msx2 double mutants exhibit an earlier phenotype closely
resembling the lamina stage arrest observed in Dlx1,Dlx2 double mutants. These
results are consistent with functional redundancy between Msx1 and Msx2 in dental
mesenchyme and support a model whereby Msx and Dlx genes function in parallel
within the dental mesenchyme during tooth initiation. Indeed, as predicted by
such a model, BMP4 and FGF8, epithelial signals that induce differential Msx1 and
Msx2 expression in dental mesenchyme, also differentially induce Dlx1 and Dlx2
expression, and do so in an Msx1-independent manner. These results integrate
Dlx1, Dlx2 and Fgf3 and Fgf8 into the odontogenic regulatory hierarchy along with
Msx1, Msx2 and Bmp4, and provide a basis for interpreting tooth induction in
terms of transcription factors which, individually, are necessary but not
sufficient for the expression of downstream signals and therefore must act in
specific combinations.

PMID: 9753686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Development. 1998 Jul;125(14):2599-610.

Vax1 is a novel homeobox-containing gene expressed in the developing anterior
ventral forebrain.

Hallonet M(1), Hollemann T, Wehr R, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Pieler T, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institut for Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Molecular and
Cell Biology, Am Fassberg 11, Germany.

The vertebrate forebrain is formed at the rostral end of the neural plate under
the regulation of local and specific signals emanating from both the endomesoderm
and neuroectoderm. The development of the rostral and ventral forebrain in
particular was difficult to study, mainly because no specific markers are
available to date. Here, we report the identification of Vax1, a novel
homeobox-containing gene identified in mouse, Xenopus and human. It is closely
related to members of the Not and Emx gene families, all of which are required
for the formation of structures where they are expressed. In mouse and Xenopus,
Vax1 expression first occurs in the rostral neural plate, in the medial anterior 
neural ridge and adjacent ectoderm. Later, at midgestation in the mouse and
tadpole stage in Xenopus, the expression remains confined in the derivatives of
this territory which differentiate into rostromedial olfactory placode, optic
nerve and disc, and anterior ventral forebrain. Together, these observations
suggest that Vax1 could have an early evolutionary origin and could participate
in the specification and formation of the rostral and ventral forebrain in
vertebrates. Comparison of the limits of the expression territory of Vax1 with
that of Dlx1, Pax6 and Emx1 indicates that the corticostriatal ridge is a complex
structure with distinct identifiable genetic compartments. Besides, the study of 
Vax1 expression in Pax6-deficient homozygous brains indicates that its regulation
is independent of Pax6, although the expression patterns of these two genes
appear complementary in wild-type animals. Vax1 chromosomal location is mapped at
the distal end of the mouse chromosome 19, linked with that of Emx2. These two
genes may have arisen by tandem duplication. The Vax1 gene is thus an interesting
new tool to study the rostral ventral forebrain patterning, morphogenesis and
evolution as well as the terminal differentiation of the forebrain in mouse and
Xenopus.

PMID: 9636075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Genomics. 1997 Nov 1;45(3):580-90.

Relationship between the genomic organization and the overlapping embryonic
expression patterns of the zebrafish dlx genes.

Ellies DL(1), Stock DW, Hatch G, Giroux G, Weiss KM, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Civic Hospital, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, K1Y 4E9, Canada.

To understand the relationship between the expression and the genomic
organization of the zebrafish dlx genes, we have determined the genomic structure
of the dlx2 and dlx4 loci. This led to the identification of the zebrafish dlx1
and dlx6 genes, which are closely linked to dlx2 and dlx4, respectively.
Therefore, the inverted convergent configuration of Dlx genes is conserved among 
vertebrates. Analysis of the expression patterns of dlx1 and dlx6 showed striking
similarities to those of dlx2 and dlx4, respectively, the genes to which they are
linked. Furthermore, the expression patterns of dlx3 and dlx7, which likely
constitute a third pair of convergently transcribed genes, are indistinguishable.
Thus, the overlapping expression patterns of linked Dlx genes during embryonic
development suggest that they share cis-acting sequences that control their
spatiotemporal expression. The evolutionary conservation of the genomic
organization and combinatorial expression of Dlx genes in distantly related
vertebrates suggest tight control mechanisms that are essential for their
function during development.

Copyright 1997 Academic Press.

PMID: 9367683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Mech Dev. 1997 Sep;67(1):83-96.

Expression patterns of Brx1 (Rieg gene), Sonic hedgehog, Nkx2.2, Dlx1 and Arx
during zona limitans intrathalamica and embryonic ventral lateral geniculate
nuclear formation.

Kitamura K(1), Miura H, Yanazawa M, Miyashita T, Kato K.

Author information: 
(1)Mitsubishi Kasei Institute of Life Sciences, Tokyo, Japan.
kunio@libra.ls.m-kagaku.co.jp

The Brx1 homeobox gene has been isolated and shown to be expressed in the zona
limitans intrathalamica (ZLI) of the mouse embryo. Brx1 is a member of the Brx
gene family and comprises the genes for Brx1a and Brx1b, which differ in the
sequence in the region located on the 5'-terminal side of the homeobox. The
complete amino acid sequences of the open reading frame of Brx1a and Brx1b were
determined and each was found to be similar to that of Rgs, the mouse homologue
of the Rieger syndrome associated human RIEG gene (RGS), to the extent that the
sequence of Rgs has been clarified. Brx1 was strongly expressed in the mammillary
area as well as in the ZLI of the mouse embryonic brain. Homologues of Brx1a and 
Brx1b were isolated in chick in which the expression of Brx1 in the ventral
diencephalon was well conserved. The expression of Brx1 along with that of Sonic 
hedgehog (Shh), Nkx2.2, Dlx1 and Arx was examined at the time of the formation of
ZLI in mouse embryos. The expression of Shh was initially noted in the
ventricular zone of the presumptive ZLI and was then replaced by that of Brx1 at 
the time of radial migration of the neuroepithelial cells. Nkx2.2 was widely
expressed in the ventricular zone of presumptive ZLI and also as a narrow band in
the mantle zone. The expression of Dlx1 and Arx in the presumptive ventral
thalamus extended as far as ZLI and overlapped with that of Brx1. The Dlx1- and
Arx-expressing cells in ZLI, which extended towards the lateral (pial) surface of
the diencephalic wall, differed from those expressing Nkx2.2 and Brx1. The
embryonic ventral lateral geniculate nucleus present in the visual pathway was
eventually formed from these cells. Each homeobox gene was also expressed
regionally in the nucleus, suggesting that the nucleus is comprised of
subdivisions.

PMID: 9347917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Mech Dev. 1997 Jul;65(1-2):99-109.

Expression of a novel aristaless related homeobox gene 'Arx' in the vertebrate
telencephalon, diencephalon and floor plate.

Miura H(1), Yanazawa M, Kato K, Kitamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Mitsubishi Kasei Institute of Life Sciences, Machida-shi, Tokyo, Japan.

We have isolated a novel homeobox gene that is expressed in the vertebrate
central nervous system and which shows striking similarity to the Drosophila al
gene in the homeodomain (85% identity) and in a 17 amino acid-sequence near the
carboxyl-terminus. This gene was designated Arx (aristaless related homeobox
gene) in consideration of its structural similarity to the al gene. Arx was
highly conserved between mouse and zebrafish. Neuromeric expression in the
forebrain and longitudinal expression in the floor plate were observed in mouse
and zebrafish. The expression of Arx in the ganglionic eminence and ventral
thalamus overlapped regionally with that of Dlx1, but the cell layer where Arx is
expressed differed from that of the Dlx1. This gene was also found to be
expressed in the dorsal telencephalon (presumptive cerebral cortex) of mouse
embryos. The structure and expression pattern of Arx with respect to any possible
relationship to al and Dlx1, as well as the function of Arx in the floor plate
are discussed.

PMID: 9256348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Gene. 1997 Mar 10;187(1):55-61.

Isolation and identification of homeobox genes from the human placenta including 
a novel member of the Distal-less family, DLX4.

Quinn LM(1), Johnson BV, Nicholl J, Sutherland GR, Kalionis B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Flinders University of South
Australia, Adelaide.

We have carried out a DNA binding site screen of a 32-week human placental cDNA
library using a consensus homeodomain binding site as a probe. This study
represents the first library screen carried out to isolate homeobox genes from
the human placenta. We have shown that three homeobox genes known to be expressed
in the embryo, HB24, GAX and MSX2 are also expressed in the placenta. We have
also identified a novel homeobox gene, DLX4, that shows 85% sequence identity
with the homeodomain encoded by the Drosophila Distal-less (Dll) gene. DLX4
therefore represents a new member of the Distal-less family of homeobox genes.
This is the first evidence that members of the Distal-less family of homeobox
genes are expressed in the placenta. Using fluorescence in situ hybridisation
(FISH), DLX4 has been assigned to human chromosome 17q21-q22. This places DLX4 in
the same region of chromosome 17 as another member of the Distal-less family,
DLX3 (Scherer et al., 1995), and the HOX-B homeobox gene cluster (Acampora et
al., 1989: Boncinelli et al., 1991). Members of the Distal-less family (DLX1 and 
DLX2; DLX5 and DLX6) are found as closely linked pairs on human chromosomes
(Simeone et al., 1994). We predict that DLX3 and DLX4 are closely linked and have
arisen through gene duplication and divergence from a common ancestral precursor.

PMID: 9073066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Development. 1996 Nov;122(11):3453-65.

Forebrain patterning defects in Small eye mutant mice.

Stoykova A(1), Fritsch R, Walther C, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute of Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany.

Pax6 is a member of the Pax gene family of transcriptional regulators that
exhibits a restricted spatiotemporal expression in the developing central nervous
system, eye and nose. Mutations in Pax6 are responsible for inherited
malformations in man, rat and mouse. To evaluate the role of Pax6 in forebrain
development, we studied in detail mouse Small eye/Pax6 mutant brains. This
analysis revealed severe defects in forebrain regions where Pax6 is specifically 
expressed. The establishment of some expression boundaries along the dorsoventral
axis of the secondary prosencephalon is distorted and the specification of
several ventral structures and nuclei is abolished. Specifically, the development
of the hypothalamo-telencephalic transition zone and the ventral thalamus is
distorted. Our detailed analysis included a comparison of the expression of Pax6,
Dlx1 and several other genes during embryonic mouse brain development in
wild-type and in the mutant Small eye (Sey) brain. The results from the analysis 
of normal brain development show that the restricted expression of Pax6 and Dlx1 
at E12.5 dpc respect domains within the forebrain, consistent with the
implications of the prosomeric model for the organisation of the forebrain (L.
Puelles and J. L. R. Rubenstein (1993) Trends Neurosci. 16, 472-479).
Furthermore, we found an early restriction of Pax6 and Dlx1 expression into
presumptive histogenetic fields that correlate with the formation of distinct
forebrain structures and nuclei. Our results are discussed in light of changes in
adhesive properties in the Sey brain that might control segregation, assembly and
cell migration of progenitors of specific forebrain regions.

PMID: 8951061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Dev Biol. 1996 May 1;175(2):347-57.

Retinoic acid induces stage-specific repatterning of the rostral central nervous 
system.

Avantaggiato V(1), Acampora D, Tuorto F, Simeone A.

Author information: 
(1)International Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, C.N.R., Naples, Italy.

We had previously reported that in gastrulating mouse embryos retinoic acid (RA) 
induces morphological as well molecular alterations strictly depending on the
time of administration. In particular, embryos treated with RA at the mid-late
streak stage share reduction of the rostral central nervous system (CNS) and
increase of the hindbrain. In the same embryos, loss of the forebrain-expressed
genes, such as Emx1, Emx2, and Dlx1, and rostral ectopic expression of the Hoxb-1
gene suggest an antero-posterior (A/P) ordered repatterning of the fore-, mid-,
and hindbrain regions. Several genes, such as Pax-2, Wnt-1, En-2, and En-1, are
involved in the establishment of midbrain and rostral hindbrain regional
identities and boundaries. We report that these genes become coordinately
anteriorized only in embryos treated with RA at the late streak stage. Moreover, 
in the hindbrain of the same embryos, at 8.5 days post coitum (dpc), Wnt-1 and
Pax-2 are rostrally induced all along the neural plate. Considering that
forebrain markers are repressed in embryos treated with RA at the same time,
these findings strongly support the idea that RA administration at the late
streak stage induces an ordered repatterning of the rostral CNS, possibly
altering the A/P nature of mesendodermal inductive signals.

PMID: 8626038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Dev Genet. 1996;18(3):181-97.

Genetic aspects of embryonic eye development in vertebrates.

Graw J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Säugetiergenetik, GSF-Forschungszentrum für Umwelt und Gesundheit
Neuherberg, Oberschleissheim, Germany.

The vertebrate eye comprises tissues from different embryonic origins, e.g., iris
and ciliary body are derived from the wall of the diencephalon via optic vesicle 
and optic cup. Lens and cornea, on the other hand, come from the overlying
surface ectoderm. The timely action of transcription factors and inductive
signals ensure the correct development of the different eye components.
Establishing the genetic basis of eye defects has been an important tool for the 
detailed analysis of this complex process. One of the main control genes for eye 
development was discovered by the analysis of the allelic series of the Small eye
mouse mutants and characterized as Pax6. It is involved in the interaction
between the optic cup and the overlaying ectoderm. The central role for Pax6 in
eye development is conserved throughout the animal kingdom as the murine Pax6
gene induces ectopic eyes in transgenic Drosophila despite the obvious diverse
organization of the eye in the fruit fly compared to vertebrates. In human,
mutations in the PAX6 gene are responsible for aniridia and Peter's anomaly. In
addition to Pax6, other mutations affecting the interaction of the optic cup and 
the lens placode have been documented in the mouse. For the differentiation of
the retina from the optic cup several genes are responsible: Mi leads to
microphthalmia, if mutated, and encodes for a transcription factor, which is
expressed in the melanocytes of the pigmented layer of the retina. In addition,
further genes are implicated in the correct development of the retina, e.g.,
Chx10, Dlx1, GH6, Msx1 and -2, Otx1 and -2, or Wnt7b. Mutations within the
retinoblastoma gene (RB1) are responsible for retinal tumors. Knock-out mutants
of RB1 exhibit a block of lens differentiation prior to the retinal defect.
Besides the influence of Rb1, the lens differentiates under the influence of
growth factors (e.g., FGF, IGF, PDGF, TGF), and specific genes become activated
encoding cytoskeletal proteins (e.g., filensin, phakinin, vimentin), structural
proteins (e.g., crystallins) or membrane proteins (e.g., Mip). The optic nerve
originates from the neural retina; ganglion cells grow to the optic stalk,
forming the optic nerve. Its retrograde walk to the brain through the rudiment of
the optic stalk depends on the correct Pax2 expression.

PMID: 8631154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Neurosci. 1995 Dec;15(12):7879-91.

Fibroblast growth factor 2 increases Otx2 expression in precursor cells from
mammalian telencephalon.

Robel L(1), Ding M, James AJ, Lin X, Simeone A, Leckman JF, Vaccarino FM.

Author information: 
(1)Child Study Center, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Dissociated primary cultures from rat telencephalon at different developmental
stages were used to study the effect of basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF2) on 
Otx2, Dlx1, and Emx1, three homeobox genes expressed in different regions of the 
developing mammalian forebrain. At embryonic day (E)13.5. the regional pattern of
expression of Otx1, Otx2, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, and Emx1 is maintained in primary
culture, suggesting that cells are already committed to a regional identity at
this stage. In these cultures, Otx2 is expressed by precursor cells, whereas Dlx1
and Emx1 are predominantly expressed by postmitotic cells. We found that FGF2
increased Otx2 expression within precursor cells and the total number of
Otx2-expressing cells. This effect was gene-specific, dose-dependent, and
temporally regulated, with larger effects at earlier stages of development
(E11.5). At E13.5, the effect of FGF2 on Otx2 expression was restricted to the
basal telencephalon. Our results suggest that a restricted population of
neuroblasts respond to FGF2 in a temporally regulated fashion by proliferating
and increasing Otx2 expression. This interaction between FGF2 and Otx2 may be
important for the regulation of neurogenesis in the forebrain.

PMID: 8613727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Cas Lek Cesk. 1995 Aug 2;134(15):484-6.

[The human genome--chromosome 15].

[Article in Czech]

Brdicka R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ustav hematologie a krevní transfuze, Praha.

The Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) with Angelman's syndrome form a pair known above 
all due to problems of genetic imprinting and uniparental disomy. Both phenomena 
drew attention to the importance of control of expression of different alleles
and their genetic origin. The causes of the two syndromes have not been
elucidated unequivocally so far. In case of the PWS, at least, there is the
possibility of a gene of the protein carrier of a small nuclear ribonucleic acid 
described as SNRPN. In case of Marfan's syndrome the responsible gene is the
fibrillin gene (FNB1) with the locus on area 15q21. The mentioned gene
participates probably also in diseases caused by a change of the vascular wall
(aneurysm) and in prolapse of the mitral valves. On the 15th chromosome are
several representatives of the family of genes of cytochrome P450 the products of
which play a part in the metabolism of exogenous substances, incl. pharmaceutical
ones. Their activity is part of the natural sensitivity or resistance to some
chemical cancerogens. The postscriptis devoted to the assumed locus of dyslexia
DLX1.

PMID: 7585867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Hum Mol Genet. 1995 Aug;4(8):1453-8.

Localization of the syndactyly type II (synpolydactyly) locus to 2q31 region and 
identification of tight linkage to HOXD8 intragenic marker.

Sarfarazi M(1), Akarsu AN, Sayli BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
USA.

Syndactyly type II (SynPolyDactyly; SPD) is an autosomal dominant condition with 
incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity. Sixty-two meioses from a kindred
with 425 individuals were used to map the SPD locus to 2q31 region, approximately
1.7 cM (Lod score = 12.96) centromeric to HOXD8 intragenic marker. Other
homeobox-containing genes in this region have previously been ordered as
cen-DLX1/DLX2-EVX2-(5' --> HOXD13..HOXD8.HOXD1 --> 3')-tel')-tel. A single
recombinant with HOXD8 excluded the most 3' end of HOXD cluster as a candidate
site for SPD, but a mutation in the 5' end of HOXD cluster, especially in HOXD13,
EVX2 or DLX2/DLX1, may still be responsible for this phenotype. An updated order 
of D2S142-D2S111-(D2S335/D2S333)-D2S326-D2 S1238-SPD-
(HOXD8/D2S1244)-(D2S300/D2S138)-D2S148- D2S324- D2S1384-D2S434 [sequence:see
text] was deduced from meiotic recombination events.

PMID: 7581388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Neurosci. 1995 Jul;15(7 Pt 1):4927-42.

Developmental analysis of murine Promyelocyte Leukemia Zinc Finger (PLZF) gene
expression: implications for the neuromeric model of the forebrain organization.

Avantaggiato V(1), Pandolfi PP, Ruthardt M, Hawe N, Acampora D, Pelicci PG,
Simeone A.

Author information: 
(1)International Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, Consiglio Nazionale delle 
Ricerche, Naples, Italy.

Promyelocyte Leukemia Zinc Finger (PLZF) is a Kruppel-like zinc finger gene
previously identified in a unique case of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) as
the counterpart of a reciprocal chromosomal translocation involving the retinoic 
acid receptor alpha gene (RAR alpha). PLZF is highly conserved throughout
evolution from yeast to mammals. To elucidate its role, we isolated the murine
PLZF gene and studied its expression during embryogenesis. PLZF is expressed in
an extremely dynamic pattern with transcripts appearing at E 7.5 in the anterior 
neuroepithelium and quickly spreading to the entire neuroectoderm until E 10. At 
E 8.5, PLZF is transcribed in most of the endoderm. During mid to late gestation 
PLZF is expressed in restricted domains of the developing CNS as well as in
specific organs and body structures. We have focused our attention on the
developing forebrain where PLZF is transcribed in a transverse, segment-like
domain corresponding to the anterior pretectum, in the alarmost part of the
dorsal thalamus, in the epithalamus, and in the hypothalamus along a defined
longitudinal subdomain. Furthermore, PLZF is expressed in several segmentary
boundaries, among them, the zona limitans intrathalamica. Combined analysis with 
other regionally restricted genes, such as Orthopedia and Dlx1, indicates that in
the hypothalamus the PLZF domain is contained within that of Orthopedia and both 
are complementary to that of Dlx1. Our data suggest a role for PLZF in the
establishment and maintenance of transverse identities, longitudinal subdomains, 
and interneuromeric boundaries, providing additional evidences in favor of the
neuromeric organization of the forebrain.

PMID: 7623123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Mech Dev. 1995 May;51(1):83-98.

Retinoic acid induces stage-specific antero-posterior transformation of rostral
central nervous system.

Simeone A(1), Avantaggiato V, Moroni MC, Mavilio F, Arra C, Cotelli F, Nigro V,
Acampora D.

Author information: 
(1)International Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, Consiglio Nazionale delle 
Ricerche, Naples, Italy.

We report a time-course analysis of the effect of retinoic acid (RA) on the
development of the mouse central nervous system (CNS) from the beginning of
gastrulation throughout induction and patterning of the neural tube. RA
administration induces three different, stage-specific alterations of brain
development, indicating perturbation of different morphogenetic steps during the 
establishment of a neural pattern. In particular, treatment at mid-late streak
stage (7.2-7.4 days post coitum (d.p.c.)) results in early repression of Otx2
expression in the posterior neuroectoderm of the head fold and in the ventral mid
line, including the prechordal plate and the rostralmost endoderm, followed by
loss of forebrain morphological and molecular identities, as revealed by analysis
of the expression of regionally-restricted brain genes (Otx2, Otx1, Emx2, Emx1
and Dlx1). In these embryos, reduction of the Otx2 expression domain correlates
with hindbrain expansion marked by rostral extension of the Hoxb-1 expression
domain. Our analysis indicates that RA interferes with the correct definition of 
both planar and vertical morphogenetic signals at specific developmental stages
by affecting gene expression in the regions which are likely either to produce or
to respond to these signals. We suggest that retinoids may contribute to early
definition of head from trunk structures by selecting different sets of
regulatory genes.

PMID: 7669695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Development. 1995 Mar;121(3):839-53.

The mouse homolog of the orphan nuclear receptor tailless is expressed in the
developing forebrain.

Monaghan AP(1), Grau E, Bock D, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Division Molecular Biology of the Cell I, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

The Drosophila tailless gene is a member of the orphan nuclear receptor
subfamily. In Drosophila, the tailless gene is required for pattern formation in 
embryonic poles. During development, tailless is activated in the termini of the 
embryo in response to the torso receptor tyrosine kinase signal transduction
cascade. Recessive mutations of tailless result in abnormalities in anterior
portions of the head and in all structures posterior to the eighth abdominal
segment. Localised expression of tailless is required in combination with a
second terminal gene, huckebein, to control the expression of downstream genes.
We have isolated a mouse homolog of the Drosophila tailless gene, which shows
considerable homology in the DNA-binding domain suggesting that the respective
proteins bind similar recognition sequences. Although the ligand-binding domain
shows features in common with the tailless ligand domain, it also shares
conserved amino acid stretches with other orphan nuclear receptors, the human
ovalbumin upstream binding protein transcription factors (hCOUP-TF I and II). We 
have analysed the expression of taillees in mice, and show that it is
specifically localised to the developing forebrain from day 8 p.c. and in dorsal 
midbrain from day 8.75 p.c. To define the anterior and posterior boundaries of
expression, we compared the expression pattern of tailless to those of other
forebrain markers, including distal-less (Dlx1), brain factor 1 (BF1), and the
orthodenticle genes (Otx1 and Otx2). In addition to the developing forebrain,
these genes show dynamic patterns of expression in two structures whose
development requires inductive signals from the forebrain: the eye and the nose. 
These results suggest that the mouse taillees gene may be required to pattern
anterior brain differentiation.

PMID: 7720587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Connect Tissue Res. 1995;32(1-4):35-40.

Dlx and other homeobox genes in the morphological development of the dentition.

Weiss KM(1), Ruddle FH, Bollekens J.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Genetics, Penn State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

The dentition is a segmental system whose evolution and morphology bears analogy 
to the evolution of segmentation in the vertebral column and limb. Combinatorial 
expression of members of the large "Hox" class of homeobox regulatory genes has
been shown to play an important role in positional specification in these
skeletal systems. This raises the possibility that homeobox genes are also used
for positional specification in the dentition, and several homeobox genes are
known to be expressed in developing teeth. To identify additional dentally
expressed homeobox genes, cDNA from from murine tooth germs at 9.5, 14.5, and
17.5 days gestational age was amplified by PCR using sets of degenerate primers
to the homeodomains of 18 different classes of homeobox genes. Amplification
products were cloned and sequenced and compared to known gene sequences. To date 
this approach has confirmed the presence of Msx1, Msx2, Dlx1, and Dlx2, and
identified several other homeobox genes not previously known to be expressed in
teeth: Dbx, MHox, and Mox2A, plus an a additional Dlx gene, Dlx7. The Msx and Dlx
genes are the best current candidates for a combinatorial mechanism that controls
the differentiation of structures within and between teeth, and perhaps also the 
evolution of those structures.

PMID: 7554933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Genomics. 1994 Nov 1;24(1):34-40.

Order of six loci at 2q24-q31 and orientation of the HOXD locus.

Rossi E(1), Faiella A, Zeviani M, Labeit S, Floridia G, Brunelli S, Cammarata M, 
Boncinelli E, Zuffardi O.

Author information: 
(1)Università di Pavia, Italy.

HOXD, a gene cluster of 9 homeobox genes of the Antennapedia class; EVX2, a
homeobox gene related to Drosophila-even-skipped gene; DLX1 and DLX2, two
homeobox genes related to the Drosophila distal-less gene; and TTN and NEB, the
genes for the two giant molecules titin and nebulin, both involved in the
sarcomere structure, have been previously mapped to human 2q31-q32 and to mouse
chromosome 2. We studied their relative order in human by applying FISH to three 
balanced chromosome rearrangements each with a breakpoint at 2q31. Unambiguous
results led us to map these genes and to orient the HOXD locus along chromosome 2
according to the following order: cen, NEB, DLX1-DLX2, EVX2, HOXD (5'-3'), TTN,
tel. All of these genes are part of a syntenic region covering 5-10 cM and
conserved since the divergence of humans and rodents, and thus the same loci
order should be present in mouse. FISH in metaphases of approximately 500 bands
localized NEB to 2q24.1-q24.2, while HOXD and TTN were localized to 2q31.

PMID: 7896287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Mar 15;91(6):2250-4.

Cloning and characterization of two members of the vertebrate Dlx gene family.

Simeone A(1), Acampora D, Pannese M, D'Esposito M, Stornaiuolo A, Gulisano M,
Mallamaci A, Kastury K, Druck T, Huebner K, et al.

Author information: 
(1)International Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, Consiglio Nazionale delle 
Ricerche, Naples, Italy.

A number of vertebrate genes of the Dlx gene family have been cloned in mouse,
frog, and zebrafish. These genes contain a homeobox related to that of
Distalless, a gene expressed in the developing head and limbs of Drosophila
embryos. We cloned and studied the expression of two members of this family,
which we named Dlx5 and Dlx6, in human and mouse. The two human genes, DLX5 and
DLX6, are closely linked in an inverted convergent configuration in a region of
chromosome 7, at 7q22. Similarly, the two human genes DLX1 and DLX2 are closely
linked in a convergent configuration at 2q32, near the HOXD (previously HOX4)
locus. In situ hybridization experiments in mouse embryos revealed expression of 
Dlx5 and Dlx6 mRNA in restricted regions of ventral diencephalon and basal
telencephalon, with a distribution very similar to that reported for Dlx1 and
Dlx2 mRNA. A surprising feature of Dlx5 and Dlx6 is that they are also expressed 
in all skeletal structures of midgestation embryos after the first cartilage
formation. The expression pattern of these genes, together with their chromosome 
localization, may provide useful cues for the study of congenital disorders in
which there is a combination of craniofacial and limb defects.

PMCID: PMC43348
PMID: 7907794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


