
1. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2016 Mar 4:1-6. [Epub ahead of print]

Inhibitory effect of Phalaenopsis orchid extract on WNT1-induced immature
melanocyte precursor differentiation in a novel in vitro solar lentigo model.

Yamada T(1), Hasegawa S(1,)(2), Inoue Y(1), Kunita M(1), Ohsumi K(1), Sakaida
T(1), Yashiro Y(1), Nakata S(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Research Laboratories , Nippon Menard Cosmetic Co., Ltd. , Nagoya , Japan.
(2)b Nagoya University-Menard Collaborative Research Chair , Nagoya University
Graduate School of Medicine , Nagoya , Japan.

Recently, it has been reported that increased expression of WNT1 accelerates the 
differentiation of melanocyte stem cells (McSCs) in solar lentigines (SLs),
hyperpigmented maculae commonly seen on sun-exposed areas of the skin. In this
study, to establish an in vitro SL model, human epidermal squamous carcinoma cell
line HSC-1, which expresses higher levels of WNT1 than normal human epidermal
keratinocytes, was co-cultured with early passage normal human epidermal
melanocytes (NHEMs) as an in vitro McSC model. As a result, mRNA expression
levels of melanocyte differentiation-related genes MITF and TYR in NHEMs were
significantly increased by co-culturing with HSC-1 cells. Furthermore,
Phalaenopsis orchid extract (Phex) inhibited McSCs differentiation by suppressing
WNT1 expression via down-regulation of DLX2, a transcriptional activator of WNT1,
in HSC-1 cells. Therefore, our finding suggested that extracts such as Phex,
which suppresses WNT1 expression, may be useful as a novel treatment of SLs.

PMID: 26940255  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Genes Dev. 2016 Feb 1;30(3):293-306. doi: 10.1101/gad.271445.115.

A gain-of-function senescence bypass screen identifies the homeobox transcription
factor DLX2 as a regulator of ATM-p53 signaling.

Wang Y(1), Xu Q(1), Sack L(1), Kang C(1), Elledge SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard University Medical School, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115 USA.

Senescence stimuli activate multiple tumor suppressor pathways to initiate cycle 
arrest and a differentiation program characteristic of senescent cells. We
performed a two-stage, gain-of-function screen to select for the genes whose
enhanced expression can bypass replicative senescence. We uncovered multiple
genes known to be involved in p53 and Rb regulation and ATM regulation, two
components of the CST (CTC1-STN1-TEN1) complex involved in preventing telomere
erosion, and genes such as REST and FOXO4 that have been implicated in aging.
Among the new genes now implicated in senescence, we identified DLX2, a homeobox 
transcription factor that has been shown to be required for tumor growth and
metastasis and is associated with poor cancer prognosis. Growth analysis showed
that DLX2 expression led to increased cellular replicative life span. Our data
suggest that DLX2 expression reduces the protein components of the TTI1/TTI2/TEL2
complex, a key complex required for the proper folding and stabilization of ATM
and other members of the PIKK (phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related kinase)
family kinase, leading to reduced ATM-p53 signaling and senescence bypass. We
also found that the overexpression of DLX2 exhibited a mutually exclusive
relationship with p53 alterations in cancer patients. Our functional screen
identified novel players that may promote tumorigenesis by regulating the ATM-p53
pathway and senescence.

© 2016 Wang et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4743059 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26833729  [PubMed - in process]


3. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 22;11(1):e0147343. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147343.
eCollection 2016.

Smad2/3-Regulated Expression of DLX2 Is Associated with Radiation-Induced
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition and Radioresistance of A549 and MDA-MB-231
Human Cancer Cell Lines.

Choi YJ(1), Baek GY(1), Park HR(1,)(2), Jo SK(1,)(2), Jung U(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Biotechnology Research Division, Advanced Radiation Technology
Institute, Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI), Jeongeup, Republic of 
Korea. (2)Department of Radiation Biotechnology and Applied Radioisotope,
University of Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

The control of radioresistance and metastatic potential of surviving cancer cells
is important for improving cancer eradication by radiotheraphy. The distal-less
homeobox2 (DLX2) gene encodes for a homeobox transcription factor involved in
morphogenesis and its deregulation was found in human solid tumors and
hematologic malignancies. Here we investigated the role of DLX2 in association
with radiation-induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and stem
cell-like properties and its regulation by Smad2/3 signaling in irradiated A549
and MDA-MB-231 human cancer cell lines. In irradiated A549 and MDA-MB-231 cells, 
EMT was induced as demonstrated by EMT marker expression, phosphorylation of
Smad2/3, and migratory and invasive ability. Also, irradiated A549 and MDA-MB-231
cells showed increased cancer stem cells (CSCs) marker. Interestingly, DLX2 was
overexpressed upon irradiation. Therefore, we examined the role of DLX2 in
radiation-induced EMT and radioresistance. The overexpression of DLX2 alone
induced EMT, migration and invasion, and CSC marker expression. The reduced
colony-forming ability in irradiated cells was partially restored by DLX2
overexpression. On the other hand, the depletion of DLX2 using si-RNA abolished
radiation-induced EMT, CSC marker expression, and phosphorylation of Smad2/3 in
irradiated A549 and MDA-MB-231 cells. Also, depletion of DLX2 increased the
radiation sensitivity in both cell lines. Moreover, knockdown of Smad2/3, a key
activator of TGF-ß1 pathway, abrogated the radiation-induced DLX2 expression,
indicating that radiation-induced DLX2 expression is dependent on Smad2/3
signaling. These results demonstrated that DLX2 plays a crucial role in
radioresistance, radiation-induced EMT and CSC marker expression, and the
expression of DLX2 is regulated by Smad2/3 signaling in A549 and MDA-MB-231 cell 
lines.

PMCID: PMC4723265
PMID: 26799321  [PubMed - in process]


4. Nat Commun. 2016 Jan 22;7:10481. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10481.

LSD1 co-repressor Rcor2 orchestrates neurogenesis in the developing mouse brain.

Wang Y(1), Wu Q(2), Yang P(3), Wang C(1), Liu J(2), Ding W(2), Liu W(2), Bai
Y(2), Yang Y(1), Wang H(1), Gao S(1), Wang X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Translational Research Center of Shanghai First Maternity and
Infant Health Hospital, School of Life Sciences and Technology, Tongji
University, Shanghai 200092, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Brain and
Cognitive Science, CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence
Technology, Beijing MRI Centre for Brain Research, Institute of Biophysics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing Institute for Brain Disorders, 8803, 8th
Building, 15 Datun Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100101, China. (3)National
Institute of Biological Sciences (NIBS), Beijing 102206, China.

Epigenetic regulatory complexes play key roles in the modulation of
transcriptional regulation underlying neural stem cell (NSC) proliferation and
progeny specification. How specific cofactors guide histone demethylase
LSD1/KDM1A complex to regulate distinct NSC-related gene activation and
repression in cortical neurogenesis remains unclear. Here we demonstrate that
Rcor2, a co-repressor of LSD1, is mainly expressed in the central nervous system 
(CNS) and plays a key role in epigenetic regulation of cortical development.
Depletion of Rcor2 results in reduced NPC proliferation, neuron population,
neocortex thickness and brain size. We find that Rcor2 directly targets Dlx2 and 
Shh, and represses their expressions in developing neocortex. In addition,
inhibition of Shh signals rescues the neurogenesis defects caused by Rcor2
depletion both in vivo and in vitro. Hence, our findings suggest that
co-repressor Rcor2 is critical for cortical development by repressing Shh
signalling pathway in dorsal telencephalon.

PMCID: PMC4736047
PMID: 26795843  [PubMed - in process]


5. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Feb 15;25(4):740-54. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv514. Epub 2015 Dec
18.

The apical ectodermal ridge of the mouse model of ectrodactyly Dlx5;Dlx6-/- shows
altered stratification and cell polarity, which are restored by exogenous Wnt5a
ligand.

Conte D(1), Garaffo G(1), Lo Iacono N(2), Mantero S(2), Piccolo S(3), Cordenonsi 
M(3), Perez-Morga D(4), Orecchia V(1), Poli V(1), Merlo GR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of
Torino, Torino, Italy. (2)Human Genome Department, Istituto Tecnologie
Biomediche, CNR Milano, Italy. (3)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of
Padova, Padova, Italy and. (4)Laboratoire de Parasitologie Moléculaire, IBMM-DBM,
Université Libre de Bruxelles, B-6041 Gosselies, Belgium. (5)Department of
Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of Torino, Torino, Italy,
giorgioroberto.merlo@unito.it.

The congenital malformation split hand/foot (SHFM) is characterized by missing
central fingers and dysmorphology or fusion of the remaining ones. Type-1 SHFM is
linked to deletions/rearrangements of the DLX5-DLX6 locus and point mutations in 
the DLX5 gene. The ectrodactyly phenotype is reproduced in mice by the double
knockout (DKO) of Dlx5 and Dlx6. During limb development, the apical ectodermal
ridge (AER) is a key-signaling center responsible for early proximal-distal
growth and patterning. In Dlx5;6 DKO hindlimbs, the central wedge of the AER
loses multilayered organization and shows down-regulation of FGF8 and Dlx2. In
search for the mechanism, we examined the non-canonical Wnt signaling,
considering that Dwnt-5 is a target of distalless in Drosophila and the knockout 
of Wnt5, Ryk, Ror2 and Vangl2 in the mouse causes severe limb malformations. We
found that in Dlx5;6 DKO limbs, the AER expresses lower levels of Wnt5a, shows
scattered ß-catenin responsive cells and altered basolateral and planar cell
polarity (PCP). The addition of Wnt5a to cultured embryonic limbs restored the
expression of AER markers and its stratification. Conversely, the inhibition of
the PCP molecule c-jun N-terminal kinase caused a loss of AER marker expression. 
In vitro, the addition of Wnt5a on mixed primary cultures of embryonic ectoderm
and mesenchyme was able to confer re-polarization. We conclude that the
Dlx-related ectrodactyly defect is associated with the loss of basoapical and
PCP, due to reduced Wnt5a expression and that the restoration of the Wnt5a level 
is sufficient to partially reverts AER misorganization and dysmorphology.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4743692
PMID: 26685160  [PubMed - in process]


6. Histochem Cell Biol. 2016 Feb;145(2):175-84. doi: 10.1007/s00418-015-1380-9. Epub
2015 Nov 4.

HSPC280, a winged helix protein expressed in the subventricular zone of the
developing ganglionic eminences, inhibits neuronal differentiation.

Stylianopoulou E(1), Kalamakis G(1), Pitsiani M(1), Fysekis I(1), Ypsilantis
P(2), Simopoulos C(2), Skavdis G(1), Grigoriou ME(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Democritus University of Thrace,
Building 10, University Campus, Dragana, 68100, Alexandroupolis, Greece.
(2)Laboratory of Experimental Surgery and Surgical Research, School of Medicine, 
Democritus University of Thrace, Alexandroupolis, Greece. (3)Department of
Molecular Biology and Genetics, Democritus University of Thrace, Building 10,
University Campus, Dragana, 68100, Alexandroupolis, Greece. mgrigor@mbg.duth.gr.

Winged helix proteins have critical roles in a variety of developmental
processes. During a screening for genes expressed in the developing forebrain, we
identified HSPC280, a non-typical winged helix protein, which shares similarity
with a protein-protein interaction domain found in the proteins of the
actin-binding Rho-activating protein family. In this work, we analyzed HSPC280
expression during mouse development as well as during neuronal differentiation of
mouse Neuro2a cells. HSPC280 expression is tightly regulated; during mouse
development, it was detected predominantly in the ganglionic eminences of the
ventral telencephalon, from their appearance at E11.5 to P0, with the highest
levels between E13.5 and E15.5, a period that correlates with the peak of
neurogenesis in these structures. Comparative expression analysis of HSPC280 with
Dlx2, cyclinD2 and Lhx6 revealed that, within the ganglionic eminences, HSPC280
was restricted in the proliferating cell population of the subventricular zone,
in a pattern similar to that of cyclinD2. Finally, we showed that HSPC280 is a
nuclear protein which, when overexpressed in Neuro2a cells, it inhibited neuronal
differentiation in vitro, suggesting its involvement in the mechanisms
controlling neural progenitor cells proliferation.

PMID: 26537243  [PubMed - in process]


7. Cell Rep. 2015 Oct 27;13(4):840-53. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.09.037. Epub 2015 
Oct 17.

New Functional Signatures for Understanding Melanoma Biology from Tumor Cell
Lineage-Specific Analysis.

Rambow F(1), Job B(2), Petit V(1), Gesbert F(1), Delmas V(1), Seberg H(3),
Meurice G(2), Van Otterloo E(3), Dessen P(2), Robert C(4), Gautheret D(2),
Cornell RA(3), Sarasin A(5), Larue L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Normal and Pathological Development of Melanocytes, 91405
Orsay, France; Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) UMR3347, 91405
Orsay, France; INSERM U1021, 91405 Orsay, France; Equipe Labellisée - Ligue
Nationale contre le Cancer, 91405 Orsay, France. (2)Plateforme de
Bioinformatique, UMS AMMICA, Gustave-Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA
52242, USA. (4)INSERM U981, Gustave-Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France. (5)Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) UMR8200, Gustave-Roussy and
University Paris-Sud, 94805 Villejuif, France. (6)Institut Curie, Normal and
Pathological Development of Melanocytes, 91405 Orsay, France; Centre National de 
la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) UMR3347, 91405 Orsay, France; INSERM U1021,
91405 Orsay, France; Equipe Labellisée - Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer, 91405 
Orsay, France. Electronic address: lionel.larue@curie.fr.

Molecular signatures specific to particular tumor types are required to design
treatments for resistant tumors. However, it remains unclear whether tumors and
corresponding cell lines used for drug development share such signatures. We
developed similarity core analysis (SCA), a universal and unsupervised
computational framework for extracting core molecular features common to tumors
and cell lines. We applied SCA to mRNA/miRNA expression data from various
sources, comparing melanoma cell lines and metastases. The signature obtained was
associated with phenotypic characteristics in vitro, and the core genes CAPN3 and
TRIM63 were implicated in melanoma cell migration/invasion. About 90% of the
melanoma signature genes belong to an intrinsic network of transcription factors 
governing neural development (TFAP2A, DLX2, ALX1, MITF, PAX3, SOX10, LEF1, and
GAS7) and miRNAs (211-5p, 221-3p, and 10a-5p). The SCA signature effectively
discriminated between two subpopulations of melanoma patients differing in
overall survival, and classified MEKi/BRAFi-resistant and -sensitive melanoma
cell lines.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26489459  [PubMed - in process]


8. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Dec 15;24(24):2943-51. doi: 10.1089/scd.2015.0146. Epub 2015
Oct 28.

Growth-Arrest-Specific 7 Gene Regulates Neural Crest Formation and Craniofacial
Development in Zebrafish.

Hung FC(1), Shih HY(1,)(2), Cheng YC(1,)(2,)(3), Chao CC(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Chang Gung University ,
Taiwan, Republic of China . (2)2 Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
College of Medicine, Chang Gung University , Taiwan, Republic of China . (3)3
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital , Taiwan, Republic of China .

Growth-arrest-specific 7 (Gas7) is preferentially expressed in the nervous system
and plays an important role during neuritogenesis in vertebrates. We recently
demonstrated that gas7 is highly expressed in zebrafish neurons, where it
regulates neural development. The possibility that gas7 may also regulate the
development of other tissues remains to be examined. In this study, we
investigate the role of Gas7 in the development of craniofacial tissues.
Knockdown of gas7 using morpholino oligomers produced abnormal phenotypes in
neural crest (NC) cells and their derivatives. NC-derived cartilage maturation
was altered in Gas7 morphants as revealed by aberrant sox9b and dlx2 expression, 
a phenotype that could be rescued by coinjection of gas7 mRNA. While rhombomere
morphology remained normal in Gas7 morphants, we observed reduced expression of
the prechondrogenic genes sox9b and dlx2 in cells populating the posterior
pharyngeal arches, but the fundamental structure of pharyngeal arches was
preserved. In addition, NC cell sublineages that migrate to form neurons, glial
cells, and melanocytes were altered in Gas7 morphants as revealed by aberrant
expression of neurod, foxd3, and mitfa, respectively. Development of NC
progenitors was also examined in Gas7 morphants at 12<U+2009>hpf, and we observed that
the reduction of cell precursors in Gas7 morphants was due to increased apoptosis
level. These results indicate that the formation of NC progenitors and
derivatives depends on Gas7 expression. Our observations also suggest that Gas7
regulates the formation of NC derivatives constituting the internal tissues of
pharyngeal arches, without affecting the fundamental structure of
mesodermal-derived pharyngeal arches.

PMID: 26414806  [PubMed - in process]


9. Exp Ther Med. 2015 Jun;9(6):2173-2179. Epub 2015 Mar 20.

Effects of DLX2 overexpression on the osteogenic differentiation of MC3T3-E1
cells.

Sun H(1), Liu Z(1), Li B(1), Dai J(1), Wang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Ninth People's Hospital, College
of Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Stomatology, Shanghai 200011, P.R. China.

Distal-less genes (DLX) play important roles in regulating organism development. 
DLX2 is crucial for the differentiation and development of the primordium, which 
determines the subsequent development and phenotype of the maxillofacial skeletal
patterns, and is the primary candidate gene that regulates the development of the
first branchial arch. The aim of the present study was to investigate the effects
of DLX2 overexpression on the osteogenic differentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells in
vitro. A DLX2-expression retrovirus vector was constructed by subcloning with a
murine stem cell virus (MSCV) and verified by sequencing. MC3T3-E1 cells were
transfected with pMSCV-DLX2 and stable clones were selected with puromycin. The
mRNA and protein expression levels of DLX2 were determined using quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and western blot analysis, respectively. In
addition, the expression levels of the osteogenic biomarkers, alkaline
phosphatase (ALP), osteocalcin (OCN), runt-related transcription factor (RUNX)2
and Msh homeobox (MSX)2, were assessed by quantitative PCR. ALP detection and
Alizarin red staining were conducted to evaluate the effect of DLX2
overexpression on osteogenic differentiation. The data were analyzed by analysis 
of variance using the Student-Newman-Keuls method. Successful pMSCV-DLX2
construction, as verified by direct sequencing, enabled DLX2 overexpression in
vitro. Enhanced ALP activity and Alizarin red staining were observed in the
MC3T3-E1-DLX2 cells when compared with the control group. During osteogenic
induction, DLX2 overexpression was demonstrated to upregulate ALP and MSX2
expression at the early stage and OCN expression at the late stage, while no
statistically significant difference was observed in RUNX2 expression when
compared with the control group. Therefore, DLX2 overexpression in vitro induced 
the osteogenic differentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells via upregulating bone
formation-associated genes, such as ALP and MSX2.

PMCID: PMC4473650
PMID: 26136955  [PubMed]


10. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Aug 1;24(15):4340-52. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv167. Epub 2015 May 
7.

DLX4 is associated with orofacial clefting and abnormal jaw development.

Wu D(1), Mandal S(1), Choi A(1), Anderson A(1), Prochazkova M(2), Perry H(3),
Gil-Da-Silva-Lopes VL(4), Lao R(5), Wan E(5), Tang PL(5), Kwok PY(6), Klein O(7),
Zhuan B(8), Slavotinek AM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (2)Division of Craniofacial Anomalies, Department of
Orofacial Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA,
USA, Laboratory of Transgenic Models of Diseases, Institute of Molecular Genetics
of the ASCR, v. v.i., Prague, Czech Republic, Program in Craniofacial Biology,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94114, USA.
(3)Division of Craniofacial Anomalies, Department of Orofacial Sciences,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. (4)Department of
Medical Genetics, University of Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. (5)Cardiovascular
Research Institute, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, USA
and. (6)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, USA and Institute for Human Genetics, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. (7)Department of Pediatrics,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA, Division
of Craniofacial Anomalies, Department of Orofacial Sciences, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA, Institute for Human Genetics, 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA, Program in
Craniofacial Biology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 
94114, USA. (8)Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine, Ministry of Education, School 
and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, China. (9)Department of
Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143,
USA, Institute for Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA, slavotia@ucsf.edu.

Cleft lip and/or palate (CL/P) are common structural birth defects in humans. We 
used exome sequencing to study a patient with bilateral CL/P and identified a
single nucleotide deletion in the patient and her similarly affected
sonc.546_546delG, predicting p.Gln183Argfs*57 in the Distal-less 4 (DLX4) gene. 
The sequence variant was absent from databases, predicted to be deleterious and
was verified by Sanger sequencing. In mammals, there are three Dlx homeobox
clusters with closely located gene pairs (Dlx1/Dlx2, Dlx3/Dlx4, Dlx5/Dlx6). In
situ hybridization showed that Dlx4 was expressed in the mesenchyme of the murine
palatal shelves at E12.5, prior to palate closure. Wild-type human DLX4, but not 
mutant DLX4_c.546delG, could activate two murine Dlx conserved regulatory
elements, implying that the mutation caused haploinsufficiency. We showed that
reduced DLX4 expression after short interfering RNA treatment in a human cell
line resulted in significant up-regulation of DLX3, DLX5 and DLX6, with reduced
expression of DLX2 and significant up-regulation of BMP4, although the increased 
BMP4 expression was demonstrated only in HeLa cells. We used antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides to target the orthologous Danio rerio gene, dlx4b, and found
reduced cranial size and abnormal cartilaginous elements. We sequenced DLX4 in
155 patients with non-syndromic CL/P and CP, but observed no sequence variants.
From the published literature, Dlx1/Dlx2 double homozygous null mice and Dlx5
homozygous null mice both have clefts of the secondary palate. This first finding
of a DLX4 mutation in a family with CL/P establishes DLX4 as a potential cause of
human clefts.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4492397 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25954033  [PubMed - in process]


11. Cell Death Dis. 2015 May 7;6:e1756. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.121.

Neuronal developmental gene and miRNA signatures induced by histone deacetylase
inhibitors in human embryonic stem cells.

Meganathan K(1), Jagtap S(1), Srinivasan SP(1), Wagh V(1), Hescheler J(1),
Hengstler J(2), Leist M(3), Sachinidis A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Neurophysiology and
Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), Robert-Koch-Str. 39, Cologne,
Germany. (2)Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors,
Technical University of Dortmund (IfADo), Dortmund, Germany.
(3)Doerenkamp-Zbinden Chair for In Vitro Toxicology and Biomedicine, University
of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) may be applied to develop human-relevant
sensitive in vitro test systems for monitoring developmental toxicants. The aim
of this study was to identify potential developmental toxicity mechanisms of the 
histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDAC) valproic acid (VPA), suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid (SAHA) and trichostatin A (TSA) relevant to the in vivo condition
using a hESC model in combination with specific differentiation protocols and
genome-wide gene expression and microRNA profiling. Analysis of the gene
expression data showed that VPA repressed neural tube and dorsal forebrain (OTX2,
ISL1, EMX2 and SOX10)-related transcripts. In addition, VPA upregulates
axonogenesis and ventral forebrain-associated genes, such as SLIT1, SEMA3A,
DLX2/4 and GAD2. HDACi-induced expression of miR-378 and knockdown of miR-378
increases the expression of OTX2 and EMX2, which supports our hypothesis that
HDACi targets forebrain markers through miR-378. In conclusion, multilineage
differentiation in vitro test system is very sensitive for monitoring molecular
activities relevant to in vivo neuronal developmental toxicity. Moreover, miR-378
seems to repress the expression of the OTX2 and EMX2 and therefore could be a
regulator of the development of neural tube and dorsal forebrain neurons.

PMCID: PMC4669700
PMID: 25950486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. RNA. 2015 Jun;21(6):1159-72. doi: 10.1261/rna.045559.114. Epub 2015 Apr 22.

Noncoding RNAs that associate with YB-1 alter proliferation in prostate cancer
cells.

Liu TT(1), Arango-Argoty G(1), Li Z(1), Lin Y(1), Kim SW(1), Dueck A(2), Ozsolak 
F(3), Monaghan AP(4), Meister G(2), DeFranco DB(5), John B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational and Systems Biology, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260, USA. (2)University of
Regensburg, Biochemistry I, 93053 Regensburg, Bavaria, Germany. (3)Helicos
BioSciences Corporation, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA. (4)Department of
Neurobiology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15260, USA. (5)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260, USA.

The highly conserved, multifunctional YB-1 is a powerful breast cancer prognostic
indicator. We report on a pervasive role for YB-1 in which it associates with
thousands of nonpolyadenylated short RNAs (shyRNAs) that are further processed
into small RNAs (smyRNAs). Many of these RNAs have previously been identified as 
functional noncoding RNAs (http://www.johnlab.org/YB1). We identified a novel,
abundant, 3'-modified short RNA antisense to Dicer1 (Shad1) that colocalizes with
YB-1 to P-bodies and stress granules. The expression of Shad1 was shown to
correlate with that of YB-1 and whose inhibition leads to an increase in cell
proliferation. Additionally, Shad1 influences the expression of additional
prognostic markers of cancer progression such as DLX2 and IGFBP2. We propose that
the examination of these noncoding RNAs could lead to better understanding of
prostate cancer progression.

© 2015 Liu et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the RNA
Society.

PMCID: PMC4436668 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25904138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Cereb Cortex. 2015 Apr 16. pii: bhv074. [Epub ahead of print]

Extended Production of Cortical Interneurons into the Third Trimester of Human
Gestation.

Arshad A(1), Vose LR(2), Vinukonda G(2), Hu F(1), Yoshikawa K(3), Csiszar A(4),
Brumberg JC(5), Ballabh P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics. (2)Department of Pediatrics Department of Cell
Biology and Anatomy, Regional Neonatal Center, Maria Fareri Children's Hospital
at Westchester Medical Center-New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY, USA.
(3)Institute for Protein Research Osaka University Yamadaoka, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Reynolds Oklahoma Center of Aging,
University of Oklahoma Health Science Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.
(5)Psychology and Biology PhD Programs, The Graduate Center, City University of
New York, New York, NY, USA Department of Psychology, Queens College, City
University of New York, Flushing, NY, USA.

In humans, the developmental origins of interneurons in the third trimester of
pregnancy and the timing of completion of interneuron neurogenesis have remained 
unknown. Here, we show that the total and cycling Nkx2.1(+) and Dlx2(+)
interneuron progenitors as well as Sox2(+) precursor cells were higher in density
in the medial ganglionic eminence (MGE) compared with the lateral ganglionic
eminence and cortical ventricular/subventricular zone (VZ/SVZ) of 16-35 gw
subjects. The proliferation of these progenitors reduced as a function of
gestational age, almost terminating by 35 gw. Proliferating Dlx2(+) cells were
higher in density in the caudal ganglionic eminence (CGE) compared with the MGE, 
and persisted beyond 35 gw. Consistent with these findings, Sox2, Nkx2.1, Dlx2,
and Mash1 protein levels were higher in the ganglionic eminences relative to the 
cortical VZ/SVZ. The density of gamma-aminobutyric acid-positive (GABA(+))
interneurons was higher in the cortical VZ/SVZ relative to MGE, but Nkx2.1 or
Dlx2-expressing GABA(+) cells were more dense in the MGE compared with the
cortical VZ/SVZ. The data suggest that the MGE and CGE are the primary source of 
cortical interneurons. Moreover, their generation continues nearly to the end of 
pregnancy, which may predispose premature infants to neurobehavioral disorders.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25882040  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. J Craniofac Surg. 2015 Mar;26(2):340-2. doi: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000001403.

Biologic characteristics and osteogenic differentiation of maxillary primordium
mesenchymal cells.

Zhao J(1), Wang R.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Stomatology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate the biologic characteristics 
and osteogenic differentiation of mouse maxillary primordium mesenchymal cells
(MPMCs) in vitro.
METHODS: The MPMCs were obtained from the E13.5 mouse embryos and cultured in
vitro. The biologic characteristics were studied based on general observation and
5-Bromo-2-deoxyUridine (BrdU) label. The MPMCs from the first passage were
cultured in the osteogenic medium for 1 week. Then, the immunofluorescence
staining, alkaline phosphatase staining, Alizarin red S staining, and quantity
polymerase chain reaction were used to evaluate the osteogenic capability of
MPMCs.
RESULTS: The E13.5 MPMCs were successfully adherent cultured and passaged in
vitro. These cells expressed Dlx2 and SMAD7, two genes that play important roles 
in the development of maxillary primordium. The percentage of
5-Bromo-2-deoxyUridine-labeled MPMCs was 32.1%. Osteogenic induction could
promote the expression of Runx2, osteocalcin, and osteopontin, 3 osteogenic
markers, in MPMCs. In addition, osteogenic induction could stimulate the
secretion of alkaline phosphatase and promote the deposition of calcium nodules
in MPMCs.
CONCLUSIONS: The MPMCs could be cultured in vitro and could differentiate into
osteoblast in vitro through osteogenic induction. It offered an alternative cell 
source to regenerate craniofacial bone and offered a useful cell model to study
the craniofacial bone development.

PMID: 25675012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Dev Biol. 2015 Feb 15;398(2):280-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.12.003. Epub 2014 
Dec 12.

Ascl1 and Helt act combinatorially to specify thalamic neuronal identity by
repressing Dlxs activation.

Song H(1), Lee B(1), Pyun D(1), Guimera J(2), Son Y(1), Yoon J(1), Baek K(1),
Wurst W(2), Jeong Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, College of Life Sciences and Graduate
School of Biotechnology, Kyung Hee University, Yongin-si 446-701, Republic of
Korea. (2)Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Developmental Genetics, D-85764
Neuherberg, Germany. (3)Department of Genetic Engineering, College of Life
Sciences and Graduate School of Biotechnology, Kyung Hee University, Yongin-si
446-701, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: yongsu@khu.ac.kr.

The mammalian thalamus is an essential diencephalic derivative that plays unique 
roles in processing and relaying sensory and motor information to and from the
cerebral cortex. The profile of transcription factors and lineage tracing
experiments revealed a spatiotemporal relationship between diencephalic
progenitor domains and discrete differentiated neurons contributing to thalamic
nuclei. However, the precise molecular mechanisms by which heterogeneous thalamic
neurons become specified and assemble into distinct thalamic nuclei are still
poorly understood. Here, we show that a combinatorial interaction between the
bHLH transcription factors Ascl1 and Helt is required for acquiring thalamic
progenitor identity. Surprisingly, in the combined absence of Ascl1 and Helt,
rostral thalamic progenitors (TH-R) adopt a molecular profile of a more rostral
diencephalic derivative, the prethalamus. Furthermore, we show that the
prethalamic factors Dlxs upregulated by Ascl1/Helt deficiency play unique roles
in regulating thalamic progenitor specification, and that derepression of Dlx2
and Dlx5 suppress generation of TH-R neurons. Taken together, our results suggest
a model whereby the combined activity of two distinct bHLH factors plays a key
role in the development of discrete classes of thalamic interneurons.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25512300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Neurophysiol. 2015 Feb 15;113(4):1234-48. doi: 10.1152/jn.00594.2014. Epub 2014
Dec 4.

PACAP modulation of calcium ion activity in developing granule cells of the
neonatal mouse olfactory bulb.

Irwin M(1), Greig A(1), Tvrdik P(2), Lucero MT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, Utah; (2)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah School of
Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah; Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program,
University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah; and. (3)Department
of Physiology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah;
Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah; and Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, American
University of the Caribbean, Cupecoy, Sint Maarten, Netherlands Antilles
mlucero@aucmed.edu.

Ca(2+) activity in the CNS is critical for the establishment of developing
neuronal circuitry prior to and during early sensory input. In developing
olfactory bulb (OB), the neuromodulators that enhance network activity are
largely unknown. Here we provide evidence that pituitary adenylate
cyclase-activating peptide (PACAP)-specific PAC1 receptors (PAC1Rs) expressed in 
postnatal day (P)2-P5 mouse OB are functional and enhance network activity as
measured by increases in calcium in genetically identified granule cells (GCs).
We used confocal Ca(2+) imaging of OB slices from Dlx2-tdTomato mice to visualize
GABAergic GCs. To address whether the PACAP-induced Ca(2+) oscillations were
direct or indirect effects of PAC1R activation, we used antagonists for the GABA 
receptors (GABARs) and/or glutamate receptors (GluRs) in the presence and absence
of PACAP. Combined block of GABARs and GluRs yielded a 66% decrease in the
numbers of PACAP-responsive cells, suggesting that 34% of OB neurons are directly
activated by PACAP. Similarly, immunocytochemistry using anti-PAC1 antibody
showed that 34% of OB neurons express PAC1R. Blocking either GluRs or GABARs
alone indirectly showed that PACAP stimulates release of both glutamate and GABA,
which activate GCs. The appearance of PACAP-induced Ca(2+) activity in immature
GCs suggests a role for PACAP in GC maturation. To conclude, we find that PACAP
has both direct and indirect effects on neonatal OB GABAergic cells and may
enhance network activity by promoting glutamate and GABA release. Furthermore,
the numbers of PACAP-responsive GCs significantly increased between P2 and P5,
suggesting that PACAP-induced Ca(2+) activity contributes to neonatal OB
development.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4329444
PMID: 25475351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Arch Oral Biol. 2015 Feb;60(2):223-8. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2014.10.002.
Epub 2014 Oct 22.

DLX1 and MMP3 contribute to oral clefts with and without positive family history 
of cancer.

Sabóia TM(1), Reis MF(2), Martins ÂM(3), Romanos HF(1), Tannure PN(4), Granjeiro 
JM(5), Vieira AR(6), Antunes LS(7), Küchler EC(8), Costa MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry and Orthodontics, School of Dentistry,
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil. (2)Unit of Clinical Research,
Fluminense Federal University, Niterói, RJ, Brazil. (3)Department of Specific
Formation, School of Dentistry, Fluminense Federal University, Nova Friburgo, RJ,
Brazil. (4)Discipline of Pediatric Dentistry, School of Dentistry, Veiga de
Almeida University, RJ, Brazil. (5)Unit of Clinical Research, Fluminense Federal 
University, Niterói, RJ, Brazil; Bioengineering Program, National Institute of
Metrology, Quality and Technology (INMETRO), Duque de Caxias, RJ, Brazil.
(6)Department of Oral Biology and Center for Craniofacial and Dental Genetics,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; Department of Pediatric Dentistry,
School of Dental Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA;
Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Public Health, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; Clinical and Translational Science Institute,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (7)Unit of Clinical Research,
Fluminense Federal University, Niterói, RJ, Brazil; Department of Specific
Formation, School of Dentistry, Fluminense Federal University, Nova Friburgo, RJ,
Brazil. Electronic address: leonardoantunes@id.uff.br. (8)Department of Oral
Biology and Center for Craniofacial and Dental Genetics, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: It has been suggested that oral clefts and cancer share a common
genetic background. This study aimed to investigate the epidemiological and
molecular association between oral clefts and cancer.
METHODS: One hundred forty-eight nuclear families with oral clefts and 162
subjects with no birth defect were recruited. Data on self-reported family
history of cancer among first, second, and third degree relatives of each patient
were collected via a structured questionnaire. We also investigated the
association between polymorphisms in the genes AXIN2, BMP2, BMP4, BMP7, DLX1,
DLX2, and MMP3 and oral cleft with and without history of cancer. Markers in
these genes were genotyped using real time PCR. Chi-square and t-test were used
to assess the differences about self-reported family history of cancer between
oral cleft and non-cleft individuals. The transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) 
was used to analyze the distortion of the inheritance of alleles from parents to 
their affected offspring.
RESULTS: Families with oral clefts had an increased risk of having a family
history of cancer (p=0.01; odds ratio=1.79; 95% confidence interval, 1.07-1.87). 
TDT results showed an association between DLX1 and cleft lip and palate, in which
the A allele was undertransmited (p=0.022). For MMP3, G was undertransmited among
affected progeny (p=0.019) in cleft palate subgroup.
CONCLUSION: Oral clefts were associated with positive self-reported family
history of cancer and with variants in DLX1 and MMP3. The association between
oral clefts and cancer raises interesting possibilities to identify risk markers 
for cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25463899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Cell Biochem. 2015 May;116(5):730-42. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25026.

miR-124 negatively regulates osteogenic differentiation and in vivo bone
formation of mesenchymal stem cells.

Qadir AS(1), Um S, Lee H, Baek K, Seo BM, Lee G, Kim GS, Woo KM, Ryoo HM, Baek
JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, School of Dentistry and Dental Research
Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, 110-744, Korea.

MicroRNAs are novel key regulators of cellular differentiation. Dlx transcription
factors play an important role in osteoblast differentiation, and Dlx5 and Dlx2
are known targets of miR-124. Therefore, in the present study, we investigated
the regulatory effects of miR-124 on the osteogenic differentiation and in vivo
bone formation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). During osteogenic induction by
BMP2, the expression levels of miR-124 were inversely correlated with those of
osteogenic differentiation marker genes in human and mouse bone marrow-derived
MSCs, MC3T3-E1 cells and C2C12 cells. The overexpression of a miR-124 mimic
significantly decreased the expression levels of Dlx5, Dlx3, and Dlx2, whereas
the silencing of miR-124 with hairpin inhibitors significantly increased the
expression of these Dlx genes. Luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that
miR-124 directly targets the 3'UTRs of Dlx3, Dlx5, and Dlx2. The overexpression
of a miR-124 mimic suppressed the osteogenic marker gene expression levels,
alkaline phosphatase activity and matrix mineralization, which were all
significantly increased by the overexpression of a miR-124 inhibitor. When
ectopic bone formation was induced by the subcutaneous transplantation of human
bone marrow-derived MSCs in nude mice, MSCs overexpressing a miR-124 inhibitor
significantly enhanced woven bone formation compared with control MSCs. However, 
MSCs overexpressing a miR-124 mimic exhibited increased adipocyte differentiation
at the expense of ectopic bone formation. These results suggest that miR-124 is a
negative regulator of osteogenic differentiation and in vivo bone formation and
that the targeting of Dlx5, Dlx3, and Dlx2 genes partly contributes to this
inhibitory effect exerted by miR-124.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25424317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Dent Res. 2015 Jan;94(1):101-11. doi: 10.1177/0022034514556815. Epub 2014 Nov
14.

Early dental epithelial transcription factors distinguish ameloblastoma from
keratocystic odontogenic tumor.

Heikinheimo K(1), Kurppa KJ(2), Laiho A(3), Peltonen S(4), Berdal A(5), Bouattour
A(6), Ruhin B(7), Catón J(8), Thesleff I(9), Leivo I(10), Morgan PR(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Institute of Dentistry,
University of Turku, Turku, Finland Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland
Department of Oral Diagnostic Sciences, Institute of Dentistry, University of
Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Diseases,
Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland krihei@utu.fi. (2)Department of
Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland Turku
Doctoral Programme of Molecular Medicine, Turku, Finland. (3)Microarray and
Sequencing Centre, Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku, Turku,
Finland Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland. (4)Turku University Hospital,
Turku, Finland Department of Dermatology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(5)Molecular Oral Pathophysiology, INSERM UMRS 872, Cordeliers Biomedical
Institute, Paris 7 University, Paris, France. (6)Department of Maxillofacial
Surgery and Stomatology, André Grégoire Hospital, Paris, France. (7)Molecular
Oral Pathophysiology, INSERM UMRS 872, Cordeliers Biomedical Institute, Paris 7
University, Paris, France Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris,
Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Department of Maxillofacial Surgery and Stomatology, 
Paris, France. (8)Head and Neck/Oral Pathology, Dental Institute, King's College 
London, London, UK. (9)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland. (10)Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland Department of
Pathology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.

The aim of the study was to characterize the molecular relationship between
ameloblastoma and keratocystic odontogenic tumor (KCOT) by means of a genome-wide
expression analysis. Total RNA from 27 fresh tumor samples of 15
solid/multicystic intraosseous ameloblastomas and 12 sporadic KCOTs was
hybridized on Affymetrix whole genome arrays. Hierarchical clustering separated
ameloblastomas and KCOTs into 2 distinct groups. The gene set enrichment analysis
based on 303 dental genes showed a similar separation of ameloblastomas and
KCOTs. Early dental epithelial markers PITX2, MSX2, DLX2, RUNX1, and ISL1 were
differentially overexpressed in ameloblastoma, indicating its dental identity.
Also, PTHLH, a hormone involved in tooth eruption and invasive growth, was one of
the most differentially upregulated genes in ameloblastoma. The most
differentially overexpressed genes in KCOT were squamous epithelial
differentiation markers SPRR1A, KRTDAP, and KRT4, as well as DSG1, a component of
desmosomal cell-cell junctions. Additonally, the epithelial stem cell marker SOX2
was significantly upregulated in KCOT when compared with ameloblastoma. Taken
together, the gene expression profile of ameloblastoma reflects differentiation
from dental lamina toward the cap/bell stage of tooth development, as indicated
by dental epithelium-specific transcription factors. In contrast, gene expression
of KCOT indicates differentiation toward keratinocytes.

© International & American Associations for Dental Research 2014.

PMID: 25398365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Neuron. 2014 Oct 22;84(2):311-23. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.10.016. Epub 2014
Oct 22.

Generation of human striatal neurons by microRNA-dependent direct conversion of
fibroblasts.

Victor MB(1), Richner M(2), Hermanstyne TO(3), Ransdell JL(3), Sobieski C(4),
Deng PY(5), Klyachko VA(5), Nerbonne JM(3), Yoo AS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine,
Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA; Program in Neuroscience, Washington University School
of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA. (2)Department of Developmental Biology, 
Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(3)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine,
Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA; Center for Cardiovascular Research, Washington
University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA. (4)Program in
Neuroscience, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110,
USA; Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint
Louis, MO 63110, USA. (5)Departments of Biomedical Engineering and Cell Biology
and Physiology, CIMED, Washington University, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(6)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine,
Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic address: yooa@wustl.edu.

The promise of using reprogrammed human neurons for disease modeling and
regenerative medicine relies on the ability to induce patient-derived neurons
with high efficiency and subtype specificity. We have previously shown that
ectopic expression of brain-enriched microRNAs (miRNAs), miR-9/9* and miR-124
(miR-9/9*-124), promoted direct conversion of human fibroblasts into neurons.
Here we show that coexpression of miR-9/9*-124 with transcription factors
enriched in the developing striatum, BCL11B (also known as CTIP2), DLX1, DLX2,
and MYT1L, can guide the conversion of human postnatal and adult fibroblasts into
an enriched population of neurons analogous to striatal medium spiny neurons
(MSNs). When transplanted in the mouse brain, the reprogrammed human cells
persisted in situ for over 6 months, exhibited membrane properties equivalent to 
native MSNs, and extended projections to the anatomical targets of MSNs. These
findings highlight the potential of exploiting the synergism between miR-9/9*-124
and transcription factors to generate specific neuronal subtypes.

PMCID: PMC4223654
PMID: 25374357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Neurosci. 2014 Sep 10;34(37):12560-7. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3159-13.2014.

The Ink4a/Arf locus is a barrier to direct neuronal transdifferentiation.

Price JD(1), Park KY(2), Chen J(3), Salinas RD(2), Cho MJ(2), Kriegstein AR(3),
Lim DA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research,
Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Graduate Program, Department of Neurological 
Surgery. (2)Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell
Research, Department of Neurological Surgery. (3)Eli and Edythe Broad Center of
Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, Department of Neurology, and.
(4)Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research,
Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Graduate Program, Department of Neurological 
Surgery, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143 Limd@neurosurg.ucsf.edu.

Comment in
    Regen Med. 2015;10(2):103-4.

Non-neurogenic cell types, such as cortical astroglia and fibroblasts, can be
directly converted into neurons by the overexpression of defined transcription
factors. Normally, the cellular phenotype of such differentiated cells is
remarkably stable and resists direct cell transdifferentiation. Here we show that
the Ink4a/Arf (also known as Cdkn2a) locus is a developmental barrier to direct
neuronal transdifferentiation induced by transcription factor overexpression.
With serial passage in vitro, wild-type postnatal cortical astroglia become
progressively resistant to Dlx2-induced neuronal transdifferentiation. In
contrast, the neurogenic competence of Ink4a/Arf-deficient astroglia is both
greatly increased and does not diminish through serial cell culture passage.
Electrophysiological analysis further demonstrates the neuronal identity of cells
induced from Ink4a/Arf-null astroglia, and short hairpin RNA-mediated acute
knockdown of p16Ink4a and p19Arf p16(Ink4a) and p19(Arf) indicates that these
gene products function postnatally as a barrier to cellular transdifferentiation.
Finally, we found that mouse fibroblasts deficient for Ink4a/Arf also exhibit
greatly enhanced transcription factor-induced neuronal induction. These data
indicate that Ink4a/Arf is a potent barrier to direct neuronal
transdifferentiation and further suggest that this locus functions normally in
the progressive developmental restriction of postnatal astrocytes.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/3412560-08$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4160784
PMID: 25209293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Cell Rep. 2014 Sep 11;8(5):1290-9. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.07.060. Epub 2014
Aug 28.

Activation of neuronal gene expression by the JMJD3 demethylase is required for
postnatal and adult brain neurogenesis.

Park DH(1), Hong SJ(2), Salinas RD(2), Liu SJ(2), Sun SW(1), Sgualdino J(3),
Testa G(3), Matzuk MM(4), Iwamori N(5), Lim DA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration
Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Veterans Affairs Medical Center, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (2)Department of
Neurological Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 
94143, USA; Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell
Research, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. 
(3)European Institute of Oncology (IEO), IFOM-IEO Campus, Via Adamello 16, 20139 
Milan, Italy. (4)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Molecular Human
Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of
Pharmacology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Center for
Reproductive Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Center
for Drug Discovery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
TX 77030, USA; Center for Reproductive Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Center of Biomedical Research, Research Center for Human 
Disease Modeling, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka
812-8582, Japan. (6)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Eli and Edythe Broad Center of
Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. Electronic
address: limd@neurosurg.ucsf.edu.

The epigenetic mechanisms that enable lifelong neurogenesis from neural stem
cells (NSCs) in the adult mammalian brain are poorly understood. Here, we show
that JMJD3, a histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27) demethylase, acts as a critical
activator of neurogenesis from adult subventricular zone (SVZ) NSCs. JMJD3 is
upregulated in neuroblasts, and Jmjd3 deletion targeted to SVZ NSCs in both
developing and adult mice impairs neuronal differentiation. JMJD3 regulates
neurogenic gene expression via interaction at not only promoter regions but also 
neurogenic enhancer elements. JMJD3 localizes at neural enhancers genome-wide in 
embryonic brain, and in SVZ NSCs, JMJD3 regulates the I12b enhancer of Dlx2. In
Jmjd3-deleted SVZ cells, I12b remains enriched with H3K27me3 and Dlx2-dependent
neurogenesis fails. These findings support a model in which JMJD3 and the poised 
state of key transcriptional regulatory elements comprise an epigenetic mechanism
that enables the activation of neurogenic gene expression in adult NSCs
throughout life.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4201382
PMID: 25176653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 12;9(8):e103696. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103696.
eCollection 2014.

Fgfr1 inactivation in the mouse telencephalon results in impaired maturation of
interneurons expressing parvalbumin.

Smith KM(1), Maragnoli ME(1), Phull PM(1), Tran KM(1), Choubey L(2), Vaccarino
FM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Child Study Center, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of 
America. (2)Department of Biology, University of Louisiana at Lafayette,
Lafayette, Louisiana, United States of America. (3)Child Study Center, Yale
University, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America; Department of
Neurobiology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America; 
Kavli Institute for Neuroscience, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, United
States of America.

Fibroblast growth factors (Fgfs) and their receptors (Fgfr) are expressed in the 
developing and adult CNS. Previous studies demonstrated a decrease in cortical
interneurons and locomotor hyperactivity in mice with a conditional Fgfr1
deletion generated in radial glial cells during midneurogenesis
(Fgfr1(f/f);hGfapCre+). Here, we report earlier and more extensive inactivation
of Fgfr1 in neuroepithelial cells of the CNS (Fgfr1(f/f);NesCre+). Similar to
findings in Fgfr1(f/f);hGfapCre+ mice, parvalbumin positive (PV+) cortical
interneurons are also decreased in the neocortex of Fgfr1(f/f);NesCre+ mice when 
compared to control littermates (Fgfr1(f/f)). Fgfr1(f/f);NesCre+ embryos do not
differ from controls in the initial specification of GABAergic cells in the
ganglionic eminence (GE) as assessed by in situ hybridization for Dlx2, Mash1 and
Nkx2. Equal numbers of GABAergic neuron precursors genetically labeled with green
fluorescent protein (GFP) were observed at P0 in Fgfr1(f/f);hGfapCre+;Gad1-GFP
mutant mice. However, fewer GFP+ and GFP+/PV+ interneurons were observed in these
mutants at adulthood, indicating that a decrease in cortical interneuron markers 
is occurring postnatally. Fgfr1 is expressed in cortical astrocytes in the
postnatal brain. To test whether the astrocytes of mice lacking Fgfr1 are less
capable of supporting interneurons, we co-cultured wild type Gad1-GFP+
interneuron precursors isolated from the medial GE (MGE) with astrocytes from
Fgfr1(f/f) control or Fgfr1(f/f);hGfapCre+ mice. Interneurons grown on Fgfr1
deficient astrocytes had small soma size and fewer neurites per cell, but no
differences in cell survival. Decreased soma size of Gad67 immunopositive
interneurons was also observed in the cortex of adult Fgfr1(f/f);NesCre+ mice.
Our data indicate that astrocytes from Fgfr1 mutants are impaired in supporting
the maturation of cortical GABAergic neurons in the postnatal period. This model 
may elucidate potential mechanisms of impaired PV interneuron maturation relevant
to neuropsychiatric disorders that develop in childhood and adolescence.

PMCID: PMC4130531
PMID: 25116473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Brain Struct Funct. 2015 Sep;220(5):2905-26. doi: 10.1007/s00429-014-0834-5. Epub
2014 Jul 31.

Tangential migratory pathways of subpallial origin in the embryonic telencephalon
of sharks: evolutionary implications.

Quintana-Urzainqui I(1), Rodríguez-Moldes I, Mazan S, Candal E.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Celular y Ecología, Edificio CIBUS, Campus Vida,
University of Santiago de Compostela, 15782, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

Tangential neuronal migration occurs along different axes from the axis
demarcated by radial glia and it is thought to have evolved as a mechanism to
increase the diversity of cell types in brain areas, which in turn resulted in
increased complexity of functional networks. In the telencephalon of amniotes,
different embryonic tangential pathways have been characterized. However, little 
is known about the exact routes of migrations in basal vertebrates. Cartilaginous
fishes occupy a key phylogenetic position to assess the ancestral condition of
vertebrate brain organization. In order to identify putative subpallial-derived
tangential migratory pathways in the telencephalon of sharks, we performed a
detailed analysis of the distribution pattern of GAD and Dlx2, two reliable
markers of tangentially migrating interneurons of subpallial origin in the
developing forebrain. We propose the existence of five tangential routes directed
toward different telencephalic regions. We conclude that four of the five routes 
might have emerged in the common ancestor of jawed vertebrates. We have paid
special attention to the characterization of the proposed migratory pathway
directed towards the olfactory bulbs. Our results suggest that it may be
equivalent to the "rostral migratory stream" of mammals and led us to propose a
hypothesis about its evolution. The analysis of the final destinations of two
other streams allowed us to identify the putative dorsal and medial pallium of
sharks, the regions from which the neocortex and hippocampus might have,
respectively, evolved. Derived features were also reported and served to explain 
some distinctive traits in the morphology of the telencephalon of cartilaginous
fishes.

PMID: 25079345  [PubMed - in process]


25. Neural Dev. 2014 Jun 15;9:14. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-9-14.

Transcriptional control of GABAergic neuronal subtype identity in the thalamus.

Sellers K, Zyka V, Lumsden AG, Delogu A(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, London SE1
1UL, UK. alessio.delogu@kcl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: The thalamus is often defined as the 'gateway to consciousness', a
feature that is supported by the specific connectivity and electrophysiological
properties of its neurons. Inhibitory GABAergic neurons are required for the
dynamic gating of information passing through the thalamus. The high degree of
heterogeneity among thalamic GABA neurons suggests that, during embryonic
development, alternative differentiation programmes exist to guide the
acquisition of inhibitory neuron subtype identity.
RESULTS: Taking advantage of the accessibility of the developing chick embryo, we
have used in ovo manipulations of gene expression to test the role of candidate
transcription factors in controlling GABAergic neuronal subtype identity in the
developing thalamus.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we describe two alternative differentiation
programmes for GABAergic neurogenesis in the thalamus and identify Helt and Dlx2 
as key transcription factors that are sufficient to direct neuronal progenitors
along a specific differentiation pathway at the expense of alternative lineage
choices. Furthermore, we identify Calb2, a gene encoding for the GABA subtype
marker calretinin as a target of the transcription factor Sox14. This work is a
step forward in our understanding of how GABA neuron diversity in the thalamus is
achieved during development and will help future investigation of the molecular
mechanisms that lead up to the acquisition of different synaptic targets and
electrophysiological features of mature thalamic inhibitory neurons.

PMCID: PMC4065548
PMID: 24929424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. PLoS One. 2014 May 9;9(5):e96938. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096938. eCollection 
2014.

Interactions between BMP-7 and USAG-1 (uterine sensitization-associated gene-1)
regulate supernumerary organ formations.

Kiso H(1), Takahashi K(1), Saito K(1), Togo Y(1), Tsukamoto H(1), Huang B(2),
Sugai M(3), Shimizu A(4), Tabata Y(5), Economides AN(6), Slavkin HC(7), Bessho
K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto University, Shogoin-Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan. (2)Department of 
Paediatric Dentistry, School of Medicine and Dentistry, James Cook University,
Cairns, Australia. (3)Translational Research Center, Kyoto University Hospital,
Shogoin-Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan. (4)Laboratory of Host Defense,
World Premier International Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka, Japan. (5)Department of Biomaterials, Institute for
Frontier Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. (6)Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals, Tarrytown, New York, United States of America. (7)Center for
Craniofacial Molecular Biology, Division of Biomedical Sciences, Ostrow School of
Dentistry, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United
States of America.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are highly conserved signaling molecules that 
are part of the transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta superfamily, and function
in the patterning and morphogenesis of many organs including development of the
dentition. The functions of the BMPs are controlled by certain classes of
molecules that are recognized as BMP antagonists that inhibit BMP binding to
their cognate receptors. In this study we tested the hypothesis that USAG-1
(uterine sensitization-associated gene-1) suppresses deciduous incisors by
inhibition of BMP-7 function. We learned that USAG-1 and BMP-7 were expressed
within odontogenic epithelium as well as mesenchyme during the late bud and early
cap stages of tooth development. USAG-1 is a BMP antagonist, and also modulates
Wnt signaling. USAG-1 abrogation rescued apoptotic elimination of odontogenic
mesenchymal cells. BMP signaling in the rudimentary maxillary incisor, assessed
by expressions of Msx1 and Dlx2 and the phosphorylation of Smad protein, was
significantly enhanced. Using explant culture and subsequent subrenal capsule
transplantation of E15 USAG-1 mutant maxillary incisor tooth primordia
supplemented with BMP-7 demonstrated in USAG-1+/- as well as USAG-1-/- rescue and
supernumerary tooth development. Based upon these results, we conclude that
USAG-1 functions as an antagonist of BMP-7 in this model system. These results
further suggest that the phenotypes of USAG-1 and BMP-7 mutant mice reported
provide opportunities for regenerative medicine and dentistry.

PMCID: PMC4016158
PMID: 24816837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Dev Biol. 2014 Jul 15;391(2):170-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.04.013. Epub 2014 
Apr 28.

Directed Bmp4 expression in neural crest cells generates a genetic model for the 
rare human bony syngnathia birth defect.

He F(1), Hu X(2), Xiong W(3), Li L(3), Lin L(4), Shen B(2), Yang L(5), Gu S(3),
Zhang Y(2), Chen Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA. (2)South China Center for Biomedical Research,
Fujian Key Laboratory of Developmental and Neuro Biology, College of Life
Science, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, Fujian Province, PR China.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans, 
LA 70118, USA. (4)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, The First
Affiliated Hospital, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou 350005, Fujian Province,
PR China. (5)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New
Orleans, LA 70118, USA; Guanghua School of Stomatology, Sun Yat-Sen University,
Guangzhou 510055, Guangdong Province, PR China. (6)South China Center for
Biomedical Research, Fujian Key Laboratory of Developmental and Neuro Biology,
College of Life Science, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, Fujian Province, PR
China; Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New
Orleans, LA 70118, USA. Electronic address: ychen@tulane.edu.

Congenital bony syngnathia, a rare but severe human birth defect, is
characterized by bony fusion of the mandible to the maxilla. However, the genetic
mechanisms underlying this birth defect are poorly understood, largely due to
limitation of available animal models. Here we present evidence that transgenic
expression of Bmp4 in neural crest cells causes a series of craniofacial
malformations in mice, including a bony fusion between the maxilla and
hypoplastic mandible, resembling the bony syngnathia syndrome in humans. In
addition, the anterior portion of the palatal shelves emerged from the mandibular
arch instead of the maxilla in the mutants. Gene expression assays showed an
altered expression of several facial patterning genes, including Hand2, Dlx2,
Msx1, Barx1, Foxc2 and Fgf8, in the maxillary and mandibular processes of the
mutants, indicating mis-patterned cranial neural crest (CNC) derived cells in the
facial region. However, despite of formation of cleft palate and ectopic
cartilage, forced expression of a constitutively active form of BMP receptor-Ia
(caBmprIa) in CNC lineage did not produce the syngnathia phenotype, suggesting a 
non-cell autonomous effect of the augmented BMP4 signaling. Our studies
demonstrate that aberrant BMP4-mediated signaling in CNC cells leads to
mis-patterned facial skeleton and congenital bony syngnathia, and suggest an
implication of mutations in BMP signaling pathway in human bony syngnathia.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4089042
PMID: 24785830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cell Tissue Res. 2014 Jul;357(1):133-43. doi: 10.1007/s00441-014-1833-9. Epub
2014 Apr 23.

Distal-less homeobox 2 promotes the osteogenic differentiation potential of stem 
cells from apical papilla.

Qu B(1), Liu O, Fang X, Zhang H, Wang Y, Quan H, Zhang J, Zhou J, Zuo J, Tang J, 
Tang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Xiangya Stomatology Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 410078,
China.

Dental tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are a reliable cell source
for dental tissue regeneration. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the 
directed differentiation of MSCs remain unclear; thus, their use is limited. The 
histone demethylase, lysine (K)-specific demethylase 4B (KDM4B), plays critical
roles in the osteogenic commitment of MSCs by up-regulating distal-less homeobox 
2 (DLX2) expression. The DLX2 gene is highly expressed in dental tissue-derived
MSCs but the roles of DLX2 in osteogenesis are unclear. Here, we investigate DLX2
function in stem cells from apical papilla (SCAPs). We found that, in vitro, DLX2
expression was up-regulated in SCAPs by adding BMP4 and by inducing osteogenesis.
The knock-down of DLX2 in SCAPs decreased alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and
mineralization. DLX2 depletion affected the mRNA expression of ALP, bone
sialoprotein (BSP) and osteocalcin (OCN) and inhibited SCAP osteogenic
differentiation in vitro. Over-expression of DLX2 enhanced ALP activity,
mineralization and the expression of ALP, BSP and OCN in vitro. In addition,
transplant experiments in nude mice confirmed that SCAP osteogenesis was
triggered when DLX2 was activated. Furthermore, DLX2 expression led to the
expression of the key transcription factor, osterix (OSX) but not to the
expression of runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2). Taken together, these 
results indicate that DLX2 is stimulated by BMP signaling and enhances SCAP
osteogenic differentiation by up-regulating OSX. Thus, the activation of DLX2
signaling might improve tissue regeneration mediated by MSCs of dental origin.
These results provide insight into the mechanism underlying the directed
differentiation of MSCs of dental origin.

PMID: 24756434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Neuroscience. 2014 Jun 13;270:148-57. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.04.009.
Epub 2014 Apr 13.

Prenatal betamethasone does not affect glutamatergic or GABAergic neurogenesis in
preterm newborns.

Vose LR(1), Vinukonda G(1), Diamond D(1), Korumilli R(1), Hu F(1), Zia MT(1),
Hevner R(2), Ballabh P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, New York Medical College-Westchester Medical Center,
Valhalla, NY, United States. (2)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, United States. (3)Department of Pediatrics, New York
Medical College-Westchester Medical Center, Valhalla, NY, United States;
Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, New York Medical College-Westchester
Medical Center, Valhalla, NY, United States. Electronic address:
pballabh@msn.com.

Prenatal glucocorticoids (GCs) are routinely used for pregnant women in preterm
labor to prevent respiratory distress syndrome and intraventricular hemorrhage in
premature infants. However, the effect of antenatal GCs on neurogenesis in
preterm neonates remains elusive. Herein, we hypothesized that prenatal GCs might
suppress both glutamatergic and GABAergic neurogenesis in preterm rabbits and
that this treatment would induce distinct changes in the expression of
transcription factors regulating these developmental events. To test our
hypotheses, we treated pregnant rabbits with betamethasone at E27 and E28,
delivered the pups at E29 (term=32d), and assessed neurogenesis at birth and
postnatal day 3. We quantified radial glia (Sox2(+)) and intermediate progenitor 
cells (Tbr2(+)) in the dorsal cortical subventricular zone to assess
glutamatergic neuronal progenitors, and counted Nkx2.1(+) and Dlx2(+) cells in
the ganglionic eminence to evaluate GABAergic neurogenesis. In addition, we
assayed transcription factors regulating neurogenesis. We found that prenatal GCs
did not affect the densities of radial glia and intermediate progenitors of
glutamatergic or GABAergic neurons. The number of GABA(+) interneurons in the
ganglionic eminence was similar between the prenatal GC-treated pups compared to 
untreated controls. Moreover, the mRNA expression of transcription factors,
including Pax6, Ngn1/2, Emx1/2, Insm1, Dlx1, Nkx2.1, and Gsh2, were comparable
between the two groups. However, there was a transient elevation in Mash1 protein
in betamethasone-treated pups relative to controls at birth. These data suggest
that prenatal GC treatment does not significantly impact the balance of
glutamatergic and GABAergic neurogenesis in premature infants.

Copyright © 2014 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4044920
PMID: 24735821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Front Neuroanat. 2014 Jan 16;7:54. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2013.00054. eCollection
2013.

Organization of the human fetal subpallium.

Pauly MC(1), Döbrössy MD(2), Nikkhah G(3), Winkler C(4), Piroth T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University Freiburg - Medical Center Freiburg,
Germany ; Department of Stereotactic and Functional Neurosurgery, University
Freiburg - Medical Center Freiburg, Germany. (2)Department of Stereotactic and
Functional Neurosurgery, University Freiburg - Medical Center Freiburg, Germany. 
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, University Clinic Erlangen Erlangen, Germany.
(4)Department of Neurology, University Freiburg - Medical Center Freiburg,
Germany ; Department of Neurology, Lindenbrunn Hospital Coppenbrügge, Germany.
(5)Department of Neurology, University Freiburg - Medical Center Freiburg,
Germany.

The subpallium comprises large parts of the basal ganglia including striatum and 
globus pallidus. Genes and factors involved in the development of the subpallium 
have been extensively studied in most vertebrates, including amphibians, birds,
and rodents. However, our knowledge on patterning of the human subpallium remains
insufficient. Using double fluorescent immunohistochemistry, we investigated the 
protein distribution of transcription factors involved in patterning of the
subventricular zone (SVZ) in the human forebrain at late embryonic development.
Furthermore, we compared the development of cortical and striatal precursors
between human fetal brain and E14 and E16 fetal rat brains. Our results reveal
that DLX2 marks SVZ precursors in the entire subpallium. Individual subpallial
subdomains can be identified based on co-expression of DLX2 with either PAX6 or
NKX2-1. SVZ precursors in the dorsal LGE and preopto-hypothalamic boundary are
characterized by DLX2/PAX6 co-expression, while precursors in the MGE and
preoptic region co-express DLX2/NKX2-1. SVZ precursors in the ventral LGE are
DLX2(+)/PAX6(-)/NKX2-1(-). In terms of staging comparisons, the development of
the corpus striatum in the human fetal brain during late embryonic stages
corresponds well with the development of the striatum observed in E14 fetal rat
brains. Our study demonstrates that the pattern underlying the development of the
subpallium is highly conserved between rodents and humans and suggests a similar 
function for these factors in human brain development. Moreover, our data
directly influence the application of ganglionic eminence derived human tissue
for cell therapeutic approaches in neurodegenerative disorders such as
Huntington's disease.

PMCID: PMC3893616
PMID: 24474906  [PubMed]


31. Yi Chuan. 2013 Oct;35(10):1198-208.

[Comparative analysis of conservation and regulatory network on core
transcription factors in mouse inner ear development].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen ZQ(1), Han XH(2), Wei QJ(2), Xing GQ(3), Cao X(2).

Author information: 
(1)The First Clinical Medical College, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing
210029, China. erwin_0108@sina.com (2)School of Basic Medicine, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, China. (3)The First Clinical Medical College, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China.

During vertebrate inner ear development, several core genes, such as Six1, Six4, 
Pax2, Pax8, Foxi1, Dlx5, Gbx2, Irx2/3, and Msx1, are crucial to the regulation of
the otic placode induction. In order to get the gene regulatory network during
inner ear development, bioinformatics methods were adopted to analyze
conservation and regulation of the core transcription factors in mice. Pax2,
Pax8, Foxi1, and Dlx5 remained to be the main regulators during inner ear
development, which was consistent with the gene regulatory network from
literature. Six1 was regulated by many transcription factors, and Gbx2, Irx2/3,
and Msx1 played important roles in the regulatory network. The differences in the
constructed regulatory network were reasonably analyzed. It was predicted that
Msxl regulated the expression of Six1 and Gbx2. In addition, several
transcription factors, such as Sox5, Lhx2, Rax, Otx1, Otx2, Pitxl, Pitx2, Nkx2-5,
Irx4, Irx6, Dlx2, Hmx1/2/3, Pou4f3, Pax4 and Tlx2, were found to be involved in
the regulatory network. Our results provide an improved understanding of the
regulatory mechanism during inner ear development.

PMID: 24459893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Clin Chim Acta. 2014 Mar 20;430:129-33. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2014.01.002. Epub 2014
Jan 9.

A patient with five chromosomal rearrangements and a 2q31.1 microdeletion.

Wang T(1), Mao J(1), Liu MJ(1), Choy KW(2), Li HB(1), Cram DS(3), Li H(1), Chen
Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproduction and Genetics, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated
Suzhou Hospital, Suzhou 215002, China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; Joint Centre 
with Utrecht University-Genetic Core, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong, China. (3)Berry Genomics, Ltd., China. (4)Center for Reproduction and
Genetics, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated Suzhou Hospital, Suzhou 215002,
China. Electronic address: cyandzh@sohu.com.

BACKGROUND: Complex chromosomal rearrangements and chromosomal deletion and
duplication syndromes are commonly associated with abnormal clinical phenotypes. 
The 2q31.1 microdeletion syndrome is a rare cytogenetic event that leads to limb 
and multi-internal organ anomalies. In this study we investigated the genetic
basis of the physical and mental symptoms exhibited by a 4-year-old boy with a
suspected 2q31.1 deletion.
METHODS: Cytogenetic and molecular techniques including karyotyping, array-based 
comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) and real-time PCR were used to identify the nature and extent of
chromosome abnormalities in the patient.
RESULTS: A 3.6Mb interstitial microdeletion of 2q31.1 was identified in
association with complex balanced genomic structural rearrangements involving
chromosomes 2, 3, 6, 15 and 18. The 2q31.1 deletion resulted in the loss of one
copy of several known disease genes, including GAD1, DCAF17, SLC25A12 and ITGA6
associated with mental retardation and facial abnormalities and DLX1/DLX2
partially associated with limb abnormalities. Two additional genes, HOXD13 and
CHN1, required for normal limb and eye development that map immediately distal to
the 2q31.1 deletion had normal copy numbers, although CHN1 was found to express
at a lower level in patient's lymphocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: We speculated that the 2q31.1 deletion and/or translocation may have
a positional effect which reduces expression of HOXD13 and CHN1 causing
haplo-insufficiency, and in combination with the hemizygous expression of the
disease genes at 2q31.1, provides a plausible explanation for the diverse
clinical symptoms exhibited by the patient.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24412318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Craniofac Surg. 2014 Jan;25(1):129-34. doi: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000000373.

Bioinformatic analysis of Msx1 and Msx2 involved in craniofacial development.

Dai J(1), Mou Z, Shen S, Dong Y, Yang T, Shen SG.

Author information: 
(1)From the *Department of Oral & Cranio-maxillofacial Science, Shanghai Ninth
People's Hospital, Shanghai JiaoTong University School of Medicine,Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Stomatology, Shanghai; and Emergency Department and Department of
Orthopaedics, the First People's Hospital of Lian Yun Gang, Lianyungang, China.

Msx1 and Msx2 were revealed to be candidate genes for some craniofacial
deformities, such as cleft lip with/without cleft palate (CL/P) and
craniosynostosis. Many other genes were demonstrated to have a cross-talk with
MSX genes in causing these defects. However, there is no systematic evaluation
for these MSX gene-related factors. In this study, we performed systematic
bioinformatic analysis for MSX genes by combining using GeneDecks, DAVID, and
STRING database, and the results showed that there were numerous genes related to
MSX genes, such as Irf6, TP63, Dlx2, Dlx5, Pax3, Pax9, Bmp4, Tgf-beta2, and
Tgf-beta3 that have been demonstrated to be involved in CL/P, and Fgfr2, Fgfr1,
Fgfr3, and Twist1 that were involved in craniosynostosis. Many of these genes
could be enriched into different gene groups involved in different signaling
ways, different craniofacial deformities, and different biological process. These
findings could make us analyze the function of MSX gens in a gene network. In
addition, our findings showed that Sumo, a novel gene whose polymorphisms were
demonstrated to be associated with nonsyndromic CL/P by genome-wide association
study, has protein-protein interaction with MSX1, which may offer us an
alternative method to perform bioinformatic analysis for genes found by
genome-wide association study and can make us predict the disrupted protein
function due to the mutation in a gene DNA sequence. These findings may guide us 
to perform further functional studies in the future.

PMID: 24406565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Neuron. 2013 Dec 4;80(5):1145-58. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.09.022.

A modular gain-of-function approach to generate cortical interneuron subtypes
from ES cells.

Au E(1), Ahmed T, Karayannis T, Biswas S, Gan L, Fishell G.

Author information: 
(1)NYU Neuroscience Institute, NYU Langone Medical Center, 522 First Avenue, New 
York, NY 10016, USA; New York University School of Medicine, NYU Langone Medical 
Center, 522 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Whereas past work indicates that cortical interneurons (cINs) can be generically 
produced from stem cells, generating large numbers of specific subtypes of this
population has remained elusive. This reflects an information gap in our
understanding of the transcriptional programs required for different interneuron 
subtypes. Here, we have utilized the directed differentiation of stem cells into 
specific subpopulations of cortical interneurons as a means to identify some of
these missing factors. To establish this approach, we utilized two factors known 
to be required for the generation of cINs, Nkx2-1 and Dlx2. As predicted, their
regulated transient expression greatly improved the differentiation efficiency
and specificity over baseline. We extended upon this "cIN-primed" model in order 
to establish a modular system whereby a third transcription factor could be
systematically introduced. Using this approach, we identified Lmo3 and Pou3f4 as 
genes that can augment the differentiation and/or subtype specificity of cINs
in vitro.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24314726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Development. 2014 Jan;141(1):28-38. doi: 10.1242/dev.097295. Epub 2013 Nov 27.

Meis2 is a Pax6 co-factor in neurogenesis and dopaminergic periglomerular fate
specification in the adult olfactory bulb.

Agoston Z(1), Heine P, Brill MS, Grebbin BM, Hau AC, Kallenborn-Gerhardt W,
Schramm J, Götz M, Schulte D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurology (Edinger Institute), J. W. Goethe University Medical
School, D-60528 Frankfurt, Germany.

Meis homeodomain transcription factors control cell proliferation, cell fate
specification and differentiation in development and disease. Previous studies
have largely focused on Meis contribution to the development of non-neuronal
tissues. By contrast, Meis function in the brain is not well understood. Here, we
provide evidence for a dual role of the Meis family protein Meis2 in adult
olfactory bulb (OB) neurogenesis. Meis2 is strongly expressed in neuroblasts of
the subventricular zone (SVZ) and rostral migratory stream (RMS) and in some of
the OB interneurons that are continuously replaced during adult life. Targeted
manipulations with retroviral vectors expressing function-blocking forms or with 
small interfering RNAs demonstrated that Meis activity is cell-autonomously
required for the acquisition of a general neuronal fate by SVZ-derived
progenitors in vivo and in vitro. Additionally, Meis2 activity in the RMS is
important for the generation of dopaminergic periglomerular neurons in the OB.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation identified doublecortin and tyrosine hydroxylase as
direct Meis targets in newly generated neurons and the OB, respectively.
Furthermore, biochemical analyses revealed a previously unrecognized complex of
Meis2 with Pax6 and Dlx2, two transcription factors involved in OB neurogenesis. 
The full pro-neurogenic activity of Pax6 in SVZ derived neural stem and
progenitor cells requires the presence of Meis. Collectively, these results show 
that Meis2 cooperates with Pax6 in generic neurogenesis and dopaminergic fate
specification in the adult SVZ-OB system.

PMID: 24284204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 21;8(11):e81105. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081105.
eCollection 2013.

The olfactory bulb in newborn piglet is a reservoir of neural stem and progenitor
cells.

Martin LJ(1), Katzenelson A, Koehler RC, Chang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuropathology, Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America ; Pathobiology 
Graduate Program, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland, United States of America ; The Solomon Snyder Department of
Neuroscience Graduate Program, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

The olfactory bulb (OB) periventricular zone is an extension of the forebrain
subventricular zone (SVZ) and thus is a source of neuroprogenitor cells and
neural stem cells. While considerable information is available on the SVZ-OB
neural stem cell (NSC)/neuroprogenitor cell (NPC) niche in rodents, less work has
been done on this system in large animals. The newborn piglet is used as a
preclinical translational model of neonatal hypoxic-ischemic brain damage, but
information about the endogenous sources of NSCs/NPCs in piglet is needed to
implement endogenous or autologous cell-based therapies in this model. We
characterized NSC/NPC niches in piglet forebrain and OB-SVZ using western
blotting, histological, and cell culture methods. Immunoblotting revealed nestin,
a NSC/NPC marker, in forebrain-SVZ and OB-SVZ in newborn piglet. Several
progenitor or newborn neuron markers, including Dlx2, musashi, doublecortin, and 
polysialated neural cell adhesion molecule were also detected in OB-SVZ by
immunoblotting. Immunohistochemistry confirmed the presence of nestin, musashi,
and doublecortin in forebrain-SVZ and OB-SVZ. Bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) labeling
showed that the forebrain-SVZ and OB-SVZ accumulate newly replicated cells.
BrdU-positive cells were immunolabeled for astroglial, oligodendroglial, and
neuronal markers. A lateral migratory pathway for newly born neuron migration to 
primary olfactory cortex was revealed by BrdU labeling and co-labeling for
doublecortin and class III ß tubulin. Isolated and cultured forebrain-SVZ and
OB-SVZ cells from newborn piglet had the capacity to generate numerous
neurospheres. Single cell clonal analysis of neurospheres revealed the capacity
for self-renewal and multipotency. Neurosphere-derived cells differentiated into 
neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes and were amenable to permanent genetic 
tagging with lentivirus encoding green fluorescent protein. We conclude that the 
piglet OB-SVZ is a reservoir of NSCs and NPCs suitable to use in autologous cell 
therapy in preclinical models of neonatal/pediatric brain injury.

PMCID: PMC3836747
PMID: 24278384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2014 Apr;71(8):1395-415. doi: 10.1007/s00018-013-1501-3. Epub 
2013 Nov 7.

Mechanisms regulating GABAergic neuron development.

Achim K(1), Salminen M, Partanen J.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL Heidelberg, Meyerhofstr. 1, 69117, Heidelberg, Germany,
kaia.achim@embl.de.

Neurons using gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) as their neurotransmitter are the
main inhibitory neurons in the mature central nervous system (CNS) and show great
variation in their form and function. GABAergic neurons are produced in all of
the main domains of the CNS, where they develop from discrete regions of the
neuroepithelium. Here, we review the gene expression and regulatory mechanisms
controlling the main steps of GABAergic neuron development: early patterning of
the proliferative neuroepithelium, production of postmitotic neural precursors,
establishment of their identity and migration. By comparing the molecular
regulation of these events across CNS, we broadly identify three regions
utilizing distinct molecular toolkits for GABAergic fate determination:
telencephalon-anterior diencephalon (DLX2 type), posterior diencephalon-midbrain 
(GATA2 type) and hindbrain-spinal cord (PTF1A and TAL1 types). Similarities and
differences in the molecular regulatory mechanisms reveal the core determinants
of a GABAergic neuron as well as provide insights into generation of the vast
diversity of these neurons.

PMID: 24196748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cereb Cortex. 2015 Mar;25(3):631-45. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bht254. Epub 2013 Sep
18.

The early fetal development of human neocortical GABAergic interneurons.

Al-Jaberi N(1), Lindsay S(2), Sarma S(2), Bayatti N(3), Clowry GJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK. (2)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK. (3)Institute of Neuroscience
Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ,
UK Current address: Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience (SITraN), 
Department of Neuroscience, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2HQ, UK.
(4)Institute of Neuroscience.

GABAergic interneurons are crucial to controlling the excitability and
responsiveness of cortical circuitry. Their developmental origin may differ
between rodents and human. We have demonstrated the expression of 12 GABAergic
interneuron-associated genes in samples from human neocortex by quantitative
rtPCR from 8 to 12 postconceptional weeks (PCW) and shown a significant anterior 
to posterior expression gradient, confirmed by in situ hybridization or
immunohistochemistry for GAD1 and 2, DLX1, 2, and 5, ASCL1, OLIG2, and CALB2.
Following cortical plate (CP) formation from 8 to 9 PCW, a proportion of cells
were strongly stained for all these markers in the CP and presubplate. ASCL1 and 
DLX2 maintained high expression in the proliferative zones and showed extensive
immunofluorescent double-labeling with the cell division marker Ki-67.
CALB2-positive cells increased steadily in the SVZ/VZ from 10 PCW but were not
double-labeled with Ki-67. Expression of GABAergic genes was generally higher in 
the dorsal pallium than in the ganglionic eminences, with lower expression in the
intervening ventral pallium. It is widely accepted that the cortical
proliferative zones may generate CALB2-positive interneurons from mid-gestation; 
we now show that the anterior neocortical proliferative layers especially may be 
a rich source of interneurons in the early neocortex.

© The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4318531
PMID: 24047602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Zebrafish. 2013 Dec;10(4):486-99. doi: 10.1089/zeb.2013.0903. Epub 2013 Aug 31.

Normal function of Myf5 during gastrulation is required for pharyngeal arch
cartilage development in zebrafish embryos.

Lin CY(1), Lee HC, Chen HC, Hsieh CC, Tsai HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University ,
Taipei, Taiwan .

Myf5, a myogenic regulatory factor, plays a key role in regulating muscle
differentiation. However, it is not known if Myf5 has a regulatory role during
early embryogenesis. Here, we used myf5-morpholino oligonucleotides [MO] to knock
down myf5 expression and demonstrated a series of results pointing to the
functional roles of Myf5 during early embryogenesis: (1) reduced head size
resulting from abnormal morphology in the cranial skeleton; (2) decreased
expressions of the cranial neural crest (CNC) markers foxd3, sox9a, dlx2, and
col2a1; (3) defect in the chondrogenic neural crest similar to that of fgf3
morphants; (4) reduced fgf3/fgf8 transcripts in the cephalic mesoderm rescued by 
co-injection of myf5 wobble-mismatched mRNA together with myf5-MO1 during 12 h
postfertilization; (5) abnormal patterns of axial and non-axial mesoderm causing 
expansion of the dorsal organizer, and (6) increased bmp4 gradient, but reduced
fgf3/fgf8 marginal gradient, during gastrulation. Interestingly, overexpression
of fgf3 could rescue the cranial cartilage defects caused by myf5-MO1, suggesting
that Myf5 modulates craniofacial cartilage development through the fgf3 signaling
pathway. Together, the loss of Myf5 function results in a cascade effect that
begins with abnormal formation of the dorsal organizer during gastrulation,
causing, in turn, defects in the CNC and cranial cartilage of myf5-knockdown
embryos.

PMCID: PMC3842889
PMID: 23992145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Acta Neurobiol Exp (Wars). 2013;73(2):250-9.

Directed differentiation of umbilical cord blood stem cells into cortical
GABAergic neurons.

Ali H(1), Bayatti N, Lindsay S, Dashti AA, Al-Mulla F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences (MLS), Faculty of Allied Health
Sciences, Health Sciences Center, Kuwait Universiy, The State of Kuwait.
Hamad.ali@hsc.edu.kw

Umbilical cord blood contains a population of non-hematopoietic multipotent stem 
cells that are capable of neuronal differentiation in-vitro. These cells have
shown great potential as a therapeutic tool for central nervous system diseases
and disorders. However whether these cells are able to produce neurons with
similar developmental and functional characteristics to indigenous neurons within
the brain remains poorly investigated. In this study, we used purified umbilical 
cord blood non-hematopoietic stem cells to produced GABAergic neurons with
similar developmental and functional characteristics to cortical GABAergic
neurons. We analyzed the expression of transcription factors MASH1, DLX1 and DLX2
throughout the 24 days of a sequential neuronal induction protocol and found that
their expression patterns resembled those reported in the developing human
cortex. The derived neurons also expressed components of GABAergic
neurotransmission including GABA regulatory enzymes, GABA receptor subunits and
GABA transporters. Thus we have demonstrated that umbilical cord blood stem cells
are capable of producing cortical-like GABAergic neurons in vitro. This
highlights the potential of umbilical cord blood stem cells as a therapeutic tool
for neural injuries and disorders.

PMID: 23823986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2013 Aug;49(7):479-85. doi:
10.1007/s11626-013-9640-2. Epub 2013 Jun 12.

Effective induction of cells expressing GABAergic neuronal markers from mouse
embryonic stem cell.

Nishikawa M(1), Yanagawa N, Yuri S, Hauser P, Jo OD, Yanagawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Medical and Research Services, Greater Los Angeles Veterans Affairs Healthcare
System at Sepulveda, North Hills, CA, USA. masakiwestriver@gmail.com

Successful derivations of specific neuronal and glial cells from embryonic stem
cells have enormous potential for cell therapies and regenerative medicine.
However, the low efficiency, the complexity of induction method, and the need for
purification represent obstacles that make their application impractical. In this
study, we found that PDGFRa(+) cells derived from mouse embryonic stem cells
(mESC) can serve as a useful source from which to induce cells that express
<U+03B3>-aminobutyric-acid (GABA)-releasing (GABAergic) neuronal markers. PDGFRa(+)
cells were induced from mESC on collagen IV-coated plates in mesenchymal stem
cell (MSC) culture medium with limited exposure to retinoic acid, sorted by
fluorescence-activated cell sorter and maintained in MSC culture medium
containing Y-27632, a Rho-associated kinase inhibitor. We found that
supplementation of vascular endothelial growth factor, fibroblast growth
factor-basic, and sodium azide (NaN3) to MSC culture medium effectively
differentiated PDGFRa(+) cells into cells that express GABAergic neuronal
markers, such as Pax2, Dlx2, GAD67 NCAM, and tubulin-ßIII, while markers for
oligodendrocyte (Sox2) and astrocyte (Glast) were suppressed. Immunostaining for 
GABA showed the majority (86<U+2009>±<U+2009>5%) of the induced cells were GABA-positive. We
also found that the PDGFRa(+) cells retained such differentiation potential even 
after more than ten passages and cryopreservation. In summary, this study
presents a simple and highly efficient method of inducing cells that express
GABAergic neuronal markers from mESC. Together with its ease of maintenance in
vitro, PDGFRa(+) cells derived from mESC may serve as a useful source for such
purpose.

PMID: 23756999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 May 7;19(17):2697-703. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i17.2697.

Increased expression of DLX2 correlates with advanced stage of gastric
adenocarcinoma.

Tang P(1), Huang H, Chang J, Zhao GF, Lu ML, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Kunming
Medical University, Kunming 650101, Yunnan Province, China.

AIM: To investigate the expression of distal-less homeobox 2 (DLX2) in gastric
adenocarcinoma and its clinicopathological significance.
METHODS: Gastric adenocarcinoma tissues were obtained from gastrectomy specimens 
of 129 patients from the Department of Surgery and Pathology, the Second
Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University. Sixty cases of normal gastric 
tissues were collected from gastrectomy specimens of adjacent gastric cancer
margins greater than 5 cm. Patient diagnosis was established pathologically, and 
no patient had received chemotherapy or radiotherapy before surgery. All tissue
specimens were formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded. Immunohistochemistry was
carried out to investigate the expression of DLX2 in 129 gastric adenocarcinoma
tissues and 60 adjacent normal tissues. The immunostaining reaction was
semiquantitatively evaluated based on the proportion of positive cells and the
median staining intensity in normal gastric epithelial cells or tumor cells. All 
patients had follow-up records for more than 5 years. Correlations of DLX2
expression with clinicopathological features and prognosis of patients with
gastric adenocarcinoma were analyzed. All statistical analyses were performed
using the SPSS 17.0 software.
RESULTS: The positive expression of DLX2 was detected in 68 (52.7%) cases of 129 
gastric adenocarcinoma tissues and 14 (23.3%) cases of 60 adjacent normal
tissues. The difference in DLX2 expression between gastric adenocarcinoma tissues
and adjacent normal tissues was statistically significant (<U+03C7>² = 14.391, P <
0.001). Moreover, high expression of DLX2 was detected in 48 (37.2%) cases of 129
human gastric cancer tissues, but not in adjacent normal tissues. The expression 
of DLX2 correlated with the size of tumor (P = 0.001), depth of invasion (P =
0.008), lymph node metastasis (P = 0.023) and tumor-node-metastasis stages (P =
0.020), but was not correlated with age, gender, histological differentiation and
distant metastasis. The Kaplan-Meier survival analysis revealed that survival
time of patients with high DLX2 expression was significantly shorter than that
with low DLX2 expression. However, the multivariate analysis showed that invasion
depth (P < 0.001), lymph nodes metastasis (P = 0.001) and distant metastasis (P <
0.001) were independent prognostic factors for patients with gastric
adenocarcinoma, but DLX2 expression, tumor location and tumor size were not.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that increased expression of DLX2 may correlate
with the advanced stage of gastric adenocarcinoma, and it may contribute to tumor
development.

PMCID: PMC3645389
PMID: 23674878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. PLoS One. 2013 May 7;8(5):e63218. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063218. Print 2013.

Distinct functional and temporal requirements for zebrafish Hdac1 during neural
crest-derived craniofacial and peripheral neuron development.

Ignatius MS(1), Unal Eroglu A, Malireddy S, Gallagher G, Nambiar RM, Henion PD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology Program, Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.

The regulation of gene expression is accomplished by both genetic and epigenetic 
means and is required for the precise control of the development of the neural
crest. In hdac1(b382) mutants, craniofacial cartilage development is defective in
two distinct ways. First, fewer hoxb3a, dlx2 and dlx3-expressing posterior
branchial arch precursors are specified and many of those that are consequently
undergo apoptosis. Second, in contrast, normal numbers of progenitors are present
in the anterior mandibular and hyoid arches, but chondrocyte precursors fail to
terminally differentiate. In the peripheral nervous system, there is a disruption
of enteric, DRG and sympathetic neuron differentiation in hdac1(b382) mutants
compared to wildtype embryos. Specifically, enteric and DRG-precursors
differentiate into neurons in the anterior gut and trunk respectively, while
enteric and DRG neurons are rarely present in the posterior gut and tail.
Sympathetic neuron precursors are specified in hdac1(b382) mutants and they
undergo generic neuronal differentiation but fail to undergo noradrenergic
differentiation. Using the HDAC inhibitor TSA, we isolated enzyme activity and
temporal requirements for HDAC function that reproduce hdac1(b382) defects in
craniofacial and sympathetic neuron development. Our study reveals distinct
functional and temporal requirements for zebrafish hdac1 during neural
crest-derived craniofacial and peripheral neuron development.

PMCID: PMC3646935
PMID: 23667588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2013 Jul;37(7):1111-22. doi: 10.1111/acer.12080. Epub 2013 
Mar 12.

Alcohol-induced epigenetic alterations to developmentally crucial genes
regulating neural stemness and differentiation.

Veazey KJ(1), Carnahan MN, Muller D, Miranda RC, Golding MC.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, 
College Station, TX 77843-4466, USA.

BACKGROUND: From studies using a diverse range of model organisms, we now
acknowledge that epigenetic changes to chromatin structure provide a plausible
link between environmental teratogens and alterations in gene expression leading 
to disease. Observations from a number of independent laboratories indicate that 
ethanol (EtOH) has the capacity to act as a powerful epigenetic disruptor and
potentially derail the coordinated processes of cellular differentiation. In this
study, we sought to examine whether primary neurospheres cultured under
conditions maintaining stemness were susceptible to alcohol-induced alterations
in the histone code. We focused our studies on trimethylated histone 3 lysine 4
and trimethylated histone 3 lysine 27, as these are 2 of the most prominent
posttranslational histone modifications regulating stem cell maintenance and
neural differentiation.
METHODS: Primary neurosphere cultures were maintained under conditions promoting 
the stem cell state and treated with EtOH for 5 days. Control and EtOH-treated
cellular extracts were examined using a combination of quantitative RT-PCR and
chromatin immunoprecipitation techniques.
RESULTS: We find that the regulatory regions of genes controlling both neural
precursor cell identity and processes of differentiation exhibited significant
declines in the enrichment of the chromatin marks examined. Despite these
widespread changes in chromatin structure, only a small subset of genes including
Dlx2, Fabp7, Nestin, Olig2, and Pax6 displayed EtOH-induced alterations in
transcription. Unexpectedly, the majority of chromatin-modifying enzymes examined
including members of the Polycomb Repressive Complex displayed minimal changes in
expression and localization. Only transcripts encoding Dnmt1, Uhrf1, Ehmt1, Ash2 
l, Wdr5, and Kdm1b exhibited significant differences.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that primary neurospheres maintained as stem
cells in vitro are susceptible to alcohol-induced perturbation of the histone
code and errors in the epigenetic program. These observations indicate that
alterations to chromatin structure may represent a crucial component of alcohol
teratogenesis and progress toward a better understanding of the developmental
origins of fetal alcohol spectrum disorders.

Copyright © 2013 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

PMCID: PMC3688681
PMID: 23488822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Mar;27(3):422-36. doi: 10.1210/me.2012-1289. Epub 2013 Jan
31.

Msx1 homeodomain protein represses the aGSU and GnRH receptor genes during
gonadotrope development.

Xie H(1), Cherrington BD, Meadows JD, Witham EA, Mellon PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, Center for Reproductive Science and
Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0674, USA.

Multiple homeodomain transcription factors are crucial for pituitary
organogenesis and cellular differentiation. A homeodomain repressor, Msx1, is
expressed from the ventral aspect of the developing anterior pituitary and
implicated in gonadotrope differentiation. Here, we find that Msx1 represses
transcription of lineage-specific pituitary genes such as the common
a-glycoprotein subunit (aGSU) and GnRH receptor (GnRHR) promoters in the mouse
gonadotrope-derived cell lines, aT3-1 and LßT2. Repression of the mouse GnRHR
promoter by Msx1 is mediated through a consensus-binding motif in the downstream 
activin regulatory element (DARE). Truncation and mutation analyses of the human 
aGSU promoter map Msx1 repression to a site at -114, located at the junctional
regulatory element (JRE). Dlx activators are closely related to the Msx
repressors, acting through the same elements, and Dlx3 and Dlx2 act as
transcriptional activators for GnRHR and aGSU, respectively. Small interfering
RNA knockdown of Msx1 in aT3-1 cells increases endogenous aGSU and GnRHR mRNA
expression. Msx1 gene expression reaches its maximal expression at the rostral
edge at e13.5. The subsequent decline in Msx1 expression specifically coincides
with the onset of expression of both aGSU and GnRHR. The expression levels of
both aGSU and GnRHR in Msx1-null mice at e18.5 are higher compared with wild
type, further confirming a role for Msx1 in the repression of aGSU and GnRHR. In 
summary, Msx1 functions as a negative regulator early in pituitary development by
repressing the gonadotrope-specific aGSU and GnRHR genes, but a temporal decline 
in Msx1 expression alleviates this repression allowing induction of GnRHR and
aGSU, thus serving to time the onset of gonadotrope-specific gene program.

PMCID: PMC3589667
PMID: 23371388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54868. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054868. Epub 2013 Jan 22.

Dact2 represses PITX2 transcriptional activation and cell proliferation through
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling during odontogenesis.

Li X(1), Florez S, Wang J, Cao H, Amendt BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, The University of Iowa, Iowa City,
Iowa, USA.

Dact proteins belong to the Dapper/Frodo protein family and function as
cytoplasmic attenuators in Wnt and TGFß signaling. Previous studies show that
Dact1 is a potent Wnt signaling inhibitor by promoting degradation of ß-catenin. 
We report a new mechanism for Dact2 function as an inhibitor of the canonical Wnt
signaling pathway by interacting with PITX2. PITX2 is a downstream transcription 
factor in Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, and PITX2 synergizes with Lef-1 to activate
downstream genes. Immunohistochemistry verified the expression of Dact2 in the
tooth epithelium, which correlated with Pitx2 epithelial expression. Dact2 loss
of function and PITX2 gain of function studies reveal a feedback mechanism for
controlling Dact2 expression. Pitx2 endogenously activates Dact2 expression and
Dact2 feeds back to repress Pitx2 transcriptional activity. A Topflash reporter
system was employed showing PITX2 activation of Wnt signaling, which is
attenuated by Dact2. Transient transfections demonstrate the inhibitory effect of
Dact2 on critical dental epithelial differentiation factors during tooth
development. Dact2 significantly inhibits PITX2 activation of the Dlx2 and
amelogenin promoters. Multiple lines of evidence conclude the inhibition is
achieved by the physical interaction between Dact2 and Pitx2 proteins. The loss
of function of Dact2 also reveals increased cell proliferation due to
up-regulated Wnt downstream genes, cyclinD1 and cyclinD2. In summary, we have
identified a novel role for Dact2 as an inhibitor of the canonical Wnt pathway in
embryonic tooth development through its regulation of cell proliferation and
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3551926
PMID: 23349981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Mol Ecol Resour. 2013 May;13(3):347-53. doi: 10.1111/1755-0998.12066. Epub 2013
Jan 25.

Mitochondrial genome primers for Lake Malawi cichlids.

Darrin Hulsey C(1), Keck BP, Alamillo H, O'Meara BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Tennessee,
Knoxville, TN 37996, USA. chulsey@utk.edu

Resolving the evolutionary history of rapidly diversifying lineages like the Lake
Malawi Cichlid Flock demands powerful phylogenetic tools. Although this clade of 
over 500 species of fish likely diversified in less than two million years, the
availability of extensive sequence data sets, such as complete mitochondrial
genomes, could help resolve evolutionary patterns in this group. Using a large
number of newly developed primers, we generated whole mitochondrial genome
sequences for 14 Lake Malawi cichlids. We compared sequence divergence across
protein-coding regions of the mitochondrial genome and also compared divergence
in the mitochondrial loci to divergence at two nuclear protein-coding loci, Mitfb
and Dlx2. Despite the widespread sharing of haplotypes of identical sequences at 
individual loci, the combined use of all protein-coding mitochondrial loci
provided a bifurcating phylogenetic hypothesis for the exemplars of major
lineages within the Lake Malawi cichlid radiation. The primers presented here
could have substantial utility for evolutionary analyses of mitochondrial
evolution and hybridization within this diverse clade.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 23347464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Curr Mol Med. 2013 Mar;13(3):438-45.

Upregulation of DLX2 confers a poor prognosis in glioblastoma patients by
inducing a proliferative phenotype.

Yan ZH(1), Bao ZS, Yan W, Liu YW, Zhang CB, Wang HJ, Feng Y, Wang YZ, Zhang W,
You G, Zhang QG, Jiang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.

The human Distal-less Homeobox (DLX) gene family encodes homeobox transcription
factors involved in the control of morphogenesis and tissue homeostasis, which is
primarily expressed in embryonic development. Recently, DLX gene family was
reported to have essential roles in carcinogenesis. We have profiled whole genome
expressed genes in 83 glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) patients from the Chinese
Glioma Genome Atlas (CGGA) Group. Two major groups of samples were identified in 
mRNA expression profiles (referred to as Cluster 1 (C1) and Cluster 2 (C2)). We
identified 7 out of the top 10 Gene Ontology terms in the C1 group were
associated with differentiation and development of neuronal cell. The most
significant prognostic gene was DLX2 (P < 0.001, OR = 1.744); overexpression of
DLX2 indicated poor survival in the 83 GBM patients (low DLX2 vs high DLX2, 77.6 
vs 44.7 weeks, P < 0.001). Annotation of mRNA profiling data on GBM from The
Cancer Genome Atlas and MD Anderson Cancer Center showed the proneural and neural
subtypes highly correlated with low and high DLX2 expression, respectively.
Knocking down of DLX2 in GBM cell line-LN229 results in decreased cyclin D1
expression and cell proliferation. Collectively, these data identified high
expression of DLX2 as a poor prognostic marker to GBM patients.

PMID: 23331016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Biomaterials. 2013 Mar;34(8):1898-910. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.11.051.
Epub 2012 Dec 14.

The effect of overexpression of Dlx2 on the migration, proliferation and
osteogenic differentiation of cranial neural crest stem cells.

Dai J(1), Kuang Y, Fang B, Gong H, Lu S, Mou Z, Sun H, Dong Y, Lu J, Zhang W,
Zhang J, Wang Z, Wang X, Shen G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral & Cranio-maxillofacial Science, Shanghai Ninth People's
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Stomatology, Shanghai 200011, China.

Craniofacial skeleton mainly originate from the cranial neural crest stem cells
(CNCCs), which is a subpopulation of neural crest stem cells (NCCs). Dlx2, a
member of the homeodomain family of transcription factors, plays crucial roles in
the development of the CNCCs derived craniofacial skeleton. Previous reports
reveal that Dlx2-targeted null mutation resulted in anomalies in the skeletal
derivatives of CNCCs in mice. Dlx2 overexpression in ova disturbed the migration 
and differentiation of affected CNCCs and induced the development of ectopic
skeleton elements. However, whether Dlx2 overexpression can impair the
morphogenesis of CNCCs derived craniofacial skeleton in vivo has not been
explored. Here, we generated a transgenic mouse overexpressing Dlx2 in NCCs
(Wnt1Cre::iZEG-Dlx2). The Wnt1Cre::iZEG-Dlx2 embryos showed decreased cell
proliferation, increased cell apoptosis, abnormal chondrogenesis and impaired
osteogenesis within the CNCCs population, resulting in obvious craniofacial
defects that ranged from a cleft lip and midfacial clefts to neural tube defects 
and exencephaly. Adult Wnt1Cre::iZEG-Dlx2 mice showed nasal and premaxillary
hypoplasia and spinal deformities. These findings reveal that Dlx2 overexpression
in NCCs may be a new pathogenesis of facial cleft and spinal kyphosis in mammals,
and may offer us a useful model organism to find suitable therapy methods for
these genetic defects that may be different from the traumatic defect and
resected defect.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23246068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49087. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049087. Epub 2012 Nov 15.

3-dimensional examination of the adult mouse subventricular zone reveals
lineage-specific microdomains.

Azim K(1), Fiorelli R, Zweifel S, Hurtado-Chong A, Yoshikawa K, Slomianka L,
Raineteau O.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Research Institute, University of Zürich/ETHZ, Zürich, Switzerland.

Recent studies suggest that the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the lateral
ventricle is populated by heterogeneous populations of stem and progenitor cells 
that, depending on their exact location, are biased to acquire specific neuronal 
fates. This newly described heterogeneity of SVZ stem and progenitor cells
underlines the necessity to develop methods for the accurate quantification of
SVZ stem and progenitor subpopulations. In this study, we provide 3-dimensional
topographical maps of slow cycling "stem" cells and progenitors based on their
unique cell cycle properties. These maps revealed that both cell populations are 
present throughout the lateral ventricle wall as well as in discrete regions of
the dorsal wall. Immunodetection of transcription factors expressed in defined
progenitor populations further reveals that divergent lineages have clear
regional enrichments in the rostro-caudal as well as in the dorso-ventral span of
the lateral ventricle. Thus, progenitors expressing Tbr2 and Dlx2 were confined
to dorsal and dorso-lateral regions of the lateral ventricle, respectively, while
Mash1+ progenitors were more homogeneously distributed. All cell populations were
enriched in the rostral-most region of the lateral ventricle. This diversity and 
uneven distribution greatly impede the accurate quantification of SVZ progenitor 
populations. This is illustrated by measuring the coefficient of error of
estimates obtained by using increasing section sampling interval. Based on our
empirical data, we provide such estimates for all progenitor populations
investigated in this study. These can be used in future studies as guidelines to 
judge if the precision obtained with a sampling scheme is sufficient to detect
statistically significant differences between experimental groups if a biological
effect is present. Altogether, our study underlines the need to consider the SVZ 
of the lateral ventricle as a complex 3D structure and define methods to
accurately assess neural stem cells or progenitor diversity and population sizes 
in physiological or experimental paradigms.

PMCID: PMC3499551
PMID: 23166605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Comp Neurol. 2013 May 1;521(7):1561-84. doi: 10.1002/cne.23242.

Loss of Gsx1 and Gsx2 function rescues distinct phenotypes in Dlx1/2 mutants.

Wang B(1), Long JE, Flandin P, Pla R, Waclaw RR, Campbell K, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and the Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California
94158-2324, USA.

Mice lacking the Dlx1 and Dlx2 homeobox genes (Dlx1/2 mutants) have severe
deficits in subpallial differentiation, including overexpression of the Gsx1 and 
Gsx2 homeobox genes. To investigate whether Gsx overexpression contributes to the
Dlx1/2 mutant phenotypes, we made compound loss-of-function mutants. Eliminating 
Gsx2 function from the Dlx1/2 mutants rescued the increased expression of Ascl1
and Hes5 (Notch signaling mediators) and Olig2 (oligodendrogenesis mediator). In 
addition, Dlx1/2;Gsx2 mutants, like Dlx1/2;Ascl1 mutants, exacerbated the Gsx2
and Dlx1/2 patterning and differentiation phenotypes, particularly in the lateral
ganglionic eminence (LGE) caudal ganglionic eminence (CGE), and septum, including
loss of GAD1 expression. On the other hand, eliminating Gsx1 function from the
Dlx1/2 mutants (Dlx1/2;Gsx1 mutants) did not severely exacerbate their phenotype;
on the contrary, it resulted in a partial rescue of medial ganglionic eminence
(MGE) properties, including interneuron migration to the cortex. Thus, despite
their redundant properties, Gsx1 and -2 have distinct interactions with Dlx1 and 
-2. Gsx2 interaction is strongest in the LGE, CGE, and septum, whereas the Gsx1
interaction is strongest in the MGE. From these studies, and earlier studies, we 
present a model of the transcriptional network that regulates early steps of
subcortical development.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3615175
PMID: 23042297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Brain Behav Evol. 2012;80(2):127-41. doi: 10.1159/000339871. Epub 2012 Sep 13.

Contributions of developmental studies in the dogfish Scyliorhinus canicula to
the brain anatomy of elasmobranchs: insights on the basal ganglia.

Quintana-Urzainqui I(1), Sueiro C, Carrera I, Ferreiro-Galve S, Santos-Durán G,
Pose-Méndez S, Mazan S, Candal E, Rodríguez-Moldes I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Ecology, CIBUS, University of Santiago de
Compostela, Spain.

The basic anatomy of the elasmobranch brain has been previously established after
studying the organization of the different subdivisions in the adult brain.
However, despite the relatively abundant immunohistochemical and hodologic
studies performed in different species of sharks and skates, the organization of 
some brain subdivisions remains unclear. The present study focuses on some brain 
regions in which subdivisions established on the basis of anatomical data in
adults remain controversial, such as the subpallium, mainly the striatal
subdivision. Taking advantage of the great potential of the lesser spotted
dogfish, Scyliorhinus canicula, as a model for developmental studies, we have
characterized the subpallium throughout development and postembryonic stages by
analyzing the distribution of immunomarkers for GABA, catecholamines, and
neuropeptides, such as substance P. Moreover, we have analyzed the expression
pattern of regulatory genes involved in the regionalization of the telencephalon,
such as Dlx2, Nkx2.1, and Shh, and followed their derivatives throughout
development in relation to the distribution of such neurochemical markers. For
further characterization, we have also analyzed the patterns of innervation of
the subpallium after applying tract-tracing techniques. Our observations may shed
light on postulate equivalences of regions and nuclei among elasmobranchs and
support homologies with other vertebrates.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22986828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Dev Dyn. 2012 Nov;241(11):1757-69. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23867. Epub 2012 Sep 28.

Cleft palate defect of Dlx1/2-/- mutant mice is caused by lack of vertical
outgrowth in the posterior palate.

Jeong J(1), Cesario J, Zhao Y, Burns L, Westphal H, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Science and Craniofacial Biology, New York University
College of Dentistry, New York, NY 10010, USA. jj78@nyu.edu

BACKGROUND: Mice lacking the activities of Dlx1 and Dlx2 (Dlx1/2-/-) exhibit
cleft palate, one of the most common human congenital defects, but the etiology
behind this phenotype has been unknown. Therefore, we analyzed the morphological,
cellular, and molecular changes caused by inactivation of Dlx1 and Dlx2 as
related to palate development.
RESULTS: Dlx1/2-/- mutants exhibited lack of vertical growth in the posterior
palate during the earliest stage of palatogenesis. We attributed this growth
deficiency to reduced cell proliferation. Expression of a cell cycle regulator
Ccnd1 was specifically down-regulated in the same region. Previous studies
established that the epithelial-mesenchymal signaling loop involving Shh, Bmp4,
and Fgf10 is important for cell proliferation and tissue growth during palate
development. This signaling loop was disrupted in Dlx1/2-/- palate.
Interestingly, however, the decreases in Ccnd1 expression and mitosis in
Dlx1/2-/- mutants were independent of this signaling loop. Finally, Dlx1/2
activity was required for normal expression of several transcription factor genes
whose mutation results in palate defects.
CONCLUSIONS: The functions of Dlx1 and Dlx2 are crucial for the initial formation
of the posterior palatal shelves, and that the Dlx genes lie upstream of multiple
signaling molecules and transcription factors important for later stages of
palatogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3988582
PMID: 22972697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Neuron. 2012 Aug 23;75(4):648-62. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.06.013.

Subcortical visual shell nuclei targeted by ipRGCs develop from a
Sox14+-GABAergic progenitor and require Sox14 to regulate daily activity rhythms.

Delogu A(1), Sellers K, Zagoraiou L, Bocianowska-Zbrog A, Mandal S, Guimera J,
Rubenstein JL, Sugden D, Jessell T, Lumsden A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, School of Medicine, King's College 
London, London SE1 1UL, UK.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2012 Aug 23;75(4):546-8.

Intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs) and their nuclear
targets in the subcortical visual shell (SVS) are components of the
non-image-forming visual system, which regulates important physiological
processes, including photoentrainment of the circadian rhythm. While ipRGCs have 
been the subject of much recent research, less is known about their central
targets and how they develop to support specific behavioral functions. We
describe Sox14 as a marker to follow the ontogeny of the SVS and find that the
complex forms from two narrow stripes of Dlx2-negative GABAergic progenitors in
the early diencephalon through sequential waves of tangential migration. We
characterize the requirement for Sox14 to orchestrate the correct distribution of
neurons among the different nuclei of the network and describe how Sox14
expression is required both to ensure robustness in circadian entrainment and for
masking of motor activity.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22920256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2013 Apr;38(4):509-21. doi:
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2012.07.011. Epub 2012 Aug 19.

Prenatal stress delays inhibitory neuron progenitor migration in the developing
neocortex.

Stevens HE(1), Su T, Yanagawa Y, Vaccarino FM.

Author information: 
(1)Child Study Center, Yale University, 230 South Frontage Rd, New Haven, CT
06520, United States. hanna.stevens@yale.edu

Prenatal stress has been widely demonstrated to have links with behavioral
problems in clinical populations and animal models, however, few investigations
have examined the immediate developmental events that are affected by prenatal
stress. Here, we utilize GAD67GFP transgenic mice in which GABAergic progenitors 
express green fluorescent protein (GFP) to examine the impact of prenatal stress 
on the development of these precursors to inhibitory neurons. Pregnant female
mice were exposed to restraint stress three times daily from embryonic day 12
(E12) onwards. Their offspring demonstrated changes in the distribution of
GFP-positive (GFP+) GABAergic progenitors in the telencephalon as early as E13
and persisting until postnatal day 0. Changes in distribution reflected
alterations in tangential migration and radial integration of GFP+ cells into the
developing cortical plate. Fate mapping of GAD67GFP+ progenitors with
bromodeoxyuridine injected at E13 demonstrated a significant increase of these
cells at P0 in anterior white matter. An overall decrease in GAD67GFP+
progenitors at P0 in medial frontal cortex could not be attributed to a reduction
in cell proliferation. Significant changes in dlx2, nkx2.1 and their downstream
target erbb4, transcription factors which regulate interneuron migration, were
found within the prenatally stressed developing forebrain, while no differences
were seen in mash1, a determinant of interneuron fate, bdnf, a maturation factor 
for GABAergic cells or fgf2, an early growth/differentiation factor. These
results demonstrate that early disruption in GABAergic progenitor migration
caused by prenatal stress may be responsible for neuronal defects in disorders
with GABAergic abnormalities like schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3532962
PMID: 22910687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Stem Cells. 2012 Apr;30(4):773-84. doi: 10.1002/stem.1042.

Histamine stimulates neurogenesis in the rodent subventricular zone.

Bernardino L(1), Eiriz MF, Santos T, Xapelli S, Grade S, Rosa AI, Cortes L,
Ferreira R, Bragança J, Agasse F, Ferreira L, Malva JO.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Coimbra, Largo Marquês de Pombal, 3004-504 Coimbra, Portugal.
libernardino@gmail.com

Neural stem/progenitor cells present in the subventricular zone (SVZ) are a
potential source of repairing cells after injury. Therefore, the identification
of novel players that modulate neural stem cells differentiation can have a huge 
impact in stem cell-based therapies. Herein, we describe a unique role of
histamine in inducing functional neuronal differentiation from cultured mouse SVZ
stem/progenitor cells. This proneurogenic effect depends on histamine 1 receptor 
activation and involves epigenetic modifications and increased expression of
Mash1, Dlx2, and Ngn1 genes. Biocompatible poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid)
microparticles, engineered to release histamine in a controlled and prolonged
manner, also triggered robust neuronal differentiation in vitro. Preconditioning 
with histamine-loaded microparticles facilitated neuronal differentiation of
SVZ-GFP cells grafted in hippocampal slices and in in vivo rodent brain. We
propose that neuronal commitment triggered by histamine per se or released from
biomaterial-derived vehicles may represent a new tool for brain repair
strategies.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 22893458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Nov 20;21(17):3069-80. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0155. Epub 2012
Oct 4.

A stable cranial neural crest cell line from mouse.

Ishii M(1), Arias AC, Liu L, Chen YB, Bronner ME, Maxson RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, USC/Norris Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Cranial neural crest cells give rise to ectomesenchymal derivatives such as
cranial bones, cartilage, smooth muscle, dentin, as well as melanocytes, corneal 
endothelial cells, and neurons and glial cells of the peripheral nervous system. 
Previous studies have suggested that although multipotent stem-like cells may
exist during the course of cranial neural crest development, they are transient, 
undergoing lineage restriction early in embryonic development. We have developed 
culture conditions that allow cranial neural crest cells to be grown as
multipotent stem-like cells. With these methods, we obtained 2 independent cell
lines, O9-1 and i10-1, which were derived from mass cultures of Wnt1-Cre;
R26R-GFP-expressing cells. These cell lines can be propagated and passaged
indefinitely, and can differentiate into osteoblasts, chondrocytes, smooth muscle
cells, and glial cells. Whole-genome expression profiling of O9-1 cells revealed 
that this line stably expresses stem cell markers (CD44, Sca-1, and Bmi1) and
neural crest markers (AP-2a, Twist1, Sox9, Myc, Ets1, Dlx1, Dlx2, Crabp1, Epha2, 
and Itgb1). O9-1 cells are capable of contributing to cranial mesenchymal
(osteoblast and smooth muscle) neural crest fates when injected into E13.5 mouse 
cranial tissue explants and chicken embryos. These results suggest that O9-1
cells represent multipotent mesenchymal cranial neural crest cells. The O9-1 cell
line should serve as a useful tool for investigating the molecular properties of 
differentiating cranial neural crest cells.

PMCID: PMC3495126
PMID: 22889333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Neurosci. 2012 Aug 8;32(32):10940-8. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2216-12.2012.

Fezf2 regulates multilineage neuronal differentiation through activating basic
helix-loop-helix and homeodomain genes in the zebrafish ventral forebrain.

Yang N(1), Dong Z, Guo S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai
200433, People's Republic of China.

Transcription factors of the achaete-scute and atonal bHLH proneural gene family 
play important roles in neuronal differentiation. They are also involved in
neuronal subtype specification through collaboration with homeodomain (HD)
transcription factors. However, concerted regulation of these genes and in turn
progenitor fate toward distinct lineages within the developing vertebrate brain
is not well understood. Fezf2 is an evolutionarily conserved zinc finger protein 
important for monoaminergic neuronal development in zebrafish. Here, we show that
Fezf2 is also critical for GABAergic neuronal fate and investigate how a single
transcription factor regulates the identity of multiple neuronal lineages in the 
developing ventral forebrain. First, our genetic analyses reveal the requirement 
of the achaete-scute-like genes ascl1a and 1b in serotonergic and GABAergic
neuron development, but they are dispensable for the specification of
dopaminergic neurons, which is dependent on the atonal-like gene neurog1. Second,
the expression of fezf2, ascl1a/1b, and neurog1 demarcates distinct progenitor
subpopulations, where fezf2 is required for activating but not maintaining the
expression of bHLH genes. Third, Fezf2 is required to activate HD genes otpb and 
dlx2, which are involved in dopaminergic and GABAergic neuronal development,
respectively. Finally, we uncover that Fezf2 is sufficient to increase
dopaminergic neuronal numbers but not serotonergic or GABAergic lineages.
Together, these findings reveal new mechanisms by which multilineage
differentiation is coordinately regulated by a single transcription factor in the
vertebrate ventral forebrain.

PMCID: PMC3478895
PMID: 22875928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Neurosci. 2012 Jun 13;32(24):8219-30. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1344-12.2012.

The Rb/E2F pathway modulates neurogenesis through direct regulation of the
Dlx1/Dlx2 bigene cluster.

Ghanem N(1), Andrusiak MG, Svoboda D, Al Lafi SM, Julian LM, McClellan KA, De
Repentigny Y, Kothary R, Ekker M, Blais A, Park DS, Slack RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada.

During brain morphogenesis, the mechanisms through which the cell cycle machinery
integrates with differentiation signals remain elusive. Here we show that the
Rb/E2F pathway regulates key aspects of differentiation and migration through
direct control of the Dlx1 and Dlx2 homeodomain proteins, required for
interneuron specification. Rb deficiency results in a dramatic reduction of Dlx1 
and Dlx2 gene expression manifested by loss of interneuron subtypes and severe
migration defects in the mouse brain. The Rb/E2F pathway modulates Dlx1/Dlx2
regulation through direct interaction with a Dlx forebrain-specific enhancer,
I12b, and the Dlx1/Dlx2 proximal promoter regions, through repressor E2F sites
both in vitro and in vivo. In the absence of Rb, we demonstrate that repressor
E2Fs inhibit Dlx transcription at the Dlx1/Dlx2 promoters and Dlx1/2-I12b
enhancer to suppress differentiation. Our findings support a model whereby the
cell cycle machinery not only controls cell division but also modulates neuronal 
differentiation and migration through direct regulation of the Dlx1/Dlx2 bigene
cluster during embryonic development.

PMID: 22699903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Front Cell Neurosci. 2012 May 7;6:20. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2012.00020. eCollection 
2012.

Significance of the dynamic expression of pax6 and dlx2 in the postnatal
periventricular zone cells.

Saha B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Clinical Neurosciences Laboratory, Cellular Therapies in
Brain Diseases Group, INSERM U1084, University of Poitiers Poitiers, France.

PMCID: PMC3345580
PMID: 22586370  [PubMed]


61. Cereb Cortex. 2013 Apr;23(4):922-31. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs085. Epub 2012 Apr 3.

Early decline in progenitor diversity in the marmoset lateral ventricle.

Azim K(1), Zweifel S, Klaus F, Yoshikawa K, Amrein I, Raineteau O.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Research Institute, University of Zürich/Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology Zurich (ETHZ), 8057 Zürich, Switzerland.

The lateral ventricle (LV) of the adult rodent brain harbors neural stem cells
(NSCs) that continue to generate new neurons throughout life. NSCs located in
defined areas of the LV walls generate progenitors with distinct transcriptional 
profiles that are committed to specific neuronal fates. Here, we assessed if such
diversity of NSCs also exist in the adult common marmoset, a widely used primate 
species in basic and clinical neuroscience research. We first investigated the 3D
distributions of proliferative progenitors and committed neuroblasts in the
marmoset forebrain. In addition to these maps, we assessed the spatial presence
of divergent progenitor populations based on their expression of defined
transcription factors, that is, Dlx2, Pax6, Tbr2, and Ngn2 which are
differentially expressed by <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acidergic versus glutamatergic
progenitors in the adult rodent forebrain. In striking contrast to rodents,
glutamatergic progenitors were only sparse in neonates and absent from the adult 
LV, whilst present in the hippocampus. Our analyses highlight major differences
in the diversity of NSCs of the marmoset LV compared with rodents and emphasize
the need to address NSCs diversity in evolutionary higher order mammals
concomitantly to rodents.

PMID: 22473896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Hum Gene Ther. 2012 Jul;23(7):742-53. doi: 10.1089/hum.2011.216. Epub 2012 Jun 5.

Rapid transgene expression in multiple precursor cell types of adult rat
subventricular zone mediated by adeno-associated type 1 vectors.

Bockstael O(1), Melas C, Pythoud C, Levivier M, McCarty D, Samulski RJ, De Witte 
O, Tenenbaum L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Neurosurgery, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
BE-1070 Brussels, Belgium. olivier.bockstael@ulb.ac.be

The adult rat brain subventricular zone (SVZ) contains proliferative precursors
that migrate to the olfactory bulb (OB) and differentiate into mature neurons.
Recruitment of precursors constitutes a potential avenue for brain repair. We
have investigated the kinetics and cellular specificity of transgene expression
mediated by AAV2/1 vectors (i.e., adeno-associated virus type 2 pseudotyped with 
AAV1 capsid) in the SVZ. Self-complementary (sc) and single-stranded (ss) AAV2/1 
vectors mediated efficient GFP expression, respectively, at 17 and 24<U+2009>hr
postinjection. Transgene expression was efficient in all the rapidly
proliferating cells types, that is, Mash1(+) precursors (30% of the GFP(+)
cells), Dlx2(+) neuronal progenitors (55%), Olig2(+) oligodendrocyte progenitors 
(35%), and doublecortin-positive (Dcx(+)) migrating cells (40%), but not in the
slowly proliferating glial fibrillary acidic protein-positive (GFAP(+)) neural
stem cell pool (5%). Because cell cycle arrest by wild-type and recombinant AAV
has been described in primary cultures, we examined SVZ proliferative activity
after vector injection. Indeed, cell proliferation was reduced immediately after 
vector injection but was normal after 1 month. In contrast, migration and
differentiation of GFP(+) precursors were unaltered. Indeed, the proportion of
Dcx(+) cells was similar in the injected and contralateral hemispheres.
Furthermore, 1 month after vector injection into the SVZ, GFP(+) cells, found, as
expected, in the OB granular cell layer, were mature GABAergic neurons. In
conclusion, the rapid and efficient transgene expression in SVZ neural precursors
mediated by scAAV2/1 vectors underlines their potential usefulness for brain
repair via recruitment of immature cells. The observed transient precursor
proliferation inhibition, not affecting their migration and differentiation, will
likely not compromise this strategy.

PMCID: PMC3404419
PMID: 22471423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Front Cell Neurosci. 2012 Feb 27;6:6. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2012.00006. eCollection 
2012.

Dynamic expression of the pro-dopaminergic transcription factors Pax6 and Dlx2
during postnatal olfactory bulb neurogenesis.

de Chevigny A(1), Core N, Follert P, Wild S, Bosio A, Yoshikawa K, Cremer H,
Beclin C.

Author information: 
(1)IBDML, Institut de Biologie du Développement de Marseille-Luminy,
CNRS/Université de la Méditerranée, Campus de Luminy Marseille, France.

Olfactory bulb (OB) neurogenesis generates neurons that use GABA or dopamine as
their neurotransmitters throughout life. Regionalized stem cell populations in
the periventricular zone (PVZ) of the lateral ventricles (LVs) have been shown to
be at the basis of neuronal diversity in the system. For example dopaminergic
neurons arise predominantly from neural stem cells (NSCs) residing in the dorsal 
PVZ and depend on the expression of the transcription factors Pax6 and Dlx2 for
their specification. In addition, Dlx2 is required for neurogenesis in general.
Using targeted in vivo electroporation combined with immuno-fluorescence imaging 
and microarray analysis, we provide here detailed spatial and temporal expression
data with cellular resolution in this system. We find that all along the
neurogenic process Pax6 expression remains restricted to the dorsal PVZ, whereas 
nearly all neuroblasts express Dlx2, including those of the dorsal lineage, which
are switched on for Dlx2 when they enter the rostral migratory stream (RMS).
These data allow to explain and precise the functions of these two genes in
postnatal OB neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3284257
PMID: 22371698  [PubMed]


64. Am J Stem Cells. 2011 Aug 18;1(1):48-58. Print 2012.

Intrinsic regulation of adult subventricular zone neural progenitor cells and the
effect of brain injury.

Jones KS(1), Connor B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacology, Centre for Brain
Research, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of Auckland Private 
Bag 92019, Auckland, New Zealand.

Regulation over the generation of adult born neuroblasts and oligodendrocyte
precursor cells is governed by a myriad of extracellular signals. These signals
must be related into the cell nucleus to regulate cell cycle and cell lineage
maturation programmes. This internal regulation is controlled by proneural and
anti-neurogenic transcription factors, including Mash1, Pax6, Dlx2 and Olig2.
This review will cover how transcription factors regulate adult SVZ neurogenesis;
the progression from neural stem cell, to transit amplifying precursor cell, to
neuroblast or oligodendrocyte precursor cell, and how transcription factors
influence neuronal subtype specification. Changes to transcriptional regulation
that occur after brain injury and what this means for endogenous brain repair
strategies will also be covered.

PMCID: PMC3643385
PMID: 23671797  [PubMed]


65. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2012 Mar 15;302(6):G588-97. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00284.2011. Epub 2011 Dec 22.

Comparison of effects of a selective 5-HT reuptake inhibitor versus a 5-HT4
receptor agonist on in vivo neurogenesis at the rectal anastomosis in rats.

Kawahara I(1), Kuniyasu H, Matsuyoshi H, Goto K, Obata K, Misawa H, Fujii H,
Takaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology II, Nara Medical University School of Medicine,
Kashihara, Japan.

It was recently reported that activation of enteric neural 5-HT(4) receptors
(SR4) promotes reconstruction of enteric neural circuit injury in distal gut of
guinea pigs and that this reconstruction involves neural stem cells. We aimed to 
explore a novel approach using a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI),
which increases endogenous 5-HT, to repair enteric nerve fiber injury in the rat 
distal gut. Enteric nerve fiber injury was performed by rectal transection and
subsequent end-to-end one-layer anastomosis. The SSRI fluvoxamine maleate (100
µmol/l) was applied locally at the anastomotic site to compare with the 5-HT(4)
agonist mosapride citrate (100 µmol/l) (applied for patent) applied locally and
orally. Unlike mosapride, fluvoxamine failed to promote the regeneration of the
nerve fiber tract across the anastomosis. Furthermore, fluvoxamine did not
generate anti-distal-less homeobox 2 (DLX2)- and anti-SR4-positive cells (neural 
stem cells) and/or anti-neurofilament (NF)-positive cells (neural cells) in newly
formed granulation tissue at the anastomosis, whereas these cell types were
observed in mosapride-treated preparations. In contrast to its effects in guinea 
pigs, mosapride generated 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU)-positive neural cells in
ganglia sites 3 mm oral and anal from the anastomosis 2 wk after nerve fiber
injury. All actions of mosapride were observed after local and or oral
applications. These findings indicate that local SSRI treatment does not induce
in vivo nerve fiber tract growth across the anastomosis in the rat distal gut.
Mosapride induces nerve fiber tract growth across the anastomosis, mediated
through enteric neural stem cells possibly from neural crest-derived stem cells
or mesenchymal stem cells in the bone marrow.

PMID: 22194416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2012;723:685-91. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-0631-0_87.

Roles of homeobox genes in retinal ganglion cell differentiation and axonal
guidance.

Zhang Q(1), Eisenstat DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Cell Science, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, MB, Canada, R3E 0V9.

In this review, we have described four major families of homeobox genes which
play important roles in RGC differentiation as well as axonal pathfinding. The
mechanism underlying how these HD TFs affect axonal pathfinding is not entirely
known. One possibility is that the downstream targets directly regulated by these
HD TF are responsible for axonal guidance. Examples of this are the repression of
EphB1 by Isl2, and Vax1/Vax2 regulation of EphB2/EphB3 expression. The roles of
Dlx homeobox genes in RGC axonal guidance have not yet been reported. However, in
the mouse telencephalon, Dlx1 and Dlx2 promote the tangential migration of
GABAergic interneurons by repressing axonal growth (Cobos et al. 2007) and
inhibiting Neuropilin-2 expression (Le et al. 2007). It is possible that the
genetic program defining RGC identity also encodes a unique "sensory" network for
their axons, determining how and where RGC axons respond to guidance cues en
route to CNS targets.

PMID: 22183394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Dec 9;89(6):773-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.002.

Homozygosity mapping and candidate prioritization identify mutations, missed by
whole-exome sequencing, in SMOC2, causing major dental developmental defects.

Bloch-Zupan A(1), Jamet X, Etard C, Laugel V, Muller J, Geoffroy V, Strauss JP,
Pelletier V, Marion V, Poch O, Strahle U, Stoetzel C, Dollfus H.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Dentistry, University of Strasbourg, 1 place de l'Hôpital,
Strasbourg, France.

Inherited dental malformations constitute a clinically and genetically
heterogeneous group of disorders. Here, we report on a severe developmental
dental defect that results in a dentin dysplasia phenotype with major
microdontia, oligodontia, and shape abnormalities in a highly consanguineous
family. Homozygosity mapping revealed a unique zone on 6q27-ter. The two affected
children were found to carry a homozygous mutation in SMOC2. Knockdown of smoc2
in zebrafish showed pharyngeal teeth that had abnormalities reminiscent of the
human phenotype. Moreover, smoc2 depletion in zebrafish affected the expression
of three major odontogenesis genes: dlx2, bmp2, and pitx2.

Copyright © 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3234372
PMID: 22152679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;814:485-98. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-452-0_32.

Reprogramming of postnatal astroglia of the mouse neocortex into functional,
synapse-forming neurons.

Heinrich C(1), Götz M, Berninger B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Genomics, Institute of Physiology,
Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, Munich, Germany.

Direct conversion of glia into neurons by cellular reprogramming represents a
novel approach toward a cell-based therapy of neurodegenerative processes. Here
we describe a protocol that allows for the direct and efficient in vitro
reprogramming of mouse astroglia from the early postnatal neocortex by forced
expression of single neurogenic fate determinants. By selective
retrovirus-mediated expression of neurogenin-2 (Neurog2) on the one hand, or the 
mouse homologue of Distal-less Dlx2 or the mammalian homologue of
achaete-schute-1 (Mash1) on the other, it is possible to drive postnatal
astroglia in culture toward the genesis of fully functional, synapse-forming,
glutamatergic, i.e., excitatory, and GABAergic, i.e., inhibitory, neurons,
respectively.

PMID: 22144327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Neuroscience. 2012 Jan 10;201:67-84. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.11.006.
Epub 2011 Nov 11.

The 5'-flanking region of the RP58 coding sequence shows prominent promoter
activity in multipolar cells in the subventricular zone during corticogenesis.

Ohtaka-Maruyama C(1), Hirai S, Miwa A, Takahashi A, Okado H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Brain Development and Neural Regeneration, Tokyo Metropolitan
Institute of Medical Science, 2-1-6 Kamikitazawa, Setagaya, Tokyo 156-8506,
Japan. maruyama-ck@igakuken.or.jp

Erratum in
    Neuroscience. 2012 May 17;210:481-92.

Pyramidal neurons of the neocortex are produced from progenitor cells located in 
the neocortical ventricular zone (VZ) and subventricular zone (SVZ) during
embryogenesis. RP58 is a transcriptional repressor that is strongly expressed in 
the developing brain and plays an essential role in corticogenesis. The
expression of RP58 is strictly regulated in a time-dependent and spatially
restricted manner. It is maximally expressed in E15-16 embryonic cerebral cortex,
localized specifically to the cortical plate and SVZ of the neocortex,
hippocampus, and parts of amygdala during brain development, and found in
glutamatergic but not GABAergic neurons. Identification of the promoter activity 
underlying specific expression patterns provides important clues to their
mechanisms of action. Here, we show that the RP58 gene promoter is activated
prominently in multipolar migrating cells, the first in vivo analysis of RP58
promoter activity in the brain. The 5.3 kb 5'-flanking genomic DNA of the RP58
coding region demonstrates promoter activity in neurons both in vitro and in
vivo. This promoter is highly responsive to the transcription factor neurogenin2 
(Ngn2), which is a direct upstream activator of RP58 expression. Using in utero
electroporation, we demonstrate that RP58 gene promoter activity is first
detected in a subpopulation of pin-like VZ cells, then prominently activated in
migrating multipolar cells in the multipolar cell accumulation zone (MAZ) located
just above the VZ. In dissociated primary cultured cortical neurons, RP58
promoter activity mimics in vivo expression patterns from a molecular standpoint 
that RP58 is expressed in a fraction of Sox2-positive progenitor cells,
Ngn2-positive neuronal committed cells, and Tuj1-positive young neurons, but not 
in Dlx2-positive GABAergic neurons. Finally, we show that Cre recombinase
expression under the control of the RP58 gene promoter is a feasible tool for
conditional gene switching in post-mitotic multipolar migrating young neurons in 
the developing cerebral cortex.

Copyright © 2011 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22119643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2012 Feb;112(3):490-500. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.01477.2010. Epub 2011 Nov 10.

Divergent postnatal development of the carotid body in DBA/2J and A/J strains of 
mice.

Kostuk EW(1), Balbir A, Fujii K, Fujioka A, Pichard LE, Shirahata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

We have previously shown that the adult DBA/2J and A/J strains of mice differ in 
carotid body volume and morphology. The question has arisen whether these
differences develop during the prenatal or postnatal period. Investigating
morphological development of the carotid body and contributing genes in these
mice can provide further understanding of the appropriate formation of the
carotid body. We examined the carotid body of these mice from 1 day to 4 wk old
for differences in volume, morphology, and gene expression of Gdnf family, Dlx2, 
Msx2, and Phox2b. The two strains showed divergent morphology starting at 1 wk
old. The volume of the carotid body increased from 1 wk up to 2 wk old to the
level of 4 wk old in the DBA/2J mice but not in the A/J mice. This corresponds
with immunoreactivity of LC3, an autophagy marker, in A/J tissues at 10 days and 
2 wk. The differences in gene expression were examined at 1 wk, 10 days, and 2 wk
old, because divergent growth occurred during this period. The DBA/2J's carotid
body at 1 wk old showed a greater expression of Msx2 than the A/J's carotid body.
No other candidate genes showed consistent differences between the ages and
strains. The difference was not seen in sympathetic cervical ganglia of 1 wk old,
suggesting that the difference is carotid body specific. The current study
indicates the critical postnatal period for developing distinctive morphology of 
the carotid body in these mice. Further studies are required to further elucidate
a role of Msx2 and other uninvestigated genes.

PMCID: PMC3289426
PMID: 22074716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Clin Invest. 2011 Dec;121(12):4722-34. doi: 10.1172/JCI59145. Epub 2011 Nov 7.

Inflammation-induced subventricular zone dysfunction leads to olfactory deficits 
in a targeted mouse model of multiple sclerosis.

Tepavcevic V(1), Lazarini F, Alfaro-Cervello C, Kerninon C, Yoshikawa K,
Garcia-Verdugo JM, Lledo PM, Nait-Oumesmar B, Baron-Van Evercooren A.

Author information: 
(1)UPMC, CRICM, UMR-S 975, Paris, France.

Neural stem cells (NSCs) persist in defined brain niches, including the
subventricular zone (SVZ), throughout adulthood and generate new neurons destined
to support specific neurological functions. Whether brain diseases such as
multiple sclerosis (MS) are associated with changes in adult NSCs and whether
this might contribute to the development and/or persistence of neurological
deficits remains poorly investigated. We examined SVZ function in mice in which
we targeted an MS-like pathology to the forebrain. In these mice, which we refer 
to herein as targeted EAE (tEAE) mice, there was a reduction in the number of
neuroblasts compared with control mice. Altered expression of the transcription
factors Olig2 and Dlx2 in the tEAE SVZ niche was associated with amplification of
pro-oligodendrogenic transit-amplifying cells and decreased neuroblast
generation, which resulted in persistent reduction in olfactory bulb
neurogenesis. Altered SVZ neurogenesis led to impaired long-term olfactory
memory, mimicking the olfactory dysfunction observed in MS patients. Importantly,
we also found that neurogenesis was reduced in the SVZ of MS patients compared
with controls. Thus, our findings suggest that neuroinflammation induces
functional alteration of adult NSCs that may contribute to olfactory dysfunction 
in MS patients.

PMCID: PMC3226002
PMID: 22056384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. BMC Evol Biol. 2011 Oct 18;11:307. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-11-307.

The homology of odontodes in gnathostomes: insights from Dlx gene expression in
the dogfish, Scyliorhinus canicula.

Debiais-Thibaud M(1), Oulion S, Bourrat F, Laurenti P, Casane D, Borday-Birraux
V.

Author information: 
(1)Evolution des familles multigéniques, Laboratoire Evolution Génome et
Spéciation, UPR CNRS, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

BACKGROUND: Teeth and tooth-like structures, together named odontodes, are
repeated organs thought to share a common evolutionary origin. These structures
can be found in gnathostomes at different locations along the body: oral teeth in
the jaws, teeth and denticles in the oral-pharyngeal cavity, and dermal denticles
on elasmobranch skin. We, and other colleagues, had previously shown that teeth
in any location were serially homologous because: i) pharyngeal and oral teeth
develop through a common developmental module; and ii) the expression patterns of
the Dlx genes during odontogenesis were highly divergent between species but
almost identical between oral and pharyngeal dentitions within the same species. 
Here we examine Dlx gene expression in oral teeth and dermal denticles in order
to test the hypothesis of serial homology between these odontodes.
RESULTS: We present a detailed comparison of the first developing teeth and
dermal denticles (caudal primary scales) of the dogfish (Scyliorhinus canicula)
and show that both odontodes develop through identical stages that correspond to 
the common stages of oral and pharyngeal odontogenesis. We identified six Dlx
paralogs in the dogfish and found that three showed strong transcription in teeth
and dermal denticles (Dlx3, Dlx4 and Dlx5) whereas a weak expression was detected
for Dlx1 in dermal denticles and teeth, and for Dlx2 in dermal denticles. Very
few differences in Dlx expression patterns could be detected between tooth and
dermal denticle development, except for the absence of Dlx2 expression in teeth.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our histological and expression data strongly
suggest that teeth and dermal denticles develop from the same developmental
module and under the control of the same set of Dlx genes. Teeth and dermal
denticles should therefore be considered as serial homologs developing through
the initiation of a common gene regulatory network (GRN) at several body
locations. This mechanism of heterotopy supports the 'inside and out' model that 
has been recently proposed for odontode evolution.

PMCID: PMC3217942
PMID: 22008058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e25163. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025163. Epub 2011 Oct 5.

Spatial segregation of BMP/Smad signaling affects osteoblast differentiation in
C2C12 cells.

Heining E(1), Bhushan R, Paarmann P, Henis YI, Knaus P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemistry and Biochemistry, Freie Universitaet Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are involved in a plethora of
cellular processes in embryonic development and adult tissue homeostasis.
Signaling specificity is achieved by dynamic processes involving BMP receptor
oligomerization and endocytosis. This allows for spatiotemporal control of Smad
dependent and non-Smad pathways. In this study, we investigate the spatiotemporal
regulation within the BMP-induced Smad transcriptional pathway.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we discriminate between Smad signaling
events that are dynamin-dependent (i.e., require an intact endocytic pathway) and
dynamin-independent. Inhibition of dynamin-dependent endocytosis in fluorescence 
microscopy and fractionation studies revealed a delay in Smad1/5/8
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation after BMP-2 stimulation of C2C12 cells.
Using whole genome microarray and qPCR analysis, we identified two classes of
BMP-2 induced genes that are differentially affected by inhibition of
endocytosis. Thus, BMP-2 induced gene expression of Id1, Id3, Dlx2 and Hey1 is
endocytosis-dependent, whereas BMP-2 induced expression of Id2, Dlx3, Zbtb2 and
Krt16 is endocytosis-independent. Furthermore, we demonstrate that short term
inhibition of endocytosis interferes with osteoblast differentiation as measured 
by alkaline phosphatase (ALP) production and qPCR analysis of osteoblast marker
gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our study demonstrates that dynamin-dependent
endocytosis is crucial for the concise spatial activation of the BMP-2 induced
signaling cascade. Inhibition of endocytic processes during BMP-2 stimulation
leads to altered Smad1/5/8 signaling kinetics and results in differential target 
gene expression. We show that interfering with the BMP-2 induced transcriptional 
network by endocytosis inhibition results in an attenuation of osteoblast
differentiation. This implies that selective sensitivity of gene expression to
endocytosis provides an additional mechanism for the cell to respond to BMP in a 
context specific manner. Moreover, we suggest a novel Smad dependent signal
cascade induced by BMP-2, which does not require endocytosis.

PMCID: PMC3187766
PMID: 21998639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. BMC Res Notes. 2011 Sep 26;4:370. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-4-370.

Unveiling novel genes upregulated by both rhBMP2 and rhBMP7 during early
osteoblastic transdifferentiation of C2C12 cells.

Bustos-Valenzuela JC(1), Fujita A, Halcsik E, Granjeiro JM, Sogayar MC.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Institute, Department of Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Therapy
Centre (NUCEL), University of São Paulo, Avenida Prof, Lineu Prestes, 748 Bloco
9S, São Paulo, SP 05508-000, Brazil. mcsoga@iq.usp.br.

FINDINGS: We set out to analyse the gene expression profile of pre-osteoblastic
C2C12 cells during osteodifferentiation induced by both rhBMP2 and rhBMP7 using
DNA microarrays. Induced and repressed genes were intercepted, resulting in 1,318
induced genes and 704 repressed genes by both rhBMP2 and rhBMP7. We selected and 
validated, by RT-qPCR, 24 genes which were upregulated by rhBMP2 and rhBMP7; of
these, 13 are related to transcription (Runx2, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, Id1, Id2, Id3,
Fkhr1, Osx, Hoxc8, Glis1, Glis3 and Cfdp1), four are associated with cell
signalling pathways (Lrp6, Dvl1, Ecsit and PKCd) and seven are associated with
the extracellular matrix (Ltbp2, Grn, Postn, Plod1, BMP1, Htra1 and IGFBP-rP10). 
The novel identified genes include: Hoxc8, Glis1, Glis3, Ecsit, PKCd, LrP6, Dvl1,
Grn, BMP1, Ltbp2, Plod1, Htra1 and IGFBP-rP10.
BACKGROUND: BMPs (bone morphogenetic proteins) are members of the TGFß
(transforming growth factor-ß) super-family of proteins, which regulate growth
and differentiation of different cell types in various tissues, and play a
critical role in the differentiation of mesenchymal cells into osteoblasts. In
particular, rhBMP2 and rhBMP7 promote osteoinduction in vitro and in vivo, and
both proteins are therapeutically applied in orthopaedics and dentistry.
CONCLUSION: Using DNA microarrays and RT-qPCR, we identified both previously
known and novel genes which are upregulated by rhBMP2 and rhBMP7 during the onset
of osteoblastic transdifferentiation of pre-myoblastic C2C12 cells. Subsequent
studies of these genes in C2C12 and mesenchymal or pre-osteoblastic cells should 
reveal more details about their role during this type of cellular differentiation
induced by BMP2 or BMP7. These studies are relevant to better understanding the
molecular mechanisms underlying osteoblastic differentiation and bone repair.

PMCID: PMC3196718
PMID: 21943021  [PubMed]


75. EMBO J. 2011 Sep 6;30(21):4489-99. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.319.

Transcription factor Dlx2 protects from TGFß-induced cell-cycle arrest and
apoptosis.

Yilmaz M(1), Maass D, Tiwari N, Waldmeier L, Schmidt P, Lehembre F, Christofori
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, University 
of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Acquiring resistance against transforming growth factor ß (TGFß)-induced growth
inhibition at early stages of carcinogenesis and shifting to TGFß's
tumour-promoting functions at later stages is a pre-requisite for malignant
tumour progression and metastasis. We have identified the transcription factor
distal-less homeobox 2 (Dlx2) to exert critical functions during this switch.
Dlx2 counteracts TGFß-induced cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in mammary
epithelial cells by at least two molecular mechanisms: Dlx2 acts as a direct
transcriptional repressor of TGFß receptor II (TGFßRII) gene expression and
reduces canonical, Smad-dependent TGFß signalling and expression of the
cell-cycle inhibitor p21(CIP1) and increases expression of the mitogenic
transcription factor c-Myc. On the other hand, Dlx2 directly induces the
expression of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) family member betacellulin, which
promotes cell survival by stimulating EGF receptor signalling. Finally, Dlx2
expression supports experimental tumour growth and metastasis of B16 melanoma
cells and correlates with tumour malignancy in a variety of human cancer types.
These results establish Dlx2 as one critical player in shifting TGFß from its
tumour suppressive to its tumour-promoting functions.

PMCID: PMC3230376
PMID: 21897365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Neuroscience. 2011 Nov 10;195:9-20. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.08.015. Epub
2011 Aug 12.

Brn-3b inhibits generation of amacrine cells by binding to and negatively
regulating DLX1/2 in developing retina.

Feng L(1), Eisenstat DD, Chiba S, Ishizaki Y, Gan L, Shibasaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

During retinogenesis, the basic helix-loop-helix proneural gene math5 (atoh7)
initiates the generation of the first-born neurons, retinal ganglion cells
(RGCs), by activating a network of RGC transcription factors, including Brn-3b
(POU4F2). Herein, we show that the expression of DLX1 and DLX2 is significantly
down-regulated in math5-null retina but is markedly increased in Brn-3b-null
retina. Interestingly, Brn-3b interacts with DLX1 through its homeodomain, and
this interaction represses DLX1 activity. Retrovirus-mediated mis-expression of
DLX1 or DLX2 dramatically increases the number of amacrine/bipolar cells and
concurrently reduces rod photoreceptors. Conversely, combined ectopic expression 
of Brn-3b with DLX1 or DLX2 promotes the production of RGCs and inhibits amacrine
cell differentiation. Thus, DLX1/2 play an essential role in cell fate selection 
between amacrine and RGCs. Brn-3b suppresses the role of DLX1/2 through physical 
interaction and biases the competent precursors toward RGC fates.

Copyright © 2011 IBRO. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21875655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Shanghai Kou Qiang Yi Xue. 2011 Jun;20(3):331.

Dlx2 over-expression: a possible mechanism for first branchial arch malformation.

Dai JW(1), Wang XD, Sun H, Jiang WH, Lu JT, Shen GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Ninth People's Hospital, College
of Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Stomatology. Shanghai 200011, China. daijiewen@163.com

The first branchial arch malformation (FBAM) is a rare congenital defect
associated with anomalous development of the first and second branchial arches.
Cause of FBAM still remains unknown, and is thought in most cases to be
multifactorial, involving both genetic and enviromental factors. Dlx2 as a member
of the Dlx homeobox gene family, plays a crucial role in the development of the
first branchial arch. The tissues regulated mainly by Dlx2 are coincident with
the tissues mainly involved in FBAM. Dlx2 over-expression generated by
electroporation transfection can disturb the migration and differentiation of
cranial neural crest cells (CNCCs), which migrate to the branchial arches and in 
turn give rise to much of the facial skeleton and connective tissues.
Furthermore, Dlx2 over-expression can be found in the first branchial arch
spontaneous mutant mice. So we hypothesize that Dlx2 over-expression mutation
causes FBAM due to an increase in cell-cell adhesion and inhibiting the migration
of CNCC to the first branchial arch in the early stage, or migrating to an
incorrect position and can't differentiate into normal tissues. What an exact
role of Dlx2 over-expression in FBAM remains to be investigated and Dlx2
over-expression transgenic mouse will be a nice model for further research in
FBAM.

PMID: 21779750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2011 Nov;29(7):681-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2011.06.005.
Epub 2011 Jun 23.

Activity of dlx5a/dlx6a regulatory elements during zebrafish GABAergic neuron
development.

Yu M(1), Xi Y, Pollack J, Debiais-Thibaud M, Macdonald RB, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Advanced Research in Environmental Genomics (CAREG), Department of 
Biology, University of Ottawa, ON, Canada.

During vertebrate forebrain formation, Dlx homeobox genes play essential roles in
the differentiation, migration and survival of subpallial precursor cells that
will later give rise to diverse subtypes of <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-expressing
neurons, including inhibitory cortical interneurons in mammals. They also
participate in the regulation of the Gad genes encoding the enzymes necessary for
GABA synthesis. In mice, at least four cis-regulatory elements (CREs) control Dlx
expression in the telencephalon and diencephalon: URE2 and I12b in the Dlx1/Dlx2 
bigene cluster, and I56i and I56ii in the Dlx5/Dlx6 bigene cluster. However,
little is known so far with respect to the function of orthologous dlx genes and 
their regulatory elements during zebrafish GABAergic neuron development. To
investigate whether similar dlx-mediated pathways exist in the early developing
zebrafish forebrain, we generated independent lines of transgenic zebrafish
carrying two distinct GFP reporter constructs driven by a ß-globin minimal
promoter: one containing a ~1.4kb dlx5a/dlx6a intergenic sequence (encompassing
I56i and I56ii) and one with a ~1.1kb fragment containing only the I56i CRE,
respectively. The expression patterns of these two transgenes were compared with 
that obtained with another construct containing the ~1.4kb dlx5a/dlx6a intergenic
sequence and driven by a ~3.5kb dlx6a 5'-flanking fragment. Our comparative
analysis showed that GFP expression of the three transgene is largely overlapping
throughout the ventral forebrain. Intriguingly, the dlx6a 5'-flanking fragment
has a major impact on transgene expression in the mesencephalic tectum.
Furthermore, comparison of transgene expression between the ~1.4kb and ~1.1kb
intergenic fragments did not show any specific spatial expression conferred by
I56ii. Almost all GFP-expressing cells in the transgenic zebrafish are
GABA-positive and also express various GABAergic interneuron markers. Together,
our data suggest that zebrafish dlx5a/dlx6a intergenic CREs may be involved in a 
conserved genetic pathway necessary for proper dlx expression during zebrafish
GABAergic neuron development.

Copyright © 2011 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21723936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Stem Cells. 2011 Sep;29(9):1415-26. doi: 10.1002/stem.682.

Expression of Tlx in both stem cells and transit amplifying progenitors regulates
stem cell activation and differentiation in the neonatal lateral subependymal
zone.

Obernier K(1), Simeonova I, Fila T, Mandl C, Hölzl-Wenig G, Monaghan-Nichols P,
Ciccolini F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Interdisciplinary Center for Neurosciences,
University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

Niche homeostasis in the postnatal subependymal zone of the lateral ventricle
(lSEZ) requires coordinated proliferation and differentiation of neural
progenitor cells. The mechanisms regulating this balance are scarcely known.
Recent observations indicate that the orphan nuclear receptor Tlx is an intrinsic
factor essential in maintaining this balance. However, the effect of Tlx on gene 
expression depends on age and cell-type cues. Therefore, it is essential to
establish its expression pattern at different developmental ages. Here, we show
for the first time that in the neonatal lSEZ activated neural stem cells (NSCs)
and especially transit-amplifying progenitors (TAPs) express Tlx and that its
expression may be regulated at the posttranscriptional level. We also provide
evidence that in both cell types Tlx affects gene expression in a positive and
negative manner. In activated NSCs, but not in TAPs, absence of Tlx leads to
overexpression of negative cell cycle regulators and impairment of proliferation.
Moreover, in both cell types, the homeobox transcription factor Dlx2 is
downregulated in the absence of Tlx. This is paralleled by increased expression
of Olig2 in activated NSCs and glial fibrillary acidic protein in TAPs,
indicating that in both populations Tlx decreases gliogenesis. Consistent with
this, we found a higher proportion of cells expressing glial makers in the
neonatal lSEZ of mutant mice than in the wild type counterpart. Thus, Tlx playing
a dual role affects the expression of distinct genes in these two lSEZ cell
types.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21714038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Rev Neurosci. 2011;22(4):457-65. doi: 10.1515/RNS.2011.034. Epub 2011 Jun 22.

Role of transcription factors in neurogenesis after cerebral ischemia.

Zhang C(1), Wu H, Zhu X, Wang Y, Guo J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory Center for Basic Medical Sciences, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China.

Studies have revealed that the adult mammalian brain has the capacity to
regenerate some neurons after cerebral ischemia. And this perspective on
neurogenesis adds to the conceptual framework for strategies for the repair of
ischemia-induced brain injury, that is, if the effect of ischemia-induced
neurogenesis is enhanced, then the recovery of brain function after stroke can be
promoted. Neurogenesis is a multistep process that requires the proliferation of 
neural stem/progenitor cells, migration and that new cells differentiate, survive
and integrate into existing neural networks. For that to occur, the same
concerted action of various factors is needed, especially transcription factors
which regulate the expression of many moleculars and interact with them to
promote neurogenesis. This review article gives a brief overview of some
transcription factors (NF-<U+03BA>B, Hes, STAT3, AP-1, CREB, HIF1, Pax6, Tcf/Lef, Gli,
Sox2, Olig2, Dlx2, TLX, Bmi-1) in ischemia-induced neurogenesis.

PMID: 21692687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 17;286(24):21372-83. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.252031. Epub
2011 Apr 19.

Hierarchical interactions of homeodomain and forkhead transcription factors in
regulating odontogenic gene expression.

Venugopalan SR(1), Li X, Amen MA, Florez S, Gutierrez D, Cao H, Wang J, Amendt
BA.

Author information: 
(1)Texas A&M University Health Science Center, Institute of Biosciences and
Technology, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

FoxJ1 is a forkhead transcription factor expressed in multiple tissues during
development and a major regulator of cilia development. FoxJ1(-/-) mice present
with defects in odontogenesis, and we correlate these defects to hierarchical
interactions between homeodomain factors Pitx2 and Dlx2 with FoxJ1 in regulating 
their expression through direct physical interactions. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays reveal endogenous Pitx2 and Dlx2 binding to the Dlx2
promoter and Dlx2 binding to the FoxJ1 promoter as well as Dlx2 and FoxJ1 binding
to the amelogenin promoter. PITX2 activation of the Dlx2 promoter is attenuated
by a direct Dlx2 physical interaction with PITX2. Dlx2 autoregulates its
promoter, and Dlx2 transcriptionally activates the downstream gene FoxJ1. Dlx2
and FoxJ1 physically interact and synergistically regulate both Dlx2 and FoxJ1
promoters. Dlx2 and FoxJ1 also activate the amelogenin promoter, and amelogenin
is required for enamel formation and late stage tooth development. FoxJ1(-/-)
mice maxillary and mandibular incisors are reduced in length and width and have
reduced amelogenin expression. FoxJ1(-/-) mice show a reduced and defective
ameloblast layer, revealing a biological effect of these transcription factor
hierarchies during tooth morphogenesis. These transcriptional mechanisms may
contribute to other developmental processes such as neuronal, pituitary, and
heart development.

PMCID: PMC3122197
PMID: 21504905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Comp Neurol. 2011 Aug 15;519(12):2320-34. doi: 10.1002/cne.22618.

Dlx6 regulates molecular properties of the striatum and central nucleus of the
amygdala.

Wang B(1), Lufkin T, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and the Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California
94158-2324, USA.

We describe here the prenatal telencephalic expression of Dlx6 RNA and
ß-galactosidase driven from a mutant Dlx6 locus. The mutant Dlx6 allele, which we
believe is either a null or severe hypomorph, has an IRES-lacZ-neomycin
resistance cassette inserted into the Dlx6 homeobox coding sequence (Dlx6(LacZ)
). We compared expression from the Dlx6-lacZ (Dlx6(LacZ) ) allele in
heterozygotes (Dlx6(LacZ/+) ), with the expression of Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5 and Dlx6
RNA. Like these wild-type alleles, Dlx6(LacZ) is expressed in the developing
ganglionic eminences, and their derivatives. Unlike the other Dlx genes, Dlx6 and
Dlx6(LacZ) expression is not readily observed in tangentially migrating
interneurons. In addition to Dlx6's expression at later stages of differentiation
of many basal ganglia nuclei, it shows particularly robust expression in the
central nucleus of the amygdala. Histological analysis of Dlx6 mutants
(Dlx6(LacZ/LacZ) ) shows that this homeobox transcription factor is required for 
molecular properties of the striatum, nucleus accumbens, olfactory tubercle, and 
central nucleus of the amygdala. For instance, we observed reduced of Golf, RXR<U+03B3>,
and Tiam2 expression in the striatum, and reduced Dlx5 expression in the central 
nucleus of the amygdala. RNA expression array analysis of the E18.5 striatum was 
useful in identifying the transcription factors that are expressed in this
tissue, but did not identify major changes in gene expression in the
Dlx6(LacZ/LacZ) mutant.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4019376
PMID: 21452241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2011 May;47(1):53-60. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2011.03.001. Epub
2011 Mar 17.

Proneural transcription factors Dlx2 and Pax6 are altered in adult SVZ neural
precursor cells following striatal cell loss.

Jones KS(1), Connor B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacology, Centre for Brain
Research, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of Auckland, Private
Bag 92019, Auckland 1142, New Zealand.

Compensatory replacement of neurons by endogenous subventricular zone
(SVZ)-derived neural precursor cells has been demonstrated in the adult brain
following striatal cell loss. Such cell replacement is associated with increased 
SVZ cell proliferation and neuroblast expansion in the rostral migratory stream
(RMS). SVZ-derived neural precursor cells co-express multiple transcription
factors involved in lineage restriction and cell fate determination. We propose
that compensatory neurogenesis in response to striatal cell loss will alter the
temporal expression of transcription factors in discrete populations of
SVZ-derived neural precursor cells. We therefore examined the expression of
Mash1, Dlx2, Pax6 and Olig2 in SVZ-derived neural precursor cell populations
across a range of times following quinolinic acid (QA) induced striatal cell
death. We have identified a heterogeneous population of SVZ-derived neural
precursor cells that respond independently to striatal cell loss. In both the
anterior SVZ (aSVZ) and RMS we observed an increase in a sub-population of Dlx2+ 
transit amplifying precursor (TAP) cells and neuroblasts following QA lesioning
when compared to controls. Subsequently, the number of Pax6+ TAPs and neuroblasts
in the QA lesioned aSVZ and RMS was also increased. Olig2 expression was not
however altered in response to QA-induced cell loss. Our results suggest Dlx2 and
Pax6 may play a prominent role in directing neural precursor cell proliferation
and neuroblast generation following striatal cell loss. Selective alteration of
specific transcription factors in the SVZ and during migration through the RMS in
response to cell loss may predetermine the subsequent generation of specific
neuronal subclasses for endogenous replacement.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21397028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Haematologica. 2011 Jun;96(6):820-8. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.031179. Epub 2011
Feb 28.

Up-regulation of homeodomain genes, DLX1 and DLX2, by FLT3 signaling.

Starkova J(1), Gadgil S, Qiu YH, Zhang N, Hermanova I, Kornblau SM, Drabkin HA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, SC, USA. julia.starkova@lfmotol.cuni.cz

BACKGROUND: Activating mutations in fms-like tyrosine kinase-3 (FLT3) are
frequent in acute myeloid leukemia and represent both a poor prognostic feature
and a therapeutic target. We have identified a previously unrecognized downstream
effect of FLT3 activation, namely up-regulation of the homeodomain genes, DLX1
and DLX2.
DESIGN AND METHODS: MV4;11 cells with FLT3-internal tandem duplication mutation, 
RS4;11 cells with wild-type FLT3 and blasts from patients with acute myeloid
leukemia were used to pursue the relation between FLT3, DLX1/2 and transforming
growth factor-ß (TGFß). Real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction, western blot and reverse-phase protein array were performed to
detect changes in gene and protein expression. RNA interference and MTS assays
were used to study the interaction of PKC412, FLT3 inhibitor and TGFß1.
RESULTS: A direct relationship between FLT3 activity and DLX1/2 expression was
revealed by both inhibition and up-regulation of FLT3 signaling in MV4;11 and
RS4;11 cell lines, respectively, in isolated blast cells from patients with acute
myeloid leukemia, and in reverse-phase protein array assays of samples from
patients with acute myeloid leukemia. Mechanistically, the link between FLT3 and 
DLX1 expression appears to involve MAPK signaling through the ERK and JNK
pathways. To determine whether elevated DLX1 had a functional consequence, we
explored the reported inhibition by DLX1 on TGFß/Smad signaling. Indeed, TGFß
responses were blunted by FLT3 activation in a DLX1-dependent manner and FLT3
inhibition resulted in a time-dependent increase in nuclear phospho-Smad2.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that alterations in DLX1/2 contribute to the 
biological consequences of FLT3 activation.

PMCID: PMC3105643
PMID: 21357706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Nov;20(11):1873-87. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0282. Epub 2011
Apr 5.

Purmorphamine increases DARPP-32 differentiation in human striatal neural stem
cells through the Hedgehog pathway.

El-Akabawy G(1), Medina LM, Jeffries A, Price J, Modo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, King's College London, Institute of Psychiatry,
London, UK.

Transplantation of neural stem cells (NSCs) is a promising therapeutic approach
for Huntington's disease (HD). HD is characterized by a progressive loss of
medium-sized spiny neurons (MSNs) in the striatum. DARPP-32 (dopamine and cyclic 
AMP-regulated phosphoprotein, 32<U+2009>kDa) is expressed in 98% of these MSNs. To
establish an effective cell therapy for HD, the differentiation of human NSCs
into MSNs is essential. Enhancing differentiation of NSCs is therefore an
important aspect to optimize transplant efficacy. A comparison of 5
differentiation protocols indicated that the Hedgehog agonist purmorphamine
(1<U+2009>µM) most significantly increased the neuronal differentiation of a human
striatal NSC line (STROC05). This 3-fold increase in neurons was associated with 
a dramatic reduction in proliferation as well as a decrease in astrocytic
differentiation. A synergistic effect between purmorphamine and cell density even
further increased neuronal differentiation from 20% to 30% within 7 days. Upon
long-term differentiation (21 days), this combined differentiation protocol
tripled the number of DARPP-32 cells (7%) and almost doubled the proportion of
calbindin cells. However, there was no effect on calretinin cells. Differential
expression of positional specification markers (DLX2, MASH1, MEIS2, GSH2, and
NKX2.1) further confirmed the striatal identity of these differentiated cells.
Purmorphamine resulted in a significant upregulation of the Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling pathway (GLI1 expression). Cyclopamine, an Hh inhibitor, blocked this
effect, indicating that purmorphamine specifically acts through this pathway to
increase neuronal differentiation. These results demonstrate that small synthetic
molecules can play a pivotal role in directing the differentiation of NSCs to
optimize their therapeutic potential in HD.

PMID: 21345011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Neurosci. 2011 Feb 16;31(7):2675-87. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3110-10.2011.

Wnt5a is a transcriptional target of Dlx homeogenes and promotes differentiation 
of interneuron progenitors in vitro and in vivo.

Paina S(1), Garzotto D, DeMarchis S, Marino M, Moiana A, Conti L, Cattaneo E,
Perera M, Corte G, Calautti E, Merlo GR.

Author information: 
(1)Dulbecco Telethon Institute c/o Molecular Biotechnology Center, University of 
Torino, 10126 Torino, Italy.

During brain development, neurogenesis, migration, and differentiation of neural 
progenitor cells are regulated by an interplay between intrinsic genetic programs
and extrinsic cues. The Dlx homeogene transcription factors have been proposed to
directly control the genesis and maturation of GABAergic interneurons of the
olfactory bulb (OB), subpallium, and cortex. Here we provide evidence that Dlx
genes promote differentiation of olfactory interneurons via the signaling
molecule Wnt5a. Dlx2 and Dlx5 interact with homeodomain binding sequences within 
the Wnt5a locus and activate its transcription. Exogenously provided Wnt5a
promotes GABAergic differentiation in dissociated OB neurons and in organ-type
brain cultures. Finally, we show that the Dlx-mutant environment is unfavorable
for GABA differentiation, in vivo and in vitro. We conclude that Dlx genes favor 
interneuron differentiation also in a non-cell-autonomous fashion, via expression
of Wnt5a.

PMID: 21325536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Nat Protoc. 2011 Feb;6(2):214-28. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2010.188. Epub 2011 Feb 3.

Generation of subtype-specific neurons from postnatal astroglia of the mouse
cerebral cortex.

Heinrich C(1), Gascón S, Masserdotti G, Lepier A, Sanchez R, Simon-Ebert T,
Schroeder T, Götz M, Berninger B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Genomics, Institute of Physiology,
Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, Munich, Germany.

Instructing glial cells to generate neurons may prove to be a strategy to replace
neurons that have degenerated. Here, we describe a robust protocol for the
efficient in vitro conversion of postnatal astroglia from the mouse cerebral
cortex into functional, synapse-forming neurons. This protocol involves two
steps: (i) expansion of astroglial cells (7 d) and (ii) astroglia-to-neuron
conversion induced by persistent and strong retroviral expression of Neurog2
(encoding neurogenin-2) or Mash1 (also referred to as achaete-scute complex
homolog 1 or Ascl1) and/or distal-less homeobox 2 (Dlx2) for generation of
glutamatergic or GABAergic neurons, respectively (7-21 d for different degrees of
maturity). Our protocol of astroglia-to-neuron conversion by a single neurogenic 
transcription factor provides a stringent experimental system to study the
specification of a selective neuronal subtype, thus offering an alternative to
the use of embryonic or neural stem cells. Moreover, it can be a useful model for
studies of lineage conversion from non-neuronal cells, with potential for brain
regenerative medicine.

PMID: 21293461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Birth Defects Res B Dev Reprod Toxicol. 2011 Feb;92(1):77-81. doi:
10.1002/bdrb.20284. Epub 2011 Jan 19.

Early genetic control of craniofacial development is affected by the in vitro
exposure of rat embryos to the fungicide triadimefon.

Di Renzo F(1), Rossi F, Prati M, Giavini E, Menegola E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Università di Milano, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Previous published experiments reported that in vitro exposure of
postimplantation rat embryos to the triazole fungicide triadimefon (FON) resulted
in specific abnormalities at the branchial apparatus and that the sensitive
period is restricted to the first 24 hr of culture and is associated with the
abnormal expression of TGF family genes (some of a large panel of genes regulated
by retinoic acid (RA) and involved in branchial arch morphogenesis). The aim of
this study is the determination of the sensitive window to FON-induced
abnormalities during in vitro development and the evaluation of the expression of
some genes controlled by RA and involved in early branchial arch morphogenesis
(Gsc, Msx1, Msx2, Dlx1, Dlx2, Shh, Patched (the main Shh receptor)).
METHODS: Rat embryos were exposed in vitro to the FON under condition known to be
able to induce 100% of abnormal embryos (250<U+2009> µM) at different stages and
examined after 48 hr of culture. The sensitive window for FON-induced
abnormalities was during the hours E9 h8.00 PM-E10 h8.00 AM. To evaluate the
expression of selected genes, embryos exposed during the sensitive stages were
processed to perform quantitative PCR after 18 and 24 hr of culture.
RESULTS: FON was able to affect the expression of some genes in a stage-specific 
manner: earlier embryos were characterized by the downregulation of Msx2 and Gsc,
later embryos showed the downregulation of Gsc, Shh, and Patched. The obtained
data suggest that FON-induced abnormalities are mediated, at least in part,
through the imbalance of the expression of RA-related signals.

© 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21254369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Development. 2011 Feb;138(3):409-19. doi: 10.1242/dev.061051.

The Wnt receptor Ryk controls specification of GABAergic neurons versus
oligodendrocytes during telencephalon development.

Zhong J(1), Kim HT, Lyu J, Yoshikawa K, Nakafuku M, Lu W.

Author information: 
(1)The Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell
Research, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

GABAergic neurons and oligodendrocytes originate from progenitors within the
ventral telencephalon. However, the molecular mechanisms that control
neuron-glial cell-fate segregation, especially how extrinsic factors regulate
cell-fate changes, are poorly understood. We have discovered that the Wnt
receptor Ryk promotes GABAergic neuron production while repressing
oligodendrocyte formation in the ventral telencephalon. We demonstrate that Ryk
controls the cell-fate switch by negatively regulating expression of the
intrinsic oligodendrogenic factor Olig2 while inducing expression of the
interneuron fate determinant Dlx2. In addition, we demonstrate that Ryk is
required for GABAergic neuron induction and oligodendrogenesis inhibition caused 
by Wnt3a stimulation. Furthermore, we showed that the cleaved intracellular
domain of Ryk is sufficient to regulate the cell-fate switch by regulating the
expression of intrinsic cell-fate determinants. These results identify Ryk as a
multi-functional receptor that is able to transduce extrinsic cues into
progenitor cells, promote GABAergic neuron formation, and inhibit
oligodendrogenesis during ventral embryonic brain development.

PMCID: PMC3014630
PMID: 21205786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Mol Oncol. 2011 Feb;5(1):77-92. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2010.11.002. Epub 2010 Dec 
2.

DNA methylation patterns in luminal breast cancers differ from non-luminal
subtypes and can identify relapse risk independent of other clinical variables.

Kamalakaran S(1), Varadan V, Giercksky Russnes HE, Levy D, Kendall J, Janevski A,
Riggs M, Banerjee N, Synnestvedt M, Schlichting E, Kåresen R, Shama Prasada K,
Rotti H, Rao R, Rao L, Eric Tang MH, Satyamoorthy K, Lucito R, Wigler M,
Dimitrova N, Naume B, Borresen-Dale AL, Hicks JB.

Author information: 
(1)Philips Research North America, Biomedical Informatics, Briarcliff Manor, NY
10510, United States. sitharthk@philips.com

The diversity of breast cancers reflects variations in underlying biology and
affects the clinical implications for patients. Gene expression studies have
identified five major subtypes- Luminal A, Luminal B, basal-like, ErbB2+ and
Normal-Like. We set out to determine the role of DNA methylation in subtypes by
performing genome-wide scans of CpG methylation in breast cancer samples with
known expression-based subtypes. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering using a set
of most varying loci clustered the tumors into a Luminal A majority (82%)
cluster, Basal-like/ErbB2+ majority (86%) cluster and a non-specific cluster with
samples that were also inconclusive in their expression-based subtype
correlations. Contributing methylation loci were both gene associated loci (30%) 
and non-gene associated (70%), suggesting subtype dependant genome-wide
alterations in the methylation landscape. The methylation patterns of significant
differentially methylated genes in luminal A tumors are similar to those
identified in CD24 + luminal epithelial cells and the patterns in basal-like
tumors similar to CD44 + breast progenitor cells. CpG islands in the HOXA cluster
and other homeobox (IRX2, DLX2, NKX2-2) genes were significantly more methylated 
in Luminal A tumors. A significant number of genes (2853, p < 0.05) exhibited
expression-methylation correlation, implying possible functional effects of
methylation on gene expression. Furthermore, analysis of these tumors by using
follow-up survival data identified differential methylation of islands proximal
to genes involved in Cell Cycle and Proliferation (Ki-67, UBE2C, KIF2C, HDAC4),
angiogenesis (VEGF, BTG1, KLF5), cell fate commitment (SPRY1, OLIG2, LHX2 and
LHX5) as having prognostic value independent of subtypes and other clinical
factors.

Copyright © 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21169070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. BMC Cancer. 2010 Nov 25;10:649. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-649.

Mutually exclusive expression of DLX2 and DLX5/6 is associated with the
metastatic potential of the human breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231.

Morini M(1), Astigiano S, Gitton Y, Emionite L, Mirisola V, Levi G, Barbieri O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Genova, Largo R, Benzi 10, 
16132 Genova, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The DLX gene family encodes for homeobox transcription factors
involved in the control of morphogenesis and tissue homeostasis. Their expression
can be regulated by Endothelin1 (ET1), a peptide associated with breast cancer
invasive phenotype. Deregulation of DLX gene expression was found in human solid 
tumors and hematologic malignancies. In particular, DLX4 overexpression
represents a possible prognostic marker in ovarian cancer. We have investigated
the role of DLX genes in human breast cancer progression.
METHODS: MDA-MB-231 human breast carcinoma cells were grown in vitro or injected 
in nude mice, either subcutaneously, to mimic primary tumor growth, or
intravenously, to mimic metastatic spreading. Expression of DLX2, DLX5 and DLX6
was assessed in cultured cells, either treated or not with ET1, tumors and
metastases by RT-PCR. In situ hybridization was used to confirm DLX gene
expression in primary tumors and in lung and bone metastases. The expression of
DLX2 and DLX5 was evaluated in 408 primary human breast cancers examining the
GSE1456 and GSE3494 microarray datasets. Kaplan-Meier estimates for disease-free 
survival were calculated for the patients grouped on the basis of DLX2/DLX5
expression.
RESULTS: Before injection, or after subcutaneous growth, MDA-MB-231 cells
expressed DLX2 but neither DLX5 nor DLX6. Instead, in bone and lung metastases
resulting from intravenous injection we detected expression of DLX5/6 but not of 
DLX2, suggesting that DLX5/6 are activated during metastasis formation, and that 
their expression is alternative to that of DLX2. The in vitro treatment of
MDA-MB-231 cells with ET1, resulted in switch from DLX2 to DLX5 expression. By
data mining in microarray datasets we found that expression of DLX2 occurred in
21.6% of patients, and was significantly correlated with prolonged disease-free
survival and reduced incidence of relapse. Instead, DLX5 was expressed in a small
subset of cases, 2.2% of total, displaying reduced disease-free survival and high
incidence of relapse which was, however, non-significantly different from the
other groups due to the small size of the DLX+ cohort. In all cases, we found
mutually exclusive expression of DLX2 and DLX5.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies indicate that DLX genes are involved in human breast
cancer progression, and that DLX2 and DLX5 genes might serve as prognostic
markers.

PMCID: PMC3003273
PMID: 21108812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Development. 2010 Dec;137(24):4307-16. doi: 10.1242/dev.052647.

The neural crest-enriched microRNA miR-452 regulates epithelial-mesenchymal
signaling in the first pharyngeal arch.

Sheehy NT(1), Cordes KR, White MP, Ivey KN, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Neural crest cells (NCCs) are a subset of multipotent, migratory stem cells that 
populate a large number of tissues during development and are important for
craniofacial and cardiac morphogenesis. Although microRNAs (miRNAs) have emerged 
as important regulators of development and disease, little is known about their
role in NCC development. Here, we show that loss of miRNA biogenesis by
NCC-specific disruption of murine Dicer results in embryos lacking craniofacial
cartilaginous structures, cardiac outflow tract septation and thymic and dorsal
root ganglia development. Dicer mutant embryos had reduced expression of Dlx2, a 
transcriptional regulator of pharyngeal arch development, in the first pharyngeal
arch (PA1). miR-452 was enriched in NCCs, was sufficient to rescue Dlx2
expression in Dicer mutant pharyngeal arches, and regulated non-cell-autonomous
signaling involving Wnt5a, Shh and Fgf8 that converged on Dlx2 regulation in PA1.
Correspondingly, knockdown of miR-452 in vivo decreased Dlx2 expression in the
mandibular component of PA1, leading to craniofacial defects. These results
suggest that post-transcriptional regulation by miRNAs is required for
differentiation of NCC-derived tissues and that miR-452 is involved in
epithelial-mesenchymal signaling in the pharyngeal arch.

PMCID: PMC2990216
PMID: 21098571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Med Genet. 2011 Feb;48(2):98-104. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2010.079491. Epub 2010 Nov
10.

2q31.1 microdeletion syndrome: redefining the associated clinical phenotype.

Dimitrov B(1), Balikova I, de Ravel T, Van Esch H, De Smedt M, Baten E, Vermeesch
JR, Bradinova I, Simeonov E, Devriendt K, Fryns JP, Debeer P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

INTRODUCTION: The clinical phenotype of the chromosome 2q31 deletion syndrome
consists of limb anomalies ranging from monodactylous ectrodactyly, brachydactyly
and syndactyly to camptodactyly. Additional internal organ anomalies-for example,
heart defects, ocular anomalies-may be present. Hemizygosity for HOXD13 and EVX2 
genes was thought to cause the observed skeletal defects. Recently, based on the 
phenotype of patients with overlapping 2q31 interstitial deletions, a new SHFM5
locus was proposed, proximal to the HOXD cluster, between EVX2 and marker D2S294.
DLX1 and DLX2 haploinsufficiency was suggested as the most plausible explanation 
for the observed SHFM-like limb anomalies in these cases.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Five unique, interstitial 2q31 deletion patients were
selected to further characterise the 2q31 region and to establish a
genotype/phenotype correlation map. The size of the deletions was delineated with
a chromosome 2 specific tiling path bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) array. 
The clinical and molecular data for this group of patients were compared to
others in the literature. A common locus for the observed skeletal anomalies,
including the HOXD genes and surrounding regulatory sequences, was delineated.
These results correlate with recently published studies in animal models. In
addition, a critical region for the facial gestalt of the 2q31.1 microdeletion
syndrome was delineated.
CONCLUSIONS: These results reinforce the hypothesis that the variable skeletal
phenotype in 2q31 deletion patients is a result of hemizygosity for the HOXD
genes and that the 2q31.1 microdeletion syndrome is a well defined and clinically
recognisable phenotype.

PMID: 21068127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Glia. 2011 Jan;59(1):68-81. doi: 10.1002/glia.21077.

Prospectively isolated CD133/CD24-positive ependymal cells from the adult spinal 
cord and lateral ventricle wall differ in their long-term in vitro self-renewal
and in vivo gene expression.

Pfenninger CV(1), Steinhoff C, Hertwig F, Nuber UA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund University,
Lund, Sweden.

In contrast to ependymal cells located above the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the
adult lateral ventricle wall (LVW), adult spinal cord (SC) ependymal cells
possess certain neural stem cell characteristics. The molecular basis of this
difference is unknown. In this study, antibodies against multiple cell surface
markers were applied to isolate pure populations of SC and LVW ependymal cells,
which allowed a direct comparison of their in vitro behavior and in vivo gene
expression profile. Isolated CD133(+)/CD24(+)/CD45(-)/CD34(-) ependymal cells
from the SC displayed in vitro self-renewal and differentiation capacity, whereas
those from the LVW did not. SC ependymal cells showed a higher expression of
several genes involved in cell division, cell cycle regulation, and chromosome
stability, which is consistent with a long-term self-renewal capacity, and shared
certain transcripts with neural stem cells of the embryonic forebrain. They also 
expressed several retinoic acid (RA)-regulated genes and responded to RA
exposure. LVW ependymal cells showed higher transcript levels of many genes
regulated by transforming growth factor-ß family members. Among them were Dlx2,
Id2, Hey1, which together with Foxg1 could explain their potential to turn into
neuroblasts under certain environmental conditions.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21046556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Evol Dev. 2010 Sep-Oct;12(5):459-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1525-142X.2010.00432.x.

Role of Dlx genes in craniofacial morphogenesis: Dlx2 influences skeletal
patterning by inducing ectomesenchymal aggregation in ovo.

Gordon CT(1), Brinas IM, Rodda FA, Bendall AJ, Farlie PG.

Author information: 
(1)Craniofacial Development Laboratory, Murdoch Children's Research Institute,
Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville 3052, Australia.

Dlx homeodomain transcription factors are expressed in neural crest-derived
mesenchyme of the pharyngeal arches and are required for patterning of the
craniofacial skeleton. However, the cellular and molecular mechanisms by which
Dlx factors control skeletogenesis in the facial primordia are unclear. We have
investigated the function of Dlx2 and Dlx5 by sustained misexpression in ovo. We 
find that RCAS-Dlx2- and RCAS-Dlx5-infected avian embryos exhibit very similar
patterns of local, stereotypical changes in skeletal development in the upper
jaw. The changes include ectopic dermal bone along the jugal arch, and ectopic
cartilages that develop between the quadrate and the trabecula. The ectopic
cartilage associated with the trabecula is reminiscent of a normally occurring
element in this region in some bird taxa. Analysis of the distribution of
RCAS-Dlx2-infected cells suggests that Dlx2 induces aggregation of
undifferentiated mesenchyme, which subsequently develops into the ectopic
skeletal elements. Comparison of infected embryos with restricted or widespread
misexpression, and of embryos in which Dlx genes were delivered to migratory or
postmigratory neural crest, indicate that there are limited regions of competence
in which the ectopic elements can arise. The site-specific differentiation
program that the aggregates undergo may be dependent on local environmental
signals. Our results suggest that Dlx factors mediate localization of
ectomesenchymal subpopulations within the pharyngeal arches and in doing so
define where skeletogenic condensations will arise. Consequently, variation in
Dlx expression or activity may have influenced the morphology of jaw elements
during vertebrate evolution.

© 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 20883215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Oct;24(10):1949-64. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0156. Epub 2010 Jul
28.

Enhancers of GnRH transcription embedded in an upstream gene use homeodomain
proteins to specify hypothalamic expression.

Iyer AK(1), Miller NL, Yip K, Tran BH, Mellon PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, California 92093-0674, USA.

GnRH, the central regulator of reproductive function, is produced by only
approximately 800 highly specialized hypothalamic neurons. Previous studies
identified a minimal promoter [GnRH minimal promoter (GnRH-P)] (-173/+1) and a
neuron-specific enhancer [GnRH-enhancer (E)1] (-1863/-1571) as regulatory regions
in the rat gene that confer this stringent specificity of GnRH expression to
differentiated GnRH neurons. In transgenic mice, these two elements target only
GnRH neurons but fail to drive expression in the entire population, suggesting
the existence of additional regulatory regions. Here, we define two novel, highly
conserved, upstream enhancers in the GnRH gene termed GnRH-E2 (-3135/-2631) and
GnRH-E3 (-4199/-3895) that increase neuron-specific GnRH expression through
interactions with GnRH-E1 and GnRH-P. GnRH-E2 and GnRH-E3 regulate GnRH
expression through similar mechanisms via Oct-1, Msx1, and Dlx2, which bind both 
GnRH-E2 and the GnRH-E3 critical region at -3952/-3895. Overexpression of Dlx2
increases transcription through GnRH-E2 and GnRH-E3. Remarkably, these novel
elements are contained within the 3' untranslated region of the neighboring
upstream gene, yet are marked endogenously by histone modification signatures
consistent with those of enhancers. Thus, GnRH-E2 and GnRH-E3 are novel
regulatory elements that, together with GnRH-E1 and GnRH-P, confer the
specificity of GnRH expression to differentiated and mature GnRH neurons.

PMCID: PMC2954641
PMID: 20667983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Toxicol Lett. 2010 Sep 1;197(3):188-92. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2010.05.021. Epub
2010 Jun 1.

Exposure to fenvalerate causes brain impairment during zebrafish development.

Gu A(1), Shi X, Yuan C, Ji G, Zhou Y, Long Y, Song L, Wang S, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Institute of Toxicology, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China.

Compared with increasing evidence suggesting that fenvalerate is neurotoxic to
adults, further information regarding developmental toxicity of this compound
attracts more attention. In this study, we used zebrafish as an environmental
monitoring model to further explore the potential toxicity of fenvalerate. Our
results demonstrated that larvae exposed to fenvalerate for 24-96 h displayed
obvious morphological abnormalities, and the LC50 concentrations were 131.95
microg/L (LC50-24h), 107.18 microg/L (LC50-48 h), 21.76 microg/L (LC50-72 h), and
6.25 microg/L (LC50-96 h). To further investigate the effects of fenvalerate on
embryos and larvae, acridine orange staining was performed at a 50 microg/L
concentration. Staining showed notable signs of apoptosis mainly in the brain.
Further studies revealed that fenvalerate induced alterations in SOD activity in 
larvae were concentration dependent and also related to the length of exposure.
Fenvalerate also down-regulated the expression of ogg1 and dlx2 genes in a
concentration dependent manner, which indicated that the oxidative-DNA repair
system as well as neurogenesis were impaired. In this study, we investigated the 
toxicity of fenvalerate using zebrafish, that provided new evidence of observable
brain impairment during embryogenesis due to fenvalerate exposure and discussed
their implications for the development of fenvalerate induced neurotoxicity.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20570613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. BMC Evol Biol. 2010 May 26;10:157. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-157.

Functional conservation of a forebrain enhancer from the elephant shark
(Callorhinchus milii ) in zebrafish and mice.

MacDonald RB(1), Debiais-Thibaud M, Martin K, Poitras L, Tay BH, Venkatesh B,
Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Research in Environmental Genomics, Department of Biology,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, K1N 6N5, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The phylogenetic position of the elephant shark (Callorhinchus milii 
) is particularly relevant to study the evolution of genes and gene regulation in
vertebrates. Here we examine the evolution of Dlx homeobox gene regulation during
vertebrate embryonic development with a particular focus on the forebrain. We
first identified the elephant shark sequence orthologous to the URE2 cis
-regulatory element of the mouse Dlx1/Dlx2 locus (herein named CmURE2). We then
conducted a comparative study of the sequence and enhancer activity of CmURE2
with that of orthologous regulatory sequences from zebrafish and mouse.
RESULTS: The CmURE2 sequence shows a high percentage of identity with its mouse
and zebrafish counterparts but is overall more similar to mouse URE2 (MmURE2)
than to zebrafish URE2 (DrURE2). In transgenic zebrafish and mouse embryos,
CmURE2 displayed enhancer activity in the forebrain that overlapped with that of 
DrURE2 and MmURE2. However, we detected notable differences in the activity of
the three sequences in the diencephalon. Outside of the forebrain, CmURE2 shows
enhancer activity in areas such as the pharyngeal arches and dorsal root ganglia 
where its' counterparts are also active.
CONCLUSIONS: Our transgenic assays show that part of the URE2 enhancer activity
is conserved throughout jawed vertebrates but also that new characteristics have 
evolved in the different groups. Our study demonstrates that the elephant shark
is a useful outgroup to study the evolution of regulatory mechanisms in
vertebrates and to address how changes in the sequence of cis -regulatory
elements translate into changes in their regulatory activity.

PMCID: PMC2891724
PMID: 20504318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. PLoS Biol. 2010 May 18;8(5):e1000373. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000373.

Directing astroglia from the cerebral cortex into subtype specific functional
neurons.

Heinrich C(1), Blum R, Gascón S, Masserdotti G, Tripathi P, Sánchez R, Tiedt S,
Schroeder T, Götz M, Berninger B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Genomics, Institute of Physiology,
Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, Munich, Germany.

Astroglia from the postnatal cerebral cortex can be reprogrammed in vitro to
generate neurons following forced expression of neurogenic transcription factors,
thus opening new avenues towards a potential use of endogenous astroglia for
brain repair. However, in previous attempts astroglia-derived neurons failed to
establish functional synapses, a severe limitation towards functional
neurogenesis. It remained therefore also unknown whether neurons derived from
reprogrammed astroglia could be directed towards distinct neuronal subtype
identities by selective expression of distinct neurogenic fate determinants. Here
we show that strong and persistent expression of neurogenic fate determinants
driven by silencing-resistant retroviral vectors instructs astroglia from the
postnatal cortex in vitro to mature into fully functional, synapse-forming
neurons. Importantly, the neurotransmitter fate choice of astroglia-derived
neurons can be controlled by selective expression of distinct neurogenic
transcription factors: forced expression of the dorsal telencephalic fate
determinant neurogenin-2 (Neurog2) directs cortical astroglia to generate
synapse-forming glutamatergic neurons; in contrast, the ventral telencephalic
fate determinant Dlx2 induces a GABAergic identity, although the overall
efficiency of Dlx2-mediated neuronal reprogramming is much lower compared to
Neurog2, suggesting that cortical astroglia possess a higher competence to
respond to the dorsal telencephalic fate determinant. Interestingly, however,
reprogramming of astroglia towards the generation of GABAergic neurons was
greatly facilitated when the astroglial cells were first expanded as neurosphere 
cells prior to transduction with Dlx2. Importantly, this approach of expansion
under neurosphere conditions and subsequent reprogramming with distinct
neurogenic transcription factors can also be extended to reactive astroglia
isolated from the adult injured cerebral cortex, allowing for the selective
generation of glutamatergic or GABAergic neurons. These data provide evidence
that cortical astroglia can undergo a conversion across cell lineages by forced
expression of a single neurogenic transcription factor, stably generating fully
differentiated neurons. Moreover, neuronal reprogramming of astroglia is not
restricted to postnatal stages but can also be achieved from terminally
differentiated astroglia of the adult cerebral cortex following injury-induced
reactivation.

PMCID: PMC2872647
PMID: 20502524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Evol Biol. 2010 Jul;23(7):1456-67. doi: 10.1111/j.1420-9101.2010.02004.x. Epub 
2010 May 7.

Comparative rates of lower jaw diversification in cichlid adaptive radiations.

Hulsey CD(1), Mims MC, Parnell NF, Streelman JT.

Author information: 
(1)Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN
37996, USA. chulsey@utk.edu

The lower jaw (LJ) provides an ideal trophic phenotype to compare rates and
patterns of macroevolution among cichlid radiations. Using a novel phylogeny of
four genes (ND2, dlx2, mitfb, and s7), we examined the evolutionary relationships
among two of the most phylogenetically disparate cichlid radiations: (i) the
Central America Heroines; and (ii) the East African Lake Malawi flock. To
quantify jaw morphology, we measured two LJ lever systems in approximately 40
species from each lineage. Using geologic calibrations, we generated a chronogram
for both groups and examined the rates of jaw evolution in the two radiations.
The most rapidly evolving components of the LJ differed between the two
radiations. However, the Lake Malawi flock exhibited a much faster rate of
evolution in several components of the LJ. This rapid rate of divergence is
consistent with natural selection, promoting unparalleled trophic diversification
in Lake Malawi cichlids.

PMID: 20456574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 28;5(4):e10392. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010392.

Expression of the Rap1 guanine nucleotide exchange factor, MR-GEF, is altered in 
individuals with bipolar disorder.

Bithell A(1), Hsu T, Kandanearatchi A, Landau S, Everall IP, Tsuang MT, Chana G, 
Williams BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College 
London, London, United Kingdom.

In the rodent forebrain GABAergic neurons are generated from progenitor cells
that express the transcription factors Dlx1 and Dlx2. The Rap-1 guanine
nucleotide exchange factor, MR-GEF, is turned on by many of these developing
GABAergic neurons. Expression of both Dlx1/2 and MR-GEF is retained in both adult
mouse and human forebrain where, in human, decreased Dlx1 expression has been
associated with psychosis. Using in situ hybridization studies we show that
MR-GEF expression is significantly down-regulated in the forebrain of Dlx1/2
double mutant mice suggesting that MR-GEF and Dlx1/2 form part of a common
signalling pathway during GABAergic neuronal development. We therefore compared
MR-GEF expression by in situ hybridization in individuals with major psychiatric 
disorders (schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, major depression) and control
individuals. We observed a significant positive correlation between layers II and
IV of the dorso-lateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) in the percentage of MR-GEF
expressing neurons in individuals with bipolar disorder, but not in individuals
with schizophrenia, major depressive disorder or in controls. Since MR-GEF
encodes a Rap1 GEF able to activate G-protein signalling, we suggest that changes
in MR-GEF expression could potentially influence neurotransmission.

PMCID: PMC2861006
PMID: 20436929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2010 Aug;44(4):318-29. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2010.04.003. Epub
2010 Apr 22.

Multipotent precursors in the anterior and hippocampal subventricular zone
display similar transcription factor signatures but their proliferation and
maintenance are differentially regulated.

Carrillo-García C(1), Suh Y, Obernier K, Hölzl-Wenig G, Mandl C, Ciccolini F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Interdisciplinary Center for Neurosciences (IZN), 
University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 364, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
Ciccolini@nbio.uni-heidelberg.de

Precursors within the subventricular zone (SVZ) exhibit regional variations in
the expression of transcription factors important for the regulation of their
proliferation and differentiation. In the anterior SVZ (aSVZ) the homeobox
transcription factor distalless (Dlx)2 modulates both processes by promoting
neural stem cell (NSC) activation as well as neurogenesis. Activated NSCs and
transit-amplifying precursors (TAPs) in the aSVZ both express high levels of
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR(high)) and form clones in response to
exogenous EGF. EGF-responsive cells are also present in the hippocampal
subependyma (hSVZ). However, it is not clear whether they represent NSCs or TAPs 
and whether their proliferation and differentiation are regulated as in the aSVZ.
Here we have purified EGFR(high) cells from both the aSVZ and hSVZ at different
ages. When isolated from perinatal tissue both populations were enriched in
multipotent clonogenic precursors, which generated GABAergic neurons. Although
they differed in absolute expression levels, activated NSCs and TAPs in both
regions displayed similar signatures of transcription factor expression. However,
activated NSCs were less frequent in the hSVZ than in the aSVZ. Furthermore,
increasing age had a greater inhibitory effect on NSC proliferation in the hSVZ
than in the aSVZ. This suggests that NSC activation is differentially regulated
in the two regions. Consistent with this hypothesis, we found that in hippocampal
precursors Dlx2 promoted neurogenesis but not NSC activation. Thus, most
clonogenic EGFR(high) precursors in the hSVZ represent TAPs and NSC proliferation
in the aSVZ and hSVZ is regulated by different mechanisms.

PMID: 20417282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cancer Res. 2010 Apr 1;70(7):2718-27. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3631. Epub
2010 Mar 16.

CpG island hypermethylation in human astrocytomas.

Wu X(1), Rauch TA, Zhong X, Bennett WP, Latif F, Krex D, Pfeifer GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, 
Duarte, CA, USA.

Astrocytomas are common and lethal human brain tumors. We have analyzed the
methylation status of over 28,000 CpG islands and 18,000 promoters in normal
human brain and in astrocytomas of various grades using the methylated CpG island
recovery assay. We identified 6,000 to 7,000 methylated CpG islands in normal
human brain. Approximately 5% of the promoter-associated CpG islands in the
normal brain are methylated. Promoter CpG island methylation is inversely
correlated whereas intragenic methylation is directly correlated with gene
expression levels in brain tissue. In astrocytomas, several hundred CpG islands
undergo specific hypermethylation relative to normal brain with 428 methylation
peaks common to more than 25% of the tumors. Genes involved in brain development 
and neuronal differentiation, such as BMP4, POU4F3, GDNF, OTX2, NEFM, CNTN4, OTP,
SIM1, FYN, EN1, CHAT, GSX2, NKX6-1, PAX6, RAX, and DLX2, were strongly enriched
among genes frequently methylated in tumors. There was an overrepresentation of
homeobox genes and 31% of the most commonly methylated genes represent targets of
the Polycomb complex. We identified several chromosomal loci in which many
(sometimes more than 20) consecutive CpG islands were hypermethylated in tumors. 
Seven such loci were near homeobox genes, including the HOXC and HOXD clusters,
and the BARHL2, DLX1, and PITX2 genes. Two other clusters of hypermethylated
islands were at sequences of recent gene duplication events. Our analysis offers 
mechanistic insights into brain neoplasia suggesting that methylation of the
genes involved in neuronal differentiation, in cooperation with other oncogenic
events, may shift the balance from regulated differentiation towards
gliomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC2848870
PMID: 20233874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Neurosci. 2010 Mar 10;30(10):3709-14. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5797-09.2010.

Necdin promotes tangential migration of neocortical interneurons from basal
forebrain.

Kuwajima T(1), Hasegawa K, Yoshikawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Regulation of Neuronal Development, Institute for Protein
Research, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Necdin is a pleiotropic protein that promotes neuronal differentiation and
survival. In mammals, the necdin gene on the maternal chromosome is silenced by
genomic imprinting, and only the paternal necdin gene is expressed in virtually
all postmitotic neurons. Necdin forms a complex with the homeodomain protein Dlx2
to enhance its transcriptional activity. Dlx2 plays a major role in controlling
tangential migration of GABAergic interneurons from the basal forebrain to the
neocortex. Here, we examined whether Dlx2-expressing interneurons migrate
properly in vivo in mutant mice lacking the paternal necdin gene. In
necdin-deficient mice at birth, the population of Dlx2-expressing cells
significantly decreased in the neocortex but increased in the preoptic area.
DiI-labeled cell migration assay using organotypic forebrain slice cultures
revealed that the number of cells migrating from the medial ganglionic eminence
into the neocortex was significantly reduced in necdin-deficient embryos.
Furthermore, necdin-deficient mice had a decreased population of neocortical
GABA-containing neurons and were highly susceptible to pentylenetetrazole-induced
seizures. These results suggest that necdin promotes tangential migration of
neocortical GABAergic interneurons during mammalian forebrain development.

PMID: 20220004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Jun;223(3):779-87. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22095.

Dlx homeobox gene family expression in osteoclasts.

Lézot F(1), Thomas BL, Blin-Wakkach C, Castaneda B, Bolanos A, Hotton D, Sharpe
PT, Heymann D, Carles GF, Grigoriadis AE, Berdal A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR 872, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France.
frederic.lezot@crc.jussieu.fr

Skeletal growth and homeostasis require the finely orchestrated secretion of
mineralized tissue matrices by highly specialized cells, balanced with their
degradation by osteoclasts. Time- and site-specific expression of Dlx and Msx
homeobox genes in the cells secreting these matrices have been identified as
important elements in the regulation of skeletal morphology. Such specific
expression patterns have also been reported in osteoclasts for Msx genes. The aim
of the present study was to establish the expression patterns of Dlx genes in
osteoclasts and identify their function in regulating skeletal morphology. The
expression patterns of all Dlx genes were examined during the whole
osteoclastogenesis using different in vitro models. The results revealed that
Dlx1 and Dlx2 are the only Dlx family members with a possible function in
osteoclastogenesis as well as in mature osteoclasts. Dlx5 and Dlx6 were detected 
in the cultures but appear to be markers of monocytes and their derivatives. In
vivo, Dlx2 expression in osteoclasts was examined using a Dlx2/LacZ transgenic
mouse. Dlx2 is expressed in a subpopulation of osteoclasts in association with
tooth, brain, nerve, and bone marrow volumetric growths. Altogether the present
data suggest a role for Dlx2 in regulation of skeletal morphogenesis via
functions within osteoclasts.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20205208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2010 Jul;22(7):806-13, e226. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2982.2010.01474.x. Epub 2010 Feb 8.

A 5-HT(4)-receptor activation-induced neural plasticity enhances in vivo
reconstructs of enteric nerve circuit insult.

Matsuyoshi H(1), Kuniyasu H, Okumura M, Misawa H, Katsui R, Zhang GX, Obata K,
Takaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology II, Nara Medical University School of Medicine,
Shijo-cho, Kashihara, Japan.

BACKGROUND: It was recently reported that some 5-HT(4)-receptor agonists
increased neuronal numbers and length of neurites in enteric neurons developing
in vitro from immunoselected neural crest-derived precursors. We aimed to explore
a novel approach in vivo to reconstruct the enteric neural circuitry that
mediates a fundamental distal gut reflex.
METHODS: The neural circuit insult was performed in guinea pigs by rectal
transection and subsequent end-to-end one layer anastomosis. A 5-HT(4)-receptor
agonist, mosapride citrate (10-100 micromol L(-1)) (applied for a patent) was
applied locally at the anastomotic site.
KEY RESULTS: Mosapride promoted the regeneration of the neural circuit in the
impaired myenteric plexus and the recovery of the defecation reflex in the distal
gut. Furthermore, mosapride generated neurofilament (NF)-, 5-HT(4)-receptor- and 
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU)-positive cells and surprisingly formed neural
network in the newly formed granulation tissue at the anastomotic site 2 weeks
after enteric nerve circuit insult. Possible neural stem cell markers,
anti-distal less homeobox 2 (DLX2)- and p75-positive and NF-positive cells
increased during the same time period. All actions by mosapride were inhibited by
the specific 5-HT(4)-receptor antagonist, GR113808 (10 micromol L(-1)).
CONCLUSIONS & INFERENCES: These results indicate that activation of enteric
neural 5-HT(4)-receptors promotes reconstruction of an enteric neural circuit
leading to the recovery of the defecation reflex in the distal gut, and that this
reconstruction involves possibly neural stem cells. These findings indicate that 
treatment with 5-HT(4) agonists could be a novel therapy for generating new
enteric neurons to rescue aganglionic gut disorders.

PMID: 20146727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Mol Syndromol. 2010;1(5):262-271. Epub 2011 May 18.

Refinement of the Region for Split Hand/Foot Malformation 5 on 2q31.1.

Theisen A(1), Rosenfeld JA, Shane K, McBride KL, Atkin JF, Gaba C, Hoo J,
Kurczynski TW, Schnur RE, Coffey LB, Zackai EH, Schimmenti L, Friedman N,
Zabukovec M, Ball S, Pagon R, Lucas A, Brasington CK, Spence JE, Sparks S, Banks 
V, Smith W, Friedberg T, Wyatt PR, Aust M, Tervo R, Crowley A, Skidmore D, Lamb
AN, Ravnan B, Sahoo T, Schultz R, Torchia BS, Sgro M, Chitayat D, Shaffer LG.

Author information: 
(1)Signature Genomic Laboratories, Spokane, Wash.

Background: Deletions that encompass 2q31.1 have been proposed as a microdeletion
syndrome with common clinical features, including intellectual
disability/developmental delay, microcephaly, cleft palate, growth delay, and
hand/foot anomalies. In addition, several genes within this region have been
proposed as candidates for split hand-foot malformation 5 (SHFM5). Methods: To
delineate the genotype-phenotype correlation between deletions of this region, we
identified 14 individuals with deletions at 2q31.1 detected by microarray
analysis for physical and developmental disabilities. Results: All subjects for
whom detailed clinical records were available had neurological deficits of
varying degree. Seven subjects with deletions encompassing the HOXD cluster had
hand/foot anomalies of varying severity, including syndactyly, brachydactyly, and
ectrodactyly. Of 7 subjects with deletions proximal to the HOXD cluster, 5 of
which encompassed DLX1/DLX2, none had clinically significant hand/foot anomalies.
In contrast to previous reports, the individuals in our study did not display a
characteristic gestalt of dysmorphic facial features. Conclusion: The absence of 
hand/foot anomalies in any of the individuals with deletions of DLX1/DLX2 but not
the HOXD cluster supports the hypothesis that haploinsufficiency of the HOXD
cluster, rather than DLX1/DLX2, accounts for the skeletal abnormalities in
subjects with 2q31.1 microdeletions.

PMCID: PMC3214950
PMID: 22140379  [PubMed]


108. Arch Oral Biol. 2010 Feb;55(2):108-14. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2009.12.002.

Expression of Wnt5a in tooth germs and the related signal transduction analysis.

Peng L(1), Dong G, Xu P, Ren LB, Wang CL, Aragon M, Zhou XD, Ye L.

Author information: 
(1)West China Hospital of Stomatology, China.

OBJECTIVE: Wnt5a is generally considered a non-canonical Wnt family member and
plays an important role in the development of several tissues through regulation 
of cell fate, proliferation, migration, polarity and death. This study
investigates its expression mode in human tooth development and the involved cell
signal transduction pathways, as they remain unclear.
DESIGN: The expression of Wnt5a was analyzed by immunohistochemistry method.
Recombinant adenovirus encoding full-length Wnt5a cDNA was constructed to
investigate four cell signal pathways and nine dentinogenesis nuclear
transcription factors in response to Wnt5a in human dental papilla cells (HDPCs).
RESULTS: Immunostaining revealed that Wnt5a was expressed in enamel epithelium
cells from the bud stage, and in odontoblast layers and dental papilla tissues
from early bell stage of human tooth development onward. Western blot analysis
indicated that p42/44 MAPK, p38 MAPK, JNK and AKT signal pathways could be
phosphorylated by WNT5A. RT-PCR analysis showed that Wnt5a increased the
expression of DLX1, DLX2, LEF1, MSX2, PAX9 and RUNX2 mRNA, but decreased BARX1
and PITX2 mRNA.
CONCLUSIONS: It was concluded that WNT5A is expressed in human tooth development,
and that p42/44 MAPK, p38 MAPK, JNK and AKT signal pathways and DLX1, DLX2, LEF1,
MSX2, PAX9, RUNX2 could be activated by Wnt5a.

Crown Copyright 2009. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20034610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Jan;152A(1):111-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33164.

Ectodermal dysplasia-like syndrome with mental retardation due to contiguous gene
deletion: further clinical and molecular delineation of del(2q32) syndrome.

Rifai L(1), Port-Lis M, Tabet AC, Bailleul-Forestier I, Benzacken B, Drunat S,
Kuzbari S, Passemard S, Verloes A, Aboura A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, AP-HP-Robert DEBRE University Hospital, Paris,
France.

We report on a patient with an interstitial deletion of the long arm of
chromosome 2 at 2q31.2q33.2. She had prenatal and postnatal growth retardation,
microcephaly, facial dysmorphism, cleft palate, camptodactyly, bilateral talipes 
equinovarus, severe intellectual disability, and ectodermal anomalies. She showed
thin, atrophic skin, sparse, brittle, slowly growing hair, oligodontia with
abnormally shaped teeth, normal sweating, and normal fingernails, consistent with
a diagnosis of ectodermal dysplasia. Array CGH analysis (Agilent 44K) showed the 
deletion to span 26 Mb, between cytogenetic bands 2q31.2 and 2q33. The deletion
leads to hemizygosity for the HOXD cluster and its regulatory elements,
COL3A1/COL5A2, GTF3C3, CASP8, CASP10, and SABT2 could perhaps interfere with long
range control of DLX1 and DLX2 expression. This girl confirms the existence of a 
clinically recognizable 2q32 microdeletion syndrome, as recently delineated by
Van Buggenhout et al. and confirms a novel putative locus for ectodermal
dysplasia on chromosome 2q31q33. We recommend considering cytogenetic and/or
molecular screening for del(2q32) in patients with developmental disability and
ectodermal dysplasia-like phenotype, including thin skin, oligodontia, dysplastic
teeth, and sparse hair.

PMID: 20034071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Differentiation. 2010 Feb;79(2):84-92. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2009.10.003. Epub 2009
Nov 3.

Effects of bone morphogenetic protein 2 on Id expression and neuroblastoma cell
differentiation.

Du Y(1), Yip H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, The University of Hong Kong, SAR, China.
duyang@hkusua.hku.hk

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are secretory signal molecules that have a
variety of regulatory functions during embryonic morphogenesis. BMP2 has been
shown to induce differentiation in many cell types, mediated through the
activation of its target genes: the inhibitors of differentiation (Id1-3) and key
transcription factors. In this study, we investigated the effects of BMP2 on
mouse neuroblastoma (Neuro2a) cell differentiation and regulation of the
expression of Id1-3 and neural-specific transcription factors. Our results showed
that BMP2 stimulation upregulated Id1-3 expression at the early stage of
application by involvement of the Smad signaling pathway. BMP2 caused
phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8 followed by upregulation of Id1-3. Co-incubation
with Noggin, a BMP antagonist, or Smad1 siRNA transfection significantly
inhibited phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8 and upregulation of Id protein.
Furthermore, our results showed that BMP2-induced differentiation of Neuro2a
cells into neurons by downregulating the expression of Id1-3 proteins and
upregulating the expression of neural-specific transcriptional factors Dlx2,
Brn3a, and NeuroD6. The results suggested that the transient upregulation of
Id1-3 expression during the early phase of BMP stimulation may play a role in
lineage specification and promote differentiation of neuroblastoma cells towards 
a neuronal phenotype. Subsequently, a coordinated increase in expression of
proneural transcription factors and a decrease in Id1-3 expression may culminate 
in the transition from proliferation to neurogenesis and the terminal neuronal
differentiation of neuroblastoma cells.

2009 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 19889495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2009 Dec;42(4):308-14. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2009.08.003. Epub
2009 Aug 14.

Interaction between DLX2 and EGFR regulates proliferation and neurogenesis of SVZ
precursors.

Suh Y(1), Obernier K, Hölzl-Wenig G, Mandl C, Herrmann A, Wörner K, Eckstein V,
Ciccolini F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Interdisciplinary Center for Neurosciences (IZN), 
University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 364, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

In the postnatal subventricular zone (SVZ) neural stem cells (NSCs) give rise to 
transit-amplifying precursors (TAPs) expressing high levels of epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) that in turn generate neuroblasts. Both TAPs and
neuroblasts express distal-less (DLX)2 homeobox transcription factor but the
latter proliferate less. Modulation of its expression in vivo has revealed that
DLX2 affects both neurogenesis and proliferation in the postnatal SVZ. However,
the mechanisms underlying these effects are not clear. To investigate this issue 
we have here forced the expression of DLX2 in SVZ isolated NSCs growing in
defined in vitro conditions. This analysis revealed that DLX2 affects the
proliferation of SVZ precursors by regulating two distinct steps of neural
lineage progression. Firstly, it promotes the lineage transition from NSCs to
TAPs. Secondly it enhances the proliferative response of neuronal progenitors to 
EGF. Thus DLX2 and EGFR signalling interact at multiple levels to coordinate
proliferation in the postnatal SVZ.

PMID: 19683576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2009 Dec 15;312(8):827-40. doi: 10.1002/jez.b.21298.

Forkhead transcription factor foxe1 regulates chondrogenesis in zebrafish.

Nakada C(1), Iida A, Tabata Y, Watanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute of Medical
Science, University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Forkhead transcription factor (Fox) e1 is a causative gene for Bamforth-Lazarus
syndrome, which is characterized by hypothyroidism and cleft palate. Applying
degenerate polymerase chain reaction using primers specific for the conserved
forkhead domain, we identified zebrafish foxe1 (foxe1). Foxe1 is expressed in the
thyroid, pharynx, and pharyngeal skeleton during development; strongly expressed 
in the gill and weakly expressed in the brain, eye, and heart in adult zebrafish.
A loss of function of foxe1 by morpholino antisense oligo (MO) exhibited abnormal
craniofacial development, shortening of Meckel's cartilage and the ceratohyals,
and suppressed chondrycytic proliferation. However, at 27 hr post fertilization, 
the foxe1 MO-injected embryos showed normal dlx2, hoxa2, and hoxb2 expression,
suggesting that the initial steps of pharyngeal skeletal development, including
neural crest migration and specification of the pharyngeal arch occurred
normally. In contrast, at 2 dpf, a severe reduction in the expression of sox9a,
colIIaI, and runx2b, which play roles in chondrocytic proliferation and
differentiation, was observed. Interestingly, fgfr2 was strongly upregulated in
the branchial arches of the foxe1 MO-injected embryos. Unlike Foxe1-null mice,
normal thyroid development in terms of morphology and thyroid-specific marker
expression was observed in foxe1 MO-injected zebrafish embryos. Taken together,
our results indicate that Foxe1 plays an important role in chondrogenesis during 
development of the pharyngeal skeleton in zebrafish, probably through regulation 
of fgfr2 expression. Furthermore, the roles reported for FOXE1 in mammalian
thyroid development may have been acquired during evolution.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19488987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Neuroscience. 2009 Aug 4;162(1):39-54. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.03.033.
Epub 2009 Mar 24.

Fibroblast growth factor-2 increases the expression of neurogenic genes and
promotes the migration and differentiation of neurons derived from transplanted
neural stem/progenitor cells.

Vergaño-Vera E(1), Méndez-Gómez HR, Hurtado-Chong A, Cigudosa JC, Vicario-Abejón 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Cajal, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Avda Dr.
Arce 37, E-28002 Madrid, Spain.

The capacity of neural stem cells (NSC) to generate different types of neurons
and glia depends on the action of intrinsic determinants and extracellular
signals. Here, we isolated adult olfactory bulb stem cells (aOBSC) that express
nestin, RC2 and Sox2, and that have the capacity to generate neurons possessing
mature features in culture and in vivo. The differentiation of aOBSC into neurons
and glia, as well as their genetic profile, was compared to that of embryonic
OBSC (eOBSC) and ganglionic eminence stem cells (GESC). While these eOBSC express
neurogenin (Ngn) 1 and 2, two telencephalic dorsal markers, GESC only express
Ngn2. Adult OBSC express either little or no detectable Ngn1 and 2, and they
produced significantly fewer neurons in culture than eOBSC. By contrast, Dlx2
transcripts (a telencephalic ventral marker) were only clearly detected in GESC. 
When transplanted into the early postnatal P5-P7 OB, each of the three
populations gave rise to cells with a distinct pattern of neuronal migration
and/or dendritic arborization. Overall, these findings suggest that cultured NSC 
partially maintain their regional and temporal specification. Notably,
significant neuronal migration and differentiation were only observed in vivo
when the NSC were briefly exposed to fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) before
grafting, a treatment that enhanced the neurogenin expression. Hence, the
migration and maturation of neurons derived from transplanted NSC can be promoted
by upregulating neurogenic gene expression with FGF-2.

PMID: 19318120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Nature. 2009 Mar 26;458(7237):529-33. doi: 10.1038/nature07726. Epub 2009 Feb 11.

Chromatin remodelling factor Mll1 is essential for neurogenesis from postnatal
neural stem cells.

Lim DA(1), Huang YC, Swigut T, Mirick AL, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Wysocka J, Ernst P, 
Alvarez-Buylla A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San Francisco,
505 Parnassus Street M779, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.
limd@neurosurg.ucsf.edu

Epigenetic mechanisms that maintain neurogenesis throughout adult life remain
poorly understood. Trithorax group (trxG) and Polycomb group (PcG) gene products 
are part of an evolutionarily conserved chromatin remodelling system that
activate or silence gene expression, respectively. Although PcG member Bmi1 has
been shown to be required for postnatal neural stem cell self-renewal, the role
of trxG genes remains unknown. Here we show that the trxG member Mll1
(mixed-lineage leukaemia 1) is required for neurogenesis in the mouse postnatal
brain. Mll1-deficient subventricular zone neural stem cells survive, proliferate 
and efficiently differentiate into glial lineages; however, neuronal
differentiation is severely impaired. In Mll1-deficient cells, early proneural
Mash1 (also known as Ascl1) and gliogenic Olig2 expression are preserved, but
Dlx2, a key downstream regulator of subventricular zone neurogenesis, is not
expressed. Overexpression of Dlx2 can rescue neurogenesis in Mll1-deficient
cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrates that Dlx2 is a direct target of
MLL in subventricular zone cells. In differentiating wild-type subventricular
zone cells, Mash1, Olig2 and Dlx2 loci have high levels of histone 3
trimethylated at lysine 4 (H3K4me3), consistent with their transcription. In
contrast, in Mll1-deficient subventricular zone cells, chromatin at Dlx2 is
bivalently marked by both H3K4me3 and histone 3 trimethylated at lysine 27
(H3K27me3), and the Dlx2 gene fails to properly activate. These data support a
model in which Mll1 is required to resolve key silenced bivalent loci in
postnatal neural precursors to the actively transcribed state for the induction
of neurogenesis, but not for gliogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3800116
PMID: 19212323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal. 2009 Feb 1;14(2):E69-72.

Multiple dens invaginatus, mulberry molar and conical teeth. Case report and
genetic considerations.

Sedano HO(1), Ocampo-Acosta F, Naranjo-Corona RI, Torres-Arellano ME.

Author information: 
(1)University of Minnesota, Minnesota, USA. hsedano@dentistry.ucla.edu

Dens in dente, also known as dens invaginatus and dilated compound odontoma, is a
malformation that can occur on primary, permanent, or supernumerary teeth that is
characterized by a deep invagination of the surface of a crown or root covered
with enamel. This abnormality in tooth morphology generally affect the maxillary 
lateral incisors but several cases of multiple dens invaginatus have been
reported in the literature. A 15 year-old female patient is reported here
presenting five dens invaginatus: four in the permanent mandibular incisors and
one in the permanent, maxillary left central incisor, additionally the following 
dental findings were observed: a permanent mandibular left mulberry molar,
molarization of some premolars, several microdontic conoid teeth, retention of
five primary teeth, absence of several permanent teeth germs, a macrodontic molar
with abnormal roots and several periapical radiolucencies associated to the dens 
invaginatus. There was no family history of similar dental findings to those
observed in the patient. There are several genes that participate in the
development of teeth, of those, the following five genes could be implicated as
responsible or co-participators for some of the dental anomalies present in this 
patient: MSX1 (Muscle segment homeobox 1), DLX1 & DLX2 (Distal-less homeobox 1 & 
2 genes), PAX9 (Paired box gene) and PITX2 (Pituitary homeobox transciption
factor 2).

PMID: 19179952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Comp Neurol. 2009 Feb 10;512(5):702-16. doi: 10.1002/cne.21917.

NG2 cells are distinct from neurogenic cells in the postnatal mouse
subventricular zone.

Komitova M(1), Zhu X, Serwanski DR, Nishiyama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Neurobiology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, 
Connecticut 06269-3156, USA.

NG2 cells express the chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan NG2 and are a fourth type 
of glia distinct from astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and microglia. NG2 cells
generate oligodendrocytes but have also been reported to represent neuronal
progenitor cells in the postnatal mouse subventricular zone (SVZ). We performed a
detailed immunohistochemical analysis of NG2 cells in the mouse SVZ, rostral
migratory stream (RMS), and olfactory bulb granule cell layer (OB GCL), which
constitute a neurogenic niche in the postnatal forebrain. NG2 cells in the SVZ
and RMS expressed the oligodendrocyte precursor cell antigen platelet-derived
growth factor receptor-alpha but did not express antigens known to be expressed
by neuronogenic cells in the SVZ, such as doublecortin, PSA-NCAM, beta-tubulin,
Dlx2, or GFAP. More than 99.5% of the proliferating cells in the SVZ were NG2
negative. In the olfactory bulb, NG2 cells were found to generate primarily
oligodendrocytes and a small number of astrocytes but not neurons. In the SVZ and
RMS, NG2 cells were sparse and made up a much smaller fraction of the cells
compared with the surrounding nonneurogenic parenchyma. Parenchymal NG2 cells
were often located along the border of the SVZ and RMS. The abundance of NG2
cells increased in the distal parts of the RMS and especially in the OB GCL,
where NG2 cell processes were seen in close proximity to many maturing
interneurons. Our findings indicate that NG2 cells do not represent neuronal
progenitor cells in the postnatal SVZ but are likely to be oligodendrocyte
precursor cells.

PMCID: PMC2614367
PMID: 19058188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Dev Dyn. 2008 Dec;237(12):3921-6. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21806.

Isolation and expression analysis of Alzheimer's disease-related gene xb51 in
zebrafish.

Kim HT(1), Kim EH, Yoo KW, Lee MS, Choi JH, Park HC, Yeo SY, Lee DS, Kim CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, School of Bioscience & Biotechnology, Chungnam National
University, Daejeon, South Korea.

XB51 protein is known to interact with the amino-terminal of the X11L protein and
to be involved in Abeta40 generation, a hallmark of Alzheimer's disease. In this 
study, we isolated a zebrafish xb51 homologue and analyzed its spatio-temporal
expression pattern during early brain development. The xb51 transcript was first 
detected in the forebrain at 22 hr post-fertilization. Expression of xb51 in the 
brain persisted by 36 hpf and became more complex in the brain after 48 hpf. The 
detailed expression domain of xb51 in the dorsal telencephalon was defined by
several molecular markers: emx1, dlx2, lim1, islet1, neurod4/zath3, ngn1, her4,
and elavl3/huC. The location of xb51-expressing cells was restricted in a subset 
of cells positive for elavl3/huC and acetylated alpha-tubulin, markers of
differentiating and/or differentiated neurons. Together, these results suggest
that xb51 may be required for maturation and maintenance of xb51-expressing
neurons in the forebrain.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19035353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2009 Feb;40(2):167-86. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2008.10.003. Epub
2008 Nov 1.

Generation of Cre-transgenic mice using Dlx1/Dlx2 enhancers and their
characterization in GABAergic interneurons.

Potter GB(1), Petryniak MA, Shevchenko E, McKinsey GL, Ekker M, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94158-2611, USA. gregory.potter@ucsf.edu

DLX1 and DLX2 transcription factors are necessary for forebrain GABAergic neuron 
differentiation, migration, and survival. We generated transgenic mice that
express Cre-recombinase under the control of two ultra-conserved DNA elements
near the Dlx1 and 2 locus termed I12b and URE2. We show that Cre-recombinase is
active in a "Dlx-pattern" in the embryonic forebrain of transgenic mice. I12b-Cre
is more active than URE2-Cre in the medial ganglionic eminences and its
derivatives. Fate-mapping of EGFP+ cells in adult Cre;Z/EG animals demonstrated
that GABAergic neurons, but not glia, are labeled. Most NPY+, nNOS+,
parvalbumin+, and somatostatin+ cells are marked by I12b-Cre in the cortex and
hippocampus, while 25-40% of these interneuron subtypes are labeled by URE2-Cre. 
Labeling of neurons generated between E12.5 to E15.5 indicated differences in
birth-dates of EGFP+ cells that populate the olfactory bulb, hippocampus, and
cortex. Finally, we provide the first in vivo evidence that both I12b and URE2
are direct targets of DLX2 and require Dlx1 and Dlx2 expression for proper
activity.

PMCID: PMC2693920
PMID: 19026749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Psychiatr Genet. 2008 Dec;18(6):295-301. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e3283060fa5.

Polymorphisms of coding trinucleotide repeats of homeogenes in neurodevelopmental
psychiatric disorders.

Laroche F(1), Ramoz N, Leroy S, Fortin C, Rousselot-Paillet B, Philippe A,
Colleaux L, Bresson JL, Mogenet A, Golse B, Mouren-Simeoni MC, Gorwood P, Galli
T, Simonneau M, Krebs MO, Robel L.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM AVENIR, Institut Jacques Monod UMR7592, Paris, France.

OBJECTIVES: Autism (MIM#209850) and schizophrenia (MIM#181500) are both
neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders characterized by a highly genetic
component. Homeogenes and forkhead genes encode transcription factors, which have
been involved in brain development and cell differentiation. Thus, they are
relevant candidate genes for psychiatric disorders. Genetic studies have reported
an association between autism and DLX2, HOXA1, EN2, ARX, and FOXP2 genes whereas 
only three studies of EN2, OTX2, and FOXP2 were performed on schizophrenia.
Interestingly, most of these candidate genes contain trinucleotide repeats coding
for polyamino acid stretch in which instability can be the cause of
neurodevelopmental disorders. Our goal was to identify variations of coding
trinucleotide repeats in schizophrenia, autism, and idiopathic mental
retardation.
METHODS: We screened the coding trinucleotide repeats of OTX1, EN1, DLX2, HOXA1, 
and FOXP2 genes in populations suffering from schizophrenia (247 patients),
autism (98 patients), and idiopathic mental retardation (56 patients), and
compared them with control populations (112 super controls and 202 healthy
controls).
RESULTS: Novel deletions and insertions of coding trinucleotide repeats were
found in the DLX2, HOXA1, and FOXP2 genes. Most of these variations were detected
in controls and no difference in their distribution was observed between patient 
and control groups. Two different polymorphisms in FOXP2 were, however, found
only in autistic patients and the functional consequences of these variations of 
repeats have to be characterized and correlated to particular clinical features.
CONCLUSION: This study did not identify specific disease risk variants of
trinucleotide repeats in OTX1, EN1, DLX2, HOXA1, and FOXP2 candidate genes in
neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders.

PMID: 19018235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Bone. 2009 Jan;44(1):32-45. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2008.08.133. Epub 2008 Oct 7.

Gene expression signatures of a fibroblastoid preosteoblast and cuboidal
osteoblast cell model compared to the MLO-Y4 osteocyte cell model.

Yang W(1), Harris MA, Heinrich JG, Guo D, Bonewald LF, Harris SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics and Cellular and Structural Biology, University of 
Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA.

In the osteoblast 2T3 cell model, 326 genes significantly increase in expression 
as subconfluent fibroblastic 2T3 cells become confluent and cuboidal. This gene
set includes BMP2/4, Dlx2/5, Runx2, Osterix and Lrp5, as well as TGFbeta
regulated genes. Both activated or total nuclear Smad158 and Smad2 levels
increase as they become confluent, and beta-catenin protein expression increases 
as 2T3 cells become confluent, reflecting a set of genes involved in early
preosteoblast to osteoblast commitment, as observed in vitro and in vivo. Gene
Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) demonstrated that this 326 dataset is very similar
to several early osteoblast geneset signatures. The MLO-Y4 cell model is a
well-known in vitro osteocyte model. The MLO-Y4 expression pattern was directly
compared with the 2T3 osteoblast cell model. 181 genes that are highly expressed 
in MLO-Y4 osteocytes compared to osteoblasts were identified. Very few genes
expressed in MLO-Y4 cells are found in osteocytes directly isolate from bone,
suggesting that osteocyte specific gene programs most likely require the
osteocytes to be embedded in the proper mineralized matrix. The MLO-Y4 dataset
includes few established in vivo osteocyte markers, but does include several
transcription factors such as Vitamin D receptor, Tcf7, and Irx5, whose
expression was confirmed in osteocytes in vivo. Gene expression signatures in
MLO-Y4 cells, as determined by functional clustering and interaction maps,
suggest active prostaglandin-PKA pathways, genes involved in dendrite formation, 
acute/defense response pathways, TGFbeta signaling, and interferon/chemokine
pathways. GSEA demonstrated that MLO-Y4 expression pattern is similar to
macrophages, mesenchymal fibroblasts, and early osteoblasts.

PMCID: PMC2692918
PMID: 18973839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Neurosci. 2008 Oct 15;28(42):10674-86. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1283-08.2008.

Arx is a direct target of Dlx2 and thereby contributes to the tangential
migration of GABAergic interneurons.

Colasante G(1), Collombat P, Raimondi V, Bonanomi D, Ferrai C, Maira M, Yoshikawa
K, Mansouri A, Valtorta F, Rubenstein JL, Broccoli V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Technological Research, San Raffaele Scientific
Institute, Stem Cell Research Institute, Vita e Salute San Raffaele University,
20132 Milan, Italy.

The Arx transcription factor is expressed in the developing ventral telencephalon
and subsets of its derivatives. Mutation of human ARX ortholog causes
neurological disorders including epilepsy, lissencephaly, and mental retardation.
We have isolated the mouse Arx endogenous enhancer modules that control its
tightly compartmentalized forebrain expression. Interestingly, they are scattered
downstream of its coding region and partially included within the introns of the 
downstream PolA1 gene. These enhancers are ultraconserved noncoding sequences
that are highly conserved throughout the vertebrate phylum. Functional
characterization of the Arx GABAergic enhancer element revealed its strict
dependence on the activity of Dlx transcription factors. Dlx overexpression
induces ectopic expression of endogenous Arx and its isolated enhancer, whereas
loss of Dlx expression results in reduced Arx expression, suggesting that Arx is 
a key mediator of Dlx function. To further elucidate the mechanisms involved, a
combination of gain-of-function studies in mutant Arx or Dlx tissues was pursued.
This analysis provided evidence that, although Arx is necessary for the
Dlx-dependent promotion of interneuron migration, it is not required for the
GABAergic cell fate commitment mediated by Dlx factors. Although Arx has
additional functions independent of the Dlx pathway, we have established a direct
genetic relationship that controls critical steps in the development of
telencephalic GABAergic neurons. These findings contribute elucidating the
genetic hierarchy that likely underlies the etiology of a variety of human
neurodevelopmental disorders.

PMCID: PMC3844830
PMID: 18923043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Histochem Cytochem. 2009 Jan;57(1):69-78. doi: 10.1369/jhc.2008.951707. Epub
2008 Oct 14.

Msx and dlx homeogene expression in epithelial odontogenic tumors.

Ruhin-Poncet B(1), Ghoul-Mazgar S, Hotton D, Capron F, Jaafoura MH, Goubin G,
Berdal A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Orofacial Biology and Pathology-Centre de Recherche des
Cordeliers, INSERM, UMR S 872, Team 5, Pierre and Marie Curie University, Paris, 
France.

Epithelial odontogenic tumors are rare jaw pathologies that raise clinical
diagnosis and prognosis dilemmas notably between ameloblastomas and clear cell
odontogenic carcinomas (CCOCs). In line with previous studies, the molecular
determinants of tooth development-amelogenin, Msx1, Msx2, Dlx2, Dlx3, Bmp2, and
Bmp4-were analyzed by RT-PCR, ISH, and immunolabeling in 12 recurrent
ameloblastomas and in one case of CCOC. Although Msx1 expression imitates normal 
cell differentiation in these tumors, other genes showed a distinct pattern
depending on the type of tumor and the tissue involved. In benign ameloblastomas,
ISH localized Dlx3 transcripts and inconstantly detected Msx2 transcripts in
epithelial cells. In the CCOC, ISH established a lack of both Dlx3 and Msx2
transcripts but allowed identification of the antisense transcript of Msx1, which
imitates the same scheme of distribution between mesenchyme and epithelium as in 
the cup stage of tooth development. Furthermore, while exploring the expression
pattern of signal molecules by RT-PCR, Bmp2 was shown to be completely
inactivated in the CCOC and irregularly noticeable in ameloblastomas. Bmp4 was
always expressed in all the tumors. Based on the established roles of Msx and Dlx
transcription factors in dental cell fates, these data suggest that their altered
expression is a proposed trail to explain the genesis and/or the progression of
odontogenic tumors.

PMCID: PMC2605714
PMID: 18854600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Feb;17(2):228-35. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.148. Epub 2008 Aug
27.

The DLX1and DLX2 genes and susceptibility to autism spectrum disorders.

Liu X(1), Novosedlik N, Wang A, Hudson ML, Cohen IL, Chudley AE, Forster-Gibson
CJ, Lewis SM, Holden JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.

An imbalance between excitation and inhibition in the cerebral cortex has been
suggested as a possible etiology of autism. The DLX genes encode
homeodomain-containing transcription factors controlling the generation of
GABAergic cortical interneurons. The DLX1 and DLX2 genes lie head-to-head in
2q32, a region associated with autism susceptibility. We investigated 6 Tag SNPs 
within the DLX1/2 genes in two cohorts of multiplex (MPX) and one of simplex
(SPX) families for association with autism. Family-based association tests showed
strong association with five of the SNPs. The common alleles of rs743605 and
rs4519482 were significantly associated with autism (P<0.012) in the first sample
of 138 MPX families, with the latter remaining significant after correction for
multiple testing (P(cor)=0.0046). Findings in a second sample of 169 MPX families
not only confirmed the association at rs4519482 (P=0.034) but also showed strong 
allelic association of the common alleles at rs788172, rs788173 and rs813720
(P(cor)=0.0003-0.04). In the combined MPX families, the common alleles were all
significantly associated with autism (P(cor)=0.0005-0.016). The GGGTG haplotype
was over transmitted in the two MPX cohorts and the combined samples
[P(cor)<0.05: P(cor)=0.00007 for the combined MPX families, Odds Ratio: 1.75 (95%
CI: 1.33-2.30)]. Further testing in 306 SPX families replicated the association
at rs4519482 (P=0.033) and the over transmission of the haplotype GGGTG (P=0.012)
although P-values were not significant after correction for multiple testing. The
findings support the presence of two functional polymorphisms, one in or near
each of the DLX genes that increase susceptibility to, or cause, autism in MPX
families where there is a greater genetic component for these conditions.

PMCID: PMC2986060
PMID: 18728693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Development. 2008 Sep;135(17):2905-16. doi: 10.1242/dev.019778.

Dlx genes pattern mammalian jaw primordium by regulating both lower jaw-specific 
and upper jaw-specific genetic programs.

Jeong J(1), Li X, McEvilly RJ, Rosenfeld MG, Lufkin T, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, University of California San Francisco, 1550 4th street, San
Francisco, CA 94158, USA. juhee.jeong@ucsf.edu

Dlx transcription factors are implicated in patterning the mammalian jaw, based
on their nested expression patterns in the first branchial arch (primordium for
jaw) and mutant phenotypes; inactivation of Dlx1 and Dlx2 (Dlx1/2-/-) causes
defects in the upper jaw, whereas Dlx5/6(-/-) results in homeotic transformation 
of the lower jaw into upper jaw. Therefore, the 'Dlx codes' appear to regionalize
the jaw primordium such that Dlx1/2 regulate upper jaw development, while Dlx5/6 
confer the lower jaw fate. Towards identifying the genetic pathways downstream of
Dlx5/6, we compared the gene expression profiles of the wild-type and Dlx5/6(-/-)
mouse mandibular arch (prospective lower jaw). We identified 20 previously
unrecognized Dlx5/6-downstream genes, of which 12 were downregulated and 8
upregulated in the mutant. We found a Dlx-regulated transcriptional enhancer in
close proximity to Gbx2, one of the Dlx5/6-downstream genes, strongly suggesting 
that Gbx2 is a direct target of Dlx5/6. We also showed that Pou3f3 is normally
expressed in the maxillary (prospective upper jaw) but not mandibular arch, is
upregulated in the mandibular arch of Dlx5/6(-/-), and is essential for formation
of some of the maxillary arch-derived skeleton. A comparative analysis of the
morphological and molecular phenotypes of various Dlx single and double mutants
revealed that Dlx1, 2, 5 and 6 act both partially redundantly and
antagonistically to direct differential expression of downstream genes in each
domain of the first branchial arch. We propose a new model for Dlx-mediated
mammalian jaw patterning.

PMID: 18697905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Aug 5;105(31):10877-82. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0805205105. Epub 2008 Jul 29.

Distal-less homeobox transcription factors regulate development and maturation of
natural killer cells.

Sunwoo JB(1), Kim S, Yang L, Naik T, Higuchi DA, Rubenstein JL, Yokoyama WM.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Division, Department of Medicine, and Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Natural killer (NK) cells constitute a subpopulation of lymphocytes that develop 
from precursors in the bone marrow (BM), but the transcriptional regulation of
their development and maturation is only beginning to be understood, in part due 
to their relatively rare abundance, especially of developmental subsets. Using a 
mouse model in which NK cells are arrested at an immature stage of development,
and a gene expression profiling approach, we uncovered transient normal NK cell
expression of a homeobox transcription factor (TF) family, called Distal-less
(Dlx), which had been primarily implicated in murine CNS, craniofacial, limb, and
skin development. Our studies demonstrate that Dlx1, Dlx2, and Dlx3 are
transiently expressed in immature Mac-1(lo) NK cells within the BM, with Dlx3
being the predominantly expressed member. These genes are expressed in a
temporally regulated pattern with overlapping waves of expression, and they
display functional redundancy. Expression is extinguished in fully mature splenic
NK cells, and persistent expression of Dlx genes leads to functionally immature
NK cells arrested at the Mac-1(lo) stage. Whereas conventional splenic NK cells
develop but are arrested at an immature stage, there appears to be a complete
failure to develop CD127(+) thymic NK cells when Dlx genes are persistently
expressed. We also observed that T and B cells fail to develop in the context of 
persistent Dlx1 expression. Thus, these studies indicate that Dlx TFs play a
functional role in lymphocyte development.

PMCID: PMC2504821
PMID: 18664585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Mol Phylogenet Evol. 2008 Oct;49(1):136-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ympev.2008.06.008.
Epub 2008 Jun 24.

Phylogenetic relationships and the evolution of regulatory gene sequences in the 
parrotfishes.

Smith LL(1), Fessler JL, Alfaro ME, Streelman JT, Westneat MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Field Museum of Natural History, 1400 S. Lakeshore
Drive, Chicago, IL 60605-2496, USA.

Regulatory genes control the expression of other genes and are key components of 
developmental processes such as segmentation and embryonic construction of the
skull in vertebrates. Here we examine the variability and evolution of three
vertebrate regulatory genes, addressing issues of their utility for phylogenetics
and comparing the rates of genetic change seen in regulatory loci to the rates
seen in other genes in the parrotfishes. The parrotfishes are a diverse group of 
colorful fishes from coral reefs and seagrasses worldwide and have been placed
phylogenetically within the family Labridae. We tested phylogenetic hypotheses
among the parrotfishes, with a focus on the genera Chlorurus and Scarus, by
analyzing eight gene fragments for 42 parrotfishes and eight outgroup species. We
sequenced mitochondrial 12s rRNA (967 bp), 16s rRNA (577 bp), and cytochrome b
(477 bp). From the nuclear genome, we sequenced part of the protein-coding genes 
rag2 (715 bp), tmo4c4 (485 bp), and the developmental regulatory genes otx1 (672 
bp), bmp4 (488bp), and dlx2 (522 bp). Bayesian, likelihood, and parsimony
analyses of the resulting 4903 bp of DNA sequence produced similar topologies
that confirm the monophyly of the scarines and provide a phylogeny at the species
level for portions of the genera Scarus and Chlorurus. Four major clades of
Scarus were recovered, with three distributed in the Indo-Pacific and one
containing Caribbean/Atlantic taxa. Molecular rates suggest a Miocene origin of
the parrotfishes (22 mya) and a recent divergence of species within Scarus and
Chlorurus, within the past 5 million years. Developmentally important genes made 
a significant contribution to phylogenetic structure, and rates of genetic
evolution were high in bmp4, similar to other coding nuclear genes, but low in
otx1 and the dlx2 exons. Synonymous and non-synonymous substitution patterns in
developmental regulatory genes support the hypothesis of stabilizing selection
during the history of these genes, with several phylogenetic regions of
accelerated non-synonymous change detected in the phylogeny.

PMCID: PMC3418665
PMID: 18621133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Neurosci. 2008 Jun 18;28(25):6439-52. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0700-08.2008.

A dlx2- and pax6-dependent transcriptional code for periglomerular neuron
specification in the adult olfactory bulb.

Brill MS(1), Snapyan M, Wohlfrom H, Ninkovic J, Jawerka M, Mastick GS,
Ashery-Padan R, Saghatelyan A, Berninger B, Götz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Genomics, Institute of Physiology,
Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, D-80336 Munich, Germany.

Distinct olfactory bulb (OB) interneurons are thought to become specified
depending on from which of the different subregions lining the lateral ventricle 
wall they originate, but the role of region-specific transcription factors (TFs) 
in the generation of OB interneurons diversity is still poorly understood.
Despite the crucial roles of the Dlx family of TFs for patterning and
neurogenesis in the ventral telencephalon during embryonic development, their
role in adult neurogenesis has not yet been addressed. Here we show that in the
adult brain, Dlx 1 and Dlx2 are expressed in progenitors of the lateral but not
the dorsal subependymal zone (SEZ), thus exhibiting a striking regional
specificity. Using retroviral vectors to examine the function of Dlx2 in a
cell-autonomous manner, we demonstrate that this TF is necessary for neurogenesis
of virtually all OB interneurons arising from the lateral SEZ. Beyond its
function in generic neurogenesis, Dlx2 also plays a crucial role in neuronal
subtype specification in the OB, promoting specification of adult-born
periglomerular neurons (PGNs) toward a dopaminergic fate. Strikingly, Dlx2
requires interaction with Pax6, because Pax6 deletion blocks Dlx2-mediated PGN
specification. Thus, Dlx2 wields a dual function by first instructing generic
neurogenesis from adult precursors and subsequently specifying PGN subtypes in
conjunction with Pax6.

PMCID: PMC3844782
PMID: 18562615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Vasc Res. 2008;45(6):457-68. doi: 10.1159/000127437. Epub 2008 Apr 23.

Altered transforming growth factor-beta signaling in a murine model of thoracic
aortic aneurysm.

Jones JA(1), Barbour JR, Stroud RE, Bouges S, Stephens SL, Spinale FG, Ikonomidis
JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery Research, Medical
University of South Carolina, Ralph H. Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Charleston, SC 29425, USA. jonesja@musc.edu

OBJECTIVE: Thoracic aortic aneurysms (TAAs) develop by a multifactorial process
involving maladaptive signaling pathways that alter the aortic vascular
environment. Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) has been implicated in
regulating the structure and composition of the extracellular matrix by
differential activation of various intracellular signaling pathways. However,
whether and to what degree TGF-beta signaling contributes to TAA development
remains unclear. Accordingly, the hypothesis that alterations in TGF-beta
signaling occur during aneurysm formation was tested in a murine model of TAA.
METHODS: TAAs were surgically induced in mice (C57BL/6J) and aortas were analyzed
at predetermined time points (1, 2, and 4 weeks post-TAA induction). Quantitative
real-time PCR (QPCR) was performed to evaluate the expression of 84 relevant
TGF-beta superfamily genes, and the protein levels of key signaling intermediates
were measured by immunoblotting. Results were compared to unoperated reference
control mice.
RESULTS: QPCR revealed increased expression of TGF-beta superfamily ligands
(Gdf-2, -6, -7, Inhba), ligand inhibitors (Bmper, Chrd, Gsc), and transcriptional
regulators (Dlx2, Evi1), among other genes (Cdkn2b, Igf1, IL-6). Protein levels
of TGF-beta receptor(II), Smad2, Smad1/5/8, phospho-Smad1/5/8, and Smurf1 were
increased from control values post-TAA induction. Both TGF-beta receptor(I) and
Smad4 were decreased from control values, while ALK-1 levels remained unchanged.
CONCLUSIONS: These alterations in the TGF-beta pathway suggest a mechanism by
which primary signaling is switched from a TGF-betaR(I)/Smad2-dependent response,
to an ALK-1/Smad1/5/8 response, representing a significant change in signaling
outcome, which may enhance matrix degradation.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2574785
PMID: 18434745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Cell Physiol. 2008 Sep;216(3):688-97. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21448.

Physiological implications of DLX homeoproteins in enamel formation.

Lézot F(1), Thomas B, Greene SR, Hotton D, Yuan ZA, Castaneda B, Bolaños A, Depew
M, Sharpe P, Gibson CW, Berdal A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR 872, Paris, F-75006 France. frederic.lezot@crc.jussieu.fr

Tooth development is a complex process including successive stages of initiation,
morphogenesis, and histogenesis. The role of the Dlx family of homeobox genes
during the early stages of tooth development has been widely analyzed, while
little data has been reported on their role in dental histogenesis. The
expression pattern of Dlx2 has been described in the mouse incisor; an inverse
linear relationship exists between the level of Dlx2 expression and enamel
thickness, suggesting a role for Dlx2 in regulation of ameloblast differentiation
and activity. In vitro data have revealed that DLX homeoproteins are able to
regulate the expression of matrix proteins such as osteocalcin. The aim of the
present study was to analyze the expression and function of Dlx genes during
amelogenesis. Analysis of Dlx2/LacZ transgenic reporter mice, Dlx2 and Dlx1/Dlx2 
null mutant mice, identified spatial variations in Dlx2 expression within molar
tooth germs and suggests a role for Dlx2 in the organization of preameloblastic
cells as a palisade in the labial region of molars. Later, during the secretory
and maturation stages of amelogenesis, the expression pattern in molars was found
to be similar to that described in incisors. The expression patterns of the other
Dlx genes were examined in incisors and compared to Dlx2. Within the ameloblasts 
Dlx3 and Dlx6 are expressed constantly throughout presecretory, secretory, and
maturation stages; during the secretory phase when Dlx2 is transitorily switched 
off, Dlx1 expression is upregulated. These data suggest a role for DLX
homeoproteins in the morphological control of enamel. Sequence analysis of the
amelogenin gene promoter revealed five potential responsive elements for DLX
proteins that are shown to be functional for DLX2. Regulation of amelogenin in
ameloblasts may be one method by which DLX homeoproteins may control enamel
formation. To conclude, this study establishes supplementary functions of Dlx
family members during tooth development: the participation in establishment of
dental epithelial functional organization and the control of enamel morphogenesis
via regulation of amelogenin expression.

PMID: 18366088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 16;369(4):1012-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.02.135. Epub 2008 Mar 7.

Enhanced BMP signaling results in supernumerary tooth formation in USAG-1
deficient mouse.

Murashima-Suginami A(1), Takahashi K, Sakata T, Tsukamoto H, Sugai M, Yanagita M,
Shimizu A, Sakurai T, Slavkin HC, Bessho K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto University, Shogoin-Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Uterine sensitization associated gene-1 (USAG-1) is a BMP antagonist, and also
modulates Wnt signaling. We previously reported that USAG-1 deficient mice have
supernumerary teeth. The supernumerary maxillary incisor appears to form as a
result of the successive development of the rudimentary upper incisor. USAG-1
abrogation rescued apoptotic elimination of odontogenic mesenchymal cells. We
confirmed that BMPs were expressed in both the epithelium and mesenchyme of the
rudimentary incisor at E14 and E15. BMP signaling in the rudimentary maxillary
incisor, assessed by expressions of Msx1 and Dlx2 and the phosphorylation of Smad
protein, was significantly enhanced. Wnt signaling as demonstrated by the nuclear
localization of beta-catenin was also up-regulated. Inhibition of BMP signaling
rescues supernumerary tooth formation in E15 incisor explant culture. Based upon 
these results, we conclude that enhanced BMP signaling results in supernumerary
teeth and BMP signaling was modulated by Wnt signaling in the USAG-1 deficient
mouse model.

PMID: 18329379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Dev Biol. 2008 Apr 15;316(2):458-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.01.001. Epub 2008 
Jan 16.

Expression and function of Dlx genes in the osteoblast lineage.

Li H(1), Marijanovic I, Kronenberg MS, Erceg I, Stover ML, Velonis D, Mina M,
Heinrich JG, Harris SE, Upholt WB, Kalajzic I, Lichtler AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, 263 Farmington Avenue, CT 06030, USA.

Our laboratory and others have shown that overexpression of Dlx5 stimulates
osteoblast differentiation. Dlx5(-/-)/Dlx6(-/-) mice have more severe
craniofacial and limb defects than Dlx5(-/-), some of which are potentially due
to defects in osteoblast maturation. We wished to investigate the degree to which
other Dlx genes compensate for the lack of Dlx5, thus allowing normal development
of the majority of skeletal elements in Dlx5(-/-) mice. Dlx gene expression in
cells from different stages of the osteoblast lineage isolated by FACS sorting
showed that Dlx2, Dlx5 and Dlx6 are expressed most strongly in less mature
osteoblasts, whereas Dlx3 is very highly expressed in differentiated osteoblasts 
and osteocytes. In situ hybridization and Northern blot analysis demonstrated the
presence of endogenous Dlx3 mRNA within osteoblasts and osteocytes. Dlx3 strongly
upregulates osteoblastic markers with a potency comparable to Dlx5. Cloned chick 
or mouse Dlx6 showed stimulatory effects on osteoblast differentiation. Our
results suggest that Dlx2 and Dlx6 have the potential to stimulate osteoblastic
differentiation and may compensate for the absence of Dlx5 to produce relatively 
normal osteoblastic differentiation in Dlx5 knockout mice, while Dlx3 may play a 
distinct role in late stage osteoblast differentiation and osteocyte function.

PMCID: PMC2679944
PMID: 18280462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Orthod Craniofac Res. 2008 Feb;11(1):24-31. doi:
10.1111/j.1601-6343.2008.00410.x.

Investigating the etiology of multiple tooth agenesis in three sisters with
severe oligodontia.

Swinnen S(1), Bailleul-Forestier I, Arte S, Nieminen P, Devriendt K, Carels C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, School of Dentistry, Oral Pathology and
Maxillofacial Surgery, Catholic University Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

OBJECTIVES: To describe the dentofacial phenotypes of three sisters with severe
non-syndromic oligodontia, to report on the mutation analysis in three genes,
previously shown to cause various phenotypes of non-syndromic oligodontia and in 
two other suspected genes. Based on the phenotypes in the pedigree of this
family, the different possible patterns of transmission are discussed.
METHODS: Anamnestic data and a panoramic radiograph were taken to study the
phenotype of the three sisters and their first-degree relatives. Blood samples
were also taken to obtain their karyotypes and DNA samples. Mutational screening 
was performed for the MSX1, PAX9, AXIN2, DLX1 and DLX2 genes.
RESULTS: The probands' pedigree showed evidence for a recessive or multifactorial
inheritance pattern. Normal chromosomal karyotypes were found and - despite the
severe oligodontia present in all three sisters - no mutation appeared to be
present in the five genes studied so far in these patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In the three sisters reported, their common oligodontia phenotype is
not caused by mutations in the coding regions of MSX1, PAX9, AXIN2, DLX1 or DLX2 
genes, but genetic factors most probably play a role as all three sisters were
affected. Environmental and epigenetic factors as well as genes regulating
odontogenesis need further in vivo and in vitro investigation to explain the
phenotypic heterogeneity and to increase our understanding of the odontogenic
processes.

PMID: 18199077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Neurosci Res. 2008 May 1;86(6):1217-26. doi: 10.1002/jnr.21581.

Immortalized human neural progenitor cells from the ventral telencephalon with
the potential to differentiate into GABAergic neurons.

Zhang H(1), Wang Y, Zhao Y, Yin Y, Xu Q, Xu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.

Human neural progenitor cells (hNPCs) are believed to have important potential in
clinical applications and basic neuroscience research. In the present study, we
created a new immortalized human neural cell line, hSN12W-TERT, derived from
human fetal ventral telencephalon, using IRES-based retroviral overexpression of 
human telomerase reverse transcriptase. We showed that after more than 40
passages, hSN12W-TERT cells possess high telomerase activity, maintain a normal
diploid karyotype, and retain the characteristics of hNPCs. Under proliferative
conditions, these cells remained undifferentiated, expressing the neural
progenitor cell markers nestin, vimentin, and Sox2. The cells were able to
differentiate into neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes after a significant 
decrease in the level of telomerase following withdrawal of growth factors. The
neurons were postmitotic and achieved electrophysiologic competence. Furthermore,
we showed that most neurons were GABAergic, especially on differentiation induced
by bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP2). RT-PCR analysis also confirmed that
hSN12W-TERT cells expressed mammalian achaete-scute homolog 1 (Mash1) and Dlx2,
genes associated with the development of GABAergic cortical interneurons. BMP2
exposure may activate a positive-feedback loop of BMP signaling in hSN12W-TERT
cells. Our data indicated that this hSN12W-TERT cell line could be a valuable
experimental tool with which to study the regulatory roles of intrinsic and
extrinsic factors in human neural stem cell biology and that it would be useful
in basic research and in research seeking to discover novel drug targets for
clinical candidates.

2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18189314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Feb;36(3):872-84. Epub 2007 Dec 17.

Dlx2 homeobox gene transcriptional regulation of Trkb neurotrophin receptor
expression during mouse retinal development.

de Melo J(1), Zhou QP, Zhang Q, Zhang S, Fonseca M, Wigle JT, Eisenstat DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Cell Science, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

Dlx homeobox genes are first expressed in embryonic retina at E11.5. The
Dlx1/Dlx2 null retina has a reduced ganglion cell layer (GCL), with loss of
late-born differentiated retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) due to increased
apoptosis. TrkB signaling is proposed to regulate the dynamics of RGC apoptosis
throughout development. DLX2 expression markedly precedes the onset of TrkB
expression in the GCL; TrkB co-expression with Dlx2 and RGC markers is
well-established by E13.5. In the Dlx1/Dlx2 null retina, TrkB expression is
significantly reduced by E16.5. We demonstrated that DLX2 binds to a specific
region of the TrkB promoter in retinal neuroepithelium during embryogenesis. In
vitro confirmation and the functional consequences of DLX2 binding to this TrkB
regulatory region support TrkB as a Dlx2 transcriptional target. Furthermore,
ectopic Dlx2 expression in retinal explants activates TrkB expression and Dlx2
knockdown in primary retinal cultures results in reduced TrkB expression. RGC
differentiation and survival require the coordinated expression of transcription 
factors. This study establishes a direct transcriptional relationship between a
homeodomain protein involved in RGC differentiation and a neurotrophin receptor
implicated in RGC survival. Signaling mediated by TrkB may contribute to survival
of late-born RGCs whose terminal differentiation is regulated by Dlx gene
function.

PMCID: PMC2241891
PMID: 18086710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Dev Dyn. 2007 Dec;236(12):3532-44.

GAD isoforms exhibit distinct spatiotemporal expression patterns in the
developing mouse lens: correlation with Dlx2 and Dlx5.

Kwakowsky A(1), Schwirtlich M, Zhang Q, Eisenstat DD, Erdélyi F, Baranyi M,
Katarova ZD, Szabó G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Technology and Developmental Neurobiology, Institute of
Experimental Medicine, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary.

Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the major inhibitory neurotransmitter of the
adult nervous system and its biosynthetic enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase
(GAD) are abundantly expressed in the embryonic nervous system and are involved
in the modulation of cell proliferation, migration, and differentiation. Here we 
describe for the first time the expression of GABA and embryonic and adult GAD
isoforms in the developing mouse lens. We show that the GAD isoforms are
sequentially induced with specific spatiotemporal profiles: GAD65 and embryonic
GAD isoforms prevail in primary fibers, while GAD67 is the predominant GAD
expressed in the postnatal secondary fibers. This pattern correlates well with
the expression of Dlx2 and Dlx5, known as upstream regulators of GAD. GABA and
GAD are most abundant at the tips of elongating fibers and are absent from
organelle-free cells, suggesting their involvement is primarily in shaping of the
cytoskeleton during fiber elongation stages.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 17969168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Oct;37(10):2937-48.

Inhibitory effects and target genes of bone morphogenetic protein 6 in Jurkat TAg
cells.

Sivertsen EA(1), Huse K, Hystad ME, Kersten C, Smeland EB, Myklebust JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Cancer Research,
Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Centre, Oslo, Norway.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP) are multifunctional cytokines that belong to
the TGF-beta superfamily. BMP have been shown to regulate haematopoietic stem
cells, B lymphopoiesis and early thymocyte differentiation. In the present study 
we explored the role of BMP-6 in Jurkat TAg cells. BMP-6 rapidly induced
phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8, p38 and ERK1/2, followed by a potent up-regulation 
of ID1, ID2 and ID3. ID1 and ID3 were also induced at the protein level.
Genome-wide expression profiling of cells treated with BMP-6 compared to medium
confirmed that ID1-ID3 were target genes of BMP-6 together with Noggin and Smad6.
Furthermore, several genes involved in transcriptional regulation were also
identified, including NFKBIA, HEY1, DLX2, KLF10 and early growth response 1.
Stimulation with BMP-6 exerted an antiproliferative effect that was counteracted 
by inhibitor of DNA binding (Id)1 siRNA, indicating that Id1 is an important
downstream mediator in Jurkat TAg cells. A subset of CD4(+) T cells were found to
express the BMP receptors Alk-2 and Alk-3 (type I), in addition to BMPRII (type
II). BMP-6 also induced phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8, followed by transcriptional
increase in ID1-ID3 mRNA expression. However, we did not observe significant
changes in Id protein expression in CD4(+) T cells. Altogether, the data indicate
a role for BMP-6 in human T lineage cells.

PMID: 17899540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Brain. 2007 Sep;130(Pt 9):2267-76.

Developmental lineage of cell types in cortical dysplasia with balloon cells.

Lamparello P(1), Baybis M, Pollard J, Hol EM, Eisenstat DD, Aronica E, Crino PB.

Author information: 
(1)PENN Epilepsy Center and Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania
Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Focal cortical dysplasia type IIB with Ballon cells is a developmental
malformation of the cerebral cortex highly associated with epilepsy. As a
strategy to define the embryonic origin and neurochemical phenotype of cells in
this disease, we probed specimens (n = 10) resected during epilepsy surgery with 
a panel of 13 antibodies recognizing proteins associated with (i) specific
progenitor cell types including brain lipid binding protein (BLBP), collapsin
response mediator protein 4 (CRMP4), Dlx1, Dlx2, GFAPdelta, MASH1, Otx1, Pax6,
vimentin and phosphorylated vimentin and (ii) excitatory or inhibitory
neurochemical phenotypes such as the vesicular glutamate transporters-1 and 2
(VGLUT-1, VGLUT-2), or the vesicular GABA transporter (VGAT). Balloon cells and
large dysplastic neurons in all specimens expressed Otx1, phospho-vimentin, Pax6 
and BLBP, proteins normally expressed by cells in the embryonic ventricular zone.
A subpopulation of balloon cells expressed MASH-1 also expressed in the
ventricular zone. Most balloon cells and dysplastic neurons were VGLUT2
immunoreactive, whereas none expressed Dlx1 or Dlx2, markers for inhibitory cells
derived from the medial ganglionic eminence and few expressed VGAT, found in
GABAergic interneurons. Otx1 mRNA expression and Dlx1 mRNA absence was confirmed 
by single cell RT-PCR. A subpopulation of balloon cells was labelled with CRMP4
and GFAPdelta, markers specific for newly generated cells derived from the adult 
subventricular zone. Detection of Otx1, phospho-vimentin, Pax6 and BLBP
expression but absence of Dlx1/Dlx2 expression suggests that balloon cells and
dysplastic neurons derive from radial glial cells in the telencephalic
ventricular zone and not the medial ganglionic eminence. VGLUT expression argues 
that dysplastic neurons may be glutamatergic. CRMP-4 and GFAPdelta expression
suggests that new cells may arrive in focal cortical dysplasia, perhaps deriving 
in part from the subventricular zone. These findings provide a developmental
lineage model in which balloon cells and dysplastic neurons are derived from
radial glial progenitor cells.

PMID: 17711980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Neuron. 2007 Aug 2;55(3):417-33.

Dlx1 and Dlx2 control neuronal versus oligodendroglial cell fate acquisition in
the developing forebrain.

Petryniak MA(1), Potter GB, Rowitch DH, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94158-2611, USA.

Progenitors within the ventral telencephalon can generate GABAergic neurons and
oligodendrocytes, but regulation of the neuron-glial switch is poorly understood.
We investigated the combinatorial expression and function of Dlx1&2, Olig2, and
Mash1 transcription factors in the ventral telencephalon. We show that Dlx
homeobox transcription factors, required for GABAergic interneuron production,
repress oligodendrocyte precursor cell (OPC) formation by acting on a common
progenitor to determine neuronal versus oligodendroglial cell fate acquisition.
We demonstrate that Dlx1&2 negatively regulate Olig2-dependant OPC formation and 
that Mash1 promotes OPC formation by restricting the number of Dlx+ progenitors. 
Progenitors transplanted from Dlx1&2 mutant ventral telencephalon into newborn
wild-type mice do not produce neurons but differentiate into myelinating
oligodendrocytes that survive into adulthood. Our results identify another role
for Dlx genes as modulators of neuron versus oligodendrocyte development in the
ventral embryonic forebrain.

PMCID: PMC2039927
PMID: 17678855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Neurosci. 2007 Aug 1;27(31):8219-25.

Differential synaptic integration of interneurons in the outer and inner
molecular layers of the developing dentate gyrus.

Chittajallu R(1), Kunze A, Mangin JM, Gallo V.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's National Medical Center,
Washington, DC 20010, USA.

The dentate gyrus (DG) undergoes continued reorganization and lamination during
early postnatal development. Interneurons with anatomically identified synaptic
contacts migrate from the outer to the inner regions of the molecular layer (ML) 
of the DG. By using the 2',3'-cyclic nucleotide 3'-phosphodiesterase
(CNP)-enhanced green fluorescent protein transgenic mouse, we were able to target
and physiologically characterize Dlx2(+) developing ML interneurons. We
investigated whether synapses on migrating ML interneurons were functional and
defined properties of synaptic inputs onto interneurons that were located in the 
outer ML (OML) or inner ML (IML). Consistent with ongoing maturation, IML
interneurons displayed lower input resistances and more hyperpolarized resting
membrane potentials than OML interneurons. Both OML and IML interneurons received
a direct excitatory monosynaptic input from the entorhinal cortex via the
perforant paths, but this input was differentially sensitive to activation of
presynaptic group II and III metabotropic glutamate receptors. Furthermore, only 
IML interneurons also received significant synaptic input from the CA3/hilar
region, especially under conditions of experimentally induced disinhibition.
These changes are attributed to a significant reorganization of dendritic fields.
GABA(A) receptor-mediated innervation of OML and IML interneurons also displayed 
significant differences in miniature IPSC amplitude, frequency, and decay
kinetics. Finally, cell-attached recordings indicated that GABA(A) receptor
activation was depolarizing in OML interneurons but predominantly shunting in IML
interneurons. Our data provide evidence that developing ML interneurons receive
functional glutamatergic and GABAergic inputs and undergo significant changes in 
synaptic integration during migration from the OML to the IML.

PMID: 17670968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Neurosci. 2007 Jun 27;27(26):6878-91.

A subpopulation of olfactory bulb GABAergic interneurons is derived from Emx1-
and Dlx5/6-expressing progenitors.

Kohwi M(1), Petryniak MA, Long JE, Ekker M, Obata K, Yanagawa Y, Rubenstein JL,
Alvarez-Buylla A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143, USA.

The subventricular zone (SVZ) of the postnatal brain continuously generates
olfactory bulb (OB) interneurons. We show that calretinin+, calbindin+, and
dopaminergic (TH+) periglomerular OB interneurons correspond to distinct subtypes
of GABAergic cells; all were produced in the postnatal mouse brain, but they
matured and were eliminated at different rates. The embryonic lateral ganglionic 
eminence (LGE) is thought to be the site of origin of postnatal SVZ neural
progenitors. Consistently, grafts of the embryonic LGE into the adult brain SVZ
generated many OB interneurons, including TH+ and calbindin+ periglomerular
interneurons. However, calretinin+ cells were not produced from these LGE grafts.
Surprisingly, pallial and septal embryonic progenitors transplanted into the
adult brain SVZ also resulted in the generation of OB interneurons, including
calretinin+ cells. A subset of Dlx2+ OB interneurons was derived from cells
expressing Emx1, a transcription factor largely restricted to the pallium during 
development. Emx1 lineage-derived cells contributed a substantial portion of
GABAergic cells in the OB, including calretinin+ interneurons. This is in
contrast to cortex, in which Emx1 lineage-derived cells do not differentiate into
GABAergic neurons. Our results suggest that some OB interneurons are derived from
progenitors outside the LGE and that precursors expressing what has classically
been considered a pallial transcription factor generate GABAergic interneurons.

PMID: 17596436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Neuron. 2007 Jun 21;54(6):873-88.

Dlx transcription factors promote migration through repression of axon and
dendrite growth.

Cobos I(1), Borello U, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158,
USA. inma.cobos@ucsf.edu

Comment in
    Neuron. 2007 Jun 21;54(6):845-7.

In the mouse telencephalon, Dlx homeobox transcription factors are essential for 
the tangential migration of subpallial-derived GABAergic interneurons to
neocortex. However, the mechanisms underlying this process are poorly understood.
Here, we demonstrate that Dlx1/2 has a central role in restraining neurite growth
of subpallial-derived immature interneurons at a stage when they migrate
tangentially to cortex. In Dlx1-/-;Dlx2-/- mutants, neurite length is increased
and cells fail to migrate. In Dlx1-/-;Dlx2+/- mutants, while the tangential
migration of immature interneurons appears normal, they develop dendritic and
axonal processes with increased length and decreased branching, and have deficits
in their neocortical laminar positions. Thus, Dlx1/2 is required for coordinating
programs of neurite maturation and migration. In this regard, we provide genetic 
evidence that in immature interneurons Dlx1/2 repression of the p21-activated
serine/threonine kinase PAK3, a downstream effector of the Rho family of GTPases,
is critical in restraining neurite growth and promoting tangential migration.

PMID: 17582329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Neuron. 2007 Jun 21;54(6):845-7.

Cortical interneurons refuse to follow the PAK.

Guillemot F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical Research,
Mill Hill, NW71AA London, UK. fguille@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

Comment on
    Neuron. 2007 Jun 21;54(6):873-88.

The tangential migration of GABAergic interneurons to the cortex requires the
activity of several transcription factors, but the mechanisms involved have
remained elusive. In this issue of Neuron, Rubenstein and colleagues demonstrate 
that the homeobox proteins Dlx1 and Dlx2 promote interneuron migration in part by
preventing the premature expression of PAK3, a serine/threonine kinase that is
later involved in neurite outgrowth and other aspects of interneuron maturation.

PMID: 17582322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Neurosci. 2007 May 9;27(19):5012-22.

Distinct cis-regulatory elements from the Dlx1/Dlx2 locus mark different
progenitor cell populations in the ganglionic eminences and different subtypes of
adult cortical interneurons.

Ghanem N(1), Yu M, Long J, Hatch G, Rubenstein JL, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Advanced Research in Environmental Genomics, Department of Biology,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1N 6N5.

Distinct subtypes of cortical GABAergic interneurons provide inhibitory signals
that are indispensable for neural network function. The Dlx homeobox genes have a
central role in regulating their development and function. We have characterized 
the activity of three cis-regulatory sequences involved in forebrain expression
of vertebrate Dlx genes: upstream regulatory element 2 (URE2), I12b, and I56i.
The three regulatory elements display regional and temporal differences in their 
activities within the lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE), medial ganglionic
eminence (MGE), and caudal ganglionic eminence (CGE) and label distinct
populations of tangentially migrating neurons at embryonic day 12.5 (E12.5) and
E13.5. We provide evidence that the dorsomedial and ventral MGE are distinct
sources of tangentially migrating neurons during midgestation. In the adult
cortex, URE2 and I12b/I56i are differentially expressed in parvalbumin-,
calretinin-, neuropeptide Y-, and neuronal nitric oxide synthase-positive
interneurons; I12b and I56i were specifically active in somatostatin-, vasoactive
intestinal peptide-, and calbindin-positive interneurons. These data suggest that
interneuron subtypes use distinct combinations of Dlx1/Dlx2 enhancers from the
time they are specified through adulthood.

PMID: 17494687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Development. 2007 May;134(9):1755-65. Epub 2007 Apr 4.

The proneural determinant MASH1 regulates forebrain Dlx1/2 expression through the
I12b intergenic enhancer.

Poitras L(1), Ghanem N, Hatch G, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Research in Environmental Genomics (CAREG Department of
Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Establishment of neuronal networks is an extremely complex process involving the 
interaction of a diversity of neuronal cells. During mammalian development, these
highly organized networks are formed through the differentiation of multipotent
neuronal progenitors into multiple neuronal cell lineages. In the developing
forebrain of mammals, the combined function of the Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5 and Dlx6
homeobox genes is necessary for the differentiation of the GABAergic interneurons
born in the ventricular and subventricular zones of the ventral telencephalon, as
well as for the migration of these neurons to the hippocampus, cerebral cortex
and olfactory bulbs. The 437 bp I12b enhancer sequence in the intergenic region
of the Dlx1/2 bigene cluster is involved in the forebrain regulation of Dlx1/2.
Using DNase I footprinting, we identified six regions of I12b potentially bound
by transcription factors. Mutagenesis of each binding site affected the
expression of reporter constructs in transgenic mice. However, the effects of
impairing protein-DNA interactions were not uniform across the forebrain Dlx1/2
expression domains, suggesting that distinct regulatory interactions are taking
place in the different populations of neuronal precursors. Analyses of
protein-DNA interactions provide evidence of a direct role for MASH1 in Dlx1/2
regulation in the forebrain. DLX proteins play a crucial role in the maintenance 
of their own expression, as shown by transgenic and co-transfection experiments. 
These studies suggest that the seemingly continuous domains of Dlx gene
expression in the telencephalon and diencephalon are in fact the combination of
distinct cell populations within which different genetic regulatory interactions 
take place.

PMID: 17409112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2007 Jun;79(6):465-82.

Altered localization of gene expression in both ectoderm and mesoderm is
associated with a murine strain difference in retinoic acid-induced forelimb
ectrodactyly.

Shimizu H(1), Lee GS, Beedanagari SR, Collins MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, UCLA School of Public Health, Los
Angeles, California 90095, USA.

BACKGROUND: Defects in digit number or fusion as a teratogenic response are well 
documented in humans and intensively studied in various mouse models. Maternal
exposure to excess levels of all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) at gestational day 9.5 
induces postaxial ectrodactyly (digit loss) in the murine C57BL/6N strain but not
in the SWV/Fnn strain.
METHODS: Whole-mount in situ hybridization was used to examine the differential
expression of limb patterning genes at the transcriptional level between the two 
mouse strains following the maternal exposure to a teratogenic level of RA. The
detection of a gene with altered expression was followed by either the evaluation
of other genes that were synexpressed or with an assessment of downstream genes.
RESULTS: In the C57BL/6N limb bud following maternal RA administration,
gene-specific perturbations were observed within hours of the RA injection in the
posterior pre-AER (apical ectodermal ridge) (Fgf8, Dlx3, Bmp4, Sp8, but not Dlx2 
or p63), whereas these genes were normally expressed in the SWV/Fnn limb bud.
Furthermore, although RA caused comparable reductions of Shh expression between
the strains in the 12 h after administration, some Shh downstream genes were
differentially expressed (e.g., Gli1, Ptc, and Hoxd13), whereas others were not
(e.g., Fgf4, Bmp4, and Gremlin).
CONCLUSIONS: It is proposed that altered gene expression in both pre-AER and
mesoderm is involved in the pathogenesis of postaxial digit loss, and that
because the alterations in the pre-AER occur relatively early in the temporal
sequence of events, those changes are candidates for an initiating factor in the 
malformation.

PMID: 17335046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jun 29;282(26):19071-81. Epub 2007 Jan 26.

Dlx homeobox genes promote cortical interneuron migration from the basal
forebrain by direct repression of the semaphorin receptor neuropilin-2.

Le TN(1), Du G, Fonseca M, Zhou QP, Wigle JT, Eisenstat DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, Manitoba Institute of Cell
Biology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba R3E 0V9, Canada.

Dlx homeobox genes play an important role in vertebrate forebrain development.
Dlx1/Dlx2 null mice die at birth with an abnormal cortical phenotype, including
impaired differentiation and migration of GABAergic interneurons to the
neocortex. However, the molecular basis for these defects downstream of loss of
Dlx1/Dlx2 function is unknown. Neuropilin-2 (NRP-2) is a receptor for Class III
semaphorins, which inhibit neuronal migration. Herein, we show that Neuropilin-2 
is a specific DLX1 and DLX2 transcriptional target by applying chromatin
immunoprecipitation to embryonic forebrain tissues. Both homeobox proteins
repress Nrp-2 expression in vitro, confirming the functional significance of DLX 
binding. Furthermore, the homeodomain of DLX1 and DLX2 is necessary for DNA
binding and this binding is essential for Dlx repression of Nrp-2 expression. Of 
importance, there is up-regulated and aberrant expression of NRP-2 in the
forebrains of Dlx1/Dlx2 null mice. This is the first report that DLX1 or DLX2 can
function as transcriptional repressors. Our data show that DLX proteins
specifically mediate the repression of Neuropilin-2 in the developing forebrain. 
As well, our results support the hypothesis that down-regulation of Neuropilin-2 
expression may facilitate tangential interneuron migration from the basal
forebrain.

PMID: 17259176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Brain Behav Evol. 2007;69(2):87-95. Epub 2007 Jan 24.

Developmental origin of diencephalic sensory relay nuclei in teleosts.

Ishikawa Y(1), Yamamoto N, Yoshimoto M, Yasuda T, Maruyama K, Kage T, Takeda H,
Ito H.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Radiological Sciences, Chiba, Japan. ishikawa@nirs.go.jp

We propose here a novel interpretation of the embryonic origin of cells of
diencephalic sensory relay nuclei in teleosts based on our recent studies of gene
expression patterns in the medaka (Oryzias latipes) embryonic brain and
comparative hodological studies. It has been proposed that the diencephalic
sensory relay system in teleosts is unique among vertebrates. Teleost relay
nuclei, the preglomerular complex (PG), have been assumed to originate from the
basal plate (the posterior tuberculum) of the diencephalon, whereas relay nuclei 
in mammals are derived from the alar plate (dorsal thalamus) of the diencephalon.
Our results using in situ hybridization show, however, that many pax6- or
dlx2-positive cells migrate laterally and ventrocaudally from the diencephalic
alar plate to the basal plate during development. Massive clusters of the
migrated alar cells become localized in the mantle layer lateral to the posterior
tubercular neuroepithelium, from which main nuclei of the PG appear to
differentiate. We therefore consider most if not all neurons in the PG to be of
alar, not basal, origin. Thus, the teleost PG, at least in part, can be regarded 
as migrated alar nuclei. Developmental and hodological data strongly suggest that
the teleost PG is homologous to a part of the mammalian dorsal thalamus. The
organization and origin of the diencephalic sensory relay system might have been 
conserved across vertebrates.

Copyright 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17230016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Stem Cells Regen Med. 2007 May 16;2(1):66-7. eCollection 2007.

Differential effect of Dlx2 in neural precursors derived from the anterior and
hippocampal SVZ.

Suh Y(1), Ciccolini F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Interdisciplinary Center for Neurosciences (IZN), 
Heidelberg University , Germany.

PMID: 24692909  [PubMed]


149. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2007 Mar;292(3):L704-15. Epub 2006 Nov 10.

A search for genes that may confer divergent morphology and function in the
carotid body between two strains of mice.

Balbir A(1), Lee H, Okumura M, Biswal S, Fitzgerald RS, Shirahata M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Physiology, Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, E7610, 615 N. Wolfe St., Baltimore, MD
21205, USA.

The carotid body (CB) is the primary hypoxic chemosensory organ. Its hypoxic
response appears to be genetically controlled. We have hypothesized that: 1)
genes related to CB function are expressed less in the A/J mice (low responder to
hypoxia) compared with DBA/2J mice (high responder to hypoxia); and 2) gene
expression levels of morphogenic and trophic factors of the CB are significantly 
lower in the A/J mice than DBA/2J mice. This study utilizes microarray analysis
to test these hypotheses. Three sets of CBs were harvested from both strains. RNA
was isolated and used for global gene expression profiling (Affymetrix Mouse 430 
v2.0 array). Statistically significant gene expression was determined as a
minimum six counts of nine pairwise comparisons, a minimum 1.5-fold change, and P
<or= 0.05. Our results demonstrated that 793 genes were expressed less and that
568 genes were expressed more in the A/J strain vs. the DBA/2J strain. Analysis
of individual genes indicates that genes encoding ion channels are differentially
expressed between the two strains. Genes related to neurotransmitter metabolism, 
synaptic vesicles, and the development of neural crest-derived cells are
expressed less in the A/J CB vs. the DBA/2J CB. Through pathway analysis, we have
constructed a model that shows gene interactions and offers a roadmap to
investigate CB development and hypoxic chemosensing/chemotransduction processes. 
Particularly, Gdnf, Bmp2, Kcnmb2, Tph1, Hif1a, and Arnt2 may contribute to the
functional differences in the CB between the two strains. Bmp2, Phox2b, Dlx2, and
Msx2 may be important for the morphological differences.

PMID: 17098806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Neurosci. 2006 Nov 8;26(45):11562-74.

Cell migration along the lateral cortical stream to the developing basal
telencephalic limbic system.

Carney RS(1), Alfonso TB, Cohen D, Dai H, Nery S, Stoica B, Slotkin J, Bregman
BS, Fishell G, Corbin JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, 
DC 20057, USA.

During embryogenesis, the lateral cortical stream (LCS) emerges from the
corticostriatal border (CSB), the boundary between the developing cerebral cortex
and striatum. The LCS is comprised of a mix of pallial- and subpallial-derived
neural progenitor cells that migrate to the developing structures of the basal
telencephalon, most notably the piriform cortex and amygdala. Using a combination
of in vitro and in vivo approaches, we analyzed the timing, composition,
migratory modes, origin, and requirement of the homeodomain-containing
transcription factor Gsh2 (genomic screened homeobox 2) in the development of
this prominent migratory stream. We reveal that Pax6 (paired box gene 6)-positive
pallial-derived and Dlx2 (distal-less homeobox 2)-positive subpallial-derived
subpopulations of LCS cells are generated in distinct temporal windows during
embryogenesis. Furthermore, our data indicate the CSB border not only is
comprised of separate populations of pallial- and subpallial-derived progenitors 
that contribute to the LCS but also a subpopulation of cells coexpressing Pax6
and Dlx2. Moreover, despite migrating along a route outlined by a cascade of
radial glia, the Dlx2-positive population appears to migrate primarily in an
apparent chain-like manner, with LCS migratory cells being generated locally at
the CSB with little contribution from other subpallial structures such as the
medial, lateral, or caudal ganglionic eminences. We further demonstrate that the 
generation of the LCS is dependent on the homeodomain-containing gene Gsh2,
revealing a novel requirement for Gsh2 in telencephalic development.

PMID: 17093077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006;34(20):5951-65. Epub 2006 Oct 26.

Functional interactions between Dlx2 and lymphoid enhancer factor regulate Msx2.

Diamond E(1), Amen M, Hu Q, Espinoza HM, Amendt BA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental and Genetic Medicine, Institute of Biosciences and
Genetic Medicine Texas A&M Health Science Center, 2121 W. Holcombe Boulevard,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Dlx2, Lymphoid Enhancer Factor (Lef-1) and Msx2 transcription factors are
required for several developmental processes. To understand the control of gene
expression by these factors, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
identified Msx2 as a downstream target of Dlx2 and Lef-1. Dlx2 activates the Msx2
promoter in several cell lines and binds DNA as a monomer and dimer. A Lef-1
beta-catenin-dependent isoform minimally activates the Msx2 promoter and a Lef-1 
beta-catenin-independent isoform is inactive, however co-expression of Dlx2 and
both Lef-1 isoforms synergistically activate the Msx2 promoter.
Co-immunoprecipitation and protein pull-down experiments demonstrate Lef-1
physically interacts with Dlx2. Deletion analyses of the Lef-1 protein reveal
specific regions required for synergism with Dlx2. The Lef-1 beta-catenin binding
domain (betaDB) is not required for its interaction with Dlx2. Msx2 can
auto-regulate its promoter and repress Dlx2 activation. Msx2 repression of Dlx2
activation is dose-specific and both bind a common DNA-binding element. These
transcriptional mechanisms correlate with the temporal and spatial expression of 
these factors and may provide a mechanism for the control of several
developmental processes. We demonstrate new transcriptional activities for Dlx2, 
Msx2 and Lef-1 through protein interactions and identification of downstream
targets.

PMCID: PMC1635299
PMID: 17068080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Development. 2006 Nov;133(21):4367-79.

Generation of GABAergic and dopaminergic interneurons from endogenous embryonic
olfactory bulb precursor cells.

Vergaño-Vera E(1), Yusta-Boyo MJ, de Castro F, Bernad A, de Pablo F,
Vicario-Abejón C.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Cajal, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC),
Spain.

During the embryonic period, many olfactory bulb (OB) interneurons arise in the
lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE) from precursor cells expressing Dlx2, Gsh2 and 
Er81 transcription factors. Whether GABAergic and dopaminergic interneurons are
also generated within the embryonic OB has not been studied thoroughly. In
contrast to abundant Dlx2 and Gsh2 expression in ganglionic eminences (GE), Dlx2 
and Gsh2 proteins are not expressed in the E12.5-13.5 mouse OB, whereas the
telencephalic pallial domain marker Pax6 is abundant. We found GABAergic and
dopaminergic neurons originating from dividing precursor cells in E13.5 OB and in
short-term dissociated cultures prepared from the rostral half of E13.5 OB. In OB
cultures, 22% of neurons were GAD+, of which 53% were Dlx2+, whereas none
expressed Gsh2. By contrast, 70% of GAD+ cells in GE cultures were Dlx2+ and 16% 
expressed Gsh2. In E13.5 OB slices transplanted with EGFP-labeled E13.5 OB
precursor cells, 31.7% of EGFP+ cells differentiated to GABAergic neurons. OB and
LGE precursors transplanted into early postnatal OB migrated and differentiated
in distinct patterns. Transplanted OB precursors gave rise to interneurons with
dendritic spines in close proximity to synaptophysin-positive boutons.
Interneurons were also abundant in differentiating OB neural stem cell cultures; 
the neurons responded to the neurotrophin Bdnf and expressed presynaptic
proteins. In vivo, the Bdnf receptor TrkB colocalized with synaptic proteins at
the glomeruli. These findings suggest that, in addition to receiving interneurons
from the LGE, the embryonic OB contains molecularly distinct local precursor
cells that generate mature GABAergic and dopaminergic neurons.

PMID: 17038521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Cell Biol. 2006 Oct 9;175(1):159-68.

Embryonic cortical neural stem cells migrate ventrally and persist as postnatal
striatal stem cells.

Willaime-Morawek S(1), Seaberg RM, Batista C, Labbé E, Attisano L, Gorski JA,
Jones KR, Kam A, Morshead CM, van der Kooy D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and Microbiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada. swmorawek@gmail.com

Embryonic cortical neural stem cells apparently have a transient existence, as
they do not persist in the adult cortex. We sought to determine the fate of
embryonic cortical stem cells by following Emx1(IREScre); LacZ/EGFP
double-transgenic murine cells from midgestation into adulthood. Lineage tracing 
in combination with direct cell labeling and time-lapse video microscopy
demonstrated that Emx1-lineage embryonic cortical stem cells migrate ventrally
into the striatal germinal zone (GZ) perinatally and intermingle with striatal
stem cells. Upon integration into the striatal GZ, cortical stem cells
down-regulate Emx1 and up-regulate Dlx2, which is a homeobox gene characteristic 
of the developing striatum and striatal neural stem cells. This demonstrates the 
existence of a novel dorsal-to-ventral migration of neural stem cells in the
perinatal forebrain.

PMCID: PMC2064507
PMID: 17030986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Dev Biol. 2007 Feb 1;302(1):50-65. Epub 2006 Aug 22.

Pax6 controls cerebral cortical cell number by regulating exit from the cell
cycle and specifies cortical cell identity by a cell autonomous mechanism.

Quinn JC(1), Molinek M, Martynoga BS, Zaki PA, Faedo A, Bulfone A, Hevner RF,
West JD, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Group, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Centres for
Integrative Physiology and Neuroscience Research, University of Edinburgh, Hugh
Robson Building, George Square, Edinburgh, UK.

Many cerebral cortical neurons and glia are produced by apical progenitors
dividing at the ventricular surface of the embryonic dorsal telencephalon. Other 
neurons are produced by basal progenitor cells, which are derived from apical
progenitors, dividing away from the ventricular surface. The transcription factor
Pax6 is expressed in apical progenitors and is downregulated in basal
progenitors, which upregulate the transcription factor Tbr2. Here we show that
Pax6(-/-) cells are under-represented in the cortex of Pax6(+/+)<-->Pax6(-/-)
chimeras early in corticogenesis, indicating that Pax6 is required for the
production of normal numbers of cortical cells. We provide evidence that this
underproduction is attributable to an early depletion of the progenitor pool
caused by greater than normal proportions of newly divided cells exiting the cell
cycle. We show that most progenitor cells dividing away from the ventricular
surface in Pax6(-/-) embryos fail to express the transcription factor Tbr2 and
that Pax6 is required cell autonomously for Tbr2 expression in the developing
cortex of Pax6(+/+)<-->Pax6(-/-) chimeras. Transcription factors normally
expressed ventrally in the telencephalic ganglionic eminences (Mash1, Dlx2 and
Gsh2) are upregulated cell autonomously in mutant cells in the developing cortex 
of Pax6(+/+)<-->Pax6(-/-) chimeras; Nkx2.1, which is expressed only in the medial
ganglionic eminence, is not. These data indicate that early functions of Pax6 in 
developing cortical cells are to repress expression of transcription factors
normally found in the lateral ganglionic eminence, to prevent precocious
differentiation and depletion of the progenitor pool, and to induce normal
development of cortical basal progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC2384163
PMID: 16979618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Cereb Cortex. 2006 Jul;16 Suppl 1:i96-102.

Removal of Pax6 partially rescues the loss of ventral structures in Shh null
mice.

Fuccillo M(1), Rutlin M, Fishell G.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program and the Department of Cell Biology, The
Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University Medical Center, 
New York, NY 10016, USA.

Pax6 and Gli3 are dorsally expressed genes that are known to antagonize sonic
hedgehog (Shh) activity. We have previously shown that dorsoventral patterning
defects seen in Shh(-/-) mutants are rescued in Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-) compound
mutants. Here we investigate if the loss of Pax6 can also ameliorate defects seen
in Shh(-/-) mutants. In support of this notion, we observe that the fusion of the
cerebral vesicles seen in Shh(-/-) mutants is partially corrected in E12.5
Shh(-/-);Pax6(-/-) compound mutants. Investigation of pan-ventral markers such as
Dlx2 also shows that, unlike Shh(-/-), a broad domain of expression of this gene 
is observed in Shh(-/-);Pax6(-/-) mice. Interestingly, we observe that while the 
expression of ER81 in the ventral telencephalon is expanded, the expression of
Ebf1 is lost. This suggests that the rescued ventral domain observed in
Shh(-/-);Pax6(-/-) mice is the dorsal lateral ganglionic eminence region. With
regard to dorsal telencephalic patterning, we also observe rescue of the
pallial-subpallial boundary, as well as a partial rescue of the dorsal midline.
Together, our findings are consistent with Pax6 function being required for
aspects of Gli3-mediated telencephalic patterning.

PMID: 16766714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Cereb Cortex. 2006 Jul;16 Suppl 1:i82-8.

Cellular patterns of transcription factor expression in developing cortical
interneurons.

Cobos I(1), Long JE, Thwin MT, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94158-2611, USA.

Most gamma-aminobutyric acidergic interneurons in the neocortex and hippocampus
are derived from subpallial progenitors in the medial ganglionic eminence and
migrate tangentially to the pallium, where they differentiate into a diverse set 
of neuronal subtypes. Toward elucidating the mechanisms underlying the generation
of interneuron diversity, we have studied in mice the expression patterns in
differentiating and mature neocortical interneurons of 8 transcription factors,
including 6 homeobox (Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, Arx, Lhx6, Cux2), 1 basic
helix-loop-helix, (NPAS1), and 1 bZIP (MafB). Their patterns of expression change
during interneuron differentiation and show distinct distributions within
interneuron subpopulations in adult neocortex. This study is a first step to
define the combinatorial codes of transcription factors that participate in
regulating the specification and function of cortical interneuron subtypes.

PMID: 16766712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Neurosci. 2006 May 17;26(20):5383-92.

Necdin promotes GABAergic neuron differentiation in cooperation with Dlx
homeodomain proteins.

Kuwajima T(1), Nishimura I, Yoshikawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Regulation of Neuronal Development, Institute for Protein
Research, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Necdin, a member of the MAGE (melanoma antigen) protein family, is expressed
predominantly in terminally differentiated neurons. The necdin gene NDN is
maternally imprinted and expressed only from the paternal allele, the deficiency 
of which is implicated in the pathogenesis of the neurodevelopmental disorder
Prader-Willi syndrome. Necdin binds to its homologous MAGE protein MAGE-D1 (also 
known as NRAGE or Dlxin-1), which interacts with Msx (msh homeobox) and Dlx
(distal-less homeobox) family homeodomain transcription factors. Members of the
Dlx homeobox gene family are involved in the differentiation and specification of
forebrain GABAergic neurons. Here we demonstrate that necdin associates with Dlx 
homeodomain proteins via MAGE-D1 to promote the differentiation of GABAergic
neurons in mouse embryonic forebrain. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that 
necdin was coexpressed with Dlx2, Dlx5, or MAGE-D1 in a subpopulation of
embryonic forebrain cells. Necdin bound to Dlx2 and Dlx5 via MAGE-D1 and enhanced
Dlx2-dependent activation of the Wnt1 (wingless-type MMTV integration site
family) promoter. Necdin significantly increased the populations of cells
expressing the GABAergic neuron markers calbindin D-28k and glutamic acid
decarboxylase when overexpressed by electroporation in cultured forebrain slices.
In this assay, Dlx5N, a truncated Dlx5 mutant that competes with Dlx2 to bind
MAGE-D1, diminished the effect of necdin on GABAergic neuron differentiation.
Furthermore, mutant mice lacking the paternal necdin allele showed a significant 
reduction in the differentiation of forebrain GABAergic neurons in vivo and in
vitro. These results suggest that paternally expressed necdin facilitates the
differentiation and specification of GABAergic neurons in cooperation with Dlx
homeodomain proteins.

PMID: 16707790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Eur J Oral Sci. 2006 May;114 Suppl 1:178-82; discussion 201-2, 381.

Vitamin D and tissue non-specific alkaline phosphatase in dental cells.

Lézot F(1), Descroix V, Hotton D, Mauro N, Kato S, Berdal A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U714, Paris F-75006 France.

Dental epithelium comprises different cell populations, including ameloblasts and
stratum intermedium cells. Ameloblasts are vitamin D targets, and at least five
proteins undergo specific modulation of their expression following the addition
of 1alpha,25(OH)2 vitamin D3[1alpha,25(OH)2D3]. Stratum intermedium cells have
not been studied in any great detail regarding vitamin D impact. Interestingly,
in these cells, the tissue non-specific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP) is
overexpressed. On the other hand, TNAP is a reliable bone marker of vitamin D
action, similar to calbindins in kidney and intestine, previously used for
studies of vitamin D activity in ameloblasts. Here, TNAP expression and activity 
were investigated in vivo in the microdissected epithelium and mesenchyme of
mandible incisors. Physiological doses of 1alpha,25(OH)2D3 injected in control
rats failed to modify TNAP activity in both dental epithelium and mesenchyme. No 
significant differences were observed in the steady-state levels of TNAP mRNAs of
dental tissues from wild-type and vitamin D nuclear receptor (VDRnuc)-deficient
mice of the same litters. These data suggest that, in contrast to ameloblasts,
stratum intermedium cells are not sensitive to 1alpha,25(OH)2D3. An explanation
for such a responsiveness of stratum intermedium cells to 1alpha,25(OH)2D3 is
proposed based on the respective expressions of both vitamin D receptors (VDRnuc 
and 1,25D3-[MARRS]) and the Dlx2 homeobox gene.

PMID: 16674682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Aug;208(2):326-35.

Insulin-like growth factor-I increases bone sialoprotein (BSP) expression through
fibroblast growth factor-2 response element and homeodomain protein-binding site 
in the proximal promoter of the BSP gene.

Nakayama Y(1), Nakajima Y, Kato N, Takai H, Kim DS, Arai M, Mezawa M, Araki S,
Sodek J, Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Matsudo, Chiba, Japan.

Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) promotes bone formation by stimulating
proliferation and differentiation of osteoblasts. Bone sialoprotein (BSP), is
thought to function in the initial mineralization of bone, is selectively
expressed by differentiated osteoblast. To determine the molecular mechanism of
IGF-I regulation of osteogenesis, we analyzed the effects of IGF-I on the
expression of BSP in osteoblast-like Saos2 and in rat stromal bone marrow
(RBMC-D8) cells. IGF-I (50 ng/ml) increased BSP mRNA levels at 12 h in Saos2
cells. In RBMC-D8 cells, IGF-I increased BSP mRNA levels at 3 h. From transient
transfection assays, a twofold increase in transcription by IGF-I was observed at
12 h in pLUC3 construct that included the promoter sequence from -116 to +60.
Effect of IGF-I was abrogated by 2-bp mutations in either the FGF2 response
element (FRE) or homeodomain protein-binding site (HOX). Gel shift analyses
showed that IGF-I increased binding of nuclear proteins to the FRE and HOX
elements. Notably, the HOX-protein complex was supershifted by Smad1 antibody,
while the FRE-protein complex was shifted by Smad1 and Cbfa1 antibodies. Dlx2 and
Dlx5 antibodies disrupted the formation of the FRE- and HOX-protein complexes.
The IGF-I effects on the formation of FRE-protein complexes were abolished by
tyrosine kinase inhibitor herbimycin A (HA), PI3-kinase/Akt inhibitor LY249002,
and MAP kinase kinase inhibitor U0126, while IGF-I effects on HOX-protein
complexes were abolished by HA and LY249002. These studies demonstrate that IGF-I
stimulates BSP transcription by targeting the FRE and HOX elements in the
proximal promoter of BSP gene.

PMID: 16642470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Dev Dyn. 2006 May;235(5):1334-44.

Application of lentivirus-mediated RNAi in studying gene function in mammalian
tooth development.

Song Y(1), Zhang Z, Yu X, Yan M, Zhang X, Gu S, Stuart T, Liu C, Reiser J, Zhang 
Y, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology,
Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana 70118, USA.

RNA interference (RNAi) has recently become a powerful tool to silence gene
expression in mammalian cells, but its application in assessing gene function in 
mammalian developing organs remains highly limited. Here we describe several
unique developmental properties of the mouse molar germ. Embryonic molar
mesenchyme, but not the incisor mesenchyme, once dissociated into single cell
suspension and re-aggregated, retains its odontogenic potential, the capability
of a tissue to instruct an adjacent tissue to initiate tooth formation.
Dissociated molar mesenchymal cells, even after being plated in cell culture,
retain odontogenic competence, the capability of a tissue to respond to
odontogenic signals and to support tooth formation. Most interestingly, while
dissociated epithelial and mesenchymal cells of molar tooth germ are mixed and
re-aggregated, the epithelial cells are able to sort out from the mesenchymal
cells and organize into a well-defined dental epithelial structure, leading to
the formation of a well-differentiated tooth organ after sub-renal culture. These
unique molar developmental properties allow us to develop a strategy using a
lentivirus-mediated RNAi approach to silence gene expression in dental
mesenchymal cells and assess gene function in tooth development. We show that
knockdown of Msx1 or Dlx2 expression in the dental mesenchyme faithfully
recapitulates the tooth phenotype of their targeted mutant mice. Silencing of
Barx1 expression in the dental mesenchyme causes an arrest of tooth development
at the bud stage, demonstrating a crucial role for Barx1 in tooth formation. Our 
studies have established a reliable and rapid assay that would permit large-scale
analysis of gene function in mammalian tooth development.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16628661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Neuroscience. 2006;139(4):1355-67. Epub 2006 Mar 31.

Transcription factor protein expression patterns by neural or neuronal progenitor
cells of adult monkey subventricular zone.

Tonchev AB(1), Yamashima T, Sawamoto K, Okano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Restorative Neurosurgery, Division of Neuroscience, Kanazawa
University Graduate School of Medical Science, Japan.

The anterior subventricular zone of the adult mammalian brain contains progenitor
cells which are upregulated after cerebral ischemia. We have previously reported 
that while a part of the progenitors residing in adult monkey anterior
subventricular zone travels to the olfactory bulb, many of these cells sustain
location in the anterior subventricular zone for months after injury, exhibiting 
a phenotype of either neural or neuronal precursors. Here we show that ischemia
increased the numbers of anterior subventricular zone progenitor cells expressing
developmentally regulated transcription factors including Pax6 (paired-box 6),
Emx2 (empty spiracles-homeobox 2), Sox 1-3 (sex determining region Y-box 1-3),
Ngn1 (neurogenin 1), Dlx1,5 (distalless-homeobox 1,5), Olig1,3 (oligodendrocyte
lineage gene 1,3) and Nkx2.2 (Nk-box 2.2), as compared with control brains.
Analysis of transcription factor protein expression by sustained neural or
neuronal precursors in anterior subventricular zone revealed that these two cell 
types were positive for characteristic sets of transcription factors. The
proteins Pax6, Emx2, Sox2,3 and Olig1 were predominantly localized to dividing
neural precursors while the factors Sox1, Ngn1, Dlx1,5, Olig2 and Nkx2.2 were
mainly expressed by neuronal precursors. Further, differences between monkeys and
non-primate mammals emerged, related to expression patterns of Pax6, Olig2 and
Dlx2. Our results suggest that a complex network of developmental signals might
be involved in the specification of primate progenitor cells.

PMID: 16580139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Pediatr Res. 2006 Mar;59(3):349-54.

Sonic hedgehog is essential for first pharyngeal arch development.

Yamagishi C(1), Yamagishi H, Maeda J, Tsuchihashi T, Ivey K, Hu T, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

The secreted protein sonic hedgehog (Shh) is essential for normal development of 
many organs. Targeted disruption of Shh in mouse leads to near complete absence
of craniofacial skeletal elements at birth, and mutation of SHH in human causes
holoprosencephaly (HPE), frequently associated with defects of derivatives of
pharyngeal arches. To investigate the role of Shh signaling in early pharyngeal
arch development, we analyzed Shh mutant embryos using molecular markers and
found that the first pharyngeal arch (PA1) was specifically hypoplastic and fused
in the midline, and remaining arches were well formed at embryonic day (E) 9.5.
Molecular analyses using specific markers suggested that the growth of the
maxillary arch and proximal mandibular arch was severely defective in Shh-null
PA1, whereas the distal mandibular arch was less affected. TUNEL assay revealed
an increase in the number of apoptotic signals in PA1 of Shh mutant embryos.
Ectodermal expression of fibroblast growth factor (Fgf)-8, a cell survival factor
for pharyngeal arch mesenchyme, was down-regulated in the PA1 of Shh mutants.
Consistent with this observation, downstream transcriptional targets of Fgf8
signaling in neural crest-derived mesenchyme, including Barx1, goosecoid, and
Dlx2, were also down-regulated in Shh-null PA1. These results demonstrate that
epithelial-mesenchymal signaling and transcriptional events coordinated by Shh,
partly via Fgf8, is essential for cell survival and tissue outgrowth of the
developing PA1.

PMID: 16492970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Feb 7;103(6):1930-5. Epub 2006 Jan 30.

The role of neuregulin-ErbB4 interactions on the proliferation and organization
of cells in the subventricular zone.

Ghashghaei HT(1), Weber J, Pevny L, Schmid R, Schwab MH, Lloyd KC, Eisenstat DD, 
Lai C, Anton ES.

Author information: 
(1)University of North Carolina Neuroscience Center and the Department of Cell
and Molecular Physiology, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599, USA.

Coordinated regulation of neuronal progenitor differentiation in the
subventricular zone (SVZ) is a fundamental feature of adult neurogenesis.
However, the molecular control of this process remains mostly undeciphered. Here,
we investigate the role of neuregulins (NRGs) in this process and show that a NRG
receptor, ErbB4, is primarily expressed by polysialylated neural cell adhesion
molecule immature neuroblasts but is also detected in a subset of GFAP+
astroglial cells, ependymal cells, and Dlx2+ precursors in the SVZ. Of the NRG
ligands, both NRG1 and -2 are expressed by immature polysialylated neural cell
adhesion molecule neuroblasts in the SVZ. NRG2 is also expressed by some of the
GFAP+ putative stem cells lining the ventricles. Infusion of exogenous NRG1 leads
to rapid aggregation of Dlx2+ cells in the SVZ and affects the initiation and
maintenance of organized neuroblast migration from the SVZ toward the olfactory
bulb. In contrast, the infusion of NRG2 increased the number of Sox2 and GFAP+
precursors in the SVZ. An outcome of this NRG2 effect is an increase in the
number of newly generated migrating neuroblasts in the rostral migratory stream
and GABAergic interneurons in the olfactory bulb. The analysis of conditional
null mice that lack NRG receptor, ErbB4, in the nervous system revealed that the 
observed activities of NRG2 require ErbB4 activation. These results indicate that
different NRG ligands affect distinct populations of differentiating neural
precursors in the neurogenic regions of the mature forebrain. Furthermore, these 
studies identify NRG2 as a factor capable of promoting SVZ proliferation, leading
to the formation of new neurons in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1413654
PMID: 16446434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Gene Expr Patterns. 2006 Oct;6(7):747-57. Epub 2006 Jan 24.

Spatio-temporal expression of Pbx3 during mouse organogenesis.

Di Giacomo G(1), Koss M, Capellini TD, Brendolan A, Pöpperl H, Selleri L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Cornell University Weill Medical
School, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Pbx3 is a member of the Pbx family of TALE (three amino acid loop extension)
class homeodomain transcription factors. These transcription factors are
implicated in developmental and transcriptional gene regulation in numerous cell 
types through their abilities to form hetero-oligomeric DNA-binding complexes.
Pbx3 was found to be expressed at high levels in the developing central nervous
system (CNS), including a region of the medulla oblongata which is implicated in 
the control of respiration. Furthermore, as reported, Pbx3-deficient mice develop
to term but die within a few hours of birth from central respiratory failure. In 
this study, we have characterized Pbx3 expression patterns during organogenesis
in numerous tissues and organ systems other than the CNS, as a first step toward 
understanding the potentially overlapping functions of Pbx3 with other Pbx family
members during vertebrate development. We have performed in situ hybridization on
whole mount and sectioned mouse embryos from gestational day (E) 9 to E16.5.
During early organogenesis, until E12.5, Pbx3 expression is found mostly in the
embryonic head, forelimbs, and septum transversum, unlike Pbx1 and Pbx2
expression which is more widespread. Conversely, later in organogenesis, Pbx3
expression becomes more widely detectable throughout the developing embryo.
Epithelial and mesenchymal tissues, as well as the CNS, represent major sites of 
Pbx3 expression. The enteric nervous system also expresses high levels of Pbx3,
distinctively in the cells of the ganglia of Auerbach's myenteric nerve plexus,
that also express Dlx2 and Notch1. Cartilage is also a site of Pbx3 expression.
Interestingly, like Pbx1, Pbx3 is highly expressed in proliferating chondrocytes 
but is lost as chondrocytes become hypertrophic during endochondral ossification.
Finally, Pbx3 is expressed only in the forelimb buds during early limb
development, while the hindlimb bud is devoid of Pbx3. This finding leads us to
add Pbx3 to the sparse list of early forelimb-specific molecular markers.

PMID: 16434237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Anat. 2005 Nov;207(5):501-61.

Reassessing the Dlx code: the genetic regulation of branchial arch skeletal
pattern and development.

Depew MJ(1), Simpson CA, Morasso M, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, King's College London, Guy's Hospital,
London, UK. michael.depew@kcl.ac.uk

The branchial arches are meristic vertebrate structures, being metameric both
between each other within the rostrocaudal series along the ventrocephalic
surface of the embryonic head and within each individual arch: thus, just as each
branchial arch must acquire a unique identity along the rostrocaudal axis, each
structure within the proximodistal axis of an arch must also acquire a unique
identity. It is believed that regional specification of metameric structures is
controlled by the nested expression of related genes resulting in a regional
code, a principal that is though to be demonstrated by the regulation of
rostrocaudal axis development in animals exerted by the nested HOM-C/Hox homeobox
genes. The nested expression pattern of the Dlx genes within the murine branchial
arch ectomesenchyme has more recently led to the proposal of a Dlx code for the
regional specification along the proximodistal axis of the branchial arches (i.e.
it establishes intra-arch identity). This review re-examines this hypothesis, and
presents new work on an allelic series of Dlx loss-of-function mouse mutants that
includes various combinations of Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx3, Dlx5 and Dlx6. Although we
confirm fundamental aspects of the hypothesis, we further report a number of
novel findings. First, contrary to initial reports, Dlx1, Dlx2 and Dlx1/2
heterozygotes exhibit alterations of branchial arch structures and Dlx2-/- and
Dlx1/2-/- mutants have slight alterations of structures derived from the distal
portions of their branchial arches. Second, we present evidence for a role for
murine Dlx3 in the development of the branchial arches. Third, analysis of
compound Dlx mutants reveals four grades of mandibular arch transformations and
that the genetic interactions of cis first-order (e.g. Dlx5 and Dlx6), trans
second-order (e.g. Dlx5 and Dlx2) and trans third-order paralogues (e.g. Dlx5 and
Dlx1) result in significant and distinct morphological differences in mandibular 
arch development. We conclude by integrating functions of the Dlx genes within
the context of a hypothesized general mechanism for the establishment of pattern 
and polarity in the first branchial arch of gnathostomes that includes regionally
secreted growth factors such as Fgf8 and Bmp and other transcription factors such
as Msx1, and is consistent both with the structure of the conserved gnathostome
jaw bauplan and the elaboration of this bauplan to meet organismal end-point
designs.

PMCID: PMC1571560
PMID: 16313391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. BMC Genet. 2005 Nov 2;6:52.

Analysis of four DLX homeobox genes in autistic probands.

Hamilton SP(1), Woo JM, Carlson EJ, Ghanem N, Ekker M, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
steveh@lppi.ucsf.edu

BACKGROUND: Linkage studies in autism have identified susceptibility loci on
chromosomes 2q and 7q, regions containing the DLX1/2 and DLX5/6 bigene clusters. 
The DLX genes encode homeodomain transcription factors that control craniofacial 
patterning and differentiation and survival of forebrain inhibitory neurons. We
investigated the role that sequence variants in DLX genes play in autism by
in-depth resequencing of these genes in 161 autism probands from the AGRE
collection.
RESULTS: Sequencing of exons, exon/intron boundaries and known enhancers of DLX1,
2, 5 and 6 identified several nonsynonymous variants in DLX2 and DLX5 and a
variant in a DLX5/6 intragenic enhancer. The nonsynonymous variants were detected
in 4 of 95 families from which samples were sequenced. Two of these four SNPs
were not observed in 378 undiagnosed samples from North American populations,
while the remaining 2 were seen in one sample each.
CONCLUSION: Segregation of these variants in pedigrees did not generally support 
a contribution to autism susceptibility by these genes, although functional
analyses may provide insight into the biological understanding of these important
proteins.

PMCID: PMC1310613
PMID: 16266434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Comp Neurol. 2005 Oct 31;491(4):330-8.

Spatiotemporal expression of GM1 in murine medial pallial neural progenitor
cells.

Liour SS(1), Dinkins MB, Su CY, Yu RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Medical
College of Georgia, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA. sliour@mail.mcg.edu

The expression of gangliosides is developmentally regulated in the central
nervous system. The expression of GM1 in the neural progenitor cells of the
telencephalonic ventricular zone (VZ) has been reported in several studies.
However, information on the spatial and temporal regulation of GM1 expression in 
the VZ is still lacking. In this study, we characterized the expression of GM1 in
the developing mouse telencephalon. At E13, GM1 is expressed in neuronal cells as
well as in the VZ. The initial expression of GM1 in the VZ is restricted to
regions close to the medial pallium. Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)
analysis and characterization of E14 GM1-positive cells showed that they contain 
progenitor cells that proliferate in response to epidermal growth factor (EGF)
and/or basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) stimulation. The results obtained
from quantitative gene expression analysis of region-specific genes (Emx1, Lhx2, 
Ngn1, Ngn2, Pax6, Dlx2, Gsh2, Mash1, and Nkx2.1), using real-time polymerase
chain reaction indicate that FACS of GM1-expressing cells in the fetal forebrain 
enriches for the medial pallial neural progenitor cells.

2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16175551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Dev Biol. 2005 Aug 1;284(1):48-61.

Molecular interactions coordinating the development of the forebrain and face.

Marcucio RS(1), Cordero DR, Hu D, Helms JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Stanford University School
of Medicine, 257 Campus Drive, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

From an architectural point of view, the forebrain acts as a framework upon which
the middle and upper face develops and grows. In addition to serving a structural
role, we present evidence that the forebrain is a source of signals that shape
the facial skeleton. In this study, we inhibited Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling
from the neuroectoderm then examined the molecular changes and the skeletal
alterations resulting from the treatment. One of the first changes we noted was
that the dorsoventral polarity of the forebrain was disturbed, which manifested
as a loss of Shh in the ventral telencephalon, a reduction in expression of the
ventral markers Nkx2.1 and Dlx2, and a concomitant expansion of the dorsal marker
Pax6. In addition to changes in the forebrain neuroectoderm, we observed altered 
gene expression patterns in the facial ectoderm. For example, Shh was not induced
in the frontonasal ectoderm, and Ptc and Gli1 were reduced in both the ectoderm
and adjacent mesenchyme. As a consequence, a signaling center in the frontonasal 
prominence was disrupted and the prominence failed to undergo proximodistal and
mediolateral expansion. After 15 days of development, the upper beaks of the
treated embryos were truncated, and the skeletal elements were located in more
medial and proximal locations in relation to the skeletal elements of the lower
jaw elements. These data indicate that a role of Shh in the forebrain is to
regulate Shh expression in the face, and that together, these Shh domains mediate
patterning within the frontonasal prominence and proximodistal outgrowth of the
middle and upper face.

PMID: 15979605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Dev Biol. 2005 Jun 1;282(1):55-69.

Sid4: A secreted vertebrate immunoglobulin protein with roles in zebrafish
embryogenesis.

diIorio PJ(1), Runko A, Farrell CA, Roy N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diabetes, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 373
Plantation Street, Suite 218, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.
philip.diiorio@umassmed.edu

The small members of the immunoglobulin superfamily (IGSF) are a molecularly
diverse group of proteins composed solely of immunoglobulin domains. They may be 
secreted or tethered to the cell mebrane via GPI linkages and are proposed to
have important functions in vivo. However, very few small IGSFs have been
functionally characterized. During an ongoing in situ hybridization analysis of
expressed sequence tags in zebrafish we identified secreted immunoglobulin domain
4 (sid4), a gene encoding a soluble vertebrate protein composed solely of four
immunoglobulin domains. Throughout development, sid4 is expressed in regions of
the embryo undergoing active cell division and migration. Functional analysis
using morpholino antisense oligonucleotides demonstrates that timing of gene
expression is normal in morphants, but these embryos are smaller and exhibit
defects in epiboly and patterning of axial and prechordal mesoderm. Analyses of
chordin, pax2, krox20, and dlx2 expression in morphants demonstrate that early
brain patterning is normal but later organization of hindbrain neurons and
development of cranial neural crest are perturbed. Levels of apoptosis in
morphants were normal prior to 90% epiboly, but were elevated after 10 h
post-fertilization (hpf). Apoptosis does not account for early patterning defects
of axial mesoderm, but likely contributes to overall reduction in embryo size.
Phylogenetic analysis demonstrates that Sid4 is strikingly similar to the
fibronectin binding Ig domains of Perlecan/HSPG2. Overall, our data demonstrate a
fundamental role for sid4, possibly as a co-factor in extracellular matrix (ECM) 
interactions, in processes underlying tissue patterning and organogenesis in a
vertebrate.

PMID: 15936329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Cell Physiol. 2005 Nov;205(2):202-10.

cAMP induced modifications of HOX D gene expression in prostate cells allow the
identification of a chromosomal area involved in vivo with neuroendocrine
differentiation of human advanced prostate cancers.

Cantile M(1), Kisslinger A, Cindolo L, Schiavo G, D'Antò V, Franco R, Altieri V, 
Gallo A, Villacci A, Tramontano D, Cillo C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medical, Federico II University
Medical School, Naples, Italy.

The acquisition of epithelial-neuroendocrine differentiation (ND) is a
peculiarity of human advanced, androgen-independent, prostate cancers. The HOX
genes are a network of transcription factors controlling embryonal development
and playing an important role in crucial adult eukaryotic cell functions. The
molecular organization of this 39-gene network is unique in the genome and
probably acts by regulating phenotype cell identity. The expression patterns of
the HOX gene network in human prostate cell phenotypes, representing different
stages of prostate physiology and prostate cancer progression, make it possible
to discriminate between different human prostate cell lines and to identify loci 
and paralogous groups harboring the HOX genes mostly involved in prostate
organogenesis and cancerogenesis. Exposure of prostate epithelial phenotypes to
cAMP alters the expression of lumbo-sacral HOX D genes located on the chromosomal
region 2q31-33 where the cAMP effector genes CREB1, CREB2, and cAMP-GEFII are
present. Interestingly, this same chromosomal area harbors: (i) a global
cis-regulatory DNA control region able to coordinate the expression of HOX D and 
contiguous phylogenetically unrelated genes; (ii) a prostate specific ncRNA gene 
associated with high-risk prostate cancer (PCGEM1); (iii) a series of
neurogenic-related genes involved with epithelial-neuronal cell conversion. We
report the expression of neurexin 1, Neuro D1, dlx1, and dlx2 in untreated and
cAMP treated epithelial prostate cells. The in vivo expression of Neuro D1 in
human advanced prostate cancers correlate with the state of tumor differentiation
as measured by Gleason score. Thus, we suggest that the chromosomal area 2q 31-33
might be involved in the epithelial-ND characteristic of human advanced prostate 
cancers.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15895411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Dev Biol. 2005 May 1;281(1):22-37.

Dlx2 over-expression regulates cell adhesion and mesenchymal condensation in
ectomesenchyme.

McKeown SJ(1), Newgreen DF, Farlie PG.

Author information: 
(1)Craniofacial Sciences Consortium, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal 
Children's Hospital and University of Melbourne, Parkville 3052, Victoria,
Australia.

The Dlx family of homeodomain transcription factors have diverse roles in
development including craniofacial morphogenesis and consists of 6 members with
overlapping expression patterns. Dlx2 is expressed within the developing
branchial arches in both the epithelium and mesenchyme and targeted deletion in
mice has revealed roles in patterning and development of the craniofacial
skeleton. Defects in Dlx2 null mice include skeletal anomalies of proximal
branchial arch 1 derivatives while distal elements are largely spared indicating 
redundancy within the Dlx family. We have investigated the function of Dlx2 using
in ovo electroporation and cell culture. Ectopic expression of Dlx2 within the
neural tube beginning prior to emigration of neural crest cells at E1.25
drastically inhibits the migration of transfected cells and induces aggregation
of transfected neuroepithelial cells within the neural tube at 24 h
post-electroporation. By 48 h post-electroporation, the majority of transfected
cells formed multicellular aggregates that were found adjacent to the basal side 
of the neural tube and very few Dlx2 expressing cells migrated to the level of
the branchial arches. Similar results were obtained for Dlx5, suggesting these
effects may be common to Dlx genes. Electroporation of the Dlx2 expression
construct into branchial arch mesenchyme induced N-cadherin and NCAM, a dramatic 
increase in cell-cell adhesion relative to controls, and resulted in an increase 
in mesenchymal condensation. These results suggest a role for Dlx genes in
regulating ectomesenchymal cell adhesion and supports the possibility that the
skeletal dysmorphology seen in Dlx null mice may derive from abnormalities at the
condensation stage.

PMID: 15848386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Biochemistry. 2005 Mar 15;44(10):3942-54.

Protein kinase C phosphorylation modulates N- and C-terminal regulatory
activities of the PITX2 homeodomain protein.

Espinoza HM(1), Ganga M, Vadlamudi U, Martin DM, Brooks BP, Semina EV, Murray JC,
Amendt BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, The University of Tulsa, Tulsa, Oklahoma
74104-3189, USA.

PKC phosphorylation regulates PITX2 DNA binding and transcriptional activity.
Mutation of individual PKC sites demonstrates the functional regulation of PITX2 
through phosphorylation. Immunoprecipitation of PITX2 and a PITX2 PKC mutant
protein reveal specific in vivo phosphorylation by PKC in transfected cells. The 
transcriptional activity of PITX2 is negatively regulated by N-terminal
phosphorylation and positively regulated by C-terminal phosphorylation. We
demonstrate a mechanism of increased PITX2 transcriptional activation through
protein interactions facilitated by phosphorylation of the PITX2 C-terminal tail.
Phosphorylation of the PITX2 C terminus enhances the interaction with cellular
factors. In corroboration with the PITX2 PKC functional studies, a newly
identified C-terminal PITX2 mutation associated with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome
(ARS) demonstrates reduced phosphorylation. This mutation (PITX2 DeltaT1261)
creates a frameshift mutation in codon 227 resulting in 11 novel amino acids
downstream followed by premature truncation of the protein. Three PKC sites in
the C-terminal tail and OAR domain are deleted, which results in decreased
transcriptional activation. PITX2 DeltaT1261 is unable to interact with a
cellular factor to synergistically activate transcription and demonstrates the
first link of ARS with defective PITX2 protein interactions. Gene expression
profiling of homozygous Pitx2 mutant mouse tissue reveals decreased Dlx2
expression as a potential molecular basis for developmental defects associated
with ARS patients. Overall, phosphorylation imparts another level of regulation
to the activity of the PITX2 homeodomain protein during development.

PMID: 15751970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Arch Oral Biol. 2005 Feb;50(2):271-7. Epub 2004 Dec 15.

New cellular models for tracking the odontoblast phenotype.

Priam F(1), Ronco V, Locker M, Bourd K, Bonnefoix M, Duchêne T, Bitard J, Wurtz
T, Kellermann O, Goldberg M, Poliard A.

Author information: 
(1)Faculté de Chirurgie dentaire de Montrouge - Université Paris V, 1 rue Maurice
Arnoux-92120 Montrouge, France.

Odontoblasts and osteoblasts differ functionally and histologically. Because of
their close relationship, mesenchymal cells derived from teeth and bone are
difficult to distinguish ex vivo. Indeed, the main non-collagenous components of 
the odontoblastic extracellular matrix, dentin sialoprotein (DSP) or dentin
matrix protein 1 (DMP1), have also been detected in osteoblasts. The need to
develop cellular models of odontoblast differentiation and to identify markers
specific for the odontoblast lineage, has led us to establish clonal cell lines
from tooth germs of day 18 mouse embryos transgenic for an adenovirus-SV40
recombinant plasmid. In this study, we analyzed the phenotypes of three
independent clones by RT-PCR and Western blot. These clones synthesised DSP, DMP1
and other extracellular matrix proteins typical of the odontoblast and are
therefore likely to be derived from the pulp. Transcripts encoding a set of
homeobox proteins involved in craniofacial development, such as Pax9, Msx1,
Cbfa1, Dlx2 and 5 were also expressed albeit at a different level. These features
of the pulpal clones are shared by the C1 mesodermal cells that are capable of
differentiating along osteogenic, chondrogenic or adipogenic lineages In
contrast, transcripts for two LIM-domain homeobox family genes (Lhx6 and Lhx7)
were only detected in the dental clones. Since these genes are preferentially
expressed in the mesenchyme of the developing tooth, this suggests that our
transgenic-derived cell lines retain intrinsic properties of odontoblastic cells.
They may help to characterise genes specifying the odontoblast phenotype and the 
signalling pathways underlying odontoblast differentiation.

PMID: 15721161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Dev Biol. 2005 Mar 1;279(1):155-68.

Effects of canonical Wnt signaling on dorso-ventral specification of the mouse
telencephalon.

Backman M(1), Machon O, Mygland L, van den Bout CJ, Zhong W, Taketo MM, Krauss S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Centre for Molecular Biology and
Neuroscience, University of Oslo, The National Hospital, 0027 Oslo, Norway.

Wnt signaling is involved in numerous processes during vertebrate CNS
development. In this study, we used conditional Cre/loxP system in mouse to
ablate or activate beta-catenin in the telencephalon in two time windows: before 
and after the onset of neurogenesis. We show that beta-catenin mediated Wnt
signals are required to maintain the molecular identity of the pallium.
Inactivation of beta-catenin in the telencephalon before neurogenesis results in 
downregulated expression of dorsal markers Emx1, Emx2 and Ngn2, and in ectopic
up-regulation of ventral markers Gsh2, Mash1 and Dlx2 in the pallium. In
contrast, ablation of ss-catenin after the onset of cortical neurogenesis (E11.5)
does not result in a dorso-ventral fate shift. In addition, activation of
canonical Wnt signaling in the subpallium leads to a repression of ventral
telencephalic cell identities as shown by the down-regulation of subpallial
markers Dlx2, Nkx2.1, Gsh2, Olig2 and Mash1. This was accompanied with an
expansion of dorsal identities ventrally as shown by the expanded expression
domains of pallial markers Pax6 and Ngn2. Thus, our data suggest that canonical
Wnt signals are involved in maintaining the identity of the pallium by
controlling expression of dorsal markers and by suppressing ventral programs from
being activated in pallial progenitor cells.

PMID: 15708565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Comp Neurol. 2005 Feb 28;483(1):48-65.

Dlx gene expression during chick inner ear development.

Brown ST(1), Wang J, Groves AK.

Author information: 
(1)Gonda Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, House Ear Institute, Los
Angeles, California 90057-1922, USA.

Members of the Dlx gene family play essential roles in the development of the
zebrafish and mouse inner ear, but little is known regarding Dlx genes and avian 
inner ear development. We have examined the inner ear expression patterns of
Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx3, Dlx5, and Dlx6 during the first 7 days of chicken embryonic
development. Dlx1 and Dlx2 expression was seen only in nonneuronal cells of the
cochleovestibular ganglion and nerves from stage 21 to stage 32. Dlx3 marks the
otic placode beginning at stage 9 and becomes limited to epithelium adjacent to
the hindbrain as invagination of the placode begins. Dlx3 expression then
resolves to the dorsal otocyst and gradually becomes limited to the endolymphatic
sac by stage 30. Dlx5 and Dlx6 expression in the developing inner ear is first
seen at stages 12 and 13, respectively, in the rim of the otic pit, before
spreading throughout the dorsal otocyst. As morphogenesis proceeds, Dlx5 and Dlx6
expression is seen throughout the forming semicircular canals and endolymphatic
structures. During later stages, both genes are seen to mark the distal surface
of the forming canals and display expression complementary to that of BMP4 in the
vestibular sensory regions. Dlx5 expression is also seen in the lagena macula and
the cochlear and vestibular nerves by stage 30. These findings suggest important 
roles for Dlx genes in the vestibular and neural development of the avian inner
ear.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15672396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Development. 2005 Feb;132(3):565-78. Epub 2005 Jan 5.

CNTF/LIF/gp130 receptor complex signaling maintains a VZ precursor
differentiation gradient in the developing ventral forebrain.

Gregg C(1), Weiss S.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Research Group, Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of
Calgary Faculty of Medicine, 3330 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1,
Canada.

The extrinsic signaling pathways responsible for the formation and maintenance of
the unique laminar organization of the forebrain germinal zones are largely
unknown. In the present study, we asked whether ciliary neurotrophic factor
(CNTF)/leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF)/gp130 signaling plays a role in the
development of the germinal layers in the lateral ganglionic eminence. We found
that CNTF/LIF/gp130 receptor signaling promotes the self-renewal/expansion of a
subpopulation of fibroblast growth factor-responsive ventricular zone (VZ)
precursors in the ventral forebrain. Analysis of Lifr-/- mice suggests that
CNTF/LIF/gp130 signaling maintains a subpopulation of GSH2+ VZ precursors, which 
are necessary for normal growth of the early ventral forebrain and for
maintaining a gradient of VZ precursor differentiation in the lateral ganglionic 
eminence, as defined by GSH2, MASH1 and DLX2 expression. Furthermore, addition of
exogenous CNTF to embryonic forebrain explant cultures deprived of choroid
plexus-derived CNTF, was sufficient to promote a VZ differentiation gradient. In 
contrast to the forebrain, CNTF/LIF/gp130 signaling reduced, rather than
enhanced, precursor self-renewal/expansion in the spinal cord. These results
demonstrate a novel region-specific role for CNTF/LIF/gp130 signaling in the
development of the germinal layers of the embryonic telencephalon.

PMID: 15634701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Development. 2005 Jan;132(2):311-22. Epub 2004 Dec 16.

Dlx1 and Dlx2 function is necessary for terminal differentiation and survival of 
late-born retinal ganglion cells in the developing mouse retina.

de Melo J(1), Du G, Fonseca M, Gillespie LA, Turk WJ, Rubenstein JL, Eisenstat
DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Cell Science, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, R3E 3J7, Canada.

Dlx homeobox genes, the vertebrate homologs of Distal-less, play important roles 
in the development of the vertebrate forebrain, craniofacial structures and
limbs. Members of the Dlx gene family are also expressed in retinal ganglion
cells (RGC), amacrine and horizontal cells of the developing and postnatal
retina. Expression begins at embryonic day 12.5 and is maintained until late
embryogenesis for Dlx1, while Dlx2 expression extends to adulthood. We have
assessed the retinal phenotype of the Dlx1/Dlx2 double knockout mouse, which dies
at birth. The Dlx1/2 null retina displays a reduced ganglion cell layer (GCL),
with loss of differentiated RGCs due to increased apoptosis, and corresponding
thinning of the optic nerve. Ectopic expression of Crx, the cone and rod
photoreceptor homeobox gene, in the GCL and neuroblastic layers of the mutants
may signify altered cell fate of uncommitted RGC progenitors. However, amacrine
and horizontal cell differentiation is relatively unaffected in the Dlx1/2 null
retina. Herein, we propose a model whereby early-born RGCs are Dlx1 and Dlx2
independent, but Dlx function is necessary for terminal differentiation of
late-born RGC progenitors.

PMID: 15604100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Neurosci Lett. 2004 Dec 6;372(3):209-14.

Analysis of the autism chromosome 2 linkage region: GAD1 and other candidate
genes.

Rabionet R(1), Jaworski JM, Ashley-Koch AE, Martin ER, Sutcliffe JS, Haines JL,
Delong GR, Abramson RK, Wright HH, Cuccaro ML, Gilbert JR, Pericak-Vance MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Center for Human Genetics, 595 LaSalle St., Box 3445, 
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Autism has a strong and complex genetic component, involving several genes.
Genomic screens, including our own, have shown suggestive evidence for linkage
over a 20-30 cM region on chromosome 2q31-q33. Two subsequent reports showed that
the linkage evidence increased in the subset of families with phrase speech delay
(PSD), defined as onset of phrase speech later than 3 years of age. To further
investigate the linkage in the presumptive candidate region, microsatellite
markers in a 2 cM grid covering the interval from 164 to 203 cM were analyzed in 
110 multiplex (2 or more sampled autism patients) families. A maximum
heterogeneity LOD (HLOD) score of 1.54 was detected at D2S1776 (173 cM) in the
overall dataset (dominant model), increasing to 1.71 in the PSD subset. While not
conclusive, these data continue to provide suggestive evidence for linkage,
particularly considering replication by multiple independent groups. Positive LOD
scores extended over the entire region, continuing to define a broad candidate
interval. Association studies were performed on several functional candidates
mapping within the region. These included GAD1, encoding GAD67, whose levels are 
reduced in autopsy brain material from autistic subjects, and STK17B, ABI2,
CTLA4, CD28, NEUROD1, PDE1A, HOXD1 and DLX2. We found no evidence for significant
allelic association between autism and any of these candidates, suggesting that
they do not play a major role in the genetics of autism or that substantial
allelic heterogeneity at any one of these loci dilutes potential disease-allele
association.

PMID: 15542242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Dev Dyn. 2004 Nov;231(3):614-20.

Identification and characterization of a novel transcript down-regulated in
Dlx1/Dlx2 and up-regulated in Pax6 mutant telencephalon.

Faedo A(1), Quinn JC, Stoney P, Long JE, Dye C, Zollo M, Rubenstein JL, Price DJ,
Bulfone A.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Research Institute, Dibit, H.S. Raffaele, Via Olgettina 58, 20132
Milan, Italy.

By using a custom-made array containing cDNAs preferentially expressed in the
mouse embryonic telencephalon (Porteus et al. [1992] Brain Res Mol Brain Res
12:7-22; and Alessandro Bulfone, unpublished data), we studied the gene
expression profile of the Dlx1/Dlx2(-/-) subpallium and Pax6(-/-) pallium. We
identified a transcript corresponding to Unigene Cluster Mm.94021 and rat Evf-1, 
which is down-regulated in the Dlx1/Dlx2(-/-) subpallium and up-regulated in the 
Pax6(-/-) pallium. Here, we report the expression pattern of this transcript,
designated mouse Evf1 (mEvf1), in the prenatal forebrain of wild-type,
Dlx1/Dlx2(-/-) and Pax6(-/-) mice using RNA in situ hybridization and reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. In the wild-type forebrain mEvf1
expression is restricted to the ventral thalamus, hypothalamus, and subpallial
telencephalon (caudal, lateral, and medial ganglionic eminences and septal
primordia), whereas it is down-regulated in the Dlx1/Dlx2(-/-) subpallium (mainly
in caudal, lateral, and medial ganglionic eminences), and up-regulated in the
Pax6(-/-) lateral and ventral pallium at embryonic day 12.5 and in the dorsal,
lateral, and ventral pallium at embryonic day 14.5.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15376329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Dev Dyn. 2004 Nov;231(3):631-9.

Mouse orthologue of ARX, a gene mutated in several X-linked forms of mental
retardation and epilepsy, is a marker of adult neural stem cells and forebrain
GABAergic neurons.

Colombo E(1), Galli R, Cossu G, Gécz J, Broccoli V.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Research Institute, DIBIT, San Raffaele Science Park, Via Olgettina 
58, 20132 Milan, Italy.

Mutations in the human ARX gene show unusually heterogeneous clinical
presentations, including syndromic and nonsyndromic mental retardation, myoclonic
epilepsy with spasticity, and lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia, that are
believed to arise from an impairment of the embryonic mechanisms building the
anterior central nervous system structures. Here, we show that the murine
ortholog Arx has a highly dynamic expression pattern during both early shaping of
the forebrain vesicle and later major events of neural migrations and cell-type
specification. Early on, the Arx gene is specifically activated in anterior
forebrain anlage. Afterward, Arx expression is confined to the telencephalic
vesicles and is enhanced during differentiation of the subpallial structures of
the ganglionic eminences, overlapping with Dlx2, Dlx5, and Gad1 transcriptional
domains. Tangentially migrating neurons reaching the cortical plate are also
Arx-positive at all embryonic stages analyzed. RNA-protein colabeling staining
shows that Arx expression is maintained in the mature cortical interneurons,
suggesting its involvement in the different functions of the gamma-aminobutyric
acid (GABA)ergic neurons settled into the adult cerebral cortex. Finally, Arx
expression is detected in the anterior subventricular layer of the adult brain,
where neural stem cells have been shown to be located. Of interest, Arx
expression is highly up-regulated during in vitro differentiation of pure neural 
stem cell cultures retrieved from adult brain. All together, these findings
suggest Arx as a gene involved in the commitment of proliferating neuroblasts
into a GABAergic neuronal fate. In conclusion, our mouse Arx expression data
provide important further insights into the puzzling complexity of the human ARX 
mutation pleiotropy.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15376319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Comp Neurol. 2004 Sep 6;477(1):55-80.

Expression of regulatory genes during differentiation of thalamic nuclei in mouse
and monkey.

Jones EG(1), Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience, University of California, Davis, Davis, California
95616, USA. ejones@ucdavis.edu

Expression patterns of genes implicated in development of the thalamus were
examined in mice and monkeys, using in situ hybridization with RNA probes
complementary to Cad6, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, Gbx2, Id2, and Lef1 cDNAs. Expression
patterns were related to the evolving cytoarchitecture in mice at birth (P0) and 
in adulthood, and in fetal monkeys early and late in the period of gestation when
thalamic nuclei are becoming histologically differentiated out of a series of
pronuclear masses. At the earlier developmental stage, each gene was expressed in
a pattern that appeared to be pronucleus-specific and maintained a
nucleus-specific pattern into adulthood, with the possible exception of Gbx2.
Each gene displayed a unique expression pattern in the dorsal thalamus, ventral
thalamus, and epithalamus, and no gene was expressed throughout all three
divisions or in every nucleus of a division. With the exception of Dlx2, whose
expression disappeared at the later time point, all continued to be expressed
into adulthood at higher levels and with identical patterns. Despite late
appearance of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic cells in the dorsal lateral
geniculate nucleus of mice, no Dlx genes, which promote formation of a GABAergic 
phenotype elsewhere, were detected in dorsal thalamus. Each thalamic nucleus was 
distinguished by expression of a combination of genes, and homologous nuclei in
mouse and monkey exhibited the same combination. The presence of a centre médian 
nucleus and four pulvinar nuclei in monkeys was marked by patterns of expression 
not found in mice. The centre médian nucleus was marked by high expression of
Id2, which was expressed only weakly in very few nuclei of mice.

PMID: 15281080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Mech Dev. 2004 Jul;121(7-8):977-83.

Cloning and developmental expression patterns of Dlx2, Lhx7 and Lhx9 in the
medaka fish (Oryzias latipes).

Alunni A(1), Blin M, Deschet K, Bourrat F, Vernier P, Rétaux S.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 2197 Développement, Evolution, Plasticité du Système Nerveux, Institut de 
Neurobiologie Alfred FESSARD, CNRS, Avenue de la Terrasse, 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette
cedex, France.

We have isolated three homeodomain and LIM-homeodomain developmental
transcription factors from the medaka fish (Oryzias latipes): OlDlx2, OlLhx7, and
OlLhx9, and we have studied their expression patterns in the developing and adult
brain. This analysis showed that OlDlx2 and OlLhx7 (together with OlNkx2.1b)
delineate the subpallial divisions of the medaka telencephalon, and that OlLhx9
exhibits a typical and specific topology of expression in the pallium and
diencephalic neuromeres. The expression patterns of these three genes, when
compared in details with those of their tetrapod homologs, reveal both
commonalities and differences in the basic organization of the developing teleost
and vertebrate forebrain.

PMID: 15210202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Mech Dev. 2004 Apr;121(4):387-95.

Endothelin-1 regulates the dorsoventral branchial arch patterning in mice.

Ozeki H(1), Kurihara Y, Tonami K, Watatani S, Kurihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry and Metabolism, Graduate School of
Medicine, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Endothelin-1 (ET-1), a 21-amino acid peptide secreted by the epithelium and core 
mesenchyme in the branchial arches as well as vascular endothelium, is involved
in craniofacial and cardiovascular development through endothelin receptor type-A
(EdnrA) expressed in the neural crest-derived ectomesenchyme. Here we show that
ET-1(-/-) mutant mice exhibit a homeotic-like transformation of the lower jaw to 
an upper jaw. Most of the maxillary arch-derived components are duplicated and
replaced mandibular arch-derived structures, resulting in a mirror image of the
upper and lower jaws in the ET-1(-/-) mutant. As for hyoid arch-derivatives, the 
ventral structures are severely affected in comparison to the dorsal ones in the 
ET-1(-/-) mutant. Correspondingly, the expression of Dlx5 and Dlx6,
Distalless-related homeobox genes determining the ventral identity of the
anterior branchial arches, and of the mandibular marker gene Pitx1 is
significantly downregulated in the ET-1(-/-) mutant, whereas the expression of
Dlx2 and the maxillary marker gene Prx2 is unaffected or rather upregulated.
These findings indicate that the ET-1/EdnrA signaling may contribute to the
dorsoventral axis patterning of the branchial arch system as a mediator of the
regional intercellular interactions.

PMID: 15110048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 May;4(3):315-20.

Expression of Dlx and Lhx family homeobox genes in fetal thymus and thymocytes.

Woodside KJ(1), Shen H, Muntzel C, Daller JA, Sommers CL, Love PE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Building 6B, Room
2B-210, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892-2780, USA.

Homeobox genes comprise a nearly ubiquitous and highly conserved superfamily of
developmental regulatory genes that encode transcription factors involved in the 
determination of axis and tissue identity. While homeobox gene expression has
been well characterized in a variety of embryonic tissues, their expression has
not been extensively studied in lymphoid progenitor cells or in sites of
lymphogenesis. To examine homeobox gene expression in the developing thymus, we
screened an embryonic day 13.5 thymus cDNA library by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) using degenerate oligonucleotides within the highly conserved homeodomain
region of eight homeobox gene families. The resulting PCR products were then
cloned and sequenced. Transcripts for multiple Dlx family members and Lhx2 were
repeatedly detected in this screen. Screening of embryonic day 16.5 and adult
murine thymus and Thy1+ thymocytes was performed for selected members of these
homeobox gene families. Transcripts encoding Lhx2, Lhx3, and Lhx9, as well as
Dlx1 and Dlx2 were detected in both thymus and purified thymocytes. Dlx1 is a
member of the distal-less homeobox gene family that has been shown to regulate
embryonic craniofacial development. Significantly, Dlx1 is expressed in the third
branchial arch, which contributes to the thymus. Although Dlx1 knockout mice did 
not display any obvious developmental defects in thymus or thymocyte development,
the expression of these homeobox genes in neural crest derivatives suggests a
possible role in cell migration and development that may overlap with other
homeobox genes.

PMID: 15053981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Development. 2004 Apr;131(7):1463-77. Epub 2004 Feb 25.

Neural crest survival and differentiation in zebrafish depends on mont
blanc/tfap2a gene function.

Barrallo-Gimeno A(1), Holzschuh J, Driever W, Knapik EW.

Author information: 
(1)GSF, Institute for Mammalian Genetics, Ingolstaedter Landstrasse 1, D-85764
Neuherberg, Germany.

Neural crest progenitor cells are the main contributors to craniofacial cartilage
and connective tissue of the vertebrate head. These progenitor cells also give
rise to the pigment, neuronal and glial cell lineages. To study the molecular
basis of neural crest differentiation, we have cloned the gene disrupted in the
mont blanc (mob(m610)) mutation, which affects all neural crest derivatives.
Using a positional candidate cloning approach we identified an A to G transition 
within the 3' splice site of the sixth intron of the tfap2a gene that abolishes
the last exon encoding the crucial protein dimerization and DNA-binding domains. 
Neural crest induction and specification are not hindered in mob(m610) mutant
embryos, as revealed by normal expression of early neural crest specific genes
such as snail2, foxd3 and sox10. In addition, the initial stages of cranial
neural crest migration appear undisturbed, while at a later phase the
craniofacial primordia in pharyngeal arches two to seven fail to express their
typical set of genes (sox9a, wnt5a, dlx2, hoxa2/b2). In mob(m610) mutant embryos,
the cell number of neuronal and glial derivatives of neural crest is greatly
reduced, suggesting that tfap2a is required for their normal development. By
tracing the fate of neural crest progenitors in live mont blanc (mob(m610))
embryos, we found that at 24 hpf neural crest cells migrate normally in the first
pharyngeal arch while the preotic and postotic neural crest cells begin migration
but fail to descend to the pharyngeal region of the head. TUNEL assay and
Acridine Orange staining revealed that in the absence of tfap2a a subset of
neural crest cells are unable to undergo terminal differentiation and die by
apoptosis. Furthermore, surviving neural crest cells in tfap2a/mob(m610) mutant
embryos proliferate normally and later differentiate to individual derivatives.
Our results indicate that tfap2a is essential to turn on the normal developmental
program in arches 2-7 and in trunk neural crest. Thus, tfap2a does not appear to 
be involved in early specification and cell proliferation of neural crest, but it
is a key regulator of an early differentiation phase and is required for cell
survival in neural crest derived cell lineages.

PMID: 14985255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2004 Jan;25(1):153-61.

Defective neuronogenesis in the absence of Dlx5.

Perera M(1), Merlo GR, Verardo S, Paleari L, Corte G, Levi G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Biologia dello Sviluppo, Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul 
Cancro-IST, 16132 Genova, Italy.

Dlx genes play an important role in the control of the development of the central
nervous system (CNS). Single or compound inactivation of Dlx1, Dlx2, or Dlx5 in
the mouse causes defects of neuronal migration and differentiation. Dlx5, in
particular, is essential for the correct development of the olfactory system.
Targeted inactivation of Dlx1 and Dlx2 in the mouse results in abnormal neuronal 
differentiation in the embryonic subcortical forebrain and is associated to the
loss of Dlx5 and Dlx6 expression. So far, however, it has been impossible to
investigate the role of Dlx genes on late neurogenesis, as their inactivation
leads to perinatal death. We have now generated cultures of neural stem cells
(NSCs) derived from embryonic and newborn Dlx5-null mice, and we have compared
their capacity to differentiate in vitro to that of equivalent cells derived from
normal littermates. We show here that in the absence of Dlx5, NSCs derived from
newborn animals have a severely reduced capacity to generate neurons. This is not
the case for cells derived from E12.5 embryos. Forced expression of Dlx5 in
cultures of newborn mutant NSCs fully restores their neuronogenic potential. Our 
data suggest that Dlx5 is essential for secondary (postnatal) neuronogenesis.

PMID: 14962748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Feb 9;32(3):884-92. Print 2004.

Identification of a direct Dlx homeodomain target in the developing mouse
forebrain and retina by optimization of chromatin immunoprecipitation.

Zhou QP(1), Le TN, Qiu X, Spencer V, de Melo J, Du G, Plews M, Fonseca M, Sun JM,
Davie JR, Eisenstat DD.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, 675 McDermot Avenue, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada.

Understanding homeobox gene specificity and function has been hampered by the
lack of proven direct transcriptional targets during development. Dlx genes are
expressed in the developing forebrain, retina, craniofacial structures and limbs.
Dlx1/Dlx2 double knockout mice die at birth with multiple defects including
abnormal forebrain development and decreased Dlx5 and Dlx6 expression. We have
successfully applied chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) to identify a direct
transcriptional target of DLX homeoproteins from embryonic tissues in vivo. We
optimized cross-linking conditions to enrich for protein-DNA complexes, then
using specific high affinity DLX antibodies captured immunoenriched DLX genomic
DNA transcriptional targets. DLX homeobox proteins bind differentially to the
Dlx5/Dlx6 intergenic enhancer in newborn retina (DLX2) and embryonic striatum
(DLX1, DLX2) in situ. Reporter gene assays demonstrated the functional
significance of the binding of DLX proteins to this regulatory element, confirmed
in vitro by electrophoretic mobility shift assays, using tissue extracts or
recombinant DLX proteins. ChIP provides the best approach to identify direct Dlx 
homeoprotein targets from developing tissues in situ. The use of this technology 
will advance our understanding of Dlx gene function in the vertebrate in vivo and
can be applied to examine targets of other homeobox genes and other classes of
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC373381
PMID: 14769946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Development. 2004 Feb;131(3):613-27. Epub 2004 Jan 7.

Prep1.1 has essential genetic functions in hindbrain development and cranial
neural crest cell differentiation.

Deflorian G(1), Tiso N, Ferretti E, Meyer D, Blasi F, Bortolussi M, Argenton F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia, Universita' di Padova, Via U. Bassi 58/B, 35131
Padova, Italy.

In this study we analysed the function of the Meinox gene prep1.1 during
zebrafish development. Meinox proteins form heterotrimeric complexes with Hox and
Pbx members, increasing the DNA binding specificity of Hox proteins in vitro and 
in vivo. However, a role for a specific Meinox protein in the regulation of Hox
activity in vivo has not been demonstrated. In situ hybridization showed that
prep1.1 is expressed maternally and ubiquitously up to 24 hours
post-fertilization (hpf), and restricted to the head from 48 hpf onwards.
Morpholino-induced prep1.1 loss-of-function caused significant apoptosis in the
CNS. Hindbrain segmentation and patterning was affected severely, as revealed by 
either loss or defective expression of several hindbrain markers
(foxb1.2/mariposa, krox20, pax2.1 and pax6.1), including anteriorly expressed Hox
genes (hoxb1a, hoxa2 and hoxb2), the impaired migration of facial nerve motor
neurons, and the lack of reticulospinal neurons (RSNs) except Mauthner cells.
Furthermore, the heads of prep1.1 morphants lacked all pharyngeal cartilages.
This was not caused by the absence of neural crest cells or their impaired
migration into the pharyngeal arches, as shown by expression of dlx2 and snail1, 
but by the inability of these cells to differentiate into chondroblasts. Our
results indicate that prep1.1 has a unique genetic function in craniofacial
chondrogenesis and, acting as a member of Meinox-Pbc-Hox trimers, it plays an
essential role in hindbrain development.

PMID: 14711874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mol Psychiatry. 2003 Nov;8(11):916-24.

Screening of nine candidate genes for autism on chromosome 2q reveals rare
nonsynonymous variants in the cAMP-GEFII gene.

Bacchelli E(1), Blasi F, Biondolillo M, Lamb JA, Bonora E, Barnby G, Parr J,
Beyer KS, Klauck SM, Poustka A, Bailey AJ, Monaco AP, Maestrini E; International 
Molecular Genetic Study of Autism Consortium (IMGSAC).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Evoluzionistica Sperimentale, University of Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy.

The results from several genome scans indicate that chromosome 2q21-q33 is likely
to contain an autism susceptibility locus. We studied the potential contribution 
of nine positional and functional candidate genes: TBR-1; GAD1; DLX1; DLX2;
cAMP-GEFII; CHN1; ATF2; HOXD1 and NEUROD1. Screening these genes for DNA variants
and association analysis using intragenic single nucleotide polymorphisms did not
provide evidence for a major role in the aetiology of autism. Four rare
nonsynonymous variants were identified, however, in the cAMP-GEFII gene. These
variants were present in five families, where they segregate with the autistic
phenotype, and were not observed in control individuals. The significance of
these variants is unclear, as their low frequency in IMGSAC families does not
account for the relatively strong linkage signal at the 2q locus. Further studies
are needed to clarify the contribution of cAMP-GEFII gene variants to autism
susceptibility.

PMID: 14593429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Development. 2003 Dec;130(23):5755-68. Epub 2003 Oct 8.

lockjaw encodes a zebrafish tfap2a required for early neural crest development.

Knight RD(1), Nair S, Nelson SS, Afshar A, Javidan Y, Geisler R, Rauch GJ,
Schilling TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California,
Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

The neural crest is a uniquely vertebrate cell type that gives rise to much of
the craniofacial skeleton, pigment cells and peripheral nervous system, yet its
specification and diversification during embryogenesis are poorly understood.
Zebrafish homozygous for the lockjaw (low) mutation show defects in all of these 
derivatives and we show that low (allelic with montblanc) encodes a zebrafish
tfap2a, one of a small family of transcription factors implicated in epidermal
and neural crest development. A point mutation in low truncates the DNA binding
and dimerization domains of tfap2a, causing a loss of function. Consistent with
this, injection of antisense morpholino oligonucleotides directed against splice 
sites in tfap2a into wild-type embryos produces a phenotype identical to low.
Analysis of early ectodermal markers revealed that neural crest specification and
migration are disrupted in low mutant embryos. TUNEL labeling of dying cells in
mutants revealed a transient period of apoptosis in crest cells prior to and
during their migration. In the cranial neural crest, gene expression in the
mandibular arch is unaffected in low mutants, in contrast to the hyoid arch,
which shows severe reductions in dlx2 and hoxa2 expression. Mosaic analysis,
using cell transplantation, demonstrated that neural crest defects in low are
cell autonomous and secondarily cause disruptions in surrounding mesoderm. These 
studies demonstrate that low is required for early steps in neural crest
development and suggest that tfap2a is essential for the survival of a subset of 
neural crest derivatives.

PMID: 14534133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Development. 2003 Dec;130(23):5579-87. Epub 2003 Oct 1.

Wnt signaling is required at distinct stages of development for the induction of 
the posterior forebrain.

Braun MM(1), Etheridge A, Bernard A, Robertson CP, Roelink H.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neurobiology and Behavior, Department of Biological Structure, Box 
357420, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

One of the earliest manifestations of anteroposterior pattering in the developing
brain is the restricted expression of Six3 and Irx3 in the anterior and posterior
forebrain, respectively. Consistent with the role of Wnts as posteriorizing
agents in neural tissue, we found that Wnt signaling was sufficient to induce
Irx3 and repress Six3 expression in forebrain explants. The position of the zona 
limitans intrathalamica (zli), a boundary-cell population that develops between
the ventral (vT) and dorsal thalamus (dT), is predicted by the apposition of Six3
and Irx3 expression domains. The expression patterns of several inductive
molecules are limited by the zli, including Wnt3, which is expressed posterior to
the zli in the dT. Wnt3 and Wnt3a were sufficient to induce the dT marker Gbx2
exclusively in explants isolated posterior to the presumptive zli. Blocking the
Wnt response allowed the induction of the vT-specific marker Dlx2 in prospective 
dT tissue. Misexpression of Six3 in the dT induced Dlx2 expression and inhibited 
the expression of both Gbx2 and Wnt3. These results demonstrate a dual role for
Wnt signaling in forebrain development. First, Wnts directed the initial
expression of Irx3 and repression of Six3 in the forebrain, delineating posterior
and anterior forebrain domains. Later, continued Wnt signaling resulted in the
induction of dT specific markers, but only in tissues that expressed Irx3.

PMID: 14522868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Cereb Cortex. 2003 Oct;13(10):1072-83.

Emerging complexity of layer I in human cerebral cortex.

Rakic S(1), Zecevic N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Connecticut School of Medicine,
Farmington, CT 06030, USA.

In this study we examine possible origins and migratory routes of human cortical 
neurons, with special emphasis on the preplate and layer I. In embryonic stages, 
two main cell types, Cajal-Retzius cells, and cells labeled with interneuron
markers (calretinin, calbindin and GABA), were present in the preplate layer. In 
addition, a number of preplate GABAergic cells co-expressed either Nkx2.1 or Dlx 
transcription factors, findings consistent with their origin in the ganglionic
eminence and subsequent tangential migration to the layer I. The orientation of
the leading process indicates that some of these cells descend to the cortical
plate. However, the finding of radially oriented GABAergic, NKX2.1+ and DLX+
cells in the cortical ventricular zone, argues that, unlike in rodents, a
significant subpopulation of these cells originates in the cortical ventricular
zone. In embryonic stages, expression of Reelin in Cajal-Retzius cells as well as
Reelin/DLX2+ cells in the embryonic ganglionic eminence and the olfactory region,
suggest that these cells in human may have diverse origins. In later fetal stages
in human (17-22 gestational weeks) layer I and the newly formed subpial granular 
layer, contained a population of small interneurons that originated mainly in the
lateral ganglionic eminence, since the majority of these cells were
double-labeled with DLX/GABA, and rarely with NKX2.1/GABA. Therefore, neurons in 
the human cortical layer I are heterogeneous, with more complex origin and
migratory routes than in rodents. In addition to the ganglionic eminence, both
the expended subventricular zone and subpial granular layer, contribute to the
neuronal population of the developing layer I and underlining cortical plate.

PMID: 12967924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Front Biosci. 2003 Sep 1;8:s1249-65.

Transcriptional regulation of BMP-2 activated genes in osteoblasts using gene
expression microarray analysis: role of Dlx2 and Dlx5 transcription factors.

Harris SE(1), Guo D, Harris MA, Krishnaswamy A, Lichtler A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, University of Missouri at Kansas City, School of
Dentistry, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA. harrisse@umkc.edu

This presentation will focus on using microarray data on a clonal osteoblast cell
model to analyze the early BMP-2 responsive genes, as well as some of the later
genes regulated by BMP2 during different phases of mineralization. We will focus 
on the early phases of gene expression that occur after BMP2 signaling from 30
min up to 1 day. The hypothesis is that understanding how these early genes are
regulated during the initial multilayering and growth phase of osteoblasts will
lead to models of how BMP activity stimulates cell growth, cell migration,
multilayering, matrix deposition and remodeling phase that allows subsequent
mineralization. The Dlx2 and Dlx5 homeobox genes have been shown to be critical
for bone formation both in vitro and in vivo. Both Dlx 2 and Dlx5 are activated
within 15-30 minutes after BMP2 addition to the mouse 2T3 osteoblast model and
primary fetal rat calvarial osteoblasts. The Dlx2 and Dlx5 genes stay elevated in
the presence of BMP2 for up to 5 days, a time when overt mineralization is just
beginning. To understand the genomic network that Dlx5 and Dlx2 regulate at the
transcription level, we have taken an approach where we use a specific
transcription repressor protein, Engrailed, ligated to the Dlx5 homeodomain. The 
idea is that this Eng-Dlx5 protein will interact with Dlx5 and possibly Dlx2 and 
related Dlx- regulated genes in vivo and down-regulate their transcriptional
initiation. Using a microarray approach with over 5,000 known genes we can
identify the genes that are directly and indirectly regulated by Dlx5 and Dlx2.
This will allow us to build an initial genomic network of Dlx- regulated genes at
the transcriptional level. We will present our model and preliminary efforts at
understanding the genomic network regulated by this important BMP2-regulated
transcription factor class in osteoblast biology.

PMID: 12957859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Cereb Cortex. 2003 Sep;13(9):895-903.

Dlx2 progenitor migration in wild type and Nkx2.1 mutant telencephalon.

Nery S(1), Corbin JG, Fishell G.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program and the Department of Cell Biology, The
Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University Medical Center, 
540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The transcription factor Dlx2 is expressed widely throughout the ventral
telencephalon. We have examined the in vitro and in vivo migration of Dlx2
progenitors originating from the different ganglionic eminences of both wild type
and Nkx2.1 mutant animals. By examining the expression of tauLacZ targeted into
the Dlx2 locus we were able to visualize the distribution of cells expressing
this gene at both embryonic and postnatal stages. This analysis suggested that
Dlx2-expressing cells traverse a number of characteristic migratory routes to
populate both cortical and subcortical regions. We also examined how these
patterns of migration were affected in Nkx2.1 mutant animals. In these mutants,
the early but not late populations of Dlx2-expressing cells originating in the
ventral telencephalon that migrate to the cortex are lost. This recovery may be, 
at least in part, a result of the late migration of Dlx2 progenitors from the
caudal ganglionic eminences (CGE), which, based on our previous work, does not
appear to require Nkx2.1 gene function.

PMID: 12902388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Leukoc Biol. 2003 Aug;74(2):302-5.

DLX genes as targets of ALL-1: DLX 2,3,4 down-regulation in t(4;11) acute
lymphoblastic leukemias.

Ferrari N(1), Palmisano GL, Paleari L, Basso G, Mangioni M, Fidanza V, Albini A, 
Croce CM, Levi G, Brigati C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro
IST, Genova, Italy.

Dlx genes constitute a gene family thought to be essential in morphogenesis and
development. We show here that in vertebrate cells, Dlx genes appear to be part
of a regulatory cascade initiated by acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)-1, a
master regulator gene whose disruption is implicated in several human acute
leukemias. The expression of Dlx2, Dlx3, Dlx5, Dlx6, and Dlx7 was absent in All-1
-/- mouse embryonic stem cells and reduced in All-1 +/- cells. In leukemic
patients affected by the t(4;11)(q21;q23) chromosomal abnormality, the expression
of DLX2, DLX3, and DLX4 was virtually abrogated. Our data indicate that Dlx genes
are downstream targets of ALL-1 and could be considered as important tools for
the study of the early leukemic cell phenotype.

PMID: 12885948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2003 May;23(1):107-20.

Dlx transcription factors regulate differentiation of dopaminergic neurons of the
ventral thalamus.

Andrews GL(1), Yun K, Rubenstein JL, Mastick GS.

Author information: 
(1)Biology and Biochemistry Departments, Cell and Molecular Biology Graduate
Program, University of Nevada, Reno 89557, USA.

Recent studies have provided many lines of evidence that specific homeodomain
factors act to regulate differentiation into specific neuron types. However,
these studies have mainly focused on the caudal CNS, while in the forebrain, the 
regulation of neuron specification remains relatively unknown. To investigate the
genetic regulatory networks that control neuron differentiation in the forebrain,
we have analyzed the expression patterns and functions of DLX homeodomain factors
in the ventral thalamus of early mouse embryos. During initial neurogenesis
(E9.5-E10.5), DLX(+) cells are the first progenitors to make terminal divisions
and differentiate as neurons. We have defined a set of regulatory genes
coexpressed with DLX, in both progenitors (PAX6 and MASH1) and in the
differentiating neurons (PAX6, along with a combination of LIM-type homeodomain
factors, including ISL1, Lhx1/Lim1, and Lhx5/Lim2). These initial neurons express
tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), and become the PAX6-expressing A13 dopaminergic
neurons of the zona incerta. To test for DLX function, the initial
differentiation of the ventral thalamic neurons was examined in embryos mutant
for Dlx1 and Dlx2. Dlx1/2 double homozygous mutants formed ventral thalamic
neurons, but these neurons lacked PAX6, ISL1, and TH expression. These data
suggest that DLX genes act as forebrain-specific factors linking general
neuron-inducing signals to region-specific neuron differentiation programs.

PMID: 12799141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Oncol Rep. 2003 Jul-Aug;10(4):973-7.

Induction of apoptosis by fenretinide in tumor cell lines correlates with DLX2,
DLX3 and DLX4 gene expression.

Ferrari N(1), Paleari L, Palmisano GL, Tammaro P, Levi G, Albini A, Brigati C.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro IST, Largo Rosanna Benzi 10,
16132 Genoa, Italy.

We investigated a possible relationship between apoptosis induction by
fenretinide (4HPR) and the expression of a group of genes thought to be essential
in morphogenesis and development, the DLX genes. We analyzed their expression
under normal conditions or upon 4HPR stimulation in several tumor cell lines. We 
show that DLX2, DLX3 and DLX4 were expressed at higher levels in cell lines which
where more sensitive to apoptotic induction, whereas DLX 5 and 6 appeared to
segregate in a distinct functional compartment. Our data support the notion that 
DLX2, 3, 4 genes could participate in the control of 4HPR-mediated apoptosis,
making them important molecules for the monitoring of therapy efficacy in cancer 
patients.

PMID: 12792755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Comp Neurol. 2003 Jun 30;461(3):370-93.

Expression of the genes GAD67 and Distal-less-4 in the forebrain of Xenopus
laevis confirms a common pattern in tetrapods.

Brox A(1), Puelles L, Ferreiro B, Medina L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Murcia, 30100 
Murcia, Spain.

We investigated whether gamma-amino butyric acidergic (GABAergic) cell
populations correlate positionally with specific Dlx-expressing histogenetic
territories in an anamniote tetrapod, the frog Xenopus laevis. To that end, we
cloned a fragment of Xenopus GAD67 gene (xGAD67, expressed in GABAergic neurons) 
and compared its expression with that of Distal-less-4 gene (xDll-4, ortholog of 
mouse Dlx2) in the forebrain at late larval and adult stages. In Xenopus,
GABAergic neurons were densely concentrated in xDll-4-positive territories, such 
as the telencephalic subpallium, part of the hypothalamus, and ventral thalamus, 
where nearly all neurons expressed both genes. In contrast, the pallium of
Xenopus generally contained dispersed neurons expressing xGAD67 or xDll-4, which 
may represent local circuit neurons. As in amniotes, these pallial interneurons
may have been produced in the subpallium and migrated tangentially into the
pallium during development. In Xenopus, the ventral division of the classic
lateral pallium contained extremely few GABAergic cells and showed only low
signal of the pallial gene Emx1, suggesting that it may represent the amphibian
ventral pallium, homologous to that of amniotes. At caudal forebrain levels, a
number of GABAergic neurons was observed in several areas (dorsal thalamus,
pretectum), but no correlation to xDll-4 was observed there. The location of
GABAergic neurons in the forebrain and their relation to the developmental
regulatory genes Dll and Dlx were very similar in Xenopus and in amniotes. The
close correlation in the expression of both genes in rostral forebrain regions
supported the notion that Dll/Dlx are among the genes involved in the acquisition
of the GABAergic phenotype.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12746875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Comp Neurol. 2003 Jun 23;461(2):187-204.

Dlx1, Dlx2, Pax6, Brn3b, and Chx10 homeobox gene expression defines the retinal
ganglion and inner nuclear layers of the developing and adult mouse retina.

de Melo J(1), Qiu X, Du G, Cristante L, Eisenstat DD.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba
R3E 0V9, Canada.

Distal-less homeobox genes are expressed in the developing forebrain. We assessed
Dlx gene expression in the developing and adult mouse retina. Dlx1 and Dlx2 are
detected in retinal neuroprogenitors by embryonic day (E) 12.5 (Eisenstat et al. 
[1999] J. Comp. Neurol. 217-237). At E13.5, the expression of four homeodomain
proteins, DLX2, BRN3b, PAX6, and CHX10, define distinct yet overlapping domains
in the retinal neuroepithelium. By postnatal day (P) 0, DLX2 is expressed in the 
neuroblastic layer and the ganglion cell layer (GCL) consisting of ganglion and
displaced amacrine cells. DLX1 expression resembles DLX2 to P0 but decreases
postnatally. In the adult, DLX2 is localized to ganglion, amacrine, and
horizontal cells as determined by coexpression with retinal cell-specific
markers. There is coincident expression of DLX2 with gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA), glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD)65, and GAD67 in the inner nuclear layer
(INL) and GCL. In the adult, DLX2 is coexpressed with BRN3b in ganglion cells;
PAX6 in amacrine, horizontal, and ganglion cells; and Chx10 in some bipolar
cells. We predict that a combinatorial code of these homeobox genes and others
specify retinal cell fate. Our results support a possible role for Dlx1 and Dlx2 
in inner retinal development and in the terminal differentiation and/or
maintenance of INL interneurons and ganglion cells in the adult. The correlation 
of DLX2 with GABA expression in the mouse retina closely mirrors the relationship
of DLX2 to GABAergic neuronal differentiation in the embryonic forebrain,
including neocortex, olfactory bulb and hippocampus, signifying a conservation of
function of Dlx genes in the developing central nervous system.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12724837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Development. 2003 Jun;130(11):2543-54.

Zebrafish foxi one modulates cellular responses to Fgf signaling required for the
integrity of ear and jaw patterning.

Nissen RM(1), Yan J, Amsterdam A, Hopkins N, Burgess SM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

We identified four insertional alleles of foxi one (foo), an embryonic lethal
mutation in zebrafish that displays defects in both otic placode and the jaw. In 
foo/foo embryos the otic placode is split into two smaller placodes and mutant
embryos show a dorsoventral (DV) cartilage defect manifested as a reduced
hyomandibular and reduced third and fourth branchial arches. We identified foxi
one (foo), the zebrafish ortholog of Foxi1 (FREAC6, FKHL10, HFH-3, Fkh10) and a
member of the forkhead domain transcriptional regulator family, as the gene
mutated in foo/foo embryos. foo is expressed in otic placode precursor cells, and
foo/foo embryos lack placodal pax8 expression and have disorganized otic
expression of pax2.1 and dlx3. Third stream neural crest cell migration, detected
by dlx2 and krox20 expression, is aberrant in that it invades the otic placode
territory. foo is expressed in pharyngeal pouch endoderm and is required for
pouch expression of pax8 and proper patterning of other markers in the pouch such
as nkx2.3. In foo/foo embryos, we observed a failure to maintain fgf3 expression 
in the pouches, followed by apoptosis of neural crest cells in adjacent arches.
We conclude that foo expression is essential for pax8 expression probably
downstream of Fgf signaling in a conserved pathway jointly required for integrity
of patterning in the otic placode and pharyngeal pouches. We propose that correct
placement of survival/proliferation cues is essential for shaping the pharyngeal 
cartilages and that evolutionary links between jaw and ear formation can be
traced to Fgf-Foxi1-Pax8 pathways.

PMID: 12702667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Genome Res. 2003 Apr;13(4):533-43.

Regulatory roles of conserved intergenic domains in vertebrate Dlx bigene
clusters.

Ghanem N(1), Jarinova O, Amores A, Long Q, Hatch G, Park BK, Rubenstein JL, Ekker
M.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Health Research Institute and Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1Y 4E9.

Dlx homeobox genes of vertebrates are generally arranged as three bigene clusters
on distinct chromosomes. The Dlx1/Dlx2, Dlx5/Dlx6, and Dlx3/Dlx7 clusters likely 
originate from duplications of an ancestral Dlx gene pair. Overlaps in expression
are often observed between genes from the different clusters. To determine if the
overlaps are a result of the conservation of enhancer sequences between
paralogous clusters, we compared the Dlx1/2 and the Dlx5/Dlx6 intergenic regions 
from human, mouse, zebrafish, and from two pufferfish, Spheroides nephelus and
Takifugu rubripes. Conservation between all five vertebrates is limited to four
sequences, two in Dlx1/Dlx2 and two in Dlx5/Dlx6. These noncoding sequences are
>75% identical over a few hundred base pairs, even in distant vertebrates.
However, when compared to each other, the four intergenic sequences show a much
more limited similarity. Each intergenic sequence acts as an enhancer when tested
in transgenic animals. Three of them are active in the forebrain with overlapping
patterns despite their limited sequence similarity. The lack of sequence
similarity between paralogous intergenic regions and the high degree of sequence 
conservation of orthologous enhancers suggest a rapid divergence of Dlx
intergenic regions early in chordate/vertebrate evolution followed by fixation of
cis-acting regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC430168
PMID: 12670995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Glia. 2003 Jan 15;41(2):117-27.

Early oligodendrocyte progenitor cells in the human fetal telencephalon.

Rakic S(1), Zecevic N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Connecticut Medical School,
Farmington, Connecticut 06030, USA.

Oligodendrocytes, the myelin-producing cells in the central nervous system,
represent a large portion of the total number of cells in the human brain. Using 
cell-specific markers and antibodies to ventral homeodomain transcription
factors, NKX2.1 and DLX2, we show here that a subpopulation of early
oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) in the human telencephalon may originate 
in the ganglionic eminence (GE). DLX2-labeled OPCs form a well-delineated stream 
of cells connecting the GE subventricular zone (SVZ) to the cortical intermediate
zone through the anterior cortical SVZ. This population of cells is labeled by
early OPCs markers, PDGFRalpha, Olig1, and NG2, and not with either neuronal,
astrocyte, or late OPCs markers. Intriguingly, numerous CD68(+)
microglia/macrophages, nestin(+) neural stem cells, and CD34(+) hematopoietic
stem cells (HSCs) are also present in both the GE stream and the cortical SVZ.
These cells could be colabeled with DLX2 as well as early OPCs markers. A
separate subpopulation of early OPCs, present in the GE and cortical SVZ, did not
express either DLX2 or CD68. These findings suggest that different subpopulations
of early OPCs, characterized with different sets of transcription factors and
cell-specific markers, are present in human forebrain. These subpopulations may
have different origins; one may originate in the cortical SVZ, while others may
come from the GE and/or outside the CNS as hematopoietic stem cells.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12509802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Neuron. 2002 Dec 19;36(6):1021-34.

EGF converts transit-amplifying neurogenic precursors in the adult brain into
multipotent stem cells.

Doetsch F(1), Petreanu L, Caille I, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, 16 Divinity 
Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. doetsch@fas.harvard.edu

Neural stem cells in the subventricular zone (SVZ) continue to generate new
neurons in the adult brain. SVZ cells exposed to EGF in culture grow to form
neurospheres that are multipotent and self-renewing. We show here that the
majority of these EGF-responsive cells are not derived from relatively quiescent 
stem cells in vivo, but from the highly mitotic, Dlx2(+), transit-amplifying C
cells. When exposed to EGF, C cells downregulate Dlx2, arrest neuronal
production, and become highly proliferative and invasive. Killing Dlx2(+) cells
dramatically reduces the in vivo response to EGF and neurosphere formation in
vitro. Furthermore, purified C cells are 53-fold enriched for neurosphere
generation. We conclude that transit-amplifying cells retain stem cell competence
under the influence of growth factors.

PMID: 12495619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Comp Neurol. 2003 Jan 6;455(2):238-48.

Evidence that Sema3A and Sema3F regulate the migration of GABAergic neurons in
the developing neocortex.

Tamamaki N(1), Fujimori K, Nojyo Y, Kaneko T, Takauji R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphological Brain Science, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Konoecho, Yoshida, Sakyoku, Kyoto, 606-8501 Japan.
tamamaki@mbs.kyoto-u.ac.jp

The ganglionic eminence (GE) supplies neurons containing gamma-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA) to the pallium of the telencephalon. We investigated the molecular
guidance mechanisms of GE cell migration in the neocortex and found neuropilin-1 
(Npn-1) or neuropilin-2 (Npn-2) on the GE cells. Ectopic Sema3A or -3F expression
by COS1 cell clusters placed on embryo neocortical slices reduced the cell
migration but did not block it completely. However, the cell migration was almost
completely blocked by COS1 cell clusters expressing both Sema3A and -3F. The
direction of cell migration could be reversed by placing Sema3A- and
-3F-coexpressing COS1 cell clusters at the distal cut end of the neocortical
slices. Further slice experiments revealed that migration of half of the GE cells
in the neocortex was regulated by Sema3A and that migration of the other half of 
the GE cells in the neocortex was regulated by Sema3F. When the cells responding 
to Sema3A were diverted by ectopic Sema3A expression in vivo, Dlx2-positive cells
were found predominantly in the lower intermediate zone (IZ). When the cells
responding to Sema3F were diverted by ectopic Sema3F expression in vivo,
Dlx2-positive cells were found predominantly in the upper IZ. It was speculated
that the semaphorin-neuropilin interactions distribute the GABAergic GE cells
evenly in the neocortex as well as guide the GE cells from the GE to the
neocortex. The Sema3A expression site under the subplate extended dorsally as the
embryo developed. The Sema3A expression seemed to block the Npn-1-positive GE
cells in the neocortex from entering the cortical plate (CP) and guide them to
the dorsal cortex and the hippocampus. Sema3F expression in the CP continued
through the embryonic stages. The expression seemed to block Npn-2-positive GE
cells in the neocortex from entering the CP and make them migrate into the lower 
IZ. Finally, the semaphorin-neuropilin interactions sorted GABAergic inteneurons 
into the CP and white matter neurons into the IZ.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12454988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Neurosci. 2002 Nov 15;22(22):9821-30.

Subpallial dlx2-expressing cells give rise to astrocytes and oligodendrocytes in 
the cerebral cortex and white matter.

Marshall CA(1), Goldman JE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, Department of Pathology, Columbia
University, College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York 10032, USA.

The precise origins of postnatal subventricular zone (SVZ) cells are not known.
Furthermore, the gliogenic potential of progenitors expressing Dlx genes that
migrate ventrodorsally from the ganglionic eminences has not been explored in
vivo. Here, we identify the embryonic origins of two distinct populations of
postnatal SVZ cells: SVZ border cells, which express Zebrin II, and migratory
cells in the central SVZ, which are generally devoid of Zebrin II expression
(Staugaitis et al., 2001). Zebrin II is expressed by all cells of the
telencephalic primordium, with its expression becoming restricted to astrocytes
in the mature telencephalon. As the neuroepithelium folds during corticostriatal 
sulcus formation (embryonic day 13-15), a wedge of Zebrin II+ cells is created at
the presumptive site of the dorsolateral SVZ. At this time, Dlx2-expressing cells
and their progeny begin to migrate ventrodorsally along a medial path from the
ganglionic eminences. These migratory subpallial cells invade the wedge of Zebrin
II+ cells to form the central region of the SVZ. We used a Dlx2/tauLacZ knock-in 
to perform a short-term lineage analysis of Dlx2-expressing cells throughout SVZ 
formation and the postnatal peak of gliogenesis. Dlx2/tauLacZ [beta-galactosidase
(beta-gal)]-expressing cells populate the central SVZ, whereas Zebrin
II-expressing cells form its borders. Furthermore, beta-gal expression
demonstrates a lineage relationship between Dlx2-expressing cells and glia
residing in the dorsal telencephalon. We propose a model for the formation of the
postnatal SVZ and demonstrate that subpallium-derived Dlx2-expressing cells give 
rise to astrocytes and oligodendrocytes in the white matter and cerebral cortex.

PMID: 12427838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Development. 2002 Dec;129(24):5621-34.

The early topography of thalamocortical projections is shifted in Ebf1 and Dlx1/2
mutant mice.

Garel S(1), Yun K, Grosschedl R, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143-0984,
USA.

The prevailing model to explain the formation of topographic projections in the
nervous system stipulates that this process is governed by information located
within the projecting and targeted structures. In mammals, different thalamic
nuclei establish highly ordered projections with specific neocortical domains and
the mechanisms controlling the initial topography of these projections remain to 
be characterized. To address this issue, we examined Ebf1(-/-) embryos in which a
subset of thalamic axons does not reach the neocortex. We show that the
projections that do form between thalamic nuclei and neocortical domains have a
shifted topography, in the absence of regionalization defects in the thalamus or 
neocortex. This shift is first detected inside the basal ganglia, a structure on 
the path of thalamic axons, and which develops abnormally in Ebf1(-/-) embryos. A
similar shift in the topography of thalamocortical axons inside the basal ganglia
and neocortex was observed in Dlx1/2(-/-) embryos, which also have an abnormal
basal ganglia development. Furthermore, Dlx1 and Dlx2 are not expressed in the
dorsal thalamus or in cortical projections neurons. Thus, our study shows that:
(1) different thalamic nuclei do not establish projections independently of each 
other; (2) a shift in thalamocortical topography can occur in the absence of
major regionalization defects in the dorsal thalamus and neocortex; and (3) the
basal ganglia may contain decision points for thalamic axons' pathfinding and
topographic organization. These observations suggest that the topography of
thalamocortical projections is not strictly determined by cues located within the
neocortex and may be regulated by the relative positioning of thalamic axons
inside the basal ganglia.

PMID: 12421703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Development. 2002 Nov;129(21):5065-79.

A zebrafish sox9 gene required for cartilage morphogenesis.

Yan YL(1), Miller CT, Nissen RM, Singer A, Liu D, Kirn A, Draper B, Willoughby J,
Morcos PA, Amsterdam A, Chung BC, Westerfield M, Haffter P, Hopkins N, Kimmel C, 
Postlethwait JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene 97403, USA.

Erratum in
    Development 2002 Dec;129(23):5551. Nissen Robert [corrected to Nissen Robert M].

The molecular genetic mechanisms of cartilage construction are incompletely
understood. Zebrafish embryos homozygous for jellyfish (jef) mutations show
craniofacial defects and lack cartilage elements of the neurocranium, pharyngeal 
arches, and pectoral girdle similar to humans with campomelic dysplasia. We show 
that two alleles of jef contain mutations in sox9a, one of two zebrafish
orthologs of the human transcription factor SOX9. A mutation induced by ethyl
nitrosourea changed a conserved nucleotide at a splice junction and severely
reduced splicing of sox9a transcript. A retrovirus insertion into sox9a disrupted
its DNA-binding domain. Inhibiting splicing of the sox9a transcript in wild-type 
embryos with splice site-directed morpholino antisense oligonucleotides produced 
a phenotype like jef mutant larvae, and caused sox9a transcript to accumulate in 
the nucleus; this accumulation can serve as an assay for the efficacy of a
morpholino independent of phenotype. RNase-protection assays showed that in
morpholino-injected animals, the percent of splicing inhibition decreased from
80% at 28 hours post fertilization to 45% by 4 days. Homozygous mutant embryos
had greatly reduced quantities of col2a1 message, the major collagen of
cartilage. Analysis of dlx2 expression showed that neural crest specification and
migration was normal in jef (sox9a) embryos. Confocal images of living embryos
stained with BODIPY-ceramide revealed at single-cell resolution the formation of 
precartilage condensations in mutant embryos. Besides the lack of overt cartilage
differentiation, pharyngeal arch condensations in jef (sox9a) mutants lacked
three specific morphogenetic behaviors: the stacking of chondrocytes into orderly
arrays, the individuation of pharyngeal cartilage organs and the proper shaping
of individual cartilages. Despite the severe reduction of cartilages, analysis of
titin expression showed normal muscle patterning in jef (sox9a) mutants.
Likewise, calcein labeling revealed that early bone formation was largely
unaffected in jef (sox9a) mutants. These studies show that jef (sox9a) is
essential for both morphogenesis of condensations and overt cartilage
differentiation.

PMID: 12397114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Development. 2002 Nov;129(21):5029-40.

Modulation of the notch signaling by Mash1 and Dlx1/2 regulates sequential
specification and differentiation of progenitor cell types in the subcortical
telencephalon.

Yun K(1), Fischman S, Johnson J, Hrabe de Angelis M, Weinmaster G, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, LPPI, University of California, San Francisco, 401 Parnassus, Box
0984, 94143-0984, USA.

Notch signaling has a central role in cell fate specification and
differentiation. We provide evidence that the Mash1 (bHLH) and Dlx1 and Dlx2
(homeobox) transcription factors have complementary roles in regulating Notch
signaling, which in turn mediates the temporal control of subcortical
telencephalic neurogenesis in mice. We defined progressively more mature
subcortical progenitors (P1, P2 and P3) through their combinatorial expression of
MASH1 and DLX2, as well as the expression of proliferative and postmitotic cell
markers at E10.5-E11.5. In the absence of Mash1, Notch signaling is greatly
reduced and 'early' VZ progenitors (P1 and P2) precociously acquire SVZ
progenitor (P3) properties. Comparing the molecular phenotypes of the delta-like 
1 and Mash1 mutants, suggests that Mash1 regulates early neurogenesis through
Notch-and Delta-dependent and -independent mechanisms. While Mash1 is required
for early neurogenesis (E10.5), Dlx1 and Dlx2 are required to downregulate Notch 
signaling during specification and differentiation steps of 'late' progenitors
(P3). We suggest that alternate cell fate choices in the developing telencephalon
are controlled by coordinated functions of bHLH and homeobox transcription
factors through their differential affects on Notch signaling.

PMID: 12397111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Development. 2002 Nov;129(21):4963-74.

Dorsoventral patterning is established in the telencephalon of mutants lacking
both Gli3 and Hedgehog signaling.

Rallu M(1), Machold R, Gaiano N, Corbin JG, McMahon AP, Fishell G.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program and the Department of Cell Biology, The
Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University Medical Center, 
540 First Avenue, New York 10016, USA.

Considerable data suggest that sonic hedgehog (Shh) is both necessary and
sufficient for the specification of ventral pattern throughout the nervous
system, including the telencephalon. We show that the regional markers induced by
Shh in the E9.0 telencephalon are dependent on the dorsoventral and
anteroposterior position of ectopic Shh expression. This suggests that by this
point in development regional character in the telencephalon is established. To
determine whether this prepattern is dependent on earlier Shh signaling, we
examined the telencephalon in mice carrying either Shh- or Gli3-null mutant
alleles. This analysis revealed that the expression of a subset of ventral
telencephalic markers, including Dlx2 and Gsh2, although greatly diminished,
persist in Shh(-/-) mutants, and that these same markers were expanded in
Gli3(-/-) mutants. To understand further the genetic interaction between Shh and 
Gli3, we examined Shh/Gli3 and Smoothened/Gli3 double homozygous mutants.
Notably, in animals carrying either of these genetic backgrounds, genes such as
Gsh2 and Dlx2, which are expressed pan-ventrally, as well as Nkx2.1, which
demarcates the ventral most aspect of the telencephalon, appear to be largely
restored to their wild-type patterns of expression. These results suggest that
normal patterning in the telencephalon depends on the ventral repression of Gli3 
function by Shh and, conversely, on the dorsal repression of Shh signaling by
Gli3. In addition these results support the idea that, in addition to hedgehog
signaling, a Shh-independent pathways must act during development to pattern the 
telencephalon.

PMID: 12397105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Comp Neurol. 2002 Aug 5;449(4):330-42.

Differential localization of high- and low-molecular-weight variants of
microtubule-associated protein 2 in the developing rat telencephalon.

Fujimori K(1), Takauji R, Tamamaki N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Fukui Medical University, Matsuoka, 910-1193 Fukui,
Japan.

Microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2) occurs in developing mammalian neuronal
tissue as both high- and low-molecular-weight forms with temporally regulated
expression. We studied the MAP2 expression in the developing rat telencephalon
with monoclonal antibodies that recognized both the high- and
low-molecular-weight forms of MAP2 variants or that specifically recognized
high-molecular-weight forms of MAP2 variants. Differences in the staining
patterns of these antibodies reflected differences in the distribution of the
high- and low-molecular-weight MAP2s. The immunoreactive sites of high- and
low-molecular-weight MAP2 had a more widespread distribution in the embryonic
telencephalon than those of high-molecular-weight MAP2. Many bipolar cells in the
ganglionic eminence (GE) and in the intermediate zone (IZ) of the neocortex
showed low-molecular-weight MAP2 immunoreactivity, but they showed weak or no
high-molecular-weight MAP2 immunoreactivity. Expression of mRNA containing exons 
common to high- and low-molecular-weight MAP2 was detected in the tangentially
ellipsoidal cells in the IZ, but expression of mRNA containing an exon specific
to high-molecular-weight MAP2 was not detected in these cells by in situ
hybridization. We interpreted these observations as indicating that the bipolar
cells contained MAP2c preferentially, but contained MAP2a and MAP2b (MAP2a/b) at 
a very low or negligible level. The cells that expressed MAP2c preferentially
among the MAP2 splicing variants composed 50% of the preplate cells, most of the 
MAP2-positive cells in the hippocampus and the corpus callosum. Double labeling
by DiI staining and Dlx2 immunohistochemistry, or by Dlx2 and MAP2
immunohistochemistry, revealed that most of the Dlx2-positive cells in the IZ
expressed MAP2c preferentially at embryonic day 16. Another double-labeling study
revealed that most GAD-positive cells in the preplate were MAP2a/b positive,
whereas most GAD-positive cells in the IZ expressed MAP2c preferentially, with
only a negligible level of MAP2a/b immunoreactivity. We conclude that MAP2
immunoreactivity in the IZ was localized in the tangentially migrating neurons.
The tangentially migrating neurons seemed to acquire MAP2a/b immunoreactivity as 
they entered the preplate or cortical plate and developed into mature neurons.
Radially migrating neurons in the IZ were MAP2 negative. After entering to the
preplate or the cortical plate, they became MAP2a/b positive as they developed
into mature neurons.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12115669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 12;277(28):25001-10. Epub 2002 Apr 10.

Differential regulation of gene expression by PITX2 isoforms.

Cox CJ(1), Espinoza HM, McWilliams B, Chappell K, Morton L, Hjalt TA, Semina EV, 
Amendt BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, The University of Tulsa, Oklahoma
74104-3189, USA.

Three major PITX2 isoforms are differentially expressed in human, mice,
zebrafish, chick, and frog tissues. To demonstrate differential regulation of
gene expression by these isoforms we used three different promoters and three
cell lines. Transient transfection of Chinese hamster ovary, HeLa, and LS-8 cell 
lines revealed differences in PITX2A and PITX2C activation of the PLOD1 and Dlx2 
promoters, however, PITX2B is inactive. In contrast, PITX2B actives the
pituitary-specific Prolactin promoter at higher levels than either PITX2A or
PITX2C. Interestingly, co-transfection of either PITX2A or PITX2C with PITX2B
results in a synergistic activation of the PLOD1 and Dlx2 promoters. Furthermore,
PITX2 isoforms have different transcriptional activity dependent upon the cells
used for transfection analysis. We have isolated a fourth PITX2 isoform (PITX2D) 
expressed only in humans, which acts to suppress the transcriptional activity of 
the other PITX2 isoforms. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and glutathione
S-transferase pull-down experiments demonstrated that all isoforms interact with 
PITX2D and that PITX2B forms heterodimeric complexes with PITX2A and PITX2C. Our 
research provides a molecular basis for differential gene regulation through the 
expression of PITX2 isoforms. PITX2 isoform activities are both promoter- and
cell-specific, and our data reveal new mechanisms for PITX2-regulated gene
expression.

PMID: 11948188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Apr 1;11(7):743-53.

A molecular basis for differential developmental anomalies in Axenfeld-Rieger
syndrome.

Espinoza HM(1), Cox CJ, Semina EV, Amendt BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Tulsa, 600 South College 
Avenue, Tulsa, OK 74104-3189, USA.

Pitx2, a bicoid-like homeodomain transcription factor and Dlx2 are two
transcriptional markers observed during early tooth development. PITX2 binds to
bicoid and bicoid-like elements in the Dlx2 promoter and activates this promoter 
30-fold in Chinese hamster ovary cells. Mutations in PITX2 associated with
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) provided the first link of this homeodomain
transcription factor to tooth development. We are investigating the molecular
basis of developmental anomalies associated with human PITX2 mutations. A
phenotypically less severe ARS mutant (without tooth anomalies), PITX2 R84W, has 
a similar DNA binding specificity compared to wild-type PITX2 and transactivates 
the Dlx2 promoter. This mutation is associated with iris hypoplasia (IH); in
contrast a Rieger syndrome mutation, PITX2 T68P, which presents clinically with
the full spectrum of developmental anomalies (including tooth anomalies), is
unable to transactivate the Dlx2 promoter. Since Dlx2 expression is required for 
tooth and craniofacial development the lack of tooth anomalies in the patient
with IH may be due to the residual activity of this mutant in activating the Dlx2
promoter. We demonstrate that PITX2 phosphorylation increases PITX2 and PITX2
R84W DNA binding. The PITX2 T68P ARS mutation occurs at a protein kinase C
phosphorylation site in the homeodomain. Surprisingly, phosphorylation of PITX2
T68P is increased compared to wild-type PITX2 but has little effect on its DNA
binding activity. Altogether these data suggest a molecular mechanism for tooth
development involving Dlx2 gene expression in ARS patients.

PMID: 11929847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Brain Res Bull. 2002 Feb-Mar 1;57(3-4):381-4.

The telencephalon of the frog Xenopus based on calretinin immunostaining and gene
expression patterns.

Brox A(1), Ferreiro B, Puelles L, Medina L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphological Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Murcia, Murcia, Spain. becacm2@um.es

To further understand the organization and evolution of the telencephalon, we
analyzed in the frog Xenopus laevis the expression of the genes Distal-less-4
(Xdll-4, comparable to the mouse gene Dlx2) and GAD-67 (XGAD-67, expressed in
GABAergic cells), and compared this with calretinin immunostaining and the
cytoarchitecture of the telencephalon. Our results show that like in other
vertebrates, the telencephalon of the frog Xenopus is divided into two major
territories: a basal, subpallial region showing a high density of cells
expressing Xdll-4 and XGAD-67, and a dorsal, pallial region showing only few,
dispersed cells expressing these genes. The subpallial territory of the frog
Xenopus includes the septum, the amphibian basal ganglia, some basal forebrain
cholinergic cell groups and some amygdala nuclei. In the pallium of the frog
Xenopus, medial, dorsal, lateral, and ventral parts could be distinguished,
similar to those described in amniotes. In summary, the amphibian telencephalon
shows a basic morphogenetic organization similar to that of amniotes, which
suggests that this organization is common to the telencephalon of all tetrapods.

PMID: 11922993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Development. 2002 Jan;129(1):245-52.

Ectopic expression of the Dlx genes induces glutamic acid decarboxylase and Dlx
expression.

Stühmer T(1), Anderson SA, Ekker M, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, LPPI, University of California at San Francisco, 401 Parnassus
Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143-0984, USA.

The expression of the Dlx homeobox genes is closely associated with neurons that 
express gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in the embryonic rostral forebrain. To
test whether the Dlx genes are sufficient to induce some aspects of the phenotype
of GABAergic neurons, we adapted the electroporation method to ectopically
express DLX proteins in slice cultures of the mouse embryonic cerebral cortex.
This approach showed that ectopic expression of Dlx2 and Dlx5 induced the
expression of glutamic acid decarboxylases (GADs), the enzymes that synthesize
GABA. We also used this method to show cross-regulation between different Dlx
family members. We find that Dlx2 can induce Dlx5 expression, and that Dlx1, Dlx2
and Dlx5 can induce expression from a Dlx5/6-lacZ enhancer/"reporter construct.

PMID: 11782417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Gene Expr. 2001;9(6):265-81.

Antagonistic regulation of Dlx2 expression by PITX2 and Msx2: implications for
tooth development.

Green PD(1), Hjalt TA, Kirk DE, Sutherland LB, Thomas BL, Sharpe PT, Snead ML,
Murray JC, Russo AF, Amendt BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, The University of Tulsa, OK 74104-3189, USA.

The transcriptional mechanisms underlying tooth development are only beginning to
be understood. Pitx2, a bicoid-like homeodomain transcription factor, is the
first transcriptional marker observed during tooth development. Because Pitx2,
Msx2, and Dlx2 are expressed in the dental epithelium, we examined the
transcriptional activity of PITX2 in concert with Msx2 and the Dlx2 promoter.
PITX2 activated while Msx2 unexpectedly repressed transcription of a TK-Bicoid
luciferase reporter in a tooth epithelial cell line (LS-8) and CHO cell line.
Surprisingly, Msx2 binds to the bicoid element (5'-TAATCC-3') with a high
specificity and competes with PITX2 for binding to this element. PITX2 binds to
bicoid and bicoid-like elements in the Dlx2 promoter and activates this promoter 
45-fold in CHO cells. However, it is only modestly activated in the LS-8 tooth
epithelial cell line that endogenously expresses Msx2 and Pitx2. RT-PCR and
Western blot assays reveal that two Pitx2 isoforms are expressed in the LS-8
cells. We further demonstrate that PITX2 dimerization can occur through the
C-terminus of PITX2. Msx2 represses the Dlx2 promoter in CHO cells and
coexpression of both PITX2 and Msx2 resulted in transcriptional antagonism of the
Dlx2 promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrate that factors in 
the LS-8 cell line specifically interact with PITX2. Thus, Dlx2 gene
transcription is regulated by antagonistic effects between PITX2, Msx2, and
factors expressed in the tooth epithelia.

PMID: 11763998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 2001 Oct 24;130(2):217-30.

Evidence that GRIP, a PDZ-domain protein which is expressed in the embryonic
forebrain, co-activates transcription with DLX homeodomain proteins.

Yu G(1), Zerucha T, Ekker M, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Center for Neurobiology
and Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry, 401 Parnassus Avenue, University of
California at San Francisco, CA 94143-0984, USA.

The DLX homeodomain proteins control development of the basal ganglia and
branchial arches. To identify co-factors that regulate DLX function we utilized
the yeast two-hybrid assay, and found a DLX interacting protein (DIP2) which
binds to the N-terminal region of DLX2 via a PDZ domain. DIP2 appears to be an
alternatively spliced form of GRIP1, a protein known to bind AMPA glutamate
receptors via PDZ domains. Thus, we named it GRIP1b. We provide evidence that
GRIP1b can function as a transcriptional co-activator of DLX2 and DLX5. Glutamate
receptors inhibit this co-activation. These results suggest that some PDZ
proteins may regulate transcription via their interactions with homeodomain
proteins. Furthermore, these results suggest a link between glutamate receptors, 
PDZ proteins and the DLX transcription factors, all of which are co-expressed in 
the developing basal ganglia.

PMID: 11675124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Development. 2001 Jun;128(12):2351-63.

N-terminal fatty-acylation of sonic hedgehog enhances the induction of rodent
ventral forebrain neurons.

Kohtz JD(1), Lee HY, Gaiano N, Segal J, Ng E, Larson T, Baker DP, Garber EA,
Williams KP, Fishell G.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neurobiology and Department of Pediatrics, Box 209, Children's
Memorial Institute for Research and Education, Northwestern University Medical
School, 2430 N. Halsted, Chicago, IL 60614, USA. j-kohtz@northwestern.edu

The adult basal ganglia arise from the medial and lateral ganglionic eminences,
morphologically distinct structures found in the embryonic telencephalon. We have
previously shown that temporal changes in sonic hedgehog (Shh) responsiveness
determine the sequential induction of embryonic neurons that populate the medial 
and lateral ganglionic eminences. In this report, we show that Shh-mediated
differentiation of neurons that populate the lateral ganglionic eminence express 
different combinations of the homeobox-containing transcription factors Dlx,
Mash1 and Islet 1/2. Furthermore, we show that N-terminal fatty-acylation of Shh 
significantly enhances its ability to induce the differentiation of rat E11
telencephalic neurons expressing Dlx, Islet 1/2 or Mash1. Recent evidence
indicates that in utero injection of the E9.5 mouse forebrain with retroviruses
encoding wild-type Shh induces the ectopic expression of Dlx2 and severe
deformities in the brain. In this report, we show that Shh containing a mutation 
at the site of acylation prevents either of these phenotypes. These results
suggest that N-terminal fatty-acylation of Shh may play an important role in
Shh-dependent signaling during rodent ventral forebrain formation.

PMID: 11493554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. DNA Cell Biol. 2001 Jun;20(6):359-65.

Bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) signaling to the Col2alpha1 gene in
chondroblasts requires the homeobox gene Dlx-2.

Xu SC(1), Harris MA, Rubenstein JL, Mundy GR, Harris SE.

Author information: 
(1)Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals, Mason, Ohio 45040, USA. xu.sc@pg.com

To understand the role of Dlx genes in the process of chondrogenesis, we studied 
the expression of Dlx-2 and Dlx-5 mRNAs in a mouse clonal chondroblast cell line,
TMC23. We also examined the involvement of Dlx2 in the bone morphogenetic
protein-2 (BMP-2) signaling to the type II collagen gene, Col2alpha1, in this
cell line. In this report, we show that the TMC23 cells express Dlx-2 and Dlx-5
mRNAs, and the levels can be upregulated by recombinant BMP-2 at an early stage
of chondroblast differentiation. Addition of rBMP-2 dramatically increased type
II collagen expression at both the mRNA and the protein level. Also, rBMP-2
increased transcription of Col2alpha1, as shown by stimulation of a
chondrocyte-specific Col2alpha1 enhancer. The mechanism involves Dlx-2, as the
stimulatory effect of rBMP-2 on the Col2alpha enhancer was blocked by an
antisense oligonucleotide against Dlx-2 mRNA. The rBMP-2 signaling to the
Col2alpha1 enhancer was also blocked by a dominant-negative Smad1 expression
vector. These data demonstrate that Dlx-2 is a downstream target of the BMP-2
signaling pathway in chondroblasts. Therefore, we propose a model in which rBMP-2
stimulates Dlx-2 expression, which then serves as a necessary transcription
factor for Col2alpha1 gene expression through a chondrocyte-specific enhancer
fragment.

PMID: 11445007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Neurosci. 2001 Jul 1;21(13):4699-711.

Boundary formation and compartition in the avian diencephalon.

Larsen CW(1), Zeltser LM, Lumsden A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College
London, London SE1 1UL, England.

The diencephalon comprises three functionally distinct regions: synencephalon,
dorsal thalamus, and ventral thalamus. Patterning of the diencephalon has been
proposed to involve subdivision of its anteroposterior axis into segments,
neuromeres or prosomeres (Bergquist and Kallen, 1954; Vaage, 1969; Figdor and
Stern, 1993; Rubenstein et al., 1994; Redies et al., 2000; Yoon et al., 2000).
However, the number and sequence of diencephalic neuromeres, or even their
existence, are uncertain. We have examined the proposed subdivisions by
morphology, gene expression, acquisition of boundary-specific phenotypes, and
cell lineage restriction. We find that at stage 16 in chick the diencephalon is
divided into synencephalon and parencephalon. The synencephalon exhibits
neuromeric morphology, expresses Prox, and acquires neuromere boundary properties
at its interface with both the midbrain and the parencephalon. Although the
mesencephalic/synencephalic boundary restricts cell mixing, the
synencephalic/parencephalic boundary does not. Similarly, there is no lineage
restriction between the parencephalon and the more rostral forebrain (secondary
prosencephalon). Subdivision of the parencephalon into ventral and dorsal
thalamus involves the formation of a narrow intraparencephalic territory, the
zona limitans intrathalamica (zli). This is correlated with the acquisition of
cell lineage restriction at both anterior and posterior borders of the zli, the
appearance of boundary-specific properties, and Gbx2 and Dlx2 expression in
dorsal thalamic and ventral thalamic territories, respectively. At stage 22, the 
synencephalon is divided into two domains, distinguished by differential gene
expression and tissue morphology, but associated with neither a boundary
phenotype nor cell lineage restriction. Our results suggest that the diencephalon
does not have an overt segmental pattern.

PMID: 11425897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 18;276(20):16848-56. Epub 2001 Feb 20.

The binding of Ku antigen to homeodomain proteins promotes their phosphorylation 
by DNA-dependent protein kinase.

Schild-Poulter C(1), Pope L, Giffin W, Kochan JC, Ngsee JK, Traykova-Andonova M, 
Haché RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Loeb Health Research Institute at the Ottawa
Hospital, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1Y 4E9, Canada.

The Ku antigen (70- and 80-kDa subunits) is a regulatory subunit of DNA-dependent
protein kinase (DNA-PK) that promotes the recruitment of the catalytic subunit of
DNA-PK (DNA-PKcs) to DNA ends and to specific DNA sequences from which the kinase
is activated. Ku and DNA-PKcs plays essential roles in double-stranded DNA break 
repair and V(D)J recombination and have been implicated in the regulation of
specific gene transcription. In a yeast two-hybrid screen of a Jurkat T cell cDNA
library, we have identified a specific interaction between the 70-kDa subunit of 
Ku heterodimer and the homeodomain of HOXC4, a homeodomain protein expressed in
the hematopoietic system. Unexpectedly, a similar interaction with Ku was
observed for several additional homeodomain proteins including octamer
transcription factors 1 and 2 and Dlx2, suggesting that specific binding to Ku
may be a property shared by many homeodomain proteins. Ku-homeodomain binding was
mediated through the extreme C terminus of Ku70 and was abrogated by amino acid
substitutions at Lys595/Lys596. Ku binding allowed the recruitment of the
homeodomain to DNA ends and dramatically enhanced the phosphorylation of
homeodomain-containing proteins by DNA-PK. These results suggest that Ku
functions as a substrate docking protein for signaling by DNA-PK to homeodomain
proteins from DNA ends.

PMID: 11279128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Dev Biol. 2001 Mar 15;231(2):410-9.

Formation of the middle ear: recent progress on the developmental and molecular
mechanisms.

Mallo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Stübeweg 51, Freiburg, D-79108, Germany. mallo@immunobio.mpg.de

The middle ear allows animals to hear while moving in an aerial medium. It is
composed of a cavity harbouring a chain of three ossicles that transmit
vibrations produced by airborne sound in the tympanic membrane into the inner
ear, where they are converted into neural impulses. The middle ear develops in
the branchial arches, and this requires sequential interactions between the
epithelia and the underlying mesenchyme. Gene-inactivation experiments have
identified genes required for the formation of different middle ear components.
Some encode for signalling molecules, including Endothelin1 and Fgf8, probable
mediators of epithelial-mesenchymal interactions. Other genes, including Eya1,
Prx1, Hoxa1, Hoxa2, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, and Gsc, are most likely involved in
patterning and morphogenetic processes in the neural crest-derived mesenchyme.
Mechanisms controlling formation of a functional tympanic membrane are also
discussed. Basically, the tympanic ring, which serves as support for the tympanic
membrane, directs invagination of the first pharyngeal cleft ectoderm to form the
external acoustic meatus (EAM), which provides the outer layer of the membrane.
Gsc and Prx1 are essential for tympanic ring development. While invaginating, the
EAM controls skeletogenesis in the underlying mesenchyme to form the manubrium of
the malleus, the link between the membrane and the middle ear ossicles.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11237469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Dev Biol. 2001 Mar 1;231(1):138-48.

A zebrafish forebrain-specific zinc finger gene can induce ectopic dlx2 and dlx6 
expression.

Yang Z(1), Liu N, Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Medical College of Georgia,
Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

Identification of the earliest forebrain-specific markers should facilitate the
elucidation of molecular events underlying vertebrate forebrain determination and
specification. Here we report the sequence and characterization of fez (forebrain
embryonic zinc finger), a gene that is specifically expressed in the embryonic
forebrain of zebrafish. Fez encodes a putative nuclear zinc finger protein that
is highly conserved in Drosophila, zebrafish, Xenopus, mouse, and human. In
zebrafish, the expression of fez becomes detectable at the anterior edge of the
presumptive neuroectoderm by 70% epiboly. During the segmentation period, its
expression is completely restricted to the rostral region of the prospective
forebrain. At approximately 24 h postfertilization, fez expression is mostly
confined to the telencephalon and the anterior-ventral region of the
diencephalon. Although fez expression is present in one-eyed pinhead (oep) and
cyclops (cyc) zebrafish mutants, the pattern is altered. Forced expression of fez
induces ectopic expression of dlx2 and dlx6, two genes involved in brain
development. Knockdown of fez function using a morpholino-based antisense oligo
inhibited dlx2 expression in the ventral forebrain. Our studies indicate that fez
is one of the earliest markers specific for the anterior neuroectoderm and it may
play a role in forebrain development by regulating Dlx gene expression.

PMID: 11180958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Mech Dev. 2000 Dec;99(1-2):29-38.

Transgenically ectopic expression of Bmp4 to the Msx1 mutant dental mesenchyme
restores downstream gene expression but represses Shh and Bmp2 in the enamel knot
of wild type tooth germ.

Zhao X(1), Zhang Z, Song Y, Zhang X, Zhang Y, Hu Y, Fromm SH, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology and Center for Bioenvironmental
Research, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70118, USA.

Bmp4 is a downstream gene of Msx1 in early mouse tooth development. In this
study, we introduced the Msx1-Bmp4 transgenic allele to the Msx1 mutants in which
tooth development is arrested at the bud stage in an effort of rescuing Msx1
mutant tooth phenotype in vivo. Ectopic expression of a Bmp4 transgene driven by 
the mouse Msx1promoter in the dental mesenchyme restored the expression of Lef-1 
and Dlx2 but neither Fgf3 nor syndecan-1 in the Msx1 mutant molar tooth germ. The
mutant phenotype of molar but not incisor could be partially rescued to progress 
to the cap stage. The Msx1-Bmp4 transgene was also able to rescue the alveolar
processes and the neonatal lethality of the Msx1 mutants. In contrast,
overexpression of Bmp4 in the wild type molar mesenchyme down-regulated Shh and
Bmp2 expression in the enamel knot, the putative signaling center for tooth
patterning, but did not produce a tooth phenotype. These results indicate that
Bmp4 can bypass Msx1 function to partially rescue molar tooth development in
vivo, and to support alveolar process formation. Expression of Shh and Bmp2 in
the enamel knot may not represent critical signals for tooth patterning.

PMID: 11091071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Exp Zool. 2000 Oct 15;288(3):235-41.

Differential expression of orthologous Dlx genes in zebrafish and mice:
implications for the evolution of the Dlx homeobox gene family.

Quint E(1), Zerucha T, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Loeb Health Research Institute at the Ottawa Hospital, Ontario, Canada.

Dlx homeobox genes of vertebrates are often organised as physically linked pairs 
in which the two genes are transcribed convergently (tail-to-tail arrangement).
Three such Dlx pairs have been found in mouse, human, and zebrafish and are
thought to have originated from the duplication of an ancestral gene pair. These 
pairs include Dlx1/Dlx2, Dlx7/Dlx3, and Dlx6/Dlx5 (the zebrafish orthologue of
Dlx5 is named dlx4). Expression patterns of physically linked Dlx genes overlap
extensively. Furthermore, orthologous Dlx genes often show highly similar
expression patterns. We analysed Dlx expression during the gastrula and early
somitogenesis of the mouse and zebrafish. It was found that expression of the
mouse Dlx6 gene takes place in the rostral ectoderm and presumptive olfactory and
otic placodes with patterns similar to the previously reported expression of the 
physically linked Dlx5 gene. However, we observed only very weak expression of
the mouse Dlx3 gene at the same stage. This contrasts with the expression of dlx 
genes in zebrafish where dlx3 and dlx7, but not dlx4 and dlx6 are expressed
during gastrulation in the rostral ectoderm and presumptive placodes. Thus, Dlx
expression patterns at early stages are better conserved between paralogous pairs
of physically linked genes than between orthologous pairs. This suggests that
early expression of Dlx genes existed prior to the duplications that led to the
multiple pairs of physically linked genes but was differentially conserved in
different paralogs in zebrafish and mice.

PMID: 11069141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Int J Dev Biol. 2000;44(6):619-26.

Multiple functions of Dlx genes.

Merlo GR(1), Zerega B, Paleari L, Trombino S, Mantero S, Levi G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Morphogenesis, National Cancer Institute-IST, Genova, 
Italy.

Dlx genes comprise a highly conserved family of homeobox genes homologous to the 
distal-less (Dll) gene of Drosophila. They are thought to act as transcription
factors. All Dlx genes are expressed in spatially and temporally restricted
patterns in craniofacial primordia, basal telencephalon and diencephalon, and in 
distal regions of extending appendages, including the limb and the genital bud.
Most of them are expressed during morphogenesis of sensory organs and during
migration of neural crest cells and interneurons. In addition, Dlx5 and Dlx6 are 
expressed in differentiating osteoblasts. Gene targeting of Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx3 and 
Dlx5 in the mouse germ-line has revealed functions in craniofacial patterning,
sensory organ morphogenesis, osteogenesis and placental formation. However, no
effect on limb development has yet been revealed from gene inactivation studies. 
A role for these genes in limb development is however suggested by the linkage of
the Split Foot/Hand Malformation human syndrome to a region containing DLX5 and
DLX6. As for most transcription factors, these genes seem to have multiple
functions at different stages of development or in different tissues and cell
types.

PMID: 11061425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2000;90(1-2):151-3.

Clustering of two fragile sites and seven homeobox genes in human chromosome
region 2q31-->q32.1.

Limongi MZ(1), Pelliccia F, Gaddini L, Rocchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica e Biologia Molecolare, Università La Sapienza, Roma, 
Italia.

In this study we have used FISH to examine the relationship between a group of
homeobox genes, namely DLX1/DLX2, EVX2 and four HOXD genes (10, 11, 12, 13), that
map to region q31 on chromosome 2, and the FRA2G and FRA2H fragile sites located 
at 2q31 and 2q32.1 respectively. Our results indicate that these homeobox genes
lie between the two fragile regions.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 11060466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Neurosci. 2000 Aug 15;20(16):6063-76.

Origin and molecular specification of striatal interneurons.

Marin O(1), Anderson SA, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, Langley Porter Psychiatric Institute, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143-0984, USA.

The striatum, the largest component of the basal ganglia, contains projection
neurons and interneurons. Whereas there is considerable agreement that the
lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE) is the origin of striatal projection neurons,
less is known about the origin of striatal interneurons. Using focal injections
of retrovirus into the ventral telencephalon in vitro, we demonstrate that most
striatal interneurons tangentially migrate from the medial ganglionic eminence
(MGE) or the adjacent preoptic/anterior entopeduncular areas (POa/AEP) and
express the NKX2.1 homeodomain protein. Although the majority of striatal
interneurons (cholinergic, calretinin(+), and parvalbumin(+)) maintain the
expression of NKX2.1 into adulthood, most of the interneurons expressing
somatostatin (SOM), neuropeptide Y (NPY), and neural nitric oxide synthase (NOS) 
appear to downregulate the expression of NKX2.1 as they exit the neuroepithelium.
Analysis of striatal development in mice lacking Nkx2.1 suggests that this gene
is required for the specification of nearly all striatal interneurons. Similar
analysis of mice lacking the Mash1 basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) or both the Dlx1
and Dlx2 homeodomain transcription factors demonstrates that these genes are
required for the differentiation of striatal interneurons. Mash1 mutants
primarily have a reduction in early-born striatal interneurons, whereas Dlx1/2
mutants primarily have reduced numbers of late-born striatal interneurons. We
also present evidence implicating the Lhx6 and Lhx7 LIM-homeobox genes in the
development of distinct interneuron subtypes. Finally, we hypothesize that,
within the MGE, radially migrating cells generally become projection neurons,
whereas tangentially migrating cells mainly form interneurons of the striatum and
cerebral cortex.

PMID: 10934256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Development. 2000 Sep;127(17):3815-28.

sucker encodes a zebrafish Endothelin-1 required for ventral pharyngeal arch
development.

Miller CT(1), Schilling TF, Lee K, Parker J, Kimmel CB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, Eugene, OR 97403-1254, USA.
miller@uoneuro.uoregon.edu

Mutation of sucker (suc) disrupts development of the lower jaw and other ventral 
cartilages in pharyngeal segments of the zebrafish head. Our sequencing,
cosegregation and rescue results indicate that suc encodes an Endothelin-1
(Et-1). Like mouse and chick Et-1, suc/et-1 is expressed in a central core of
arch paraxial mesoderm and in arch epithelia, both surface ectoderm and
pharyngeal endoderm, but not in skeletogenic neural crest. Long before
chondrogenesis, suc/et-1 mutant embryos have severe defects in ventral arch
neural crest expression of dHAND, dlx2, msxE, gsc, dlx3 and EphA3 in the anterior
arches. Dorsal expression patterns are unaffected. Later in development, suc/et-1
mutant embryos display defects in mesodermal and endodermal tissues of the
pharynx. Ventral premyogenic condensations fail to express myoD, which correlates
with a ventral muscle defect. Further, expression of shh in endoderm of the first
pharyngeal pouch fails to extend as far laterally as in wild types. We use mosaic
analyses to show that suc/et-1 functions nonautonomously in neural crest cells,
and is thus required in the environment of postmigratory neural crest cells to
specify ventral arch fates. Our mosaic analyses further show that suc/et-1
nonautonomously functions in mesendoderm for ventral arch muscle formation.
Collectively our results support a model for dorsoventral patterning of the
gnathostome pharyngeal arches in which Et-1 in the environment of the
postmigratory cranial neural crest specifies the lower jaw and other ventral arch
fates.

PMID: 10934026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Neurosci. 2000 Jan 15;20(2):709-21.

A highly conserved enhancer in the Dlx5/Dlx6 intergenic region is the site of
cross-regulatory interactions between Dlx genes in the embryonic forebrain.

Zerucha T(1), Stühmer T, Hatch G, Park BK, Long Q, Yu G, Gambarotta A, Schultz
JR, Rubenstein JL, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Loeb Health Research Institute at the Ottawa Hospital and Department of
Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1Y 4E9, Canada.

Four Dlx homeobox genes, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, and Dlx6 are expressed in the same
primordia of the mouse forebrain with temporally overlapping patterns. The four
genes are organized as two tail-to-tail pairs, Dlx1/Dlx2 and Dlx5/Dlx6, a genomic
arrangement conserved in distantly related vertebrates like zebrafish. The
Dlx5/Dlx6 intergenic region contains two sequences of a few hundred base pairs,
remarkably well conserved between mouse and zebrafish. Reporter transgenes
containing these two sequences are expressed in the forebrain of transgenic mice 
and zebrafish with patterns highly similar to endogenous Dlx5 and Dlx6
expression. The activity of the transgene is drastically reduced in mouse mutants
lacking both Dlx1 and Dlx2, consistent with the decrease in endogenous Dlx5 and
Dlx6 expression. These results suggest that cross-regulation by Dlx proteins,
mediated by the intergenic sequences, is essential for Dlx5 and Dlx6 expression
in the forebrain. This hypothesis is supported by cotransfection and DNA-protein 
binding experiments. We propose that the Dlx genes are part of a highly conserved
developmental pathway that regulates forebrain development.

PMID: 10632600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Development. 2000 Jan;127(2):403-12.

Temporospatial cell interactions regulating mandibular and maxillary arch
patterning.

Ferguson CA(1), Tucker AS, Sharpe PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, GKT Dental Institute, Kings College,
Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK.

The cellular origin of the instructive information for hard tissue patterning of 
the jaws has been the subject of a long-standing controversy. Are the cranial
neural crest cells prepatterned or does the epithelium pattern a developmentally 
uncommitted population of ectomesenchymal cells? In order to understand more
about how orofacial patterning is controlled we have investigated the temporal
signalling interactions and responses between epithelium and mesenchymal cells in
the mandibular and maxillary primordia. We show that within the mandibular arch, 
homeobox genes that are expressed in different proximodistal spatial domains
corresponding to presumptive molar and incisor ectomesenchymal cells are induced 
by signals from the oral epithelium. In mouse, prior to E10, all ectomesenchyme
cells in the mandibular arch are equally responsive to epithelial signals such as
Fgf8, indicating that there is no pre-specification of these cells into different
populations and suggesting that patterning of the hard tissues of the mandible is
instructed by the epithelium. By E10.5, ectomesenchymal cell gene expression
domains are still dependent on epithelial signals but have become fixed and
ectopic expression cannot be induced. At E11 expression becomes independent of
epithelial signals such that removal of the epithelium does not affect spatial
ectomesenchymal expression. Significantly, however, the response of
ectomesenchyme cells to epithelial regulatory signals was found to be different
in the mandibular and maxillary primordium. Thus, whereas both mandibular and
maxillary arch epithelia could induce Dlx2 and Dlx5 expression in the mandible
and Dlx2 expression in the maxilla, neither could induce Dlx5 expression in the
maxilla. Reciprocal cell transplantations between mandibular and maxillary arch
ectomesenchymal cells revealed intrinsic differences between these populations of
cranial neural crest-derived cells. Research in odontogenesis has shown that the 
oral epithelium of the mandibular and maxillary primordia has unique instructive 
signaling properties required to direct odontogenesis, which are not found in
other branchial arch epithelia. As a consequence, development of jaw-specific
skeletal structures may require some prespecification of maxillary ectomesenchyme
to restrict the instructive influence of the epithelial signals and allow
development of maxillary structures distinct from mandibular structures.

PMID: 10603356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Development. 2000 Jan;127(2):217-24.

Independent regulation of Dlx2 expression in the epithelium and mesenchyme of the
first branchial arch.

Thomas BL(1), Liu JK, Rubenstein JL, Sharpe PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, GKT Dental Institute, King's College, 
University of London, London, SE1 9RT, UK. bthomas@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

Dlx2, a member of the distal-less gene family, is expressed in the first
branchial arch, prior to the initiation of tooth development, in distinct,
non-overlapping domains in the mesenchyme and the epithelium. In the mesenchyme
Dlx2 is expressed proximally, whereas in oral epithelium it is expressed
distally. Dlx2 has been shown to be involved in the patterning of the murine
dentition, since loss of function of Dlx1 and Dlx2 results in early failure of
development of upper molar teeth. We have investigated the regulation of Dlx2
expression to determine how the early epithelial and mesenchymal expression
boundaries are maintained, to help to understand the role of these distinct
expression domains in patterning of the dentition. Transgenic mice produced with 
a lacZ reporter construct, containing 3.8 kb upstream sequence of Dlx2, led to
the mapping of regulatory regions driving epithelial but not mesenchymal
expression in the first branchial arch. We show that the epithelial expression of
Dlx2 is regulated by planar signalling by BMP4, which is coexpressed in distal
oral epithelium. Mesenchymal expression is regulated by a different mechanism
involving FGF8, which is expressed in the overlying epithelium. FGF8 also
inhibits expression of Dlx2 in the epithelium by a signalling pathway that
requires the mesenchyme. Thus, the signalling molecules BMP4 and FGF8 provide the
mechanism for maintaining the strict epithelial and mesenchymal expression
domains of Dlx2 in the first arch.

PMID: 10603340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Cereb Cortex. 1999 Sep;9(6):646-54.

Differential origins of neocortical projection and local circuit neurons: role of
Dlx genes in neocortical interneuronogenesis.

Anderson S(1), Mione M, Yun K, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurobiology and Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry, University
of California at San Francisco, 94143-0984, USA.

Herein we review the evidence that neocortical projection neurons and
interneurons are derived from distinct regions within the telencephalon. While
neocortical projection neurons are derived from the ventricular zone of the
neocortex, neocortical interneurons appear to be derived from the germinal zone
of the basal ganglia. These interneurons follow a tangential migratory pathway
from the ganglionic eminences to the cortex. Interneurons of the olfactory bulb
follow a distinct tangential migration from the basal ganglia. The Dlx homeobox
genes, which are essential for basal ganglia differentiation, are also required
for the development of neocortical and olfactory bulb interneurons. Furthermore, 
evidence is presented that retroviral-mediated expression of DLX2 in neocortical 
cells can induce GABAergic interneuron differentiation.

PMID: 10498283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Am J Med Genet. 1999 Sep 3;86(1):75-81.

Two cases with interstitial deletions of chromosome 2 and sex reversal in one.

Slavotinek A(1), Schwarz C, Getty JF, Stecko O, Goodman F, Kingston H.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Medical Genetics, St Mary's Hospital, Manchester,
United Kingdom.

We present two children with de novo interstitial deletions of the long arm of
chromosome 2 (karyotypes 46,XY, del(2)(q31.1q31.3) and 46,XY, del(2)(q24.3q31.3),
respectively). The first child had severe learning difficulties, growth
retardation, unilateral ptosis, small palpebral fissures, a cleft uvula, and
bilateral cutaneous syndactyly of the second and third toes. Despite her male
karyotype, she had female external genitalia with hypoplasia of the clitoris and 
labia minora. This is the first reported case of feminization of the external
genitalia in a genotypic male with an interstitial deletion of chromosome 2q31
and adds to the growing amount of evidence for a gene involved in sex
determination in this chromosome region. The second child had severe mental and
growth retardation, ptosis, down-slanting palpebral fissures, low-set ears,
micrognathia, finger camptodactyly, and brachysyndactyly of the second to fifth
toes. The clinical manifestations associated with deletions of 2q31 to 2q33 are
similar to those found with proximal deletions at 2q24 to 2q31 and of band 2q24, 
suggesting that the phenotype may result from haploinsufficiency for one or more 
genes located at 2q31. Microsatellite marker studies showed that both children
had paternally derived deletions that included the HOXD gene cluster and the
EVX2, DLX1, and DLX2 genes known to be important in limb development.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10440834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Development. 1999 Sep;126(17):3831-46.

Dlx5 regulates regional development of the branchial arches and sensory capsules.

Depew MJ(1), Liu JK, Long JE, Presley R, Meneses JJ, Pedersen RA, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Center for Neurobiology
and Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry and Programs in Neuroscience,
Developmental Biology, Oral Biology and Biomedical Sciences, University of
California at San Fran.

We report the generation and analysis of mice homozygous for a targeted deletion 
of the Dlx5 homeobox gene. Dlx5 mutant mice have multiple defects in craniofacial
structures, including their ears, noses, mandibles and calvaria, and die shortly 
after birth. A subset (28%) exhibit exencephaly. Ectodermal expression of Dlx5 is
required for the development of olfactory and otic placode-derived epithelia and 
surrounding capsules. The nasal capsules are hypoplastic (e.g. lacking
turbinates) and, in most cases, the right side is more severely affected than the
left. Dorsal otic vesicle derivatives (e. g. semicircular canals and
endolymphatic duct) and the surrounding capsule, are more severely affected than 
ventral (cochlear) structures. Dlx5 is also required in mandibular arch
ectomesenchyme, as the proximal mandibular arch skeleton is dysmorphic. Dlx5 may 
control craniofacial development in part through the regulation of the goosecoid 
homeobox gene. goosecoid expression is greatly reduced in Dlx5 mutants, and both 
goosecoid and Dlx5 mutants share a number of similar craniofacial malformations. 
Dlx5 may perform a general role in skeletal differentiation, as exemplified by
hypomineralization within the calvaria. The distinct focal defects within the
branchial arches of the Dlx1, Dlx2 and Dlx5 mutants, along with the nested
expression of their RNAs, support a model in which these genes have both
redundant and unique functions in the regulation of regional patterning of the
craniofacial ectomesenchyme.

PMID: 10433912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Development. 1999 Aug;126(15):3359-70.

Loss of Nkx2.1 homeobox gene function results in a ventral to dorsal molecular
respecification within the basal telencephalon: evidence for a transformation of 
the pallidum into the striatum.

Sussel L(1), Marin O, Kimura S, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurobiology and Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry and
University of California at San Francisco, CA 94143-0984, USA.

The telencephalon is organized into distinct longitudinal domains: the cerebral
cortex and the basal ganglia. The basal ganglia primarily consists of a dorsal
region (striatum) and a ventral region (pallidum). Within the telencephalon, the 
anlage of the pallidum expresses the Nkx2.1 homeobox gene. A mouse deficient in
Nkx2.1 function does not form pallidal structures, lacks basal forebrain
TrkA-positive neurons (probable cholinergic neurons) and has reduced numbers of
cortical cells expressing GABA, DLX2 and calbindin that migrate from the pallidum
through the striatum and into the cortex. We present evidence that these
phenotypes result from a ventral-to-dorsal transformation of the pallidal
primordium into a striatal-like anlage.

PMID: 10393115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Dev Dyn. 1998 Dec;213(4):370-85.

Ectopic expression of hoxb2 after retinoic acid treatment or mRNA injection:
disruption of hindbrain and craniofacial morphogenesis in zebrafish embryos.

Yan YL(1), Jowett T, Postlethwait JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene 97403-1254, USA.

To investigate pattern formation in the vertebrate hindbrain, we isolated a full 
length hoxb2 cDNA clone from zebrafish. In a gene phylogeny, zebrafish hoxb2
clusters with human HOXB2, and it maps on linkage group 3 along with several
other loci whose orthologues are syntenic with human HOXB2. In the hindbrain,
hoxb2 is expressed at high levels in rhombomere 3 (r3), lower levels in r4, still
lower in r5, and at undetectable levels in r6. In r7, r8, and the rostral spinal 
cord, hoxb2 is expressed at a lower level than in r5. Lateral cells appearing to 
emanate from r4 express both hoxb2 and dlx2, suggesting that they are neural
crest. Overexpression of hoxb2 by mRNA injections into early cleavage stage
embryos resulted in abnormal morphogenesis of the midbrain and rostral hindbrain,
abnormal patterning in r4, fusion of cartilage elements arising from pharyngeal
arches 1 and 2, and ectopic expression of krx20 and valentino (but not pax2,
rtk1, or hoxb1) in the rostral hindbrain, midbrain, and, surprisingly, the eye.
Treatments with retinoic acid produced a phenotype similar to that of ectopic
hoxb2 expression, including ectopic krx20 (but not valentino) expression in the
eye, and fusion of cartilages from pharyngeal arches 1 and 2. The results suggest
that hoxb2 plays an important role in the patterning of hindbrain and pharyngeal 
arches in the zebrafish.

PMID: 9853959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Development. 1998 Nov;125(21):4325-33.

FGFs and BMP4 induce both Msx1-independent and Msx1-dependent signaling pathways 
in early tooth development.

Bei M(1), Maas R.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham & Women's Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. maas@rascal.med.harvard.edu.

During early tooth development, multiple signaling molecules are expressed in the
dental lamina epithelium and induce the dental mesenchyme. One signal, BMP4, has 
been shown to induce morphologic changes in dental mesenchyme and mesenchymal
gene expression via Msx1, but BMP4 cannot substitute for all the inductive
functions of the dental epithelium. To investigate the role of FGFs during early 
tooth development, we examined the expression of epithelial and mesenchymal Fgfs 
in wild-type and Msx1 mutant tooth germs and tested the ability of FGFs to induce
Fgf3 and Bmp4 expression in wild-type and Msx1 mutant dental mesenchymal
explants. Fgf8 expression is preserved in Msx1 mutant epithelium while that of
Fgf3 is not detected in Msx1 mutant dental mesenchyme. Moreover, dental
epithelium as well as beads soaked in FGF1, FGF2 or FGF8 induce Fgf3 expression
in dental mesenchyme in an Msx1-dependent manner. These results indicate that,
like BMP4, FGF8 constitutes an epithelial inductive signal capable of inducing
the expression of downstream signaling molecules in dental mesenchyme via Msx1.
However, the BMP4 and FGF8 signaling pathways are distinct. BMP4 cannot induce
Fgf3 nor can FGFs induce Bmp4 expression in dental mesenchyme, even though both
signaling molecules can induce Msx1 and Msx1 is necessary for Fgf3 and Bmp4
expression in dental mesenchyme. In addition, we have investigated the effects of
FGFs and BMP4 on the distal-less homeobox genes Dlx1 and Dlx2 and we have
clarified the relationship between Msx and Dlx gene function in the developing
tooth. Dlx1,Dlx2 double mutants exhibit a lamina stage arrest in maxillary molar 
tooth development (Thomas B. L., Tucker A. S., Qiu M. , Ferguson C. A.,
Hardcastle Z., Rubenstein J. L. R. and Sharpe P. T. (1997) Development 124,
4811-4818). Although the maintenance of molar mesenchymal Dlx2 expression at the 
bud stage is Msx1-dependent, both the maintenance of Dlx1 expression and the
initial activation of mesenchymal Dlx1 and Dlx2 expression during the lamina
stage are not. Moreover, in contrast to the tooth bud stage arrest observed in
Msx1 mutants, Msx1,Msx2 double mutants exhibit an earlier phenotype closely
resembling the lamina stage arrest observed in Dlx1,Dlx2 double mutants. These
results are consistent with functional redundancy between Msx1 and Msx2 in dental
mesenchyme and support a model whereby Msx and Dlx genes function in parallel
within the dental mesenchyme during tooth initiation. Indeed, as predicted by
such a model, BMP4 and FGF8, epithelial signals that induce differential Msx1 and
Msx2 expression in dental mesenchyme, also differentially induce Dlx1 and Dlx2
expression, and do so in an Msx1-independent manner. These results integrate
Dlx1, Dlx2 and Fgf3 and Fgf8 into the odontogenic regulatory hierarchy along with
Msx1, Msx2 and Bmp4, and provide a basis for interpreting tooth induction in
terms of transcription factors which, individually, are necessary but not
sufficient for the expression of downstream signals and therefore must act in
specific combinations.

PMID: 9753686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Am J Hum Genet. 1998 Aug;63(2):557-68.

Association of MSX1 and TGFB3 with nonsyndromic clefting in humans.

Lidral AC(1), Romitti PA, Basart AM, Doetschman T, Leysens NJ, Daack-Hirsch S,
Semina EV, Johnson LR, Machida J, Burds A, Parnell TJ, Rubenstein JL, Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, Ohio State University, Columbus, USA.

Nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (CL/P) and nonsyndromic cleft
palate only (CPO) are common congenital anomalies with significant medical,
psychological, social, and economic ramifications. Both CL/P and CPO are examples
of complex genetic traits. There exists sufficient evidence to hypothesize that
disease loci for CL/P and CPO can be identified by a candidate-gene
linkage-disequilibrium (LD) strategy. Candidate genes for clefting, including
TGFA, BCL3, DLX2, MSX1, and TGFB3, were screened for LD with either CL/P or CPO
in a predominantly Caucasian population, with both case-control- and
nuclear-family-based approaches. Previously reported LD for TGFA with both CL/P
and CPO could not be confirmed, except in CL/P patients with a positive family
history. Also, in contrast to previous studies, no LD was found between BCL3 and 
either CL/P or CPO. Significant LD was found between CL/P and both MSX1 and TGFB3
and between CPO and MSX1, suggesting that these genes are involved in the
pathogenesis of clefting. In addition, a mutation search in the genes DLX2, MSX1,
and TGFB3 was performed in 69 CPO patients and in a subset of the CL/P patients. 
No common mutations were found in the coding regions of these genes; however,
several rare variants of MSX1 and TGFB3 were found that may alter the latters'
normal function. These results form the basis for future research, including (a) 
mutation searches in the MSX1 and TGFB3 genes in Caucasian CL/P patients and (b) 
extension of the search for MSX1 mutations in CPO patients to the noncoding
regions.

PMCID: PMC1377298
PMID: 9683588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Genomics. 1997 Nov 1;45(3):580-90.

Relationship between the genomic organization and the overlapping embryonic
expression patterns of the zebrafish dlx genes.

Ellies DL(1), Stock DW, Hatch G, Giroux G, Weiss KM, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Civic Hospital, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, K1Y 4E9, Canada.

To understand the relationship between the expression and the genomic
organization of the zebrafish dlx genes, we have determined the genomic structure
of the dlx2 and dlx4 loci. This led to the identification of the zebrafish dlx1
and dlx6 genes, which are closely linked to dlx2 and dlx4, respectively.
Therefore, the inverted convergent configuration of Dlx genes is conserved among 
vertebrates. Analysis of the expression patterns of dlx1 and dlx6 showed striking
similarities to those of dlx2 and dlx4, respectively, the genes to which they are
linked. Furthermore, the expression patterns of dlx3 and dlx7, which likely
constitute a third pair of convergently transcribed genes, are indistinguishable.
Thus, the overlapping expression patterns of linked Dlx genes during embryonic
development suggest that they share cis-acting sequences that control their
spatiotemporal expression. The evolutionary conservation of the genomic
organization and combinatorial expression of Dlx genes in distantly related
vertebrates suggest tight control mechanisms that are essential for their
function during development.

Copyright 1997 Academic Press.

PMID: 9367683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 May;17(5):2920-32.

Heterodimerization of Msx and Dlx homeoproteins results in functional antagonism.

Zhang H(1), Hu G, Wang H, Sciavolino P, Iler N, Shen MM, Abate-Shen C.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, UMDNJ-Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School, Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine,
Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

Protein-protein interactions are known to be essential for specifying the
transcriptional activities of homeoproteins. Here we show that representative
members of the Msx and Dlx homeoprotein families form homo- and heterodimeric
complexes. We demonstrate that dimerization by Msx and Dlx proteins is mediated
through their homeodomains and that the residues required for this interaction
correspond to those necessary for DNA binding. Unlike most other known examples
of homeoprotein interactions, association of Msx and Dlx proteins does not
promote cooperative DNA binding; instead, dimerization and DNA binding are
mutually exclusive activities. In particular, we show that Msx and Dlx proteins
interact independently and noncooperatively with homeodomain DNA binding sites
and that dimerization is specifically blocked by the presence of such DNA sites. 
We further demonstrate that the transcriptional properties of Msx and Dlx
proteins display reciprocal inhibition. Specifically, Msx proteins act as
transcriptional repressors and Dlx proteins act as activators, while in
combination, Msx and Dlx proteins counteract each other's transcriptional
activities. Finally, we show that the expression patterns of representative Msx
and Dlx genes (Msx1, Msx2, Dlx2, and Dlx5) overlap in mouse embryogenesis during 
limb bud and craniofacial development, consistent with the potential for their
protein products to interact in vivo. Based on these observations, we propose
that functional antagonism through heterodimer formation provides a mechanism for
regulating the transcriptional actions of Msx and Dlx homeoproteins in vivo.

PMCID: PMC232144
PMID: 9111364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Gene. 1997 Mar 10;187(1):55-61.

Isolation and identification of homeobox genes from the human placenta including 
a novel member of the Distal-less family, DLX4.

Quinn LM(1), Johnson BV, Nicholl J, Sutherland GR, Kalionis B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Flinders University of South
Australia, Adelaide.

We have carried out a DNA binding site screen of a 32-week human placental cDNA
library using a consensus homeodomain binding site as a probe. This study
represents the first library screen carried out to isolate homeobox genes from
the human placenta. We have shown that three homeobox genes known to be expressed
in the embryo, HB24, GAX and MSX2 are also expressed in the placenta. We have
also identified a novel homeobox gene, DLX4, that shows 85% sequence identity
with the homeodomain encoded by the Drosophila Distal-less (Dll) gene. DLX4
therefore represents a new member of the Distal-less family of homeobox genes.
This is the first evidence that members of the Distal-less family of homeobox
genes are expressed in the placenta. Using fluorescence in situ hybridisation
(FISH), DLX4 has been assigned to human chromosome 17q21-q22. This places DLX4 in
the same region of chromosome 17 as another member of the Distal-less family,
DLX3 (Scherer et al., 1995), and the HOX-B homeobox gene cluster (Acampora et
al., 1989: Boncinelli et al., 1991). Members of the Distal-less family (DLX1 and 
DLX2; DLX5 and DLX6) are found as closely linked pairs on human chromosomes
(Simeone et al., 1994). We predict that DLX3 and DLX4 are closely linked and have
arisen through gene duplication and divergence from a common ancestral precursor.

PMID: 9073066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Biochem Cell Biol. 1997;75(5):613-22.

Cross-interactions between two members of the Dlx family of homeobox-containing
genes during zebrafish development.

Zerucha T(1), Muller JP, Chartrand N, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Civic Hospital Loeb Research Institute, ON, Canada.

The Dlx homeobox genes of vertebrates are transcribed in multiple cells of the
embryo with overlapping patterns but often with different onsets of expression.
Here we describe the interaction between two dlx genes, dlx3 and dlx4, during
zebrafish development. The observation that dlx3 expression precedes that of dlx4
in the otic vesicle led us to investigate whether dlx3 had the ability to control
expression of dlx4. Truncated versions of dlx3 were overexpressed in zebrafish
embryos and the expression patterns of dlx4 were examined later in development.
Overexpression of truncated forms of Dlx3 or of a Dlx3-Dlx2 chimera was found to 
result in perturbations in dlx4 expression. In addition, cotransfection
experiments indicated the ability of Dlx3 to activate transcription through a
1.7-kb fragment of the 5' flanking region of dlx4. These results suggest that
dlx4 is one of the target genes of dlx3 in embryos and that cross-regulatory
interactions between Dlx genes may be one of the mechanisms responsible for their
overlapping expression.

PMID: 9551183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Neurosci. 1995 Dec;15(12):7879-91.

Fibroblast growth factor 2 increases Otx2 expression in precursor cells from
mammalian telencephalon.

Robel L(1), Ding M, James AJ, Lin X, Simeone A, Leckman JF, Vaccarino FM.

Author information: 
(1)Child Study Center, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Dissociated primary cultures from rat telencephalon at different developmental
stages were used to study the effect of basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF2) on 
Otx2, Dlx1, and Emx1, three homeobox genes expressed in different regions of the 
developing mammalian forebrain. At embryonic day (E)13.5. the regional pattern of
expression of Otx1, Otx2, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, and Emx1 is maintained in primary
culture, suggesting that cells are already committed to a regional identity at
this stage. In these cultures, Otx2 is expressed by precursor cells, whereas Dlx1
and Emx1 are predominantly expressed by postmitotic cells. We found that FGF2
increased Otx2 expression within precursor cells and the total number of
Otx2-expressing cells. This effect was gene-specific, dose-dependent, and
temporally regulated, with larger effects at earlier stages of development
(E11.5). At E13.5, the effect of FGF2 on Otx2 expression was restricted to the
basal telencephalon. Our results suggest that a restricted population of
neuroblasts respond to FGF2 in a temporally regulated fashion by proliferating
and increasing Otx2 expression. This interaction between FGF2 and Otx2 may be
important for the regulation of neurogenesis in the forebrain.

PMID: 8613727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Hum Mol Genet. 1995 Aug;4(8):1453-8.

Localization of the syndactyly type II (synpolydactyly) locus to 2q31 region and 
identification of tight linkage to HOXD8 intragenic marker.

Sarfarazi M(1), Akarsu AN, Sayli BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
USA.

Syndactyly type II (SynPolyDactyly; SPD) is an autosomal dominant condition with 
incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity. Sixty-two meioses from a kindred
with 425 individuals were used to map the SPD locus to 2q31 region, approximately
1.7 cM (Lod score = 12.96) centromeric to HOXD8 intragenic marker. Other
homeobox-containing genes in this region have previously been ordered as
cen-DLX1/DLX2-EVX2-(5' --> HOXD13..HOXD8.HOXD1 --> 3')-tel')-tel. A single
recombinant with HOXD8 excluded the most 3' end of HOXD cluster as a candidate
site for SPD, but a mutation in the 5' end of HOXD cluster, especially in HOXD13,
EVX2 or DLX2/DLX1, may still be responsible for this phenotype. An updated order 
of D2S142-D2S111-(D2S335/D2S333)-D2S326-D2 S1238-SPD-
(HOXD8/D2S1244)-(D2S300/D2S138)-D2S148- D2S324- D2S1384-D2S434 [sequence:see
text] was deduced from meiotic recombination events.

PMID: 7581388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Connect Tissue Res. 1995;32(1-4):35-40.

Dlx and other homeobox genes in the morphological development of the dentition.

Weiss KM(1), Ruddle FH, Bollekens J.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Genetics, Penn State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

The dentition is a segmental system whose evolution and morphology bears analogy 
to the evolution of segmentation in the vertebral column and limb. Combinatorial 
expression of members of the large "Hox" class of homeobox regulatory genes has
been shown to play an important role in positional specification in these
skeletal systems. This raises the possibility that homeobox genes are also used
for positional specification in the dentition, and several homeobox genes are
known to be expressed in developing teeth. To identify additional dentally
expressed homeobox genes, cDNA from from murine tooth germs at 9.5, 14.5, and
17.5 days gestational age was amplified by PCR using sets of degenerate primers
to the homeodomains of 18 different classes of homeobox genes. Amplification
products were cloned and sequenced and compared to known gene sequences. To date 
this approach has confirmed the presence of Msx1, Msx2, Dlx1, and Dlx2, and
identified several other homeobox genes not previously known to be expressed in
teeth: Dbx, MHox, and Mox2A, plus an a additional Dlx gene, Dlx7. The Msx and Dlx
genes are the best current candidates for a combinatorial mechanism that controls
the differentiation of structures within and between teeth, and perhaps also the 
evolution of those structures.

PMID: 7554933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Genomics. 1994 Nov 1;24(1):34-40.

Order of six loci at 2q24-q31 and orientation of the HOXD locus.

Rossi E(1), Faiella A, Zeviani M, Labeit S, Floridia G, Brunelli S, Cammarata M, 
Boncinelli E, Zuffardi O.

Author information: 
(1)Università di Pavia, Italy.

HOXD, a gene cluster of 9 homeobox genes of the Antennapedia class; EVX2, a
homeobox gene related to Drosophila-even-skipped gene; DLX1 and DLX2, two
homeobox genes related to the Drosophila distal-less gene; and TTN and NEB, the
genes for the two giant molecules titin and nebulin, both involved in the
sarcomere structure, have been previously mapped to human 2q31-q32 and to mouse
chromosome 2. We studied their relative order in human by applying FISH to three 
balanced chromosome rearrangements each with a breakpoint at 2q31. Unambiguous
results led us to map these genes and to orient the HOXD locus along chromosome 2
according to the following order: cen, NEB, DLX1-DLX2, EVX2, HOXD (5'-3'), TTN,
tel. All of these genes are part of a syntenic region covering 5-10 cM and
conserved since the divergence of humans and rodents, and thus the same loci
order should be present in mouse. FISH in metaphases of approximately 500 bands
localized NEB to 2q24.1-q24.2, while HOXD and TTN were localized to 2q31.

PMID: 7896287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Neurosci. 1994 Jun;14(6):3475-86.

Combinatorial expression of three zebrafish genes related to distal-less: part of
a homeobox gene code for the head.

Akimenko MA(1), Ekker M, Wegner J, Lin W, Westerfield M.

Author information: 
(1)Loeb Institute for Medical Research, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

We describe analysis of zebrafish distal-less-related homeobox genes that may
serve as specifiers of positional information in anterior regions of the CNS and 
in peripheral structures. We isolated three zebrafish genes, dlx2, dlx3, and
dlx4, by screening embryonic cDNA libraries. Comparisons of the predicted
sequences of the Dlx2, Dlx3, and Dlx4 proteins with distal-less proteins from
other species suggest that vertebrate distal-less genes can be divided into four 
orthologous groups. We observed similarities but also unique features of the
expression patterns of the zebrafish dlx genes. Among the three genes, dlx3 alone
is expressed during gastrulation. Shortly after gastrulation, cells in the
ventral forebrain rudiment express dlx2 and dlx4, but not dlx3, and hindbrain
neural crest cells express only dlx2. Presumptive precursor cells of the
olfactory placodes express dlx3 and dlx4 but not dlx2. Transcripts of dlx3 and
dlx4 are present in overlapping subsets of cells in the auditory vesicle and in
cells of the median fin fold, whereas dlx2 is never expressed in the auditory
vesicle and only at low levels in localized regions of the median fin fold. Cells
of the visceral arches and their primordia express all three dlx genes, but with 
different developmental time courses. We suggest that combinatorial expression of
the dlx genes is part of a homeobox gene code specifying pattern formation or
cell fate determination in the forebrain, in peripheral structures of the head,
and in the fins.

PMID: 7911517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Mar 15;91(6):2250-4.

Cloning and characterization of two members of the vertebrate Dlx gene family.

Simeone A(1), Acampora D, Pannese M, D'Esposito M, Stornaiuolo A, Gulisano M,
Mallamaci A, Kastury K, Druck T, Huebner K, et al.

Author information: 
(1)International Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, Consiglio Nazionale delle 
Ricerche, Naples, Italy.

A number of vertebrate genes of the Dlx gene family have been cloned in mouse,
frog, and zebrafish. These genes contain a homeobox related to that of
Distalless, a gene expressed in the developing head and limbs of Drosophila
embryos. We cloned and studied the expression of two members of this family,
which we named Dlx5 and Dlx6, in human and mouse. The two human genes, DLX5 and
DLX6, are closely linked in an inverted convergent configuration in a region of
chromosome 7, at 7q22. Similarly, the two human genes DLX1 and DLX2 are closely
linked in a convergent configuration at 2q32, near the HOXD (previously HOX4)
locus. In situ hybridization experiments in mouse embryos revealed expression of 
Dlx5 and Dlx6 mRNA in restricted regions of ventral diencephalon and basal
telencephalon, with a distribution very similar to that reported for Dlx1 and
Dlx2 mRNA. A surprising feature of Dlx5 and Dlx6 is that they are also expressed 
in all skeletal structures of midgestation embryos after the first cartilage
formation. The expression pattern of these genes, together with their chromosome 
localization, may provide useful cues for the study of congenital disorders in
which there is a combination of craniofacial and limb defects.

PMCID: PMC43348
PMID: 7907794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Genomics. 1992 Aug;13(4):1157-61.

DLX2 (TES1), a homeobox gene of the Distal-less family, assigned to conserved
regions on human and mouse chromosomes 2.

Ozçelik T(1), Porteus MH, Rubenstein JL, Francke U.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University Medical Center,
California 94305.

Dlx-2 (also called Tes-1), a mammalian member of the Distal-less family of
homeobox genes, is expressed during murine fetal development in spatially
restricted domains of the forebrain. Searching for a candidate neurological
mutation that might involve this gene, we have assigned the human and mouse loci 
to regions of conserved synteny on human chromosome 2, region cen--q33, and mouse
chromosome 2 by Southern analysis of somatic cell hybrid lines. An EcoRI
dimorphism, discovered in common inbred laboratory strains, was used for
recombinant inbred strain mapping. The results place Dlx-2/Tes-1 near the Hox-4
cluster on mouse chromosome 2.

PMID: 1354641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


