
1. Cancer Res. 2016 Feb 26. [Epub ahead of print]

Mutational Landscape and Antiproliferative Functions of ELF Transcription Factors
in Human Cancer.

Ando M(1), Kawazu M(2), Ueno T(3), Koinuma D(4), Ando K(5), Koya J(6), Kataoka
K(6), Yasuda T(3), Yamaguchi H(3), Fukumura K(3), Yamato A(3), Soda M(3), Sai
E(2), Yamashita Y(3), Asakage T(7), Miyazaki Y(5), Kurokawa M(6), Miyazono K(4), 
Nimer SD(8), Yamasoba T(7), Mano H(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Signaling, Graduate School of Medicine, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Department of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery,
Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department
of Medical Genomics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan. (3)Department of Cellular Signaling, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate
School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Department of
Hematology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki,
Japan. (6)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Department of Otolaryngology and Head and
Neck Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami, Miami, Florida.
(9)Department of Cellular Signaling, Graduate School of Medicine, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Strategic Basic Research Program, Japan Science and
Technology Agency, Saitama, Japan. hmano@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

ELF4 (also known as MEF) is a member of the ETS family of transcription factors. 
An oncogenic role for ELF4 has been demonstrated in hematopoietic malignancies,
but its function in epithelial tumors remains unclear. Here, we show that ELF4
can function as a tumor suppressor and is somatically inactivated in a wide range
of human tumors. We identified a missense mutation affecting the transactivation 
potential of ELF4 in oral squamous cell carcinoma cells. Restoration of the
transactivation activity through introduction of wild-type ELF4 significantly
inhibited cell proliferationin vitroand tumor xenograft growth. Furthermore, we
found that ELF1 and ELF2, closely related transcription factors to ELF4, also
exerted antiproliferative effects in multiple cancer cell lines. Mutations in
ELF1 and ELF2, as in ELF4, were widespread across human cancers, but were almost 
all mutually exclusive. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with
high-throughput sequencing revealed ELF4-binding sites in genomic regions
adjacent to genes related to cell-cycle regulation and apoptosis. Finally, we
provide mechanistic evidence that the antiproliferative effects of ELF4 were
mediated through the induction of HRK, an activator of apoptosis, and DLX3, an
inhibitor of cell growth. Collectively, our findings reveal a novel subtype of
human cancer characterized by inactivating mutations in the ELF subfamily of
proteins, and warrant further investigation of the specific settings where ELF
restoration may be therapeutically beneficial.Cancer Res; 76(7); 1-11. ©2016
AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26921333  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Placenta. 2016 Feb;38:16-23. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2015.12.002. Epub 2015 Dec
13.

Abnormal labyrinthine zone in the Hectd1-null placenta.

Sarkar AA(1), Sabatino JA(1), Sugrue KF(2), Zohn IE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's Research Institute, Children's
National Medical Center, Washington, DC 20010, USA. (2)Center for Neuroscience
Research, Children's Research Institute, Children's National Medical Center,
Washington, DC 20010, USA; Institute for Biomedical Sciences, The George
Washington University, Washington, DC 20052, USA. (3)Center for Neuroscience
Research, Children's Research Institute, Children's National Medical Center,
Washington, DC 20010, USA; Institute for Biomedical Sciences, The George
Washington University, Washington, DC 20052, USA. Electronic address:
izohn@cnmcresearch.org.

INTRODUCTION: The labyrinthine zone of the placenta is where exchange of
nutrients and waste occurs between maternal and fetal circulations. Proper
development of the placental labyrinth is essential for successful growth of the 
developing fetus and abnormalities in placental development are associated with
intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), preeclampsia and fetal demise. Our
previous studies demonstrate that Hectd1 is essential for development of the
junctional and labyrinthine zones of the placenta. Here we further characterize
labyrinthine zone defects in the Hectd1 mutant placenta.
METHODS: The structure of the mutant placenta was compared to wildtype
littermates using histological methods. The expression of cell type specific
markers was examined by immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: Hectd1 is expressed in the labyrinthine zone throughout development and 
the protein is enriched in syncytiotrophoblast layer type I cells (SynT-I) and
Sinusoidal Trophoblast Giant cells (S-TGCs) in the mature placenta. Mutation of
Hectd1 results in pale placentas with frequent hemorrhages along with gross
abnormalities in the structure of the labyrinthine zone including a smaller
overall volume and a poorly elaborated fetal vasculature that contain fewer fetal
blood cells. Examination of molecular markers of labyrinthine trophoblast cell
types reveals increased Dlx3 positive cells and Syna positive SynT-I cells, along
with decreased Hand1 and Ctsq positive sinusoidal trophoblast giant cells
(S-TGCs).
DISCUSSION: Together these defects indicate that Hectd1 is required for
development of the labyrinthine zonethe mouse placenta.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4768308 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26907377  [PubMed - in process]


3. Exp Cell Res. 2016 Feb 15;341(2):166-76. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2016.01.018. Epub
2016 Jan 30.

DLX3 negatively regulates osteoclastic differentiation through microRNA-124.

Zhao N(1), Han D(1), Liu Y(1), Li Y(1), Zeng L(1), Wang Y(2), Feng H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthodontics, Peking University School and Hospital of
Stomatology, PR China. (2)Central Laboratory, Peking University School and
Hospital of Stomatology, 22 Zhongguancun Avenue South, Haidian District, Beijing 
100081, PR China. Electronic address: kqwangyx@bjmu.edu.cn. (3)Department of
Prosthodontics, Peking University School and Hospital of Stomatology, PR China.
Electronic address: kqfenghl@bjmu.edu.cn.

Homeodomain gene Distal-less-3 (DLX3) plays an essential role in the development 
of bones. Mutations of DLX3 are closely associated with Tricho-Dento-Osseous
(TDO) syndrome featured with increased bone formation. However, the mechanism
regarding whether DLX3 regulates osteoclastogenesis remains largely unknown. In
this study, we firstly examined the expression of DLX3 mounting during
osteoclastic differentiation process, and then established stably expressing wild
type DLX3 (WT-DLX3), a novel mutant DLX3 (Q178R) found in our laboratory recently
(MT-DLX3) and Dlx3 knockdown cell lines (Dlx3-shRNA) in Raw 264.7 cells using
corresponding lentiviruses. Next, we investigated the influence of DLX3 on these 
stable cells in the process of osteoclastogenesis. The results showed that the
expression of osteoclastogenesis-related genes as well as tartrate-resistant acid
phosphatase-positive multinucleated cells were lower in WT-DLX3 and MT-DLX3, but 
higher in Dlx3-shRNA compared with control cells. Besides, the microRNA-124
expression was higher in WT-DLX3 and MT-DLX3 but lower in Dlx3-shRNA. Moreover,
the microRNA-124 expression level positively correlated with DLX3, negatively
with osteoclastogenesis-related gene NFATc1. Our results indicate that DLX3
negatively regulates osteoclastic differentiation through microRNA-124, which is 
partially responsible for the increased bone density in TDO patient. DLX3 may be 
exploited for osteoclastogenesis regulator and potential therapeutic target of
osteoporosis in future.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26836061  [PubMed - in process]


4. Gene. 2016 May 1;581(2):95-106. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.01.015. Epub 2016 Jan
13.

Osteogenic potential of human adipose-tissue-derived mesenchymal stromal cells
cultured on 3D-printed porous structured titanium.

Lewallen EA(1), Jones DL(2), Dudakovic A(1), Thaler R(1), Paradise CR(1), Kremers
HM(3), Abdel MP(1), Kakar S(1), Dietz AB(4), Cohen RC(5), Lewallen DG(6), van
Wijnen AJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN
55905, USA. (2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering and Physiology,
Mayo Graduate School, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
(3)Department of Health Sciences Research, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 200 
First St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pathology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW Rochester, MN 55905, USA. (5)Stryker
Orthopedics, 325 Corporate Drive, Mahwah, NJ 07430, USA. (6)Department of
Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
Electronic address: lewallen.david@mayo.edu. (7)Department of Orthopedic Surgery,
Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA; Department of Biomedical
Engineering and Physiology, Mayo Graduate School, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, 
Rochester, MN 55905, USA; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo 
Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. Electronic address:
vanwijnen.andre@mayo.edu.

Integration of porous metal prosthetics, which restore form and function of
irreversibly damaged joints, into remaining healthy bone is critical for implant 
success. We investigated the biological properties of adipose-tissue-derived
mesenchymal stromal/stem cells (AMSCs) and addressed their potential to alter the
in vitro microenvironment of implants. We employed human AMSCs as a practical
source for musculoskeletal applications because these cells can be obtained in
large quantities, are multipotent, and have trophic paracrine functions. AMSCs
were cultured on surgical-grade porous titanium disks as a model for orthopedic
implants. We monitored cell/substrate attachment, cell proliferation,
multipotency, and differentiation phenotypes of AMSCs upon osteogenic induction. 
High-resolution scanning electron microscopy and histology revealed that AMSCs
adhere to the porous metallic surface. Compared to standard tissue culture
plastic, AMSCs grown in the porous titanium microenvironment showed differences
in temporal expression for genes involved in cell cycle progression (CCNB2,
HIST2H4), extracellular matrix production (COL1A1, COL3A1), mesenchymal lineage
identity (ACTA2, CD248, CD44), osteoblastic transcription factors (DLX3, DLX5,
ID3), and epigenetic regulators (EZH1, EZH2). We conclude that metal orthopedic
implants can be effectively seeded with clinical-grade stem/stromal cells to
create a pre-conditioned implant.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26774799  [PubMed - in process]


5. Oral Dis. 2016 Jan 13. doi: 10.1111/odi.12439. [Epub ahead of print]

Unexpected identification of a recurrent mutation in the DLX3 gene causing
amelogenesis imperfecta.

Kim YJ(1), Seymen F(2), Koruyucu M(2), Kasimoglu Y(2), Gencay K(2), Shin TJ(1),
Hyun HK(1), Lee ZH(3), Kim JW(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry & Dental Research Institute, School of
Dentistry, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Pedodontics,
Faculty of Dentistry, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. (3)Department of
Cell and Developmental Biology & Dental Research Institute, School of Dentistry, 
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Molecular Genetics &
Dental Research Institute, School of Dentistry, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Korea.

OBJECTIVE: To identify the molecular genetic etiology of a family with autosomal 
dominant amelogenesis imperfecta (AI) SUBJECTS AND METHODS: DNA samples were
collected from a 6-generation family, and the candidate gene approach was used to
screen for the enamelin (ENAM) gene. Whole exome sequencing and linkage analysis 
with SNP array data identified linked regions, and candidate gene screening was
done.
RESULTS: Mutational analysis revealed a mutation (c.561_562delCT and
p.Tyr188Glnfs*13) in the DLX3 gene. After finding a recurrent DLX3 mutation, the 
clinical phenotype of the family members was re-examined. The proband's mother
had pulp elongation in the third molars. The proband had not hair phenotype, but 
her cousin had curly hair at birth.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we identified a recurrent 2-bp deletional DLX3
mutation in a new family. The clinical phenotype was the mildest one associated
with the DLX3 mutations. These results will advance the understanding of the
functional role of DLX3 in developmental processes. This article is protected by 
copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26762616  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Mol Cells. 2016 Feb 29;39(2):156-62. doi: 10.14348/molcells.2016.2291. Epub 2015 
Dec 15.

Estrogen Receptor a Regulates Dlx3-Mediated Osteoblast Differentiation.

Lee SH(1), Oh KN(1), Han Y(1), Choi YH(1), Lee KY(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Drug Development, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju 500-757, Korea.

Estrogen receptor a (ER-a), which is involved in bone metabolism and breast
cancer, has been shown to have transcriptional targets. Dlx3 is essential for the
skeletal development and plays an important role in osteoblast differentiation.
Various osteogenic stimulators and transcription factors can induce the protein
expression of Dlx3. However, the regulatory function of ER-a in the Dlx3 mediated
osteogenic process remains unknown. Therefore, we investigated the regulation of 
Dlx3 and found that ER-a is a positive regulator of Dlx3 transcription in
BMP2-induced osteoblast differentiation. We also found that ER-a interacts with
Dlx3 and increases its transcriptional activity and DNA binding affinity.
Furthermore, we demonstrated that the regulation of Dlx3 activity by ER-a is
independent of the ligand (estradiol) binding domain. These results indicate that
Dlx3 is a novel target of ER-a, and that ER-a regulates the osteoblast
differentiation through modulation of Dlx3 expression and/or interaction with
Dlx3.

PMCID: PMC4757804
PMID: 26674964  [PubMed - in process]


7. J Cell Biol. 2015 Nov 23;211(4):815-27. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201503071.

Histone demethylase KDM4B regulates otic vesicle invagination via epigenetic
control of Dlx3 expression.

Uribe RA(1), Buzzi AL(2), Bronner ME(1), Strobl-Mazzulla PH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125. (2)Laboratory of Developmental Biology, Instituto
de Investigaciones Biotecnológicas-Instituto Tecnológico de Chascomús
(CONICET-UNSAM), 7130 Chascomús, Argentina. (3)Laboratory of Developmental
Biology, Instituto de Investigaciones Biotecnológicas-Instituto Tecnológico de
Chascomús (CONICET-UNSAM), 7130 Chascomús, Argentina strobl@intech.gov.ar.

In vertebrates, the inner ear arises from the otic placode, a thickened swathe of
ectoderm that invaginates to form the otic vesicle. We report that histone
demethylase KDM4B is dynamically expressed during early stages of chick inner ear
formation. A loss of KDM4B results in defective invagination and striking
morphological changes in the otic epithelium, characterized by abnormal
localization of adhesion and cytoskeletal molecules and reduced expression of
several inner ear markers, including Dlx3. In vivo chromatin immunoprecipitation 
reveals direct and dynamic occupancy of KDM4B and its target, H3K9me3, at
regulatory regions of the Dlx3 locus. Accordingly, coelectroporations of DLX3 or 
KDM4B encoding constructs, but not a catalytically dead mutant of KDM4B, rescue
the ear invagination phenotype caused by KDM4B knockdown. Moreover, a loss of
DLX3 phenocopies a loss of KDM4B. Collectively, our findings suggest that KDM4B
play a critical role during inner ear invagination via modulating histone
methylation of the direct target Dlx3.

© 2015 Uribe et al.

PMCID: PMC4657164 [Available on 2016-05-23]
PMID: 26598618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Nature. 2015 Nov 19;527(7578):384-8. doi: 10.1038/nature15518. Epub 2015 Nov 9.

DNA-dependent formation of transcription factor pairs alters their binding
specificity.

Jolma A(1), Yin Y(1), Nitta KR(1), Dave K(1), Popov A(2), Taipale M(1), Enge
M(1), Kivioja T(3), Morgunova E(1), Taipale J(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, SE 141 83,
Sweden. (2)European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, 38043 Grenoble, France.
(3)Genome-Scale Biology Program, University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 63, FI-00014,
Finland.

Gene expression is regulated by transcription factors (TFs), proteins that
recognize short DNA sequence motifs. Such sequences are very common in the human 
genome, and an important determinant of the specificity of gene expression is the
cooperative binding of multiple TFs to closely located motifs. However,
interactions between DNA-bound TFs have not been systematically characterized. To
identify TF pairs that bind cooperatively to DNA, and to characterize their
spacing and orientation preferences, we have performed consecutive
affinity-purification systematic evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment
(CAP-SELEX) analysis of 9,400 TF-TF-DNA interactions. This analysis revealed 315 
TF-TF interactions recognizing 618 heterodimeric motifs, most of which have not
been previously described. The observed cooperativity occurred promiscuously
between TFs from diverse structural families. Structural analysis of the TF
pairs, including a novel crystal structure of MEIS1 and DLX3 bound to their
identified recognition site, revealed that the interactions between the TFs were 
predominantly mediated by DNA. Most TF pair sites identified involved a large
overlap between individual TF recognition motifs, and resulted in recognition of 
composite sites that were markedly different from the individual TF's motifs.
Together, our results indicate that the DNA molecule commonly plays an active
role in cooperative interactions that define the gene regulatory lexicon.

PMID: 26550823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Oncogene. 2015 Nov 2. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.380. [Epub ahead of print]

The homeoprotein DLX3 and tumor suppressor p53 co-regulate cell cycle progression
and squamous tumor growth.

Palazzo E(1), Kellett M(1), Cataisson C(2), Gormley A(1), Bible PW(1), Pietroni
V(1), Radoja N(1), Hwang J(1), Blumenberg M(3), Yuspa SH(2), Morasso MI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Skin Biology, NIAMS, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA. (2)Laboratory of
Cancer Biology and Genetics, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA. (3)Department of
Dermatology, New York University, New York, NY, USA.

Epidermal homeostasis depends on the coordinated control of keratinocyte cell
cycle. Differentiation and the alteration of this balance can result in
neoplastic development. Here we report on a novel DLX3-dependent network that
constrains epidermal hyperplasia and squamous tumorigenesis. By integrating
genetic and transcriptomic approaches, we demonstrate that DLX3 operates through 
a p53-regulated network. DLX3 and p53 physically interact on the p21 promoter to 
enhance p21 expression. Elevating DLX3 in keratinocytes produces a G1-S blockade 
associated with p53 signature transcriptional profiles. In contrast, DLX3 loss
promotes a mitogenic phenotype associated with constitutive activation of ERK.
DLX3 expression is lost in human skin cancers and is extinguished during
progression of experimentally induced mouse squamous cell carcinoma (SCC).
Reinstatement of DLX3 function is sufficient to attenuate the migration of SCC
cells, leading to decreased wound closure. Our data establish the DLX3-p53
interplay as a major regulatory axis in epidermal differentiation and suggest
that DLX3 is a modulator of skin carcinogenesis.Oncogene advance online
publication, 2 November 2015; doi:10.1038/onc.2015.380.

PMID: 26522723  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Calcif Tissue Int. 2015 Oct 19. [Epub ahead of print]

Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type I Caused by COL1A1 Deletions.

Bardai G(1), Lemyre E(2), Moffatt P(1), Palomo T(1), Glorieux FH(1), Tung J(3),
Ward L(3), Rauch F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Shriners Hospital for Children and McGill University, 1529 Cedar Avenue,
Montréal, QC, H3G 1A6, Canada. (2)Hôpital Sainte-Justine, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ontario, Canada. (4)Shriners Hospital 
for Children and McGill University, 1529 Cedar Avenue, Montréal, QC, H3G 1A6,
Canada. frauch@shriners.mcgill.ca.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) type I is usually caused by COL1A1 stop or
frameshift mutations, leading to COL1A1 haploinsufficiency. Here we report on 12 
individuals from 5 families who had OI type I due to an unusual
cause-heterozygous deletions of the entire COL1A1 gene. The deletions were
initially detected by semiconductor-based sequencing of genomic DNA and confirmed
by quantitative PCR. Array comparative genomic hybridization in DNA of the index 
patient in each family showed that deletion size varied from 18.5 kb to 2.23 Mb
between families, encompassing between 1 and 47 genes (COL1A1 included). The
skeletal phenotype of the affected individuals was similar to that of patients
with haploinsufficiency caused by COL1A1 stop or frameshift mutations. However,
one individual with a deletion that included also DLX3 and DLX4 had tooth
discoloration and bone fragility. Three individuals from 2 families had deletions
that included also CACNA1G, and these individuals had learning disabilities.
These features are not usually observed in COL1A1 haploinsufficiency, but are in 
accordance with previously described individuals in whom deletions included the
same genes. In summary, we found deletions of COL1A1 in 5 out of 161 families
(3 %) with OI type I that were evaluated. Deletions encompassing not only COL1A1 
but also neighboring genes can lead to contiguous gene syndromes that may include
dental involvement and learning disability.

PMID: 26478226  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 2;10(9):e0137135. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137135.
eCollection 2015.

Functional Characterization of a Single Nucleotide Polymorphism in the 3'
Untranslated Region of Sheep DLX3 Gene.

Rong E(1), Zhang Z(2), Qiao S(2), Yang H(3), Yan X(4), Li H(2), Wang N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Chicken Genetics and Breeding at Ministry of Agriculture,
Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction at Education
Department of Heilongjiang Province, Harbin, 150030, China; College of Animal
Science and Technology, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, 150030, China;
State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, China Agricultural University,
Beijing, 100193, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Chicken Genetics and Breeding at
Ministry of Agriculture, Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding and
Reproduction at Education Department of Heilongjiang Province, Harbin, 150030,
China; College of Animal Science and Technology, Northeast Agricultural
University, Harbin, 150030, China. (3)Institute of Animal Husbandry and
Veterinary Institute, Xinjiang Academy of Agriculture and Reclamation Science,
Shihezi, 832000, China. (4)Key Laboratory of Chicken Genetics and Breeding at
Ministry of Agriculture, Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding and
Reproduction at Education Department of Heilongjiang Province, Harbin, 150030,
China.

The Distal-less 3 (homeobox protein DLX-3), a transcription factor, is critical
for the development of hair follicle and hair formation and regeneration. We
previously identified and found that four SNPs (c. *118T>C, c. *228T>C, c.
*688A>G and c. *1,038_1,039 insC) in 3' untranslated region (UTR) of sheep DLX3
were in high linkage disequilibrium with each other and significantly associated 
with wool crimp (P<0.05), however, the underlying mechanisms by which these SNPs 
affect the wool crimp remains unknown. In the present study, we performed
association analysis between these four identified SNPs and DLX3 gene expression 
in sheep skin using quantitative real-time RT-PCR. The results showed that these 
SNPs were significantly associated with sheep skin DLX3 mRNA expression levels.
Then, we constructed DLX3 3'UTR luciferase reporters and validated the
association. The reporter assays showed that the three major haplotypes, derived 
from the four SNPs, had significantly different effects on luciferase reporter
activity and the four SNPs also had significantly different allelic effects on
the luciferase reporter activity (p < 0.05). Bioinformatics analysis showed that 
the SNP (c. *1,038_1,039 insC) was located within a potential miR-188 binding
site of the 3'UTR of sheep DLX3 mRNA. This SNP may affect miR-188-mediated DLX3
gene expression and result in phenotypic variation. To test the hypothesis, we
investigated the effects of miR-188 mimic and inhibitor on the activity of the
DLX3 3'UTR luciferase reporter with different SNP alleles. The results showed
that in both sheep fetal fibroblasts (SFFs) and human HaCaT cells, miR-188 mimic 
could significantly decrease the allele D (deletion) luciferase reporter activity
(p < 0.05), but miR-188 inhibitor could increased the reporter activitiy.
However, neither miR-188 mimc nor inhibitor could influence the allele I
(insertion) reporter activity. In addition, transfection of miR-188 mimic
dramatically decreased the endogenous expression of DLX3 in SFFs (p < 0.05).
Taken together, we demonstrated that DLX3 is a target gene of miR-188 and the SNP
(c. *1,038_1,039 insC) is a functional SNP, and affects miR-188-mediated gene
regulation of sheep DLX3. Our finding may in part explain allelic difference in
gene expression and wool crimp in our tested sheep population.

PMCID: PMC4558038
PMID: 26332462  [PubMed - in process]


12. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Sep;35(18):3116-30. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00093-15. Epub 2015 Jun 
29.

MicroRNA 665 Regulates Dentinogenesis through MicroRNA-Mediated Silencing and
Epigenetic Mechanisms.

Heair HM(1), Kemper AG(1), Roy B(1), Lopes HB(2), Rashid H(1), Clarke JC(1),
Afreen LK(1), Ferraz EP(2), Kim E(1), Javed A(1), Beloti MM(2), MacDougall M(1), 
Hassan MQ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Institute of Oral Health
Research, School of Dentistry, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama, USA. (2)Cell Culture Laboratory, School of Dentistry of Ribeirão Preto, 
University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brazil. (3)Department of Oral
and Maxillofacial Surgery, Institute of Oral Health Research, School of
Dentistry, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA
hassank@uab.edu.

Studies of proteins involved in microRNA (miRNA) processing, maturation, and
silencing have indicated the importance of miRNAs in skeletogenesis, but the
specific miRNAs involved in this process are incompletely defined. Here, we
identified miRNA 665 (miR-665) as a potential repressor of odontoblast
maturation. Studies with cultured cell lines and primary embryonic cells showed
that miR-665 represses the expression of early and late odontoblast marker genes 
and stage-specific proteases involved in dentin maturation. Notably, miR-665
directly targeted Dlx3 mRNA and decreased Dlx3 expression. Furthermore,
RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) immunoprecipitation and biotin-labeled
miR-665 pulldown studies identified Kat6a as another potential target of miR-665.
KAT6A interacted physically and functionally with RUNX2, activating
tissue-specific promoter activity and prompting odontoblast differentiation.
Overexpression of miR-665 reduced the recruitment of KAT6A to Dspp and Dmp1
promoters and prevented KAT6A-induced chromatin remodeling, repressing gene
transcription. Taken together, our results provide novel molecular evidence that 
miR-665 functions in an miRNA-epigenetic regulatory network to control
dentinogenesis.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4539367
PMID: 26124283  [PubMed - in process]


13. Eur J Oral Sci. 2015 Aug;123(4):228-34. doi: 10.1111/eos.12197. Epub 2015 Jun 24.

Morphological analyses and a novel de novo DLX3 mutation associated with
tricho-dento-osseous syndrome in a Chinese family.

Li Y(1), Han D(1), Zhang H(1), Liu H(1), Wong S(1), Zhao N(1), Qiu L(2), Feng
H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthodontics, Peking University School and Hospital of
Stomatology, Beijing, China. (2)The 4th Dental Division, Peking University School
and Hospital of Stomatology, Beijing, China.

Tricho-dento-osseous (TDO) syndrome, an autosomal-dominant disorder, affects the 
morphological appearance of the tooth enamel, hair, and bone. Previous studies
have confirmed that mutations in the DLX3 gene are responsible for TDO. In this
study, we describe a Chinese patient with the typical traits of TDO - kinky hair,
enamel hypoplasia, skull and jaw bones thickening, and sclerosis. Unfortunately, 
as a result of excessive attrition, we were unable to assess taurodontism.
Examination of the tooth ground section showed a thin layer of enamel with no
rods on the patient's tooth and abnormalities in Tomes' granular layer and the
dentinal tubules. Scanning electron microscopy and energy-dispersive X-ray
spectroscopy of the tooth enamel showed significant differences between the
patient and the control individuals. A hair sample from the patient observed
under a laser-scanning microscope showed longitudinal grooves in the hair shaft. 
Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry measurement showed that the bone mineral density
values of the patient's bones was much higher than normal. Finally, genetic
analysis revealed a novel de novo missense mutation c.533A>G (p.Q178R) in the
conserved homeodomain of the DLX3 gene. This DLX3 mutation is the sixth causative
mutation for TDO to be identified so far.

© 2015 Eur J Oral Sci.

PMID: 26104267  [PubMed - in process]


14. PLoS Genet. 2015 May 28;11(5):e1005253. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005253.
eCollection 2015.

Post-transcriptional Regulation of Keratinocyte Progenitor Cell Expansion,
Differentiation and Hair Follicle Regression by miR-22.

Yuan S(1), Li F(2), Meng Q(2), Zhao Y(2), Chen L(3), Zhang H(4), Xue L(4), Zhang 
X(5), Lengner C(6), Yu Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratories for Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences, 
China Agricultural University, Beijing, China; Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Basic Medical College, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin,
China; Department of Animal Science, Southwest University, Rongchang, Chongqing, 
China. (2)State Key Laboratories for Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological
Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China. (3)Chongqing Academy of 
Animal Science, Rongchang, Chongqing, China. (4)Laboratory of Molecular Cell
Biology and Tumor Biology, Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology,
Beijing, China. (5)College of Food Science and Nutritional Engineering, China
Agricultural University, Beijing, China. (6)Department of Animal Biology, School 
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States of America; Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Hair follicles (HF) undergo precisely regulated recurrent cycles of growth,
cessation, and rest. The transitions from anagen (growth), to catagen
(regression), to telogen (rest) involve a physiological involution of the HF.
This process is likely coordinated by a variety of mechanisms including apoptosis
and loss of growth factor signaling. However, the precise molecular mechanisms
underlying follicle involution after hair keratinocyte differentiation and hair
shaft assembly remain poorly understood. Here we demonstrate that a highly
conserved microRNA, miR-22 is markedly upregulated during catagen and peaks in
telogen. Using gain- and loss-of-function approaches in vivo, we find that miR-22
overexpression leads to hair loss by promoting anagen-to-catagen transition of
the HF, and that deletion of miR-22 delays entry to catagen and accelerates the
transition from telogen to anagen. Ectopic activation of miR-22 results in hair
loss due to the repression a hair keratinocyte differentiation program and
keratinocyte progenitor expansion, as well as promotion of apoptosis. At the
molecular level, we demonstrate that miR-22 directly represses numerous
transcription factors upstream of phenotypic keratin genes, including Dlx3,
Foxn1, and Hoxc13. We conclude that miR-22 is a critical post-transcriptional
regulator of the hair cycle and may represent a novel target for therapeutic
modulation of hair growth.

PMCID: PMC4447420
PMID: 26020521  [PubMed - in process]


15. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Aug 1;24(15):4340-52. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv167. Epub 2015 May 
7.

DLX4 is associated with orofacial clefting and abnormal jaw development.

Wu D(1), Mandal S(1), Choi A(1), Anderson A(1), Prochazkova M(2), Perry H(3),
Gil-Da-Silva-Lopes VL(4), Lao R(5), Wan E(5), Tang PL(5), Kwok PY(6), Klein O(7),
Zhuan B(8), Slavotinek AM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (2)Division of Craniofacial Anomalies, Department of
Orofacial Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA,
USA, Laboratory of Transgenic Models of Diseases, Institute of Molecular Genetics
of the ASCR, v. v.i., Prague, Czech Republic, Program in Craniofacial Biology,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94114, USA.
(3)Division of Craniofacial Anomalies, Department of Orofacial Sciences,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. (4)Department of
Medical Genetics, University of Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. (5)Cardiovascular
Research Institute, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, USA
and. (6)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, USA and Institute for Human Genetics, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. (7)Department of Pediatrics,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA, Division
of Craniofacial Anomalies, Department of Orofacial Sciences, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA, Institute for Human Genetics, 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA, Program in
Craniofacial Biology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 
94114, USA. (8)Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine, Ministry of Education, School 
and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, China. (9)Department of
Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143,
USA, Institute for Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA, slavotia@ucsf.edu.

Cleft lip and/or palate (CL/P) are common structural birth defects in humans. We 
used exome sequencing to study a patient with bilateral CL/P and identified a
single nucleotide deletion in the patient and her similarly affected
sonc.546_546delG, predicting p.Gln183Argfs*57 in the Distal-less 4 (DLX4) gene. 
The sequence variant was absent from databases, predicted to be deleterious and
was verified by Sanger sequencing. In mammals, there are three Dlx homeobox
clusters with closely located gene pairs (Dlx1/Dlx2, Dlx3/Dlx4, Dlx5/Dlx6). In
situ hybridization showed that Dlx4 was expressed in the mesenchyme of the murine
palatal shelves at E12.5, prior to palate closure. Wild-type human DLX4, but not 
mutant DLX4_c.546delG, could activate two murine Dlx conserved regulatory
elements, implying that the mutation caused haploinsufficiency. We showed that
reduced DLX4 expression after short interfering RNA treatment in a human cell
line resulted in significant up-regulation of DLX3, DLX5 and DLX6, with reduced
expression of DLX2 and significant up-regulation of BMP4, although the increased 
BMP4 expression was demonstrated only in HeLa cells. We used antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides to target the orthologous Danio rerio gene, dlx4b, and found
reduced cranial size and abnormal cartilaginous elements. We sequenced DLX4 in
155 patients with non-syndromic CL/P and CP, but observed no sequence variants.
From the published literature, Dlx1/Dlx2 double homozygous null mice and Dlx5
homozygous null mice both have clefts of the secondary palate. This first finding
of a DLX4 mutation in a family with CL/P establishes DLX4 as a potential cause of
human clefts.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4492397 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25954033  [PubMed - in process]


16. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 27;10(3):e0121288. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121288.
eCollection 2015.

Transcriptional factor DLX3 promotes the gene expression of enamel matrix
proteins during amelogenesis.

Zhang Z(1), Tian H(1), Lv P(1), Wang W(2), Jia Z(2), Wang S(1), Zhou C(2), Gao
X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cariology and Endodontology, School and Hospital of Stomatology,
Peking University, Beijing, PR China. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, PR China.

Mutation of distal-less homeobox 3 (DLX3) is responsible for human
tricho-dento-osseous syndrome (TDO) with amelogenesis imperfecta, indicating a
crucial role of DLX3 in amelogenesis. However, the expression pattern of DLX3 and
its specific function in amelogenesis remain largely unknown. The aim of this
study was to investigate the effects of DLX3 on enamel matrix protein (EMP)
genes. By immunohistochemistry assays of mouse tooth germs, stronger
immunostaining of DLX3 protein was identified in ameloblasts in the secretory
stage than in the pre-secretory and maturation stages, and the same pattern was
found for Dlx3 mRNA using Realtime PCR. In a mouse ameloblast cell lineage,
forced expression of DLX3 up-regulated the expression of the EMP genes Amelx,
Enam, Klk4, and Odam, whereas knockdown of DLX3 down-regulated these four EMP
genes. Further, bioinformatics, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and luciferase
assays revealed that DLX3 transactivated Enam, Amelx, and Odam through direct
binding to their enhancer regions. Particularly, over-expression of mutant-DLX3
(c.571_574delGGGG, responsible for TDO) inhibited the activation function of DLX3
on expression levels and promoter activities of the Enam, Amelx, and Odam genes. 
Together, our data show that DLX3 promotes the expression of the EMP genes Amelx,
Enam, Klk4, and Odam in amelogenesis, while mutant-DLX3 disrupts this regulatory 
function, thus providing insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying the
enamel defects of TDO disease.

PMCID: PMC4376716
PMID: 25815730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 22;9(12):e115165. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115165.
eCollection 2014.

Xenopus Nkx6.3 is a neural plate border specifier required for neural crest
development.

Zhang Z(1), Shi Y(2), Zhao S(3), Li J(3), Li C(3), Mao B(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China; Kunming College of Life
Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China. (2)Department
of Clinical Laboratory, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing, China; Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and
Disorders; Key Laboratory of Pediatrics in Chongqing; Chongqing International
Science and Technology Cooperation Center for Child Development and Disorders,
Chongqing, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution,
Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.

In vertebrates, the neural plate border (NPB) is established by a group of
transcription factors including Dlx3, Msx1 and Zic1. The crosstalk between these 
NPB specifiers governs the separation of the NPB region into placode and neural
crest (NC) territories and also their further differentiation. Understanding the 
mechanisms of NPB formation and NC development is critical for our knowledge of
related human diseases. Here we identified Nkx6.3, a transcription factor of the 
Nkx family, as a new NPB specifier required for neural crest development in
Xenopus embryos. XNkx6.3 is expressed in the ectoderm of the neural plate border 
region at neurula stages, covering the epidermis, placode and neural crest
territories, but not the neural plate. Inhibition of Nkx6.3 by dominant negative 
construct or specific morpholino leads to neural crest defects, while
overexpression of Nkx6.3 induces ectopic neural crest in the anterior neural
fold. In animal caps, Nkx6.3 alone is able to initiate the whole neural crest
regulatory network and induces neural crest fate robustly. We showed that
overexpression of Nkx6.3 affects multiple signaling pathways, creating a
high-Wnt, low-BMP environment required for neural crest development. Gain- and
loss-of-function of Nkx6.3 have compound effects on the expression of known NPB
genes, which is largely opposite to that of Dlx3. Overexpression of Dlx3 blocks
the NC inducing activity of Nkx6.3. The crosstalk between Nkx6.3, Dlx3 and Msx1
is likely crucial for proper NPB formation and neural crest development in
Xenopus.

PMCID: PMC4274032
PMID: 25531524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Cell Signal. 2015 Mar;27(3):598-605. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.12.008. Epub
2014 Dec 19.

A protein kinase A (PKA)/ß-catenin pathway sustains the BMP2/DLX3-induced
osteogenic differentiation in dental follicle cells (DFCs).

Viale-Bouroncle S(1), Klingelhöffer C(1), Ettl T(1), Reichert TE(1), Morsczeck
C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cranio- and Maxillofacial Surgery, University Hospital
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. (2)Department of Cranio- and Maxillofacial
Surgery, University Hospital Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. Electronic address:
christian.morsczeck@ukr.de.

The directed expression of osteogenic transcription factors via a balanced
activation of signaling pathways is an important prerequisite for the development
of mineralized tissues. A positive-feedback loop of the BMP2-dependent SMAD
signaling pathway and the DLX3 transcription factor (BMP2/DLX3 pathway) directs
the osteogenic differentiation of periodontal precursor cells from the dental
follicle (DFCs). However, little is known how this BMP2/DLX3 pathway interacts
with other crucial signaling pathways such as the WNT/ß-catenin signaling
pathway. This study investigated the interaction between the BMP2/DLX3 pathway
and the WNT pathway during the osteogenic differentiation of DFCs. BMP2 induced
the WNT/ß-catenin pathway in DFCs and phosphorylates ß-catenin via protein kinase
A (PKA). Moreover, only BMP2 facilitated the binding of LEF1/SMAD4/ß-catenin
complex to the DLX3 promoter, while an inducer of the canonical WNT pathway,
WNT3A, act as an inhibitor. Although WNT3A inhibits the osteogenic
differentiation of DFCs the expression of ß-catenin was crucial for both the
expression of DLX3 and for the osteogenic differentiation. In conclusion, while
the activation of the canonical WNT pathway inhibits the osteogenic
differentiation of DFCs, ß-catenin sustains the BMP2/DLX3-mediated osteogenic
differentiation via the activation of PKA.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25530217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Cell Biochem. 2015 May;116(5):730-42. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25026.

miR-124 negatively regulates osteogenic differentiation and in vivo bone
formation of mesenchymal stem cells.

Qadir AS(1), Um S, Lee H, Baek K, Seo BM, Lee G, Kim GS, Woo KM, Ryoo HM, Baek
JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, School of Dentistry and Dental Research
Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, 110-744, Korea.

MicroRNAs are novel key regulators of cellular differentiation. Dlx transcription
factors play an important role in osteoblast differentiation, and Dlx5 and Dlx2
are known targets of miR-124. Therefore, in the present study, we investigated
the regulatory effects of miR-124 on the osteogenic differentiation and in vivo
bone formation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). During osteogenic induction by
BMP2, the expression levels of miR-124 were inversely correlated with those of
osteogenic differentiation marker genes in human and mouse bone marrow-derived
MSCs, MC3T3-E1 cells and C2C12 cells. The overexpression of a miR-124 mimic
significantly decreased the expression levels of Dlx5, Dlx3, and Dlx2, whereas
the silencing of miR-124 with hairpin inhibitors significantly increased the
expression of these Dlx genes. Luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that
miR-124 directly targets the 3'UTRs of Dlx3, Dlx5, and Dlx2. The overexpression
of a miR-124 mimic suppressed the osteogenic marker gene expression levels,
alkaline phosphatase activity and matrix mineralization, which were all
significantly increased by the overexpression of a miR-124 inhibitor. When
ectopic bone formation was induced by the subcutaneous transplantation of human
bone marrow-derived MSCs in nude mice, MSCs overexpressing a miR-124 inhibitor
significantly enhanced woven bone formation compared with control MSCs. However, 
MSCs overexpressing a miR-124 mimic exhibited increased adipocyte differentiation
at the expense of ectopic bone formation. These results suggest that miR-124 is a
negative regulator of osteogenic differentiation and in vivo bone formation and
that the targeting of Dlx5, Dlx3, and Dlx2 genes partly contributes to this
inhibitory effect exerted by miR-124.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25424317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2014;34(4):1339-50. doi: 10.1159/000366341. Epub 2014 Oct
2.

BMP2 increases adipogenic differentiation in the presence of dexamethasone, which
is inhibited by the treatment of TNF-a in human adipose tissue-derived stromal
cells.

Lee SY(1), Lee JH, Kim JY, Bae YC, Suh KT, Jung JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Pusan National University,
Yangsan, Korea.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The aim of this study was to analyze the effect of BMP2 on
osteogenic differentiation of human adipose tissue-derived stromal cells
(hADSCs).
METHODS: Cultured cells were differentiated into osteogenic lineage in the
presence of BMP2. Gene expressions were determined by real time PCR.
RESULTS: BMP2 increased (2/8) or inhibited (6/8) osteogenic differentiation
according to hADSCs batches. Regardless of the BMP2 action on osteogenic
differentiation, BMP2 induced lipid droplet formation under an osteogenic
differentiation condition in all batches of hADSCs, not hBMSCs, to be tested,
which was confirmed by analysis of adipogenesis related genes expression. hADSCs 
expressed various BMP receptors. BMP2 increased expression of BMP2-responsive
genes such as DLX3 and ID2, and induced SMAD1 phosphorylation in hADSCs and
hBMSCs. BMP2 increased osteogenic differentiation of hADSCs in osteogenic medium 
in which dexamethasone was omitted. The addition of BMP2 in the control culture
media containing dexamethasone alone lead to formation of lipid droplets and
increased C/EBP-a expression in hADSCs. In the presence of TNF-a, BMP2 stimulated
osteogenic differentiation of hADSCs even in hADSCs batches in which treatment of
BMP2 alone inhibited osteogenic differentiation.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate that the control of osteogenesis and adipogenesis
in hADSCs is closely related, and that hADSCs have preferential commitment to
adipogenic lineages.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25301360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Dev Dyn. 2014 Dec;243(12):1619-31. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24194. Epub 2014 Oct 18.

Olfactory sensory system develops from coordinated movements within the neural
plate.

Torres-Paz J(1), Whitlock KE.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Interdisciplinario de Neurociencia de Valparaiso, Instituto de
Neurociencia, Universidad de Valparaiso, Valparaiso, Chile.

BACKGROUND: The peripheral olfactory sensory system arises from morphologically
identifiable structures called placodes. Placodes are relatively late developing 
structures, evident only well after the initiation of somitogenesis. Placodes are
generally described as being induced from the ectoderm suggesting that their
development is separate from the coordinated cell movements generating the
central nervous system.
RESULTS: With the advent of modern techniques it is possible to follow the
development of the neurectoderm giving rise to the anterior neural tube,
including the olfactory placodes. The cell movements giving rise to the optic cup
are coordinated with those generating the olfactory placodes and adjacent
telencephalon. The formation of the basal lamina separating the placode from the 
neural tube is coincident with the anterior migration of cranial neural crest.
CONCLUSIONS: Olfactory placodes are transient morphological structures arising
from a continuous sheet of neurectoderm that gives rise to the peripheral and
central nervous system. This field of cells is specified at the end of
gastrulation and not secondarily induced from ectoderm. The separation of
olfactory placodes and telencephalon occurs through complex cell movements within
the developing neural plate similar to that observed for the developing optic
cup.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4245031
PMID: 25255735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Arch Oral Biol. 2015 Jan;60(1):55-61.

Association of DLX3 gene polymorphism and dental caries susceptibility in
Japanese children.

Ohta M, Nishimura H, Asada Y.

OBJECTIVE: In this study, we investigated whether single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in DLX3 are associated with dental caries susceptibility in Japanese
children.
DESIGN: Genomic DNA of 201 Japanese children was extracted from buccal epithelial
cells. The subjects were divided into two groups: 'low level' group with <10,000 
colony forming units (CFU) of Streptococcus mutans/mL saliva (level 0) and 'high 
level' group with = 10,000 CFU/mL (more than level 1). Each group was further
divided according to decayed, missing, filled teeth (dmft) into low caries
experience (dmft =2) and high caries experience (dmft = 3). Seven SNPs in DLX3
were genotyped using TaqMan1® SNP Genotyping Assay.
RESULTS: Statistical significant association was observed between DLX3
(rs2278163) and caries experience in 'high level Mutans streptococci' group.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that rs2278163 SNP of DLX3 might be associated
with dental caries susceptibility in Japanese children. T and C alleles of
rs2278163 SNP may potentially be involved in caries susceptibility and caries
protection respectively.

PMID: 25247779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol. 2014 Sep-Oct;3(5):349-63. doi: 10.1002/wdev.142. 
Epub 2014 Jul 2.

Early embryonic specification of vertebrate cranial placodes.

Schlosser G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, School of Natural Sciences & Regenerative Medicine
Institute (REMEDI), National University of Ireland, Galway, Galway, Ireland.

Cranial placodes contribute to many sensory organs and ganglia of the vertebrate 
head. The olfactory, otic, and lateral line placodes form the sensory receptor
cells and neurons of the nose, ear, and lateral line system; the lens placode
develops into the lens of the eye; epibranchial, profundal, and trigeminal
placodes contribute sensory neurons to cranial nerve ganglia; and the
adenohypophyseal placode gives rise to the anterior pituitary, a major endocrine 
control organ. Despite these differences in fate, all placodes are now known to
originate from a common precursor, the preplacodal ectoderm (PPE). The latter is 
a horseshoe-shaped domain of ectoderm surrounding the anterior neural plate and
neural crest and is defined by expression of transcription factor Six1, its
cofactor Eya1, and other members of the Six and Eya families. Studies in
zebrafish, Xenopus, and chick reveal that the PPE is specified together with
other ectodermal territories (epidermis, neural crest, and neural plate) during
early embryogenesis. During gastrulation, domains of ventrally (e.g., Dlx3/Dlx5, 
GATA2/GATA3, AP2, Msx1, FoxI1, and Vent1/Vent2) and dorsally (e.g., Zic1, Sox3,
and Geminin) restricted transcription factors are established in response to a
gradient of BMP and help to define non-neural and neural competence territories, 
respectively. At neural plate stages, the PPE is then induced in the non-neural
competence territory by signals from the adjacent neural plate and mesoderm
including FGF, BMP inhibitors, and Wnt inhibitors. Subsequently, signals from
more localized signaling centers induce restricted expression domains of various 
transcription factors within the PPE, which specify multiplacodal areas and
ultimately individual placodes. For further resources related to this article,
please visit the WIREs website.CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The author has declared no
conflicts of interest for this article.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25124756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Invest Dermatol. 2015 Jan;135(1):299-301. doi: 10.1038/jid.2014.287. Epub 2014 
Jul 9.

Epidermal stem cells in the isthmus/infundibulum influence hair shaft
differentiation: evidence from targeted DLX3 deletion.

Kim JC(1), Duverger O(1), Hwang J(1), Morasso MI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Skin Biology, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.

PMCID: PMC4268239
PMID: 25120002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Sep;21(9):1365-76. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.82. Epub 2014
Jun 20.

DLX3 regulates bone mass by targeting genes supporting osteoblast differentiation
and mineral homeostasis in vivo.

Isaac J(1), Erthal J(1), Gordon J(2), Duverger O(1), Sun HW(3), Lichtler AC(4),
Stein GS(2), Lian JB(2), Morasso MI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Skin Biology, NIAMS, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA. (2)Department of
Biochemistry, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA. (3)Biodata Mining and
Discovery Section, NIAMS, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA. (4)Department of Genetics and
Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT,
USA.

Comment in
    Cell Death Differ. 2014 Sep;21(9):1345-6.

Human mutations and in vitro studies indicate that DLX3 has a crucial function in
bone development, however, the in vivo role of DLX3 in endochondral ossification 
has not been established. Here, we identify DLX3 as a central attenuator of adult
bone mass in the appendicular skeleton. Dynamic bone formation, histologic and
micro-computed tomography analyses demonstrate that in vivo DLX3 conditional loss
of function in mesenchymal cells (Prx1-Cre) and osteoblasts (OCN-Cre) results in 
increased bone mass accrual observed as early as 2 weeks that remains elevated
throughout the lifespan owing to increased osteoblast activity and increased
expression of bone matrix genes. Dlx3OCN-conditional knockout mice have more
trabeculae that extend deeper in the medullary cavity and thicker cortical bone
with an increased mineral apposition rate, decreased bone mineral density and
increased cortical porosity. Trabecular TRAP staining and site-specific Q-PCR
demonstrated that osteoclastic resorption remained normal on trabecular bone,
whereas cortical bone exhibited altered osteoclast patterning on the periosteal
surface associated with high Opg/Rankl ratios. Using RNA sequencing and chromatin
immunoprecipitation-Seq analyses, we demonstrate that DLX3 regulates
transcription factors crucial for bone formation such as Dlx5, Dlx6, Runx2 and
Sp7 as well as genes important to mineral deposition (Ibsp, Enpp1, Mepe) and bone
turnover (Opg). Furthermore, with the removal of DLX3, we observe increased
occupancy of DLX5, as well as increased and earlier occupancy of RUNX2 on the
bone-specific osteocalcin promoter. Together, these findings provide novel
insight into mechanisms by which DLX3 attenuates bone mass accrual to support
bone homeostasis by osteogenic gene pathway regulation.

PMCID: PMC4131184
PMID: 24948010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Cell. 2014 Jul 3;55(1):47-58. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.05.011. Epub 2014
Jun 12.

The SUMO-specific isopeptidase SENP3 regulates MLL1/MLL2 methyltransferase
complexes and controls osteogenic differentiation.

Nayak A(1), Viale-Bouroncle S(2), Morsczeck C(2), Muller S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University, Faculty of Medicine,
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt, Germany. (2)Department of Oral and
Maxillofacial Surgery, University of Regensburg, 93042 Regensburg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University, Faculty of Medicine,
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt, Germany. Electronic address:
ste.mueller@em.uni-frankfurt.de.

The ubiquitin-like SUMO system regulates gene expression, but the molecular
insights into this process are incomplete. We show that the SUMO-specific
isopeptidase SENP3 controls H3K4 methylation by regulating histone-modifying
SET1/MLL complexes. SET1/MLL complexes are composed of a histone
methyltransferase and the regulatory components WDR5, RbBP5, Ash2L, and DPY-30.
MLL1/MLL2 complexes contain menin as additional component and are particularly
important for the activation of HOX genes. We demonstrate that SENP3 is
associated with MLL1/MLL2 complexes and catalyzes deSUMOylation of RbBP5. This is
required for activation of a subset of HOX genes, including the developmental
regulator DLX3. In the absence of SENP3, the association of menin and Ash2L with 
the DLX3 gene is impaired, leading to decreased H3K4 methylation and reduced
recruitment of active RNA polymerase II. Importantly, the SENP3-DLX3 pathway
dictates osteogenic differentiation of human stem cells, thus delineating the
importance of balanced SUMOylation for epigenetic control of gene expression
programs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24930734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Cell Biochem. 2014 Nov;115(11):2004-11. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24872.

Protein kinase a phosphorylates Dlx3 and regulates the function of Dlx3 during
osteoblast differentiation.

Li H(1), Jeong HM, Choi YH, Kim JH, Choi JK, Yeo CY, Jeong HG, Jeong TC, Chun C, 
Lee KY.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Drug development, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju, Republic of Korea.

Protein kinase A (PKA), a serine/threonine kinase, regulates bone formation, and 
enhances Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-induced osteoblast differentiation.
However, the mechanisms of how PKA controls the cellular response to BMP are not 
well known. We investigated the effects of modulating PKA activity during
BMP2-induced osteoblast differentiation, and found that PKA regulates the
function of Dlx3. Dlx3 plays crucial roles in osteoblast differentiation and it
is expressed in most skeletal elements during development. We found that PKA
activation increases BMP2-induced expression of Dlx3 protein, and enhances the
protein stability, DNA binding, and transcriptional activity of Dlx3. In
addition, PKA activation induces the phosphorylation of Dlx3 at consensus PKA
phosphorylation target site(s). Lastly, substitution of serine 10 in Dlx3 to
alanine significantly reduces, if not completely abolishes, the phosphorylation
of Dlx3 and the regulation of Dlx3 function by PKA. These results suggest that
Dlx3 is a novel target of PKA, and that PKA mediates BMP signaling during
osteoblast differentiation, at least in part, by phosphorylating Dlx3 and
modulating the protein stability and function of Dlx3.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24924519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Int Endod J. 2015 Feb;48(2):185-92. doi: 10.1111/iej.12299. Epub 2014 Jun 25.

EGR1 supports the osteogenic differentiation of dental stem cells.

Press T(1), Viale-Bouroncle S, Felthaus O, Gosau M, Morsczeck C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cranio- and Maxillofacial Surgery, University Hospital
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.

AIM: To evaluate whether and how the transcription factor early growth response
gene 1 (EGR1) affects the osteogenic differentiation of dental stem cells.
METHODOLOGY: Dental stem cells from apical papilla (SCAPs) and from the dental
follicle (DFCs) were transfected with EGR1-specific siRNA or EGR-1 expression
plasmid. Gene regulation was verified at protein level by Western blotting. The
expression of the transcription factors distal-less homeobox 3 (DLX3), alkaline
phosphatase (ALP) and bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2), which are all
regulators and markers of the osteogenic differentiation in dental stem cells,
was determined by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR). To investigate mineralization, SCAP long-term cultures were stained
with alizarin red after EGR1 over-expression.
RESULTS: EGR1 was induced in SCAPs during osteogenic differentiation. DLX3 and
bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) were up-regulated after EGR1 over-expression 
and down-regulated after EGR1 depletion. The expression of ALP was also
down-regulated after EGR1 depletion. The over-expression of EGR1 in SCAPs
promoted mineralization after osteogenic differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: EGR1 supported the osteogenic differentiation of dental stem cells
by potentially regulating the expression of DLX3 and BMP2.

© 2014 International Endodontic Journal. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24749562  [PubMed - in process]


29. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 15;9(4):e94607. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094607. eCollection
2014.

Genetic analysis of high bone mass cases from the BARCOS cohort of Spanish
postmenopausal women.

Sarrión P(1), Mellibovsky L(2), Urreizti R(1), Civit S(3), Cols N(1),
García-Giralt N(2), Yoskovitz G(2), Aranguren A(4), Malouf J(5), Di Gregorio
S(6), Río LD(6), Güerri R(2), Nogués X(2), Díez-Pérez A(2), Grinberg D(1),
Balcells S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Genètica, Universitat de Barcelona, IBUB, Barcelona, Spain;
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER),
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain; Institut de Biomedicina
Universitat de Barcelona (IBUB), Barcelona, Spain. (2)Unitat de Recerca en
Fisiologia Òssia i Articular (URFOA), Institut Municipal d'Investigacions
Mèdiques (IMIM), Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain; Red Tematica de
Investigación Cooperativa en Envejecimiento y Fragilidad (RETICEF), Instituto de 
Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain. (3)Departament d'Estadística, Universitat de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (4)Departament de Genètica, Universitat de
Barcelona, IBUB, Barcelona, Spain. (5)Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau,
Barcelona, Spain. (6)Red Tematica de Investigación Cooperativa en Envejecimiento 
y Fragilidad (RETICEF), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain; CETIR
Medical Imaging Centre, Barcelona, Spain.

The aims of the study were to establish the prevalence of high bone mass (HBM) in
a cohort of Spanish postmenopausal women (BARCOS) and to assess the contribution 
of LRP5 and DKK1 mutations and of common bone mineral density (BMD) variants to a
HBM phenotype. Furthermore, we describe the expression of several
osteoblast-specific and Wnt-pathway genes in primary osteoblasts from two HBM
cases. A 0.6% of individuals (10/1600) displayed Z-scores in the HBM range (sum
Z-score >4). While no mutation in the relevant exons of LRP5 was detected, a rare
missense change in DKK1 was found (p.Y74F), which cosegregated with the phenotype
in a small pedigree. Fifty-five BMD SNPs from Estrada et al. [NatGenet
44:491-501,2012] were genotyped in the HBM cases to obtain risk scores for each
individual. In this small group of samples, Z-scores were found inversely related
to risk scores, suggestive of a polygenic etiology. There was a single exception,
which may be explained by a rare penetrant genetic variant, counterbalancing the 
additive effect of the risk alleles. The expression analysis in primary
osteoblasts from two HBM cases and five controls suggested that IL6R, DLX3,
TWIST1 and PPARG are negatively related to Z-score. One HBM case presented with
high levels of RUNX2, while the other displayed very low SOX6. In conclusion, we 
provide evidence of lack of LRP5 mutations and of a putative HBM-causing mutation
in DKK1. Additionally, we present SNP genotyping and expression results that
suggest additive effects of several genes for HBM.

PMCID: PMC3988071
PMID: 24736728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Cell Physiol. 2014 Jul;229(7):943-54. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24525.

BMP-2 induction of Dlx3 expression is mediated by p38/Smad5 signaling pathway in 
osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells.

Yang G(1), Yuan G, Li X, Liu P, Chen Z, Fan M.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Basic Science of Stomatology and Key
Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine Ministry of Education, School and Hospital of
Stomatology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

Dlx3 is essential for osteoblast differentiation and bone formation, and its
expression is regulated by bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2). However, the
intimate mechanism of BMP-2 regulation of Dlx3 transcription in osteoblasts is
still unknown. Considering the important roles of Smad5 and p38 in osteoblast
differentiation, we hypothesized that Smad5 and p38 mediated BMP-2-induced Dlx3
transcription in osteoblasts. We found activation of Smad5 and p38 increased the 
expression of Dlx3, whereas knocking down Smad5 or inactivation of p38 inhibited 
BMP-2-induced Dlx3 expression. Both Smad5 and p38 were able to activate Dlx3
promoter activity and p38/Smad5 response elements were located from -698 to -368 
in Dlx3 promoter. Two Smad5 binding sites (SBEI and SBEII, TGTCT box) were
identified in this region by EMSA and ChIP assay. Deletions and mutagenesis study
of the Dlx3 promoter region indicated that the TGTCT boxes are crucial for
p38/Smad5-induced Dlx3 promoter activity. At last, we found a cross-talk between 
p38 and Smad5, and that activation of p38 is necessary for BMP-2-induced Smad5
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation. Overall, we provide a novel insight
that BMP-2-induced Dlx3 expression is regulated by p38/Smad5 signaling pathway in
osteoblasts.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24647893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Biol Reprod. 2014 Apr 25;90(4):83. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.113910. Print 2014
Apr.

Preconception zinc deficiency disrupts postimplantation fetal and placental
development in mice.

Tian X(1), Anthony K, Neuberger T, Diaz FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Biology and Health and Department of Animal Science,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania.

Zinc is an essential nutrient for optimal fertility, but the effects of
preconception zinc deficiency on postimplantation development are not known.
Female mice were fed a control or a zinc-deficient diet (ZDD) for 4-5 days before
ovulation (preconception). Embryonic and/or placental development were evaluated 
on Days 3.5, 6.5, 10.5, 12.5, and 16.5 of pregnancy. The findings show a decrease
in embryo length (31%, Day 10.5; 13%, Day 12.5; 10%, Day 16.5) and weight (23%,
Day 16.5) in embryos from mothers fed a ZDD preconception. Zinc deficiency also
caused a high incidence of pregnancy loss (46%, Day 10.5; 34%, Day 12.5; 51%, Day
16.5) compared to control (2%, Day 10.5; 7%, Day 12.5; 9%, Day 16.5). ZDD embryos
transferred to normal recipients were 38% smaller and implantation rate was only 
10% compared to 40% for controls. Trophoblast cell differentiation and
implantation on Day 6.5 of pregnancy were compromised by preconception zinc
deficiency. On Day 12.5 of pregnancy, placenta weight and area of fetal placenta 
were decreased 37% and 31%, respectively, by preconception zinc deficiency.
Consistent with a smaller fetal placenta, expression of key placental
transcripts, including Ar, Esx1, Syna, Tfeb, Dlx3, and Gcm1 mRNA, but not Ctsq
mRNA, were decreased 30%-70% in the ZDD group. Preconception zinc deficiency
caused 41%-57% of embryos to exhibit delayed or aberrant neural tube development,
as examined by light microscopy and magnetic resonance imaging. Collectively, the
findings provide evidence for the importance of preconception zinc in promoting
optimal fertility and oocyte developmental potential.

PMCID: PMC4076385
PMID: 24599289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jan 10;443(2):500-4. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.11.120. Epub 2013 Dec 7.

NOTCH1 signaling regulates the BMP2/DLX-3 directed osteogenic differentiation of 
dental follicle cells.

Viale-Bouroncle S(1), Gosau M(1), Morsczeck C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cranio- and Maxillofacial Surgery, University Hospital
Regensburg, D-93053 Regensburg, Germany. (2)Department of Cranio- and
Maxillofacial Surgery, University Hospital Regensburg, D-93053 Regensburg,
Germany. Electronic address: christian.morsczeck@ukr.de.

Dental follicle cells (DFCs) are dental stem/progenitor cells and the genuine
precursors of alveolar osteoblasts and dental cementoblasts. A previous study
showed that the transcription factor DLX3 (distal less homeobox 3) supports the
osteogenic differentiation in DFCs via a positive feedback loop with the bone
morghogenetic protein (BMP) 2. Until today, however, the control of this
BMP2/DLX3 pathway by additional signaling pathways remains elusive. Previous
studies also suggested that the NOTCH signaling pathway plays a role in the
osteogenic differentiation of DFCs. In this study we showed that DLX3
overexpression and the initiation of the osteogenic differentiation by BMP2 or
dexamethasone induced the NOTCH signaling pathway in DFCs. However, the induction
of NOTCH-signaling impaired not only the osteogenic differentiation (ALP activity
and mineralized nodules) but also the expression of the transcription factor DLX3
and the activation of the BMP-signaling pathway. So, NOTCH signaling plays a
regulatory role for the osteogenic differentiation of DFCs. In conclusion,
results of our study suggest that the NOTCH-signaling pathway, which is activated
during the osteogenic differentiation of DFCs, regulates the BMP2/DLX3 directed
differentiation of DFCs via a negative feed-back loop.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24321094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Invest Dermatol. 2014 May;134(5):1323-31. doi: 10.1038/jid.2013.504. Epub 2013 
Nov 26.

CtBP1 overexpression in keratinocytes perturbs skin homeostasis.

Deng H(1), Li F(2), Li H(3), Deng Y(3), Liu J(3), Wang D(4), Han G(4), Wang
XJ(5), Zhang Q(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Dermatology, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, Colorado,
USA [2] Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, Colorado,
USA [3] Department of Dermatology, The Sixth People's Hospital of Shanghai,
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China. (2)1] Department of Pathology,
University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, Colorado, USA [2] Department of
Dermatology, Yueyang Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai University of TCM, Shanghai,
China. (3)Department of Dermatology, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora,
Colorado, USA. (4)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora,
Colorado, USA. (5)1] Department of Dermatology, University of Colorado Denver,
Aurora, Colorado, USA [2] Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Denver,
Aurora, Colorado, USA. (6)1] Department of Dermatology, University of Colorado
Denver, Aurora, Colorado, USA [2] Department of Pathology, University of Colorado
Denver, Aurora, Colorado, USA [3] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Genetics, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

Carboxyl-terminal-binding protein-1 (CtBP1) is a transcriptional corepressor with
multiple in vitro targets, but its in vivo functions are largely unknown. We
generated keratinocyte-specific CtBP1 transgenic mice with a keratin-5 promoter
(K5.CtBP1) to probe the pathological roles of CtBP1. At transgene expression
levels comparable to endogenous CtBP1 in acute skin wounds, the K5.CtBP1
epidermis displayed hyperproliferation, loss of E-cadherin, and failed terminal
differentiation. Known CtBP1 target genes associated with these processes, e.g., 
p21, Brca1, and E-cadherin, were downregulated in K5.CtBP1 skin. Surprisingly,
K5.CtBP1 pups also exhibited a hair loss phenotype. We found that expression of
the Distal-less 3 (Dlx3), a critical regulator of hair follicle differentiation
and cycling, was decreased in K5.CtBP1 mice. Molecular studies revealed that
CtBP1 directly suppressed Dlx3 transcription. Consistently, K5.CtBP1 mice
displayed abnormal hair follicles with decreased expression of Dlx3 downstream
targets Gata3, Hoxc13, and hair keratins. In summary, this CtBP1 transgenic model
provides in vivo evidence for certain CtBP1 functions predicted from in vitro
studies, reveals--to our knowledge--previously unreported functions and
transcriptional activities of CtBP1 in the context of epithelial-mesenchymal
interplay, and suggests that CtBP1 has a pathogenic role in hair follicle
morphogenesis and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4537778
PMID: 24280726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Balkan J Med Genet. 2013 Jun;16(1):49-54. doi: 10.2478/bjmg-2013-0017.

Analysis of microsatellite polymorphisms in South Indian patients with non
syndromic cleft lip and palate.

Xavier D(1), Arif Y, Murali R, Kishore Kumar S, Vipin Kumar S, Tamang R,
Thangaraj K, Bhaskar L.

Author information: 
(1)Sree Balaji Dental College and Hospital, Chennai, India.

Non syndromic cleft lip and/or palate (NSCLP) is a complex congenital anomaly
with varying incidence among patients of different geographical origins. Multiple
contributing factors are known to trigger the cleft formation. There are several 
genes involved in the aetiology of NSCLP and they are different in different
populations. The genetic components of clefts that underlie the susceptibility to
respond to the environment still remain unclear. In this study, five
microsatellite polymorphisms from five candidate genes were employed to analyze
the association between these genes and NSCLP in 83 patients and 90 controls.
Genotyping was performed by separating and visualizing the fluorescently-labeled 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products. The association of the five
microsatellite polymorphisms with NSCLP was tested by using the CLUMP v1.9
program that uses the Monte Carlo method. The genotypic distribution is in
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in the control group for only the MSX1 and DLX3 genes.
The RARA microsatellite was significantly associated with NSCLP. Our results
suggest that the RARA gene is involved in pathogenesis of cleft lip and palate in
South Indians.

PMCID: PMC3835296
PMID: 24265584  [PubMed]


35. Biomaterials. 2013 Dec;34(38):9789-802. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.08.084. 
Epub 2013 Sep 23.

BMP10 as a potent inducer of trophoblast differentiation in human embryonic and
induced pluripotent stem cells.

Lichtner B(1), Knaus P, Lehrach H, Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, Ihnestr. 63-73, 14195 Berlin, Germany; Department of Biology, Chemistry
and Pharmacy, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, 
Thielallee 63, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are known to induce diverse differentiation
fates in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). In the present study, we compared
the potency at which BMP5, BMP10 and BMP13, which are members of distinct BMP
subgroups due to differences in sequential and structural homology, induce
differentiation in hESCs and human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs). We
observed, in agreement with previous BMP4 model studies, that all ligands induced
differentiation to the trophoblast lineage in the absence of bFGF. However,
distinct BMPs exerted differences in the kinetics of induced differentiation,
with BMP10 being the most potent. hiPSCs and hESCs shared comparable expression
patterns of BMP type-I and -II receptor subtypes, which might explain conserved
properties with respect to ligand potency and activation of SMAD-dependent (via
SMAD1/5/8) and -independent (via MAPK p38) signal transduction pathways. The
tested BMPs had distinct and also conserved target genes such as CDX2, DLX3,
DLX5, GATA2, GATA3, HAND1, ID2, MSX2 and TFAP2A, known to be associated with the 
emergence of trophoblast cells. hESCs induced expression of the BMP antagonist
NOGGIN as a protection mechanism to constrict extensive BMP action. Unlike BMP4, 
BMP10 has been shown to be resistant to NOGGIN-induced inhibition which in part
might explain its potency. BMPs, in particular BMP4, are commonly used cytokines 
in differentiation protocols to generate diverse mesoderm- and endoderm-derivates
from human pluripotent stem cells. Our study has identified BMP10, a
cardiac-specific protein, as a superior alternative to BMP4 for inducing
trophoblast differentiation in human pluripotent stem cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24070570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Oct;161A(10):2504-11. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36122. Epub 2013
Aug 15.

Osteogenesis imperfecta, tricho-dento-osseous syndrome and intellectual
disability: a familial case with 17q21.33-q22 (COL1A1 and DLX3) deletion and
7q32.3-q33 duplication resulting from a reciprocal interchromosomal insertion.

Harbuz R(1), Bilan F, Couet D, Charraud V, Kitzis A, Gilbert-Dussardier B.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Génétique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Poitiers, France;
Equipe de Génétique de Maladies Rares, Université de Poitiers, France.

We report on a 22-year-old woman with features of osteogenesis imperfecta (OI),
tricho-dento-osseous (TDO) syndrome and intellectual disability. Whole genome
oligonucleotide microarray analysis revealed a copy number gain of 3<U+2009>Mb in
7q32.3-q33 and a loss of 3.4<U+2009>Mb in 17q21.33-q22. FISH analysis showed that the
third copy of 7q32 was inserted into the long arm of one chromosome 17, exactly
in the region 17q21.33-q22 that was deleted. The maternal uncle presented with
clinical features similar to the proposita and had the same chromosomal
anomalies. The mother of the proposita and two other family members were balanced
carriers of this rearrangement, interpreted as an interchromosomal reciprocal
insertion. Reciprocal insertion/four-break rearrangement is a very rare
chromosomal event. The deleted region on chromosome 17 contains 39 genes,
including COL1A1 and DLX3 involved in OI and TDO syndrome respectively. The
CACNA1G gene on the deleted segment of chromosome 17 may be a good candidate gene
to explain the intellectual impairment. © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23949819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 Sep 5;377(1-2):75-83. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.06.032.
Epub 2013 Jul 2.

Downstream targets of the homeobox gene DLX3 are differentially expressed in the 
placentae of pregnancies affected by human idiopathic fetal growth restriction.

Chui A(1), Kalionis B, Abumaree M, Cocquebert M, Fournier T, Evain-Brion D,
Brennecke SP, Murthi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Perinatal Medicine Pregnancy Research Centre, Royal Women's
Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.

Human idiopathic fetal growth restriction (FGR) is associated with placental
insufficiency. Previously, we reported that the expression of homeobox gene
Distal-less 3 (DLX3) is increased in idiopathic FGR placentae and is a regulator 
of villous trophoblast differentiation. Here, we identify the downstream targets 
of DLX3 in trophoblast-derived cell lines. We modelled the high levels of DLX3 in
FGR using an over-expression plasmid construct and complemented this using
short-interference RNA (siRNA) for inactivation in cultured cells. Using a
real-time PCR-based gene profiling, candidate target genes of DLX3
over-expression and inactivation were identified as regulators of trophoblast
differentiation; GATA2 and PPAR<U+03B3>. The expression of GATA2 and PPAR<U+03B3> were further 
assessed in placental tissues and showed increased mRNA and protein levels in
FGR-affected tissues compared with gestation-matched controls. We conclude that
DLX3 orchestrates the expression of multiple regulators of trophoblast
differentiation and that expression of these regulatory genes is abnormal in FGR.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23831639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. PLoS One. 2013 May 7;8(5):e63218. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063218. Print 2013.

Distinct functional and temporal requirements for zebrafish Hdac1 during neural
crest-derived craniofacial and peripheral neuron development.

Ignatius MS(1), Unal Eroglu A, Malireddy S, Gallagher G, Nambiar RM, Henion PD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology Program, Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.

The regulation of gene expression is accomplished by both genetic and epigenetic 
means and is required for the precise control of the development of the neural
crest. In hdac1(b382) mutants, craniofacial cartilage development is defective in
two distinct ways. First, fewer hoxb3a, dlx2 and dlx3-expressing posterior
branchial arch precursors are specified and many of those that are consequently
undergo apoptosis. Second, in contrast, normal numbers of progenitors are present
in the anterior mandibular and hyoid arches, but chondrocyte precursors fail to
terminally differentiate. In the peripheral nervous system, there is a disruption
of enteric, DRG and sympathetic neuron differentiation in hdac1(b382) mutants
compared to wildtype embryos. Specifically, enteric and DRG-precursors
differentiate into neurons in the anterior gut and trunk respectively, while
enteric and DRG neurons are rarely present in the posterior gut and tail.
Sympathetic neuron precursors are specified in hdac1(b382) mutants and they
undergo generic neuronal differentiation but fail to undergo noradrenergic
differentiation. Using the HDAC inhibitor TSA, we isolated enzyme activity and
temporal requirements for HDAC function that reproduce hdac1(b382) defects in
craniofacial and sympathetic neuron development. Our study reveals distinct
functional and temporal requirements for zebrafish hdac1 during neural
crest-derived craniofacial and peripheral neuron development.

PMCID: PMC3646935
PMID: 23667588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 Jul 15;305(2):C173-81. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00205.2012. Epub 2013 May 8.

Matrix metalloproteinase 9 is a distal-less 3 target-gene in placental
trophoblast cells.

Clark PA(1), Xie J, Li S, Zhang X, Coonrod S, Roberson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853,
USA.

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are enzymes that regulate extracellular matrix
composition and contribute to cell migration. Microarray studies in mouse
placenta suggested that MMP-9 transcript abundance was dependent on distal-less 3
(Dlx3), a placental-specific transcriptional regulator; however, it was not clear
if this was a direct or indirect effect. Here we investigate mechanism(s) for
Dlx3-dependent MMP-9 gene transcription and gelatinase activity in placental
trophoblasts. Initial studies confirmed that MMP-9 activity was reduced in
placental explants from Dlx3(-/-) mice and that murine MMP-9 promoter activity
was induced by Dlx3 overexpression. Two binding sites within a murine MMP-9
promoter fragment bound Dlx3, and mutations in both elements reduced basal
MMP-9-luciferase reporter activity and abolished regulation by Dlx3. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies in JEG3 cells confirmed Dlx3 binding to the
endogenous human MMP-9 promoter at three distinct sites and knockdown of human
Dlx3 resulted in reduced endogenous MMP-9 transcripts and secreted activity.
These studies provide novel evidence that Dlx3 is involved directly in the
transcriptional regulation of mouse and human MMP-9 gene expression in placental 
trophoblasts.

PMCID: PMC3725627
PMID: 23657566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Dev Biol. 2013 Jul 15;379(2):208-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.04.023. Epub 2013 
Apr 30.

Differential BMP signaling controls formation and differentiation of multipotent 
preplacodal ectoderm progenitors from human embryonic stem cells.

Leung AW(1), Kent Morest D, Li JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, 400 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030-6403, USA.

Sensory and endoneurocrine tissues as diverse as the lens, the olfactory
epithelium, the inner ear, the cranial sensory ganglia, and the anterior
pituitary arise from a common pool of progenitors in the preplacodal ectoderm
(PPE). Around late gastrulation, the PPE forms at the border surrounding the
anterior neural plate, and expresses a unique set of evolutionarily conserved
transcription regulators including Six1, Eya 1 and Eya2. Here, we describe the
first report to generate and characterize the SIX1(+) PPE cells from human
embryonic stem (ES) cells by adherent differentiation. Before forming PPE cells, 
differentiating cultures first expressed the non-neural ectoderm specific
transcriptional factors TFAP2A, GATA2, GATA3, DLX3, and DLX5, which are crucial
in establishing the PPE competence. We demonstrated that bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP) activity plays a transient but essential role in inducing
expression of these PPE competence factors and eventually the PPE cells.
Interestingly, we found that attenuating BMP signaling after establishing the
competence state induces anterior placode precursors. By manipulating BMP and
hedgehog signaling pathways, we further differentiate these precursors into
restricted lineages including the lens placode and the oral ectoderm (pituitary
precursor) cells. Finally, we also show that sensory neurons can be generated
from human PPE cells, demonstrating the multipotency of the human ES-derived PPE 
cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3712508
PMID: 23643939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Mar;27(3):422-36. doi: 10.1210/me.2012-1289. Epub 2013 Jan
31.

Msx1 homeodomain protein represses the aGSU and GnRH receptor genes during
gonadotrope development.

Xie H(1), Cherrington BD, Meadows JD, Witham EA, Mellon PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, Center for Reproductive Science and
Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0674, USA.

Multiple homeodomain transcription factors are crucial for pituitary
organogenesis and cellular differentiation. A homeodomain repressor, Msx1, is
expressed from the ventral aspect of the developing anterior pituitary and
implicated in gonadotrope differentiation. Here, we find that Msx1 represses
transcription of lineage-specific pituitary genes such as the common
a-glycoprotein subunit (aGSU) and GnRH receptor (GnRHR) promoters in the mouse
gonadotrope-derived cell lines, aT3-1 and LßT2. Repression of the mouse GnRHR
promoter by Msx1 is mediated through a consensus-binding motif in the downstream 
activin regulatory element (DARE). Truncation and mutation analyses of the human 
aGSU promoter map Msx1 repression to a site at -114, located at the junctional
regulatory element (JRE). Dlx activators are closely related to the Msx
repressors, acting through the same elements, and Dlx3 and Dlx2 act as
transcriptional activators for GnRHR and aGSU, respectively. Small interfering
RNA knockdown of Msx1 in aT3-1 cells increases endogenous aGSU and GnRHR mRNA
expression. Msx1 gene expression reaches its maximal expression at the rostral
edge at e13.5. The subsequent decline in Msx1 expression specifically coincides
with the onset of expression of both aGSU and GnRHR. The expression levels of
both aGSU and GnRHR in Msx1-null mice at e18.5 are higher compared with wild
type, further confirming a role for Msx1 in the repression of aGSU and GnRHR. In 
summary, Msx1 functions as a negative regulator early in pituitary development by
repressing the gonadotrope-specific aGSU and GnRHR genes, but a temporal decline 
in Msx1 expression alleviates this repression allowing induction of GnRHR and
aGSU, thus serving to time the onset of gonadotrope-specific gene program.

PMCID: PMC3589667
PMID: 23371388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Int Endod J. 2013 Jun;46(6):565-72. doi: 10.1111/iej.12029. Epub 2012 Nov 27.

Immortalization and characterization of human dental papilla cells with
odontoblastic differentiation.

Yang GB(1), Li XY, Yuan GH, Liu H, Fan MW.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Basic Science of Stomatology
(Hubei-MOST) & Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine Ministry of Education, School
and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

AIM: To establish a cell line of immortalized human dental papilla cells (hDPCs).
METHODOLOGY: Primary hDPCs were cultured and infected with lentivirus containing 
the hTERT gene. Integration and transcription of the hTERT gene were verified by 
PCR. The characteristics of the cells, such as morphology, proliferation and
mineralization, were analysed. Also, the expression of odontoblastic-related
markers including ALP, DMP1, DLX3, OSX, DSP and Nestin, was detected by
immunohistochemistry and real-time RT-PCR.
RESULTS: hTERT gene was integrated into genomic DNA of immortalized cells
(hDPC-TERT) and transcribed into mRNA. With long-time culture, hDPC-TERT bypassed
senescence and grew over 120 population doublings. hDPC-TERT cells have a higher 
proliferation rate, but retain the phenotypic characteristics of the primary
hDPCs, and so was ALP activity and mineralization activity. Furthermore, the
hDPC-TERT cells express no DSP and Nestin with maintenance medium, but highly
expressed DSP and Nestin after odontoblastic induction.
CONCLUSIONS: A line of immortalized human dental papilla cells, which remains in 
an undifferentiated state and has odontoblastic differentiation potential, was
established. This cell line can be used as a cell model for studying the
mechanism of the initiation of odontoblast differentiation.

© 2012 International Endodontic Journal.

PMID: 23186070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Endod. 2012 Nov;38(11):1504-10. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2012.07.009. Epub 2012 Sep 
6.

Effects of homeobox gene distal-less 3 on proliferation and odontoblastic
differentiation of human dental pulp cells.

Li X(1), Yang G, Fan M.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Oral Biomedical Engineering of Ministry of Education,
School and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

INTRODUCTION: Homeodomain gene Distal-less-3 (Dlx3) plays an essential role in
tooth development. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of Dlx3
on proliferation and odontoblastic differentiation of human dental pulp cells
(hDPCs).
METHODS: Human DPCs were infected by recombinant lentivirus to overexpress Dlx3
stably, and the biological effects of Dlx3 on the hDPCs were investigated.
Proliferation of the hDPCs was measured by direct cell counting and
5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine incorporation assay. Odontogenic differentiation of
hDPCs was evaluated by von Kossa staining and alkaline phosphatase activity
assay. Important mineral genes such as dentin sialophosphoprotein (DSPP), dentin 
matrix acidic phosphoprotein 1 (DMP1), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and nestin
(Nes) were determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction. Western blot
analysis was performed to determine the difference of expressions of protein of
dentin sialophosphoprotein (DSP) and DMP1 with or without the presence of
exogenous Dlx3.
RESULTS: Overexpression of Dlx3 decreased the proliferation ability of hDPCs.
Dlx3 enhanced differentiation of hDPCs with promoting mineralization nodule
formation and up-regulated the ALP activity as well as the expressions of
mineralization-related genes including DSPP, DMP1, ALP, and Nes. Meanwhile, the
protein levels of DSP and DMP1 significantly increased in the presence of
exogenous Dlx3.
CONCLUSIONS: Dlx3 is a potent regulator for proliferation and odontoblastic
differentiation of hDPCs.

Copyright © 2012 American Association of Endodontists. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 23063225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2012 Dec;318(8):639-50. doi: 10.1002/jez.b.22469. Epub
2012 Sep 5.

Theria-specific homeodomain and cis-regulatory element evolution of the Dlx3-4
bigene cluster in 12 different mammalian species.

Sumiyama K(1), Miyake T, Grimwood J, Stuart A, Dickson M, Schmutz J, Ruddle FH,
Myers RM, Amemiya CT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Population Genetics, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima,
Japan. ksumiyam@lab.nig.ac.jp

The mammalian Dlx3 and Dlx4 genes are configured as a bigene cluster, and their
respective expression patterns are controlled temporally and spatially by
cis-elements that largely reside within the intergenic region of the cluster.
Previous work revealed that there are conspicuously conserved elements within the
intergenic region of the Dlx3-4 bigene clusters of mouse and human. In this paper
we have extended these analyses to include 12 additional mammalian taxa
(including a marsupial and a monotreme) in order to better define the nature and 
molecular evolutionary trends of the coding and non-coding functional elements
among morphologically divergent mammals. Dlx3-4 regions were fully sequenced from
12 divergent taxa of interest. We identified three theria-specific amino acid
replacements in homeodomain of Dlx4 gene that functions in placenta. Sequence
analyses of constrained nucleotide sites in the intergenic non-coding region
showed that many of the intergenic conserved elements are highly conserved and
have evolved slowly within the mammals. In contrast, a branchial
arch/craniofacial enhancer I37-2 exhibited accelerated evolution at the branch
between the monotreme and therian common ancestor despite being highly conserved 
among therian species. Functional analysis of I37-2 in transgenic mice has shown 
that the equivalent region of the platypus fails to drive transcriptional
activity in branchial arches. These observations, taken together with our
molecular evolutionary data, suggest that theria-specific episodic changes in the
I37-2 element may have contributed to craniofacial innovation at the base of the 
mammalian lineage.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3651898
PMID: 22951979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Cell Physiol. 2013 Mar;228(3):654-64. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24175.

In vivo impact of Dlx3 conditional inactivation in neural crest-derived
craniofacial bones.

Duverger O(1), Isaac J, Zah A, Hwang J, Berdal A, Lian JB, Morasso MI.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Skin Biology Section, NIAMS, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland.

Mutations in DLX3 in humans lead to defects in craniofacial and appendicular
bones, yet the in vivo activities related to Dlx3 function during normal skeletal
development have not been fully elucidated. Here we used a conditional knockout
approach to analyze the effects of neural crest deletion of Dlx3 on craniofacial 
bones development. At birth, mutant mice exhibit a normal overall positioning of 
the skull bones, but a change in the shape of the calvaria was observed.
Molecular analysis of the genes affected in the frontal bones and mandibles from 
these mice identified several bone markers known to affect bone development, with
a strong prediction for increased bone formation and mineralization in vivo.
Interestingly, while a subset of these genes were similarly affected in frontal
bones and mandibles (Sost, Mepe, Bglap, Alp, Ibsp, Agt), several genes, including
Lect1 and Calca, were specifically affected in frontal bones. Consistent with
these molecular alterations, cells isolated from the frontal bone of mutant mice 
exhibited increased differentiation and mineralization capacities ex vivo,
supporting cell autonomous defects in neural crest cells. However, adult mutant
animals exhibited decreased bone mineral density in both mandibles and calvaria, 
as well as a significant increase in bone porosity. Together, these observations 
suggest that mature osteoblasts in the adult respond to signals that regulate
adult bone mass and remodeling. This study provides new downstream targets for
Dlx3 in craniofacial bone, and gives additional evidence of the complex
regulation of bone formation and homeostasis in the adult skeleton.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3514657
PMID: 22886599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Sep 7;425(4):800-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.07.155. Epub 2012 Aug 2.

Akt1 regulates phosphorylation and osteogenic activity of Dlx3.

Choi YH(1), Choi HJ, Lee KY, Oh JW.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Drug Development, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea.

Distal-less 3 (DLX3) is a highly conserved homeobox containing transcription
factor. DLX3 is specifically expressed in osteoblasts and osteocytes of all
developing bones. DLX3 is essential for osteoblast differentiation and skeletal
morphogenesis and acts as a scaffold for nucleic acids and regulatory factors
involved in skeletal gene expression. Akt can be activated by several osteogenic 
signaling molecules, but its precise function and downstream targets in bone
development are unknown. In this report, we investigated a potential regulation
of Dlx3 function by Akt1. We found that Akt1 phosphorylates Dlx3 and Akt1
activation increases protein stability, osteogenic activity and transcriptional
activity of Dlx3. Also, BMP2 was shown to increase the protein level of Dlx3 in
an Akt1 activity-dependent manner. Conversely, inhibition of Akt1 by the Akt
inhibitor decreases the protein levels of Dlx3. These results suggest that Dlx3
is a novel target of Akt1 and the activity of Dlx3 could be modulated by a novel 
mechanism involving Akt1 during osteoblast differentiation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22885182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Placenta. 2012 Oct;33(10):830-8. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2012.06.018. Epub 2012
Jul 19.

Distal-less 3 haploinsufficiency results in elevated placental oxidative stress
and altered fetal growth kinetics in the mouse.

Clark PA(1), Brown JL, Li S, Woods AK, Han L, Sones JL, Preston RL, Southard TL, 
Davisson RL, Roberson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, T4-018 Veterinary Research Tower, College
of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Distal-less 3 (Dlx3)(-/-) mice die at E9.5 presumably due to an abnormal
placental phenotype including reduced placental vasculature and secretion of
placental growth factor. To examine the role of Dlx3 specifically within the
epiblast, Dlx3 conditional knockout mice were generated using an
epiblast-specific Meox2(CreSor) allele. Dlx3(-/fl), Meox2(CreSor) animals were
born at expected frequencies and survived to weaning providing indirect evidence 
that loss of Dlx3 within the trophoectoderm plays a critical role in fetal
survival in the Dlx3(-/-) mouse. We next examined the hypothesis that loss of a
single Dlx3 allele would have a negative impact on placental and fetal fitness.
Dlx3(+/-) mice displayed reduced fetal growth beginning at E12.5 compared with
Dlx3(+/+) controls. Altered fetal growth trajectory occurred coincident with
elevated oxidative stress and apoptosis within Dlx3(+/-) placentas. Oral
supplementation with the superoxide dismutase mimetic, Tempol, rescued the fetal 
growth and placental cell death phenotypes in Dlx3(+/-) mice. To determine the
potential mechanisms associated with elevated oxidative stress on the Dlx3(+/-)
placentas, we next examined vascular characteristics within the feto-placental
unit. Studies revealed reduced maternal spiral artery luminal area in the
Dlx3(+/-) mice receiving water; Dlx3(+/-) mice receiving Tempol displayed
maternal spiral artery luminal area similar to control Dlx3(+/+) mice. We
conclude that reduced Dlx3 gene dose results in diminished fetal fitness
associated with elevated placental cell oxidative stress and apoptosis coincident
with altered vascular remodeling. Administration of antioxidant therapy
ameliorated this feto-placental phenotype, suggesting that Dlx3 may be required
for adaptation to oxidative stresses within the intrauterine environment.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3439566
PMID: 22819041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Clin Genet. 2013 Apr;83(4):375-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2012.01907.x. Epub
2012 Jun 25.

Craniofacial variations in the tricho-dento-osseous syndrome.

Nguyen T(1), Phillips C, Frazier-Bower S, Wright T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC
275997450, USA. nguyent@dentistry.unc.edu

Tricho-dento-osseous (TDO) syndrome is an autosomal dominant trait characterized 
by curly kinky hair at birth, enamel hypoplasia, taurodontism, thickening of
cortical bones and variable expression of craniofacial morphology. Genetic
studies have identified a 4-bp deletion in the DLX3 gene that is associated with 
TDO; however, phenotypic characterization and classification of TDO remains
unclear in the literature. This study compares the craniofacial variations
between 53 TDO-affected subjects and 34 unaffected family members. Standardized
cephalograms were obtained and digitized. Cephalometric measurements were
analyzed using a general linear model with family as a random effect. Numerous
craniofacial measurements from both groups showed marked variability.
TDO-affected subjects showed a Class III skeletal pattern (smaller SNA and ANB
angles), longer mandibular corpus length (GoGn) and shorter ramus height
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05).

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22671030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Oral Dis. 2012 Nov;18(8):756-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-0825.2012.01942.x. Epub 2012
May 30.

Establishment of mesenchymal cell line derived from human developing odontoma.

Hatano H(1), Kudo Y, Ogawa I, Shimasue H, Shigeishi H, Ohta K, Higashikawa K,
Takechi M, Takata T, Kamata N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Division of
Cervico-Gnathostomatology, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: An odontoma, which shows proliferating odontogenic epithelium and
mesenchymal tissue, is one of the most common odontogenic tumors encountered.
These are commonly found in tooth-bearing regions, although the etiology remains 
unknown. There are no previous reports of an established line of immortalized
human odontoma cells.
METHODS: Using odontoma fragments obtained from a girl treated at our department,
we established an immortalized human odontoma cell line and investigated cell
morphology, dynamic proliferation, the presence of contamination, and karyotype. 
Moreover, cell characterization was examined using osteogenic and odontogenic
markers.
RESULTS: We successfully established a mesenchymal odontoma cell (mOd cells). The
cells were found to be fibroblastic and had a high level of telomerase activity. 
Cell growth was confirmed after more than 200 population doublings without
significant growth retardation. mOd cells expressed mRNA for differentiation
markers, including collagen type I (COLI), alkaline phosphatase, bone
sialoprotein, osteopontin, osteocalcin, cementum-derived protein (CP-23), dentin 
sialophosphoprotein (DSPP), and distal-less homeobox 3 (DLX3), as well as bone
morphogenetic proteins (BMPs). In addition, they showed a high level of calcified
nodule formation activity in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: We successfully established a cell line that may be useful for
investigating the mechanisms of normal odontogenesis as well as characteristics
of odontoma tumors.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22642601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 May;26(5):859-72. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1146. Epub 2012 Mar
22.

Squelching of ETS2 transactivation by POU5F1 silences the human chorionic
gonadotropin CGA subunit gene in human choriocarcinoma and embryonic stem cells.

Gupta R(1), Ezashi T, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, Bond Life Sciences Center, University
of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65211, USA.

The subunit genes encoding human chorionic gonadotropin, CGA, and CGB, are
up-regulated in human trophoblast. However, they are effectively silenced in
choriocarcinoma cells by ectopically expressed POU domain class 5 transcription
factor 1 (POU5F1). Here we show that POU5F1 represses activity of the CGA
promoter through its interactions with ETS2, a transcription factor required for 
both placental development and human chorionic gonadotropin subunit gene
expression, by forming a complex that precludes ETS2 from interacting with the
CGA promoter. Mutation of a POU5F1 binding site proximal to the ETS2 binding site
does not alter the ability of POU5F1 to act as a repressor but causes a drop in
basal promoter activity due to overlap with the binding site for DLX3. DLX3 has
only a modest ability to raise basal CGA promoter activity, but its coexpression 
with ETS2 can up-regulate it 100-fold or more. The two factors form a complex,
and both must bind to the promoter for the combination to be transcriptionally
effective, a synergy compromised by POU5F1. Similarly, in human embryonic stem
cells, which express ETS2 but not CGA, ETS2 does not occupy its binding site on
the CGA promoter but is found instead as a soluble complex with POU5F1. When
human embryonic stem cells differentiate in response to bone morphogenetic
protein-4 and concentrations of POU5F1 fall and hCG and DLX3 rise, ETS2 then
occupies its binding site on the CGA promoter. Hence, a squelching mechanism
underpins the transcriptional silencing of CGA by POU5F1 and could have general
relevance to how pluripotency is maintained and how the trophoblast lineage
emerges from pluripotent precursor cells.

PMCID: PMC3355552
PMID: 22446105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 11;287(20):16681-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.320770. Epub 2012
Mar 22.

Hairless plays a role in formation of inner root sheath via regulation of Dlx3
gene.

Kim BK(1), Lee HY, Choi JH, Kim JK, Yoon JB, Yoon SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Life Sciences, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, 
137-701, Korea.

The Hairless (Hr), a transcription factor, is expressed in the suprabasal cell
layer of the interfollicular epidermis and the lower portion of the hair follicle
epithelium, where its expression is dependent on the hair cycle. Recently, we
reported a new Hr mutant mouse, Hr(Hp), in which the hairless protein (HR) was
overexpressed. In this study, we documented abnormal formation of inner root
sheath (IRS), suppressed expression of Dlx3, and IRS keratins in the
Hr(Hp)/Hr(Hp) skin. We also found that HR down-regulated Dlx3 mRNA expression
through suppression of Dlx3 promoter activity. In addition, we showed that Dlx3
regulated the expression of IRS keratins. Our results demonstrate that regulation
of Dlx3 by HR affects the IRS keratin expression, thus modulating the formation
of IRS of hair follicle.

PMCID: PMC3351296
PMID: 22442153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 6;287(15):12230-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.326900. Epub 2012
Feb 20.

Neural crest deletion of Dlx3 leads to major dentin defects through
down-regulation of Dspp.

Duverger O(1), Zah A, Isaac J, Sun HW, Bartels AK, Lian JB, Berdal A, Hwang J,
Morasso MI.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Skin Biology Section, NIAMS, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

During development, Dlx3 is expressed in ectodermal appendages such as hair and
teeth. Thus far, the evidence that Dlx3 plays a crucial role in tooth development
comes from reports showing that autosomal dominant mutations in DLX3 result in
severe enamel and dentin defects leading to abscesses and infections. However,
the normal function of DLX3 in odontogenesis remains unknown. Here, we use a
mouse model to demonstrate that the absence of Dlx3 in the neural crest results
in major impairment of odontoblast differentiation and dentin production. Mutant 
mice develop brittle teeth with hypoplastic dentin and molars with an enlarged
pulp chamber and underdeveloped roots. Using this mouse model, we found that
dentin sialophosphoprotein (Dspp), a major component of the dentin matrix, is
strongly down-regulated in odontoblasts lacking Dlx3. Using ChIP-seq, we further 
demonstrate the direct binding of Dlx3 to the Dspp promoter in vivo. Luciferase
reporter assays determined that Dlx3 positively regulates Dspp expression. This
establishes a regulatory pathway where the transcription factor Dlx3 is essential
in dentin formation by directly regulating a crucial matrix protein.

PMCID: PMC3320974
PMID: 22351765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Eur J Oral Sci. 2011 Dec;119 Suppl 1:35-40. doi:
10.1111/j.1600-0722.2011.00918.x.

Molecular and circadian controls of ameloblasts.

Athanassiou-Papaefthymiou M(1), Kim D, Harbron L, Papagerakis S, Schnell S,
Harada H, Papagerakis P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics and Pediatric Medicine, Center for Computational
Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of Michigan Schools of Dentistry and
Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Stage-specific expression of ameloblast-specific genes is controlled by
differential expression of transcription factors. In addition, ameloblasts follow
daily rhythms in their main activities (i.e. enamel protein secretion and enamel 
mineralization). This time-related control is orchestrated by oscillations of
clock proteins involved in the regulation of circadian rhythms. Our aim was to
identify the potential links between daily rhythms and developmental controls of 
ameloblast differentiation. The effects of the transcription factors distal-less 
homeobox 3 (Dlx3) and runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), and the clock 
gene nuclear receptor subfamily 1, group D, member 1 (Nr1d1), on secretory and
maturation ameloblasts [using stage-specific markers amelogenin (Amelx), enamelin
(Enam), and kallikrein-related peptidase 4 (Klk4)] were evaluated in the HAT-7
ameloblast cell line. Amelx and Enam steady-state mRNA expression levels were
down-regulated in Runx2 over-expressing cells and up-regulated in Dlx3
over-expressing cells. In contrast, Klk4 mRNA was up-regulated by both Dlx3 and
Runx2. Furthermore, a temporal and spatial relationship between clock genes and
ameloblast differentiation markers was detected. Of interest, clock genes not
only affected rhythmic expression of ameloblast-specific genes but also
influenced the expression of Runx2. Multiscale mathematical modeling is being
explored to further understand the temporal and developmental controls of
ameloblast differentiation. Our study provides novel insights into the regulatory
mechanisms sustaining ameloblast differentiation.

© 2011 Eur J Oral Sci.

PMCID: PMC3516856
PMID: 22243224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Development. 2012 Mar;139(6):1175-87. doi: 10.1242/dev.074468. Epub 2012 Feb 8.

Differential distribution of competence for panplacodal and neural crest
induction to non-neural and neural ectoderm.

Pieper M(1), Ahrens K, Rink E, Peter A, Schlosser G.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Research Institute, University of Bremen, FB2, PO Box 330440, 28334
Bremen, Germany.

It is still controversial whether cranial placodes and neural crest cells arise
from a common precursor at the neural plate border or whether placodes arise from
non-neural ectoderm and neural crest from neural ectoderm. Using tissue grafting 
in embryos of Xenopus laevis, we show here that the competence for induction of
neural plate, neural plate border and neural crest markers is confined to neural 
ectoderm, whereas competence for induction of panplacodal markers is confined to 
non-neural ectoderm. This differential distribution of competence is established 
during gastrulation paralleling the dorsal restriction of neural competence. We
further show that Dlx3 and GATA2 are required cell-autonomously for panplacodal
and epidermal marker expression in the non-neural ectoderm, while ectopic
expression of Dlx3 or GATA2 in the neural plate suppresses neural plate, border
and crest markers. Overexpression of Dlx3 (but not GATA2) in the neural plate is 
sufficient to induce different non-neural markers in a signaling-dependent
manner, with epidermal markers being induced in the presence, and panplacodal
markers in the absence, of BMP signaling. Taken together, these findings
demonstrate a non-neural versus neural origin of placodes and neural crest,
respectively, strongly implicate Dlx3 in the regulation of non-neural competence,
and show that GATA2 contributes to non-neural competence but is not sufficient to
promote it ectopically.

PMID: 22318231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Dev Dyn. 2012 Mar;241(3):563-73. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23731. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

Identification of putative retinoic acid target genes downstream of mesenchymal
Tbx1 during inner ear development.

Monks DC(1), Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York
10461, USA.

BACKGROUND: The T-box transcription factor Tbx1 is expressed in the otic vesicle 
and surrounding mesoderm of the periotic mesenchyme (POM) during inner ear
development. Mesenchymal Tbx1 is essential for inner ear development, with
conditional mutants displaying defects in both the auditory and vestibular
systems. We have previously reported that mesodermal Tbx1 loss of function
mutants (Mest-KO) have reduced expression of retinoic acid (RA) metabolic genes, 
Cyp26a1 and Cyp26c1, in the POM, consistent with other studies showing an
increase in mesodermal RA reporter expression in Tbx1-/- embryos. However,
putative RA effector genes whose expression is altered downstream of increased
otic mesenchymal-epithelial RA signaling have remained elusive.
RESULTS: Here we report the identification of 18 retinoic acid responsive genes
altered in Mest-KO conditional mutants by microarray gene profiling. Nine were
chosen for biological validation including quantitative RT-PCR and in situ
hybridization (Otor, Mia, Col2a1, Clu, Adm, Myt1, Dlx3, Itgb3, and Itga2b).
CONCLUSION: Here study provides a series of newly identified RA effector genes
for inner ear development downstream of mesenchymal Tbx1 that may contribute to
the inner ear phenotype observed in Tbx1 loss of function mouse models.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3282991
PMID: 22275070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Mol Med (Berl). 2012 Mar;90(3):273-84. doi: 10.1007/s00109-011-0836-1. Epub
2011 Nov 24.

Homeobox gene Distal-less 3 is a regulator of villous cytotrophoblast
differentiation and its expression is increased in human idiopathic foetal growth
restriction.

Chui A(1), Tay C, Cocquebert M, Sheehan P, Pathirage NA, Donath S, Fournier T,
Badet J, Evain-Brion D, Brennecke SP, Kalionis B, Murthi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Perinatal Medicine, Pregnancy Research Centre, Royal Women's
Hospital, Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia.

Human idiopathic foetal growth restriction (FGR) is frequently associated with
placental insufficiency. In our previous studies, we have reported the isolation 
and characterisation of the homeobox gene Distal-less 3 (DLX3) in the human
placenta. In this study, we have investigated the level of DLX3 expression in
idiopathic FGR-affected placentae and determined its functional role in villous
trophoblast differentiation. FGR-affected placentae (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>25) were collected based
on well-defined clinical criteria and matched for gestation with control
uncomplicated pregnancies (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>25). Real-time polymerase chain reaction and
immunoblotting showed increased DLX3 mRNA and protein expression in FGR-affected 
placentae compared with gestation-matched controls. Qualitative
immunohistochemistry revealed DLX3 localisation in the syncytiotrophoblast,
cytotrophoblasts and endothelial cells surrounding the foetal capillaries in both
FGR-affected and control placentae. Down-regulation of DLX3 in primary villous
trophoblast cells and a trophoblast-derived cell line showed decreased expression
of differentiation markers, 3ßHSD, ßhCG and syncytin. Therefore, we conclude that
increased DLX3 expression in FGR may contribute to trophoblast dysfunction
observed in FGR.

PMID: 22113468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Jul 20;21(11):1936-47. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0422. Epub 2012
Feb 7.

The transcription factor DLX3 regulates the osteogenic differentiation of human
dental follicle precursor cells.

Viale-Bouroncle S(1), Felthaus O, Schmalz G, Brockhoff G, Reichert TE, Morsczeck 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University of Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany.

The transcription factor DLX3 plays a decisive role in bone development of
vertebrates. In neural-crest derived stem cells from the dental follicle (DFCs), 
DLX3 is differentially expressed during osteogenic differentiation, while other
osteogenic transcription factors such as DLX5 or RUNX2 are not highly induced.
DLX3 has therefore a decisive role in the differentiation of DFCs, but its actual
biological effects and regulation are unknown. This study investigated the
DLX3-regulated processes in DFCs. After DLX3 overexpression, DFCs acquired a
spindle-like cell shape with reorganized actin filaments. Here, marker genes for 
cell morphology, proliferation, apoptosis, and osteogenic differentiation were
significantly regulated as shown in a microarray analysis. Further experiments
showed that DFCs viability is directly influenced by the expression of DLX3, for 
example, the amount of apoptotic cells was increased after DLX3 silencing. This
transcription factor stimulates the osteogenic differentiation of DFCs and
regulates the BMP/SMAD1-pathway. Interestingly, BMP2 did highly induce DLX3 and
reverse the inhibitory effect of DLX3 silencing in osteogenic differentiation.
However, after DLX3 overexpression in DFCs, a BMP2 supplementation did not
improve the expression of DLX3 and the osteogenic differentiation. In conclusion,
DLX3 influences cell viability and regulates osteogenic differentiation of DFCs
via a BMP2-dependent pathway and a feedback control.

PMCID: PMC3396153
PMID: 22107079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. BMC Evol Biol. 2011 Oct 18;11:307. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-11-307.

The homology of odontodes in gnathostomes: insights from Dlx gene expression in
the dogfish, Scyliorhinus canicula.

Debiais-Thibaud M(1), Oulion S, Bourrat F, Laurenti P, Casane D, Borday-Birraux
V.

Author information: 
(1)Evolution des familles multigéniques, Laboratoire Evolution Génome et
Spéciation, UPR CNRS, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

BACKGROUND: Teeth and tooth-like structures, together named odontodes, are
repeated organs thought to share a common evolutionary origin. These structures
can be found in gnathostomes at different locations along the body: oral teeth in
the jaws, teeth and denticles in the oral-pharyngeal cavity, and dermal denticles
on elasmobranch skin. We, and other colleagues, had previously shown that teeth
in any location were serially homologous because: i) pharyngeal and oral teeth
develop through a common developmental module; and ii) the expression patterns of
the Dlx genes during odontogenesis were highly divergent between species but
almost identical between oral and pharyngeal dentitions within the same species. 
Here we examine Dlx gene expression in oral teeth and dermal denticles in order
to test the hypothesis of serial homology between these odontodes.
RESULTS: We present a detailed comparison of the first developing teeth and
dermal denticles (caudal primary scales) of the dogfish (Scyliorhinus canicula)
and show that both odontodes develop through identical stages that correspond to 
the common stages of oral and pharyngeal odontogenesis. We identified six Dlx
paralogs in the dogfish and found that three showed strong transcription in teeth
and dermal denticles (Dlx3, Dlx4 and Dlx5) whereas a weak expression was detected
for Dlx1 in dermal denticles and teeth, and for Dlx2 in dermal denticles. Very
few differences in Dlx expression patterns could be detected between tooth and
dermal denticle development, except for the absence of Dlx2 expression in teeth.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our histological and expression data strongly
suggest that teeth and dermal denticles develop from the same developmental
module and under the control of the same set of Dlx genes. Teeth and dermal
denticles should therefore be considered as serial homologs developing through
the initiation of a common gene regulatory network (GRN) at several body
locations. This mechanism of heterotopy supports the 'inside and out' model that 
has been recently proposed for odontode evolution.

PMCID: PMC3217942
PMID: 22008058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e25163. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025163. Epub 2011 Oct 5.

Spatial segregation of BMP/Smad signaling affects osteoblast differentiation in
C2C12 cells.

Heining E(1), Bhushan R, Paarmann P, Henis YI, Knaus P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemistry and Biochemistry, Freie Universitaet Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are involved in a plethora of
cellular processes in embryonic development and adult tissue homeostasis.
Signaling specificity is achieved by dynamic processes involving BMP receptor
oligomerization and endocytosis. This allows for spatiotemporal control of Smad
dependent and non-Smad pathways. In this study, we investigate the spatiotemporal
regulation within the BMP-induced Smad transcriptional pathway.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we discriminate between Smad signaling
events that are dynamin-dependent (i.e., require an intact endocytic pathway) and
dynamin-independent. Inhibition of dynamin-dependent endocytosis in fluorescence 
microscopy and fractionation studies revealed a delay in Smad1/5/8
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation after BMP-2 stimulation of C2C12 cells.
Using whole genome microarray and qPCR analysis, we identified two classes of
BMP-2 induced genes that are differentially affected by inhibition of
endocytosis. Thus, BMP-2 induced gene expression of Id1, Id3, Dlx2 and Hey1 is
endocytosis-dependent, whereas BMP-2 induced expression of Id2, Dlx3, Zbtb2 and
Krt16 is endocytosis-independent. Furthermore, we demonstrate that short term
inhibition of endocytosis interferes with osteoblast differentiation as measured 
by alkaline phosphatase (ALP) production and qPCR analysis of osteoblast marker
gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our study demonstrates that dynamin-dependent
endocytosis is crucial for the concise spatial activation of the BMP-2 induced
signaling cascade. Inhibition of endocytic processes during BMP-2 stimulation
leads to altered Smad1/5/8 signaling kinetics and results in differential target 
gene expression. We show that interfering with the BMP-2 induced transcriptional 
network by endocytosis inhibition results in an attenuation of osteoblast
differentiation. This implies that selective sensitivity of gene expression to
endocytosis provides an additional mechanism for the cell to respond to BMP in a 
context specific manner. Moreover, we suggest a novel Smad dependent signal
cascade induced by BMP-2, which does not require endocytosis.

PMCID: PMC3187766
PMID: 21998639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Placenta. 2011 Nov;32(11):917-20. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2011.08.014. Epub 2011 
Sep 21.

Expression and localization of DLX3, PPARG and SP1 in bovine trophoblast during
binucleated cell differentiation.

Degrelle SA(1), Murthi P, Evain-Brion D, Fournier T, Hue I.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR1198 Biologie du Développement et Reproduction, F-78352
Jouy-en-Josas, France.

The differentiation of the trophoblast is marked in ruminants by the formation of
binucleated cells (BNC). They appear from pre-implantation onwards but the
molecular mechanisms underlying their differentiation remain largely unexplored. 
Taking advantage of our recent data, we analyzed the expression pattern of DLX3
and PPARG that are known regulators of early placenta formation and extended our 
analysis to one of their potential regulators, SP1. Our study is the first to
demonstrate the co-expression of DLX3, PPARG and SP1 in bovine BNC nuclei. This
suggests a possible role of these transcription factors through BNC specific
genes at the time of pre-placental differentiation.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21937107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Placenta. 2011 Oct;32(10):745-51. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2011.07.007. Epub 2011 
Jul 30.

Homeobox gene Distal-less 3 (DLX3) is a regulator of villous cytotrophoblast
differentiation.

Chui A(1), Evseenko DA, Brennecke SP, Keelan JA, Kalionis B, Murthi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Perinatal Medicine Pregnancy Research Centre, Royal Women's
Hospital, Australia.

Dlx3, a member of the large homeobox gene family of transcription factors, is
important for murine placental development. Targeted deletion of Dlx3 in the
mouse results in embryonic death due to placental failure. This study
investigated the role of human DLX3 in villous cytotrophoblast (VCT)
differentiation in the placenta. Primary VCT from human term placentae, which
spontaneously differentiate when maintained in culture over 72 h, showed a
significant increase in mRNA and protein expression of DLX3 and 3ßHSD. The
functional role of DLX3 was determined using trophoblast derived-cell line, BeWo.
Forskolin treated BeWo cells showed significantly increased DLX3 mRNA and protein
expression. Forskolin stimulation also showed a significant increase in syncytin 
and 3ßHSD mRNA expression, and increased release of ßhCG into the cell culture
supernatant. To determine whether DLX3 had a direct or indirect effect on VCT
differentiation, mRNA and protein expression of DLX3 was increased using a
plasmid DLX3 over-expression construct. Over-expression of DLX3 resulted in
increased mRNA expression of 3ßHSD and syncytin, as well as increased secretion
of ß-hCG protein in the cell culture medium. In conclusion, we provide evidence
that DLX3 acts upstream of syncytin, 3ßHSD and ßhCG and that DLX3 has a
regulatory role in VCT differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21802725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Biol Reprod. 2011 Oct;85(4):779-87. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.092809. Epub 2011
Jul 6.

Generation of colonies of induced trophoblast cells during standard reprogramming
of porcine fibroblasts to induced pluripotent stem cells.

Ezashi T(1), Matsuyama H, Telugu BP, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Bond Life Sciences Center and Division of Animal Sciences, University of
Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA.

During reprogramming of porcine mesenchymal cells with a four-factor
(POU5F1/SOX2/KLF4/MYC) mixture of vectors, a fraction of the colonies had an
atypical phenotype and arose earlier than the recognizable porcine induced
pluripotent stem (iPS) cell colonies. Within days after each passage, patches of 
cells with an epithelial phenotype formed raised domes, particularly under 20%
O(2) conditions. Relative to gene expression of the iPS cells, there was
up-regulation of genes for transcription factors associated with trophoblast (TR)
lineage emergence, e.g., GATA2, PPARG, MSX2, DLX3, HAND1, GCM1, CDX2, ID2, ELF5, 
TCFAP2C, and TEAD4 and for genes required for synthesis of products more typical 
of differentiated TR, such as steroids (HSD17B1, CYP11A1, and STAR),
pregnancy-associated glycoproteins (PAG6), and select cytokines (IFND, IFNG, and 
IL1B). Although POU5F1 was down-regulated relative to that in iPS cells, it was
not silenced in the induced TR (iTR) cells over continued passage. Like iPS
cells, iTR cells did not senesce on extended passage and displayed high
telomerase activity. Upon xenografting into immunodeficient mice, iTR cells
formed nonhemorrhagic teratomas composed largely of layers of epithelium
expressing TR markers. When cultured under conditions that promoted embryoid body
formation, iTR cells formed floating spheres consisting of a single epithelial
sheet whose cells were tethered laterally by desmosome-like structures. In
conclusion, reprogramming of porcine fibroblasts to iPS cells generates, as a
by-product, colonies composed of self-renewing populations of TR cells, possibly 
containing TR stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3184293
PMID: 21734265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jul 12;108(28):11566-71. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1019658108. Epub 2011 Jun 27.

Epidermal ablation of Dlx3 is linked to IL-17-associated skin inflammation.

Hwang J(1), Kita R, Kwon HS, Choi EH, Lee SH, Udey MC, Morasso MI.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Skin Biology Section, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

In an effort to understand the role of Distal-less 3 (Dlx3) in cutaneous biology 
and pathophysiology, we generated and characterized a mouse model with epidermal 
ablation of Dlx3. K14cre;Dlx3(Kin/f) mice exhibited epidermal hyperproliferation 
and abnormal differentiation of keratinocytes. Results from subsequent analyses
revealed cutaneous inflammation that featured accumulation of IL-17-producing
CD4(+) T, CD8(+) T, and <U+03B3>d T cells in the skin and lymph nodes of
K14cre;Dlx3(Kin/f) mice. The gene expression signature of K14cre;Dlx3(Kin/f) skin
shared features with lesional psoriatic skin, and Dlx3 expression was markedly
and selectively decreased in psoriatic skin. Interestingly, cultured Dlx3 null
keratinocytes triggered cytokine production that is potentially linked to
inflammatory responses in K14cre;Dlx3(Kin/f) mice. Thus, Dlx3 ablation in
epidermis is linked to altered epidermal differentiation, barrier development,
and IL-17-associated skin inflammation. This model provides a platform that will 
allow the systematic exploration of the contributions of keratinocytes to
cutaneous inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3136280
PMID: 21709238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Aug;226(8):2189-97. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22553.

A dominant mutation etiologic for human tricho-dento-osseous syndrome impairs the
ability of DLX3 to downregulate <U+0394>Np63a.

Di Costanzo A(1), Festa L, Roscigno G, Vivo M, Pollice A, Morasso M, La Mantia G,
Calabrò V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Molecular Biology, University of Naples, Naples, 
Italy.

The homeodomain transcription factors play crucial roles in many developmental
processes ranging from organization of the body plan to differentiation of
individual tissues. The homeodomain protein Distal-less-3 (DLX3) has an essential
role in epidermal stratification and development of ectodermal appendages,
placenta and bones. A four-nucleotide deletion in the human DLX3 gene is
etiologic for the human hereditary tricho-dento-osseous (TDO) ectodermal
dysplasia, a dominant syndrome characterized by abnormalities in hair, nails,
teeth, and bones. We have previously demonstrated that DLX3 gene expression
induces degradation of <U+0394>Np63a, a specific product of the TP63 gene, a master
regulator of multi-layered epithelia. Here we show that the DLX3(TDO) mutant
protein is unable to promote <U+0394>Np63a protein degradation and impairs the
expression of cell cycle regulatory proteins and skin differentiation markers.
However, we found that in cell expressing equal amounts of mutant and wild-type
DLX3, <U+0394>Np63a protein level is efficiently regulated implying that genetic
heterozygosity at the DLX3 locus protects TDO patients from developing severe
p63-associated skin defects.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21520071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Jan;227(1):390-9. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22791.

Homeodomain transcription factors regulate BMP-2-induced osteoactivin
transcription in osteoblasts.

Singh M(1), Del Carpio-Cano FE, Monroy MA, Popoff SN, Safadi FF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Temple University School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

Osteoactivin (OA) is required for the differentiation of osteoblast cells. OA
expression is stimulated by bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2). BMP-2 recruits 
homeodomain transcription factors Dlx3, Dlx5, and Msx2 to selectively activate or
repress transcription of osteogenic genes and hence tightly regulate their
transcription during osteoblast differentiation. Considering the key roles of
Dlx3, Dlx5, and Msx2 in osteoblast differentiation, here we hypothesize that
homeodomain proteins regulate BMP-2-induced OA transcription during osteoblast
differentiation. Four classical homeodomain binding sites were identified in the 
proximal 0.96 kb region of rat OA promoter. Deletions and mutagenesis studies of 
the OA promoter region indicated that all four homeodomain binding sites are
crucial for BMP-2-induced OA promoter activity. Simultaneous disruption of
homeodomain binding sites at -852 and -843 of the transcription start site of OA 
gene significantly decreased the BMP-2-induced OA transcription and inhibited
binding of Dlx3, Dlx5, and Msx2 proteins to the OA promoter. Dlx3 and Dlx5
proteins were found to activate the OA transcription, whereas, Msx2 suppressed
BMP-2-induced OA transcription. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we
demonstrated that the OA promoter is predominantly occupied by Dlx3 and Dlx5
during the proliferation and matrix maturation stages of osteoblast
differentiation, respectively. During the matrix mineralization stage, BMP-2
robustly enhanced the recruitment of Dlx5 and to a lesser extent of Dlx3 and Msx2
to the OA promoter region. Collectively, our results show that the BMP-2-induced 
OA transcription is differentially regulated by Dlx3, Dlx5, and Msx2 during
osteoblast differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21503878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Zhongguo Xiu Fu Chong Jian Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2011 Feb;25(2):155-9.

[Effects of simvastatin on bone formation relative factors of trabecular bone and
osteogenic differentiation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells in young rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang L(1), Liu X, Tian F, Zhang H, Han D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Affiliated Hospital of North China Coal Medical
University, Tangshan Hebei, 063000, PR China. zhliu130@sohu.com

OBJECTIVE: Simvastatin has been reported to be effective on stimulation of bone
formation. To investigate the effects of simvastatin on bone formation relative
factors of proximal tibia trabecular bone and on osteogenic differentiation of
bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs).
METHODS: Fourty 1-week-old male Sprague Dawley rats were divided randomly into 2 
groups, 20 rats per group. Rats in experimental group received subcutaneous
injection of simvastatin [(5 mg/(kg x d)], and the rats in control group received
injection of normal saline at the same dose. The expressions of bone
morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP-2), matrix metalloproteinase 13 (MMP-13), and
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) of trabecular bone were analyzed in the
tibia by immunohistochemical staining at 1 and 3 weeks after injection. BMSCs
from the rat femur at 1 and 3 weeks after injection were cultured under condition
of osteogenic induction. ALP staining was performed on the 14th day after
culture; real-time fluorescent quantitative PCR was used to detect the mRNA
expressions of BMP-2, Runx2, Osterix, Msx2, Dlx3, and Dlx5 on the 21st day after 
culture; and von Kossa staining was performed on the 28th day after culture.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference in the expressions of BMP-2, MMP-13,
and VEGF between the experimental group and control group at 1 and 3 weeks after 
injection (P > 0.05). There was no significant difference in the percentages of
ALP positively-stained cells between the experimental group and the control group
on the 14th day after culture (P > 0.05). The mRNA expressions of BMP-2, Runx2,
Osterix, Msx2, D1x3, and Dlx5 in osteogenic differentiation-induced BMSCs had
also no significant difference between the experimental group and the control
group at 1 and 3 weeks after culture (P > 0.05). No significant difference in
biomineralization was found between the experimental group and control group at 1
and 3 weeks after culture (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Subcutaneous injection of simvastatin [(5 mg/(kg x d)] for 1 or 3
weeks can affect neither the expressions of bone formation relative factors of
proximal tibia trabecular bone nor the osteogenic differentiation of the BMSCs.

PMID: 21427842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Cell Tissue Res. 2011 Mar;343(3):545-58. doi: 10.1007/s00441-010-1120-3. Epub
2011 Jan 27.

Development and characterization of a mouse floxed Bmp2 osteoblast cell line that
retains osteoblast genotype and phenotype.

Wu LA(1), Feng J, Wang L, Mu YD, Baker A, Donly KJ, Harris SE, MacDougall M, Chen
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Dental School, The University of Texas
Health Science Center at San Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, TX
78229-3900, USA.

Bone morphogenetic protein 2 (Bmp2) is essential for osteoblast differentiation
and osteogenesis. Generation of floxed Bmp2 osteoblast cell lines is a valuable
tool for studying the effects of Bmp2 on osteoblast differentiation and its
signaling pathways during skeletal metabolism. Due to relatively limited sources 
of primary osteoblasts, we have developed cell lines that serve as good surrogate
models for the study of osteoblast cell differentiation and bone mineralization. 
In this study, we established and characterized immortalized mouse floxed Bmp2
osteoblast cell lines. Primary mouse floxed Bmp2 osteoblasts were transfected
with pSV3-neo and clonally selected. These transfected cells were verified by PCR
and immunohistochemistry. To determine the genotype and phenotype of the
immortalized cells, cell morphology, proliferation, differentiation and
mineralization were analyzed. Also, expression of osteoblast-related gene markers
including Runx2, Osx, ATF4, Dlx3, bone sialoprotein, dentin matrix protein 1,
osteonectin, osteocalcin and osteopontin were examined by quantitative RT-PCR and
immunohistochemistry. These results showed that immortalized floxed Bmp2
osteoblasts had a higher proliferation rate but preserved their genotypic and
phenotypic characteristics similar to the primary cells. Thus, we, for the first 
time, describe the development of immortalized mouse floxed Bmp2 osteoblast cell 
lines and present a useful model to study osteoblast biology mediated by BMP2 and
its downstream signaling transduction pathways.

PMCID: PMC3050048
PMID: 21271257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Feb;112(2):445-52. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22891.

SUMOylation of DLX3 by SUMO1 promotes its transcriptional activity.

Duverger O(1), Chen SX, Lee D, Li T, Chock PB, Morasso MI.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Skin Biology Section, NIAMS/NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Small ubiquitin-like modifiers (SUMO) are post-translational modifiers that
regulate target protein activity in diverse ways. The most common group of SUMO
substrates is transcription factors, whose transcriptional activity can be
altered positively or negatively as a result of SUMOylation. DLX3 is a
homeodomain transcription factor involved in placental development, in the
differentiation of structures involving epithelial-mesenchymal interactions, such
as hair, teeth and nails, and in bone mineralization. We identified two potential
SUMOylation sites in the N-terminal domain of DLX3 at positions K83 and K112.
Among the six members of the Distal-less family, DLX3 is the only member
containing these sites, which are highly conserved among vertebrates.
Co-expression experiments demonstrated that DLX3 can be SUMOylated by SUMO1.
Site-directed mutagenesis of lysines 83 and 112 to arginines (K83R and K112R)
demonstrated that only K112 is involved in SUMOylation. Immunocytochemical
analysis determined that SUMOylation does not affect DLX3 translocation to the
nucleus and favors perinuclear localization. Moreover, using electrophoresis
mobility shift assay (EMSA), we found that DLX3 is still able to bind DNA when
SUMOylated. Using luciferase reporter assays, we showed that DLX3(K112R) exhibits
a significantly lower transcriptional activity compared to DLX3(WT), suggesting
that SUMOylation has a positive effect on DLX3 activity. We identified a new
level of regulation in the activity of DLX3 that may play a crucial role in the
regulation of hair, teeth, and bone development.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3180851
PMID: 21268066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Cells Tissues Organs. 2011;194(1):49-59. doi: 10.1159/000322561. Epub 2011 Jan
19.

DLX3 homeodomain mutations cause tricho-dento-osseous syndrome with novel
phenotypes.

Nieminen P(1), Lukinmaa PL, Alapulli H, Methuen M, Suojärvi T, Kivirikko S,
Peltola J, Asikainen M, Alaluusua S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Dentistry, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
pekka.nieminen@helsinki.fi

Tricho-dento-osseous syndrome (TDO) is a rare type of dominantly inherited
ectodermal dysplasia so far described only in a few families and associated with 
3 known mutations in the DLX3 homeobox gene. Here, we describe two families of
Finnish origin that segregate features of TDO in several generations. The
affected family members have sparse or curly/kinky hair at birth, markedly
delayed or advanced dental maturity, defective tooth enamel and dentin,
taurodontic molars, multiple dental abscesses and filling of tooth pulps with
amorphous denticle-like material as well as an increased density and/or thickness
of craniofacial bones. The disease is especially accentuated in one of the
families in which the patients develop only lanugo-type hair and the dental
abnormalities are severe. After mutational analysis of DLX3, we identified 2
missense mutations affecting the conserved homeodomain. We suggest that TDO is
essentially caused by loss of function and haploinsufficiency of DLX3.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21252474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Biochem Genet. 2011 Feb;49(1-2):104-21. doi: 10.1007/s10528-010-9392-6. Epub 2010
Dec 3.

Defining a new candidate gene for amelogenesis imperfecta: from molecular
genetics to biochemistry.

Urzúa B(1), Ortega-Pinto A, Morales-Bozo I, Rojas-Alcayaga G, Cifuentes V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical and Chemical Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, University
of Chile, Santiago, Chile. brurzua@gmail.com

Amelogenesis imperfecta is a group of genetic conditions that affect the
structure and clinical appearance of tooth enamel. The types (hypoplastic,
hypocalcified, and hypomature) are correlated with defects in different stages of
the process of enamel synthesis. Autosomal dominant, recessive, and X-linked
types have been previously described. These disorders are considered clinically
and genetically heterogeneous in etiology, involving a variety of genes, such as 
AMELX, ENAM, DLX3, FAM83H, MMP-20, KLK4, and WDR72. The mutations identified
within these causal genes explain less than half of all cases of amelogenesis
imperfecta. Most of the candidate and causal genes currently identified encode
proteins involved in enamel synthesis. We think it is necessary to refocus the
search for candidate genes using biochemical processes. This review provides
theoretical evidence that the human SLC4A4 gene (sodium bicarbonate
cotransporter) may be a new candidate gene.

PMID: 21127961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Aug;38(6):3805-20. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0496-1. Epub 2010
Nov 24.

Analyses of porcine public SNPs in coding-gene regions by re-sequencing and
phenotypic association studies.

Li X(1), Kim SW, Do KT, Ha YK, Lee YM, Yoon SH, Kim HB, Kim JJ, Choi BH, Kim KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju,
Chungbuk, 361-763, South Korea.

The Porcine SNP database has a huge number of SNPs, but these SNPs are mostly
found by computer data-mining procedures and have not been well characterized. We
re-sequenced 1,439 porcine public SNPs from four commercial pig breeds and one
Korean domestic breed (Korean Native pig, KNP) by using two DNA pools from eight 
unrelated animals in each breed. These SNPs were from 419 protein-coding genes
covering the 18 autosomes, and the re-sequencing in breeds confirmed 690 public
SNPs (47.9%) and 226 novel mutations (173 SNPs and 53 insertions/deletions).
Thus, totally, 916 variations were found from our study. Of the 916 variations,
148 SNPs (16.2%) were found across all the five breeds, and 199 SNPs (21.7%) were
breed specific polymorphisms. According to the SNP locations in the gene
sequences, these 916 variations were categorized into 802 non-coding SNPs (785 in
intron, 17 in 3'-UTR) and 114 coding SNPs (86 synonymous SNPs, 28 non-synonymous 
SNPs). The nucleotide substitution analyses for these SNPs revealed that 70.2%
were from transitions, 20.0% from transversions, and the remaining 5.79% were
deletions or insertions. Subsequently, we genotyped 261 SNPs from 180 genes in an
experimental KNP × Landrace F2 cross by the Sequenom MassARRAY system. A total of
33 traits including growth, carcass composition and meat quality were analyzed
for the phenotypic association tests using the 132 SNPs in 108 genes with minor
allele frequency (MAF)>0.2. The association results showed that five marker-trait
combinations were significant at the 5% experiment-wise level (ADCK4 for rear
leg, MYH3 for rear leg, Hunter B, Loin weight and Shearforce) and four at the 10%
experiment-wise level (DHX38 for average daily gain at live weight, LGALS9 for
crude lipid, NGEF for front leg and LIFR for pH at 24 h). In addition, 49 SNPs in
44 genes showing significant association with the traits were detected at the 1% 
comparison-wise level. A large number of genes that function as enzymes,
transcription factors or signalling molecules were considered as genetic markers 
for pig growth (RNF103, TSPAN31, DHX38, ABCF1, ABCC10, SCD5, KIAA0999 and
FKBP10), muscling (HSPA5, PTPRM, NUP88, ADCK4, PLOD1, DLX1 and GRM8), fatness
(PTGIS, IDH3B, RYR2 and NOL4) and meat quality traits (DUSP4, LIFR, NGEF, EWSR1, 
ACTN2, PLXND1, DLX3, LGALS9, ENO3, EPRS, TRIM29, EHMT2, RBM42, SESN2 and RAB4B). 
The SNPs or genes reported here may be beneficial to future marker assisted
selection breeding in pigs.

PMID: 21107721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Dec 15;111(6):1437-44. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22871.

Expression of homeobox genes in oral squamous cell carcinoma cell lines treated
with all-trans retinoic acid.

Acquafreda T(1), Nunes FD, Soprano DR, Soprano KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo,
São Paulo, Brazil.

Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) may arise from potentially malignant oral
lesions. All-trans retinoic acid (atRA), which plays a role in cell growth and
differentiation, has been studied as a possible chemotherapeutic agent in the
prevention of this progression. While the mechanism by which atRA suppresses cell
growth has not been completely elucidated, it is known that homeobox genes are
atRA targets. To determine if these genes are involved in the atRA-mediated OSCC 
growth inhibition, PCR array was performed to evaluate the expression of 84
homeobox genes in atRA-sensitive SCC-25 cells compared to atRA-resistant SCC-9
cells following 7 days with atRA treatment. Results showed that the expression of
8 homeobox genes was downregulated and expression of 4 was upregulated in SCC-25 
cells but not in SCC-9 cells. Gene expression levels were confirmed for seven of 
these genes by RT-qPCR. Expression of three genes that showed threefold
downregulation was evaluated in SCC-25 cells treated with atRA for 3, 5, and 7
days. Three different patterns of atRA-dependent gene expression were observed.
ALX1 showed downregulation only on day 7. DLX3 showed reduced expression on day 3
and further reduced on day 7. TLX1 showed downregulation only on days 5 and 7.
Clearly the expression of homeobox genes is modulated by atRA in OSCC cell lines.
However, the time course of this modulation suggests that these genes are not
direct targets of atRA mediating OSCC growth suppression. Instead they appear to 
act as downstream effectors of atRA signaling.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20830740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2010 Oct;88(10):863-82. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20712.

Genetic and pathologic aspects of retinoic acid-induced limb malformations in the
mouse.

Lee GS(1), Liao X, Shimizu H, Collins MD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Toxicology Interdepartmental Program, University of California-Los
Angeles, 10833 Le Conte Ave., Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Because all-trans retinoic acid (atRA) is teratogenic in all species tested and
many of the specific defects induced are common across the phylogenetic spectrum,
it would be logical to predict that murine strain differences in teratology to
this agent are minimal. However, for specific defects, strain susceptibilities
are vastly different. Studies with atRA have shown stark differences between
C57BL/6 and SWV mouse strains in susceptibility to postaxial forelimb
ectrodactyly and ectopic hindlimb formation, with the C57 strain being more
susceptible for both defects. Various approaches were used to determine why these
strains differ in susceptibility, but the mechanisms remain unknown. Hindlimb
duplications were hypothesized to be caused by the formation of ectopic posterior
body axes. For forelimb ectrodactyly, a locus on chromosome 11, Rafar, has
linkage to the strain difference, and mRNA localization has shown that specific
genes (Fgf8, Dlx3, Bmp4, and Sp8) in the postaxial preAER (prior to formation of 
the apical ectodermal ridge) of the developing limb bud (the site of the defect) 
were downregulated hours after atRA administration more in the susceptible C57
than in the SWV strain. Because both atRA and divalent cadmium induce postaxial
forelimb ectrodactyly (right-sided predominance) at a high rate in C57BL/6 and
low in the SWV strain, there is debate as to whether they share a common
mechanism. These teratogens cause a greater-than-additive level of forelimb
ectrodactyly when coadministered at low doses, but cadmium does not induce
ectopic hindlimb formation. The hypothesis is that these agents have separate
molecular pathologic pathways that converge to perturb a common anatomic
structure.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20706998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Connect Tissue Res. 2011 Apr;52(2):119-32. doi: 10.3109/03008207.2010.484515.
Epub 2010 Aug 11.

Adipose-derived stem cells and BMP2: part 2. BMP2 may not influence the
osteogenic fate of human adipose-derived stem cells.

Zuk P(1), Chou YF, Mussano F, Benhaim P, Wu BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, University of 
California, Los Angeles, California 90095-1749, USA. pzuk@mednet.ucla.edu

Although recent studies have proposed that human adipose-derived stem cells
(ASCs), together with BMP2, can heal critical-sized bony defects, a companion
study in this issue suggests that ASCs may not respond to BMP2 in vivo. To
examine why this may be occurring. ASCs were treated with BMP2 and the cells' in 
vitro osteogenic capacity assessed along with the canonical BMP2 signaling
pathway. In vitro treatment of ASCs with BMP2 had no consistent and significant
effect on matrix mineralization or their expression of several osteogenic
markers. Consistent and significant changes to Smad1/5/8 phosphorylation levels
were also not observed upon BMP2 induction. The removal of dexamethasone from the
BMP2 induction conditions had no effect on the observed results nor did
stimulating ASCs with BMP2 from an alternate source (INFUSE; Medtronic,
Minneapolis, MN, USA). In addition, no BMP-induced nuclear translocation of
Smad1/Smad4 complexes could be discerned, suggesting that the canonical BMP2
signaling pathway may not be functional in ASCs. Interestingly, three downstream 
BMP2 pathway genes, distal-less3 (dlx3), distal-less5 (dlx5), and osterix, were
not expressed in BMP2-induced ASCs, calling the utility of BMP2 induced in ASCs
into question. The results of this in vitro study were consistent with that of
our companion in vivo study that suggests a lack of effect of BMP2 on the
osteogenic capacity of ASCs. Taken together, the data from both studies suggest
that ASC osteogenic differentiation may not be influenced by BMP2. Consequently, 
combining BMP2 treatment with adult stem cells, like ASCs, may not be a viable
strategy for bony healing.

PMID: 20701465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Placenta. 2010 Aug;31(8):691-7. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2010.05.003. Epub 2010
Jun 12.

Homeobox gene distal-less 3 is expressed in proliferating and differentiating
cells of the human placenta.

Chui A(1), Pathirage NA, Johnson B, Cocquebert M, Fournier T, Evain-Brion D,
Roald B, Manuelpillai U, Brennecke SP, Kalionis B, Murthi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Perinatal Medicine, Pregnancy Research Centre, The Royal Women's
Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

DLX3, a member of the large homeobox gene family of transcription factors, is
necessary for normal placentation. Targeted deletion of dlx3 in mouse resulted in
embryonic death due to placental failure. This study demonstrates the presence of
DLX3 mRNA expression in human first trimester and term placental tissue, cultured
trophoblast-like cell lines and in isolated primary villous and extravillous
trophoblast cells. Using an ovine polyclonal antibody, the spatial distribution
was identified for DLX3 in human placental tissues, trophoblast cell lines and in
freshly isolated primary trophoblast cells. A 50 kDa immunoreactive DLX3 protein 
was detected in the human placenta, in trophoblast cell lines and in primary
trophoblast cells. Nuclear expression for DLX3 was observed in villous
cytotrophoblasts, syncytiotrophoblast and extravillous cytotrophoblast in the
proximal regions of the cytotrophoblast cell columns in first trimester placental
tissues. Immunoreactivity was also detected in few stromal cells and
microvascular endothelial cells surrounding the fetal capillaries. In the first
trimester placental bed, DLX3 expression was predominantly observed in the
cytoplasm of the endovascular and interstitial trophoblasts. We conclude that the
cellular expression of DLX3 was extensive in the human placenta and propose that 
DLX3 may play an important role in normal placental development.

PMID: 20542333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. FASEB J. 2010 Oct;24(10):3869-81. doi: 10.1096/fj.10-160663. Epub 2010 Jun 3.

Micro-RNA-31 controls hair cycle-associated changes in gene expression programs
of the skin and hair follicle.

Mardaryev AN(1), Ahmed MI, Vlahov NV, Fessing MY, Gill JH, Sharov AA, Botchkareva
NV.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Skin Sciences, School of Life Sciences, University of Bradford,
Richmond Rd., Bradford, West Yorkshire BD7 1DP, UK.

The hair follicle is a cyclic biological system that progresses through stages of
growth, regression, and quiescence, which involves dynamic changes in a program
of gene regulation. Micro-RNAs (miRNAs) are critically important for the control 
of gene expression and silencing. Here, we show that global miRNA expression in
the skin markedly changes during distinct stages of the hair cycle in mice.
Furthermore, we show that expression of miR-31 markedly increases during anagen
and decreases during catagen and telogen. Administration of antisense miR-31
inhibitor into mouse skin during the early- and midanagen phases of the hair
cycle results in accelerated anagen development, and altered differentiation of
hair matrix keratinocytes and hair shaft formation. Microarray, qRT-PCR and
Western blot analyses revealed that miR-31 negatively regulates expression of
Fgf10, the components of Wnt and BMP signaling pathways Sclerostin and BAMBI, and
Dlx3 transcription factor, as well as selected keratin genes, both in vitro and
in vivo. Using luciferase reporter assay, we show that Krt16, Krt17, Dlx3, and
Fgf10 serve as direct miR-31 targets. Thus, by targeting a number of growth
regulatory molecules and cytoskeletal proteins, miR-31 is involved in
establishing an optimal balance of gene expression in the hair follicle required 
for its proper growth and hair fiber formation.

PMCID: PMC4048940
PMID: 20522784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Dev Biol. 2010 Aug 15;344(2):682-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.05.499. Epub 2010 
May 25.

Mutant DLX 3 disrupts odontoblast polarization and dentin formation.

Choi SJ(1), Song IS, Feng JQ, Gao T, Haruyama N, Gautam P, Robey PG, Hart TC.

Author information: 
(1)Craniofacial and Skeletal Diseases Branch, National Institute of Dental and
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Tricho-dento-osseous (TDO) syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder
characterized by abnormalities in the thickness and density of bones and teeth. A
4-bp deletion mutation in the Distal-Less 3 (DLX3) gene is etiologic for most
cases of TDO. To investigate the in vivo role of mutant DLX3 (MT-DLX3) on dentin 
development, we generated transgenic (TG) mice expressing MT-DLX3 driven by a
mouse 2.3 Col1A1 promoter. Dentin defects were radiographically evident in all
teeth and the size of the nonmineralized pulp was enlarged in TG mice, consistent
with clinical characteristics in patients with TDO. High-resolution radiography, 
microcomputed tomography, and SEM revealed a reduced zone of mineralized dentin
with anomalies in the number and organization of dentinal tubules in MT-DLX3 TG
mice. Histological and immunohistochemical studies demonstrated that the
decreased dentin was accompanied by altered odontoblast cytology that included
disruption of odontoblast polarization and reduced numbers of odontoblasts. TUNEL
assays indicated enhanced odontoblast apoptosis. Expression levels of the
apoptotic marker caspase-3 were increased in odontoblasts in TG mice as well as
in odontoblastic-like MDPC-23 cells transfected with MT-DLX3 cDNA. Expression of 
Runx2, Wnt 10A, and TBC1D19 colocalized with DLX3 expression in odontoblasts, and
MT-DLX3 significantly reduced expression of all three genes. TBC1D19 functions in
cell polarity and decreased TBC1D19 expression may contribute to the observed
disruption of odontoblast polarity and apoptosis. These data indicate that
MT-DLX3 acts to disrupt odontoblast cytodifferentiation leading to odontoblast
apoptosis, and aberrations of dentin tubule formation and dentin matrix
production, resulting in decreased dentin and taurodontism. In summary, this TG
model demonstrates that MT-DLX3 has differential effects on matrix production and
mineralization in dentin and bone and provides a novel tool for the investigation
of odontoblast biology.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC2945701
PMID: 20510228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Bone. 2010 Jun;46(6):1533-45. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2010.02.024. Epub 2010 Mar 3.

New roles and mechanism of action of BMP4 in postnatal tooth cytodifferentiation.

Gluhak-Heinrich J(1), Guo D, Yang W, Harris MA, Lichtler A, Kream B, Zhang J,
Feng JQ, Smith LC, Dechow P, Harris SE.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 
78229-3900, USA. gluhak@uthscsa.edu

During the phase of overt tooth cytodifferentiation that occurs after birth in
the mouse and using the 3.6Collagen1a-Cre and the BMP4 floxed and BMP4 knockout
mice, the BMP4 gene was deleted in early collagen producing odontoblasts around
postnatal day 1. BMP4 expression was reduced over 90% in alveolar osteoblasts and
odontoblasts. There was decreased rate of predentin to dentin formation and
decreased mature odontoblast differentiation reflected in reduced DMP1 expression
and proper dentinal tubule formation, as well as reduced Collagen type I and
Osteocalcin expression. We observed mutant dysmorphogenic odontoblasts that
failed to properly elongate and differentiate. The consequence of this failed
differentiation process leads to permanent loss of dentin thickness, apparent
enlarged pulp chambers in the molars and reduced bone supporting the tooth
structures in mice as old as 10-12 months. Deletion of the BMP4 gene in
odontoblasts also indirectly disrupted the process of enamel formation that
persisted throughout life. The mechanism for this altered differentiation program
in the absence of the BMP4 gene in odontoblasts is from decreased BMP signaling, 
and decreased expression of three key transcription factors, Dlx3, Dlx5, and
Osterix. BMP signaling, as well as Dlx3 and Amelogenin expression, is also
indirectly reduced in the ameloblasts of the odontoblast BMP4 cKO mice. This
supports a key paracrine or endocrine postnatal role of odontoblast derived BMP4 
on the proper amelogenesis and formation of the enamel.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2875306
PMID: 20206312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2010 Feb;8(2):102-4. doi:
10.1111/j.1610-0387.2009.07125_supp.x.

Uncombable hair and atopic dermatitis in a case of trichodento-osseous syndrome.

Mayer DE(1), Baal C, Litschauer-Poursadrollah M, Hemmer W, Jarisch R.

Author information: 
(1)FAZ - Floridsdorf Allergy Center, Vienna, Austria.

The tricho-dento-osseous syndrome is a rare genetic disorder due to a mutation in
the DLX3 gene on chromosome 17q21. It can affect hair, teeth, bone and nails,
causing phenotypic variability. We report on an 8-year-old girl with
tricho-dento-osseous syndrome, who presented in our allergy center with severe
atopic dermatitis. Additional clinical findings included light, kinky hair
reminiscent of pili trianguli et canaliculi (uncombable hair), enamel hypoplasia 
and enlarged pulp chambers of the molar teeth (taurodontism). A genetic
investigation revealed a de-novo mutation in the DLX3 gene on chromosome 17q21.
Electron microscopic examination of the curly hair showed a flattened hair shaft 
with longitudinal grooves.

PMID: 20151948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2010 May;46(5):416-30. doi:
10.1007/s11626-009-9266-6. Epub 2009 Dec 24.

BMP4 induction of trophoblast from mouse embryonic stem cells in defined culture 
conditions on laminin.

Hayashi Y(1), Furue MK, Tanaka S, Hirose M, Wakisaka N, Danno H, Ohnuma K, Oeda
S, Aihara Y, Shiota K, Ogura A, Ishiura S, Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences (Biology), Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 153-8902, Japan.

Because mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) do not contribute to the formation of 
extraembryonic placenta when they are injected into blastocysts, it is believed
that mESCs do not differentiate into trophoblast whereas human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) can express trophoblast markers when exposed to bone morphogenetic 
protein 4 (BMP4) in vitro. To test whether mESCs have the potential to
differentiate into trophoblast, we assessed the effect of BMP4 on mESCs in a
defined monolayer culture condition. The expression of trophoblast-specific
transcription factors such as Cdx2, Dlx3, Esx1, Gata3, Hand1, Mash2, and Plx1 was
specifically upregulated in the BMP4-treated differentiated cells, and these
cells expressed trophoblast markers. These results suggest that BMP4 treatment in
defined culture conditions enabled mESCs to differentiate into trophoblast. This 
differentiation was inhibited by serum or leukemia inhibitory factor, which are
generally used for mESC culture. In addition, we studied the mechanism underlying
BMP4-directed mESC differentiation into trophoblast. Our results showed that BMP4
activates the Smad pathway in mESCs inducing Cdx2 expression, which plays a
crucial role in trophoblast differentiation, through the binding of Smad protein 
to the Cdx2 genomic enhancer sequence. Our findings imply that there is a common 
molecular mechanism underlying hESC and mESC differentiation into trophoblast.

PMCID: PMC2862943
PMID: 20033790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Feb;30(4):1018-27. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01401-09. Epub 2009 Dec
7.

Selective signaling by Akt2 promotes bone morphogenetic protein 2-mediated
osteoblast differentiation.

Mukherjee A(1), Wilson EM, Rotwein P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Mail Code L224, 3181 S.W. Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR
97239-3098, USA.

Mesenchymal stem cells are essential for repair of bone and other supporting
tissues. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) promote commitment of these
progenitors toward an osteoblast fate via functional interactions with osteogenic
transcription factors, including Dlx3, Dlx5, and Runx2, and also can direct their
differentiation into bone-forming cells. BMP-2-stimulated osteoblast
differentiation additionally requires continual signaling from insulin-like
growth factor (IGF)-activated pathways. Here we identify Akt2 as a critical
mediator of IGF-regulated osteogenesis. Targeted knockdown of Akt2 in mouse
primary bone marrow stromal cells or in a mesenchymal stem cell line, or genetic 
knockout of Akt2, did not interfere with BMP-2-mediated signaling but resulted in
inhibition of osteoblast differentiation at an early step that preceded
production of Runx2. In contrast, Akt1-deficient cells differentiated normally.
Complete biochemical and morphological osteoblast differentiation was restored in
cells lacking Akt2 by adenoviral delivery of Runx2 or by a recombinant lentivirus
encoding wild-type Akt2. In contrast, lentiviral Akt1 was ineffective. Taken
together, these observations define a specific role for Akt2 as a gatekeeper of
osteogenic differentiation through regulation of Runx2 gene expression and
indicate that the closely related Akt1 and Akt2 exert distinct effects on the
differentiation of mesenchymal precursors.

PMCID: PMC2815574
PMID: 19995912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Arch Oral Biol. 2009 Sep;54(9):830-4. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2009.06.005.
Epub 2009 Jul 15.

Thickness and microhardness of deciduous tooth enamel with known DLX3 mutation.

Hyun HK(1), Kim JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Dental Research Institute and BK21 Program,
School of Dentistry, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea.

AIM: To investigate the thickness and hardness of teeth affected by a 2-bp
deletion (c.561_562delCT) in the DLX3 gene.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Extracted maxillary deciduous second molar was collected
from the affected individual at age 12 years 7 months. Samples were sectioned
buccolingually after embedding in epoxy resin. We measured the enamel thickness
and microhardness and performed an elemental analysis using an electron probe
microanalyser.
RESULTS: On average, the hardness of the enamel with a 2-bp deletion in DLX3 was 
about 53% of normal enamel hardness. The mutant enamel thickness was about half
of the thickness of the normal control. The calcium level in the enamel with the 
2-bp deletion was slightly decreased, while the magnesium level was slightly
increased, in comparison to levels measured for normal teeth.
CONCLUSION: This study shows that enamel affected by a 2-bp deletion in DLX3 has 
reduced thickness as well as diminished microhardness. These data may explain the
severe attrition and interdental spacing observed in affected individuals.

PMID: 19608154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Aug 14;386(1):89-95. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.05.144. Epub 2009 Jun 6.

Immortalization and characterization of mouse floxed Bmp2/4 osteoblasts.

Wu LA(1), Yuan G, Yang G, Ortiz-Gonzalez I, Yang W, Cui Y, MacDougall M, Donly
KJ, Harris S, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, The University of Texas Health Science
Center at San Antonio, TX 78229-3900, USA.

Generation of a floxed Bmp2/4 osteoblast cell line is a valuable tool for
studying the modulatory effects of Bmp2 and Bmp4 on osteoblast differentiation as
well as relevant molecular events. In this study, primary floxed Bmp2/4 mouse
osteoblasts were cultured and transfected with simian virus 40 large T-antigen.
Transfection was verified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and
immunohistochemistry. To examine the characteristics of the transfected cells,
morphology, proliferation and mineralization were analyzed, expression of
cell-specific genes including Runx2, ATF4, Dlx3, Osx, dentin matrix protein 1,
bone sialoprotein, osteopontin, osteocalcin, osteonectin and collagen type I was 
detected. These results show that transfected floxed Bmp2/4 osteoblasts bypassed 
senescence with a higher proliferation rate, but retain the genotypic and
phenotypic characteristics similar to the primary cells. Thus, we for the first
time demonstrate the establishment of an immortalized mouse floxed Bmp2/4
osteoblast cell line.

PMCID: PMC2745638
PMID: 19501574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Anim Genet. 2009 Dec;40(6):804-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2052.2009.01919.x. Epub
2009 May 16.

Fine mapping of the FecL locus influencing prolificacy in Lacaune sheep.

Drouilhet L(1), Lecerf F, Bodin L, Fabre S, Mulsant P.

Author information: 
(1)UMR INRA-ENVT, Laboratoire de Génétique Cellulaire, BP 52627, 31326
Castanet-Tolosan, France. laurence.drouilhet@toulouse.inra.fr

In the Lacaune sheep population, two major loci influencing ovulation rate are
segregating: FecX and FecL. The FecX(L) mutation is a non-conservative
substitution (p.Cys53Tyr) in BMP15 that prevents the processing of the protein.
Using a statistical approach, FecL has been shown to be an autosomal major gene. 
A full genome scan localized the FecL locus on sheep chromosome 11. Fine mapping 
reduced the interval containing FecL to markers BM17132 and FAM117A,
corresponding to a synteny block of 1.1 megabases on human chromosome 17, which
encompasses 20 genes. The expression of 16 genes from this interval was observed 
in tissues of the reproductive axis, but expression was not affected in
homozygous FecL(L) females. In this interval, a unique haplotype was associated
with the FecL(L) mutation. This particular haplotype could be predicted by the
DLX3:c.*803A>G SNP in the 3' UTR sequence of the DLX3 gene. This SNP provided
accurate classification of animals (99.5%) as carriers or non-carriers of the
mutation and therefore maybe useful in marker assisted selection. A synergistic
action of FecL(L) and FecX(L) mutations on both ovulation rate and litter size
was demonstrated. Until now, all the Fec genes identified in sheep belong to the 
bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) system. Based on the human orthologous region,
none of the 20 genes in the FecL region corresponds to known molecules in the BMP
system. The identification of the FecL(L) mutation could lead to the discovery of
a new pathway involved in the regulation of ovulation rate.

PMID: 19466934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cell Cycle. 2009 Apr 15;8(8):1113. Epub 2009 Apr 15.

A feedback regulatory loop between p63 and Dlx3: implications for epidermal
differentiation.

Moretti F, Costanzo A.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2009 Apr 15;8(8):1185-95.

PMID: 19342886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Dent Res. 2009 Mar;88(3):266-9. doi: 10.1177/0022034509333180.

Candidate gene strategy reveals ENAM mutations.

Kang HY(1), Seymen F, Lee SK, Yildirim M, Tuna EB, Patir A, Lee KE, Kim JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Dental Research Institute and
BK21 Program, School of Dentistry, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

Amelogenesis imperfecta (AI) is a genetically and phenotypically heterogeneous
genetic disorder affecting tooth enamel without other non-oral syndromic
conditions. Based on a review of the literature, the authors constructed a
candidate-gene-based mutational analysis strategy. To test the strategy, they
identified two Turkish families with hypoplastic enamel without any other
non-oral syndromic phenotype. The authors analyzed all exons and exon/intron
boundaries of the enamelin (ENAM) gene for family 1 and the DLX3 and ENAM genes
for family 2, to identify the underlying genetic etiology. The analysis revealed 
2 ENAM mutations (autosomal-dominant g.14917delT and autosomal-recessive
g.13185-13186insAG mutations). A single T deletion in exon 10 is a novel
deletional mutation (g.14917delT, c.2991delT), which is predicted to result in a 
frameshift with a premature termination codon (p.L998fsX1062). This result
supports the use of a candidate-gene-based strategy to study the genetic basis
for AI.

PMID: 19329462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cell Cycle. 2009 Apr 15;8(8):1185-95. Epub 2009 Apr 16.

Homeodomain protein Dlx3 induces phosphorylation-dependent p63 degradation.

Di Costanzo A(1), Festa L, Duverger O, Vivo M, Guerrini L, La Mantia G, Morasso
MI, Calabrò V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Molecular Biology, University of Naples, Naples, 
Italy.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2009 Apr 15;8(8):1113.

The epidermis is a stratified epithelium which develops depending on the
transcription factor p63, a member of the p53 family of transcription factors.
p63 is strongly expressed in the innermost basal layer where highly proliferative
epithelial cells reside. p63 functions as a molecular switch that initiates
epithelial stratification or cell fate determination while regulating
proliferation and differentiation of developmentally mature keratinocytes. p63
acts upstream of Dlx3 homeobox gene in a transcriptional regulatory pathway
relevant to ectodermal dysplasia. Here we show that Dlx3 triggers p63 protein
degradation by a proteasome-dependent pathway. Mutant DeltaNp63alpha in which
Threonine397 and Serine383 were replaced with Alanine as well as C-terminal
truncated versions of DeltaNp63alpha are resistant to Dlx3-mediated degradation. 
Transient expression of Dlx3 is associated with Raf1 phosphorylation. Dlx3 is
unable to promote p63 degradation in Raf1 depleted MEF cells or upon
pharmacological knockdown of Raf1. Our data support a previously unrecognized
role for Dlx3 in posttranslational regulation of DeltaNp63alpha protein level, a 
mechanism that may contribute to reduce the abundance of DeltaNp63alpha during
differentiation of stratified epithelia.

PMCID: PMC2803028
PMID: 19282665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2009 Feb;61(2):95-106. doi:
10.1111/j.1600-0897.2008.00673.x.

Control of interferon-tau expression during early pregnancy in ruminants.

Ealy AD(1), Yang QE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences; University of Florida, Gainesville, FL
32611-0910, USA. ealy@ufl.edu

PROBLEM: A type I interferon (IFN), termed IFN-tau (tau), is responsible for the 
establishment and maintenance of early pregnancy in cattle and sheep. The control
of IFNtau gene (IFNT) expression is not completely understood.
METHOD OF STUDY: This article will provide an overview of recent progress made in
understanding the dynamic expression pattern of IFNT during pre- and
peri-attachment conceptus development.
RESULTS: Several ubiquitous transcriptional regulators (Ets2 and AP1) and at
least two trophectoderm factors (Cdx2 and Dlx3) control IFNT transcription during
early pregnancy. Co-activators (CBP/p300) are also involved in this process. At
least two uterine-derived factors (GM-CSF and FGF2) stimulate IFN-tau production 
in bovine trophectoderm, and multiple signaling pathways are functionally linked 
with IFNT expression.
CONCLUSION: Although understanding the regulation of IFNT expression is far from 
complete, considerable progress has been made in uncovering how uterine-derived
factors and key placental-specific transcriptional regulators control IFNT
expression.

PMID: 19143673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Development. 2008 Dec;135(24):4165-77. doi: 10.1242/dev.026633.

Competence, specification and commitment to an olfactory placode fate.

Bhattacharyya S(1), Bronner-Fraser M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, 139-74, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 
91125, USA.

The nasal placode shares a common origin with other sensory placodes within a
pre-placodal domain at the cranial neural plate border. However, little is known 
about early events in nasal placode development as it segregates from prospective
lens, neural tube and epidermis. Here, Dlx3, Dlx5, Pax6 and the pan-neuronal
marker Hu serve as molecular labels to follow the maturation of olfactory
precursors over time. When competence to form olfactory placode was tested by
grafting ectoderm from different axial levels to the anterior neural fold, we
found that competence is initially broad for head, but not trunk, ectoderm and
declines rapidly with time. Isolated olfactory precursors are specified by HH10, 
concomitant with their complete segregation from other placodal, epidermal and
neural progenitors. Heterotopic transplantation of olfactory progenitors reveals 
they are capable of autonomous differentiation only 12 hours later, shortly
before overt placode invagination at HH14. Taken together, these results show
that olfactory placode development is a step-wise process whereby signals from
adjacent tissues specify competent ectoderm at or before HH10, followed by
gradual commitment just prior to morphological differentiation.

PMID: 19029046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Dev Biol. 2009 Jan 1;325(1):129-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.10.014. Epub 2008
Oct 25.

In vivo impact of a 4 bp deletion mutation in the DLX3 gene on bone development.

Choi SJ(1), Roodman GD, Feng JQ, Song IS, Amin K, Hart PS, Wright JT, Haruyama N,
Hart TC.

Author information: 
(1)Human Craniofacial Genetics Section, Craniofacial and Skeletal Diseases
Branch, National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20854, USA.

Distal-less 3 (DLX3) gene mutations are etiologic for Tricho-Dento-Osseous
syndrome. To investigate the in vivo impact of mutant DLX3 on bone development,
we established transgenic (TG) mice expressing the c.571_574delGGGG DLX-3 gene
mutation (MT-DLX3) driven by a mouse 2.3 Col1A1 promoter. Microcomputed
tomographic analyses demonstrated markedly increased trabecular bone volume and
bone mineral density in femora from TG mice. In ex vivo experiments, TG mice
showed enhanced differentiation of bone marrow stromal cells to osteoblasts and
increased expression levels of bone formation markers. However, TG mice did not
show enhanced dynamic bone formation rates in in vivo fluorochrome double
labeling experiments. Osteoclastic differentiation capacities of bone marrow
monocytes were reduced in TG mice in the presence of osteoclastogenic factors and
the numbers of TRAP(+) osteoclasts on distal metaphyseal trabecular bone surfaces
were significantly decreased. TRACP 5b and CTX serum levels were significantly
decreased in TG mice, while IFN-gamma levels were significantly increased. These 
data demonstrate that increased levels of IFN-gamma decrease osteoclast bone
resorption activities, contributing to the enhanced trabecular bone volume and
mineral density in these TG mice. These data suggest a novel role for this DLX-3 
mutation in osteoclast differentiation and bone resorption.

PMCID: PMC4617241
PMID: 18996110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Biol Reprod. 2009 Feb;80(2):227-34. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.070920. Epub 2008
Oct 29.

Glial cells missing homologue 1 is induced in differentiating equine chorionic
girdle trophoblast cells.

de Mestre AM(1), Miller D, Roberson MS, Liford J, Chizmar LC, McLaughlin KE,
Antczak DF.

Author information: 
(1)Baker Institute for Animal Health and Department of Biomedical Sciences,
College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA. 
ademestre@rvc.ac.uk

The objective of this study was to identify transcription factors associated with
differentiation of the chorionic girdle, the invasive form of equine trophoblast.
The expression patterns of five transcription factors were determined on a panel 
of conceptus tissues from early horse pregnancy. Tissues from Days 15 through 46 
were tested. Eomesodermin (EOMES), glial cells missing homologue 1 (GCM1), heart 
and neural crest derivatives expressed transcript 1 (HAND1), caudal type homeobox
2 (CDX2), and distal-less homeobox 3 (DLX3) were detected in horse trophoblast,
but the expression patterns for these genes varied. EOMES had the most restricted
distribution, while DLX3 CDX2, and HAND1 were widely expressed. GCM1 seemed to
increase in the developing chorionic girdle, and this was confirmed by
quantitative RT-PCR assays. GCM1 expression preceded a striking increase in
expression of equine chorionic gonadotropin beta (CGB) in the chorionic girdle,
and binding sites for GCM1 were discovered in the promoter region of the CGB
gene. GCM1, CGB, and CGA mRNA were expressed preferentially in binucleate cells
as opposed to uninucleate cells of the chorionic girdle. Based on these findings,
it is likely that GCM1 has a role in differentiation and function of the invasive
trophoblast of the equine chorionic girdle and endometrial cups. The equine
binucleate chorionic girdle (CG) secreting trophoblast shares molecular,
morphological, and functional characteristics with human syncytiotrophoblast and 
represents a model for studies of human placental function.

PMCID: PMC2804814
PMID: 18971425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008 Dec;28(12):2266-74. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.176958. Epub 2008 Oct 23.

High-density lipoproteins affect endothelial BMP-signaling by modulating
expression of the activin-like kinase receptor 1 and 2.

Yao Y(1), Shao ES, Jumabay M, Shahbazian A, Ji S, Boström KI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, 
CA 90095-1679, USA.

OBJECTIVE: High-density lipoproteins (HDL) have antiinflammatory effects on the
vascular endothelium. Because bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are known to be 
inflammatory mediators, we examined the effect of HDL on BMP signaling.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Increasing concentrations of HDL progressively enhanced
expression of the activin-like kinase receptor (ALK)1 and ALK2 in human aortic
endothelial cells as determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction and
immunoblotting. Induction of ALK1 was a result of enhanced ALK2 expression as
determined by siRNA interference, and was associated with increased levels of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and matrix Gla protein (MGP). The
HDL-induction of ALK2 was dependent on BMP-signaling, and affected coregulation
of the ALK2 gene by the homeodomain proteins MSX2, DLX3, and DLX5, as determined 
by reporter gene assays, siRNA interference, and chromatin immunoprecipitation.
Apolipoprotein A-I transgenic mice, known to have high HDL and inhibition of
atherogenesis, exhibited similar changes in aortic gene expression as seen in
endothelial cells treated with HDL in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that HDL benefits the arterial wall by allowing for
enhanced ALK1 and ALK2 signaling, resulting in an increase of VEGF and MGP,
essential for endothelial cell survival and prevention of vascular calcification,
respectively.

PMCID: PMC2709402
PMID: 18948634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Histochem Cytochem. 2009 Jan;57(1):69-78. doi: 10.1369/jhc.2008.951707. Epub
2008 Oct 14.

Msx and dlx homeogene expression in epithelial odontogenic tumors.

Ruhin-Poncet B(1), Ghoul-Mazgar S, Hotton D, Capron F, Jaafoura MH, Goubin G,
Berdal A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Orofacial Biology and Pathology-Centre de Recherche des
Cordeliers, INSERM, UMR S 872, Team 5, Pierre and Marie Curie University, Paris, 
France.

Epithelial odontogenic tumors are rare jaw pathologies that raise clinical
diagnosis and prognosis dilemmas notably between ameloblastomas and clear cell
odontogenic carcinomas (CCOCs). In line with previous studies, the molecular
determinants of tooth development-amelogenin, Msx1, Msx2, Dlx2, Dlx3, Bmp2, and
Bmp4-were analyzed by RT-PCR, ISH, and immunolabeling in 12 recurrent
ameloblastomas and in one case of CCOC. Although Msx1 expression imitates normal 
cell differentiation in these tumors, other genes showed a distinct pattern
depending on the type of tumor and the tissue involved. In benign ameloblastomas,
ISH localized Dlx3 transcripts and inconstantly detected Msx2 transcripts in
epithelial cells. In the CCOC, ISH established a lack of both Dlx3 and Msx2
transcripts but allowed identification of the antisense transcript of Msx1, which
imitates the same scheme of distribution between mesenchyme and epithelium as in 
the cup stage of tooth development. Furthermore, while exploring the expression
pattern of signal molecules by RT-PCR, Bmp2 was shown to be completely
inactivated in the CCOC and irregularly noticeable in ameloblastomas. Bmp4 was
always expressed in all the tumors. Based on the established roles of Msx and Dlx
transcription factors in dental cell fates, these data suggest that their altered
expression is a proposed trail to explain the genesis and/or the progression of
odontogenic tumors.

PMCID: PMC2605714
PMID: 18854600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Cells Tissues Organs. 2009;189(1-4):122-5. doi: 10.1159/000151453. Epub 2008 Aug 
14.

Molecular switches involving homeodomain proteins, HOXA10 and RUNX2 regulate
osteoblastogenesis.

Hassan MQ(1), Saini S, Gordon JA, van Wijnen AJ, Montecino M, Stein JL, Stein GS,
Lian JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Mass. 01655, USA.

The osteoinductive BMP2 signal facilitates commitment to the osteoblast phenotype
by inducing several classes of early response genes. Among these are bone-related
HOX factors, homeodomain, RUNX and OSTERIX proteins. Here we demonstrate
molecular events among BMP2-induced transcription factors that constitute a
network of molecular switches on promoters of bone-related genes to coordinate
their temporal expression during cellular differentiation. Our studies provide
evidence for (1) selective association of HOXA10, MSX2, DLX3 and DLX5 homeodomain
transcription factors on Runx2 and OC genes at stages of osteoblast maturation as
well as (2) participation of these factors with RUNX2 in chromatin remodeling of 
bone-specific genes for repression, activation and attenuation of transcription. 
These findings reveal the requirement for multiple levels of control for the
appropriate timing of osteoblast-related gene expression.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2665705
PMID: 18701816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Development. 2008 Sep;135(18):3149-59. doi: 10.1242/dev.022202. Epub 2008 Aug 6.

Dlx3 is a crucial regulator of hair follicle differentiation and cycling.

Hwang J(1), Mehrani T, Millar SE, Morasso MI.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Skin Biology Unit, NIAMS, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Dlx homeobox transcription factors regulate epidermal, neural and osteogenic
cellular differentiation. Here, we demonstrate the central role of Dlx3 as a
crucial transcriptional regulator of hair formation and regeneration. The
selective ablation of Dlx3 in the epidermis results in complete alopecia owing to
failure of the hair shaft and inner root sheath to form, which is caused by the
abnormal differentiation of the cortex. Significantly, we elucidate the
regulatory cascade that positions Dlx3 downstream of Wnt signaling and as an
upstream regulator of other transcription factors that regulate hair follicle
differentiation, such as Hoxc13 and Gata3. Colocalization of phospho-Smad1/5/8
and Dlx3 is consistent with a regulatory role for BMP signaling to Dlx3 during
hair morphogenesis. Importantly, mutant catagen follicles undergo delayed
regression and display persistent proliferation. Moreover, ablation of Dlx3
expression in the telogen bulge stem cells is associated with a loss of BMP
signaling, precluding re-initiation of the hair follicle growth cycle. Taken
together with hair follicle abnormalities in humans with Tricho-Dento-Osseous
(TDO) syndrome, an autosomal dominant ectodermal dysplasia linked to mutations in
the DLX3 gene, our results establish that Dlx3 is essential for hair
morphogenesis, differentiation and cycling programs.

PMCID: PMC2707782
PMID: 18684741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Aug 5;105(31):10877-82. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0805205105. Epub 2008 Jul 29.

Distal-less homeobox transcription factors regulate development and maturation of
natural killer cells.

Sunwoo JB(1), Kim S, Yang L, Naik T, Higuchi DA, Rubenstein JL, Yokoyama WM.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Division, Department of Medicine, and Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Natural killer (NK) cells constitute a subpopulation of lymphocytes that develop 
from precursors in the bone marrow (BM), but the transcriptional regulation of
their development and maturation is only beginning to be understood, in part due 
to their relatively rare abundance, especially of developmental subsets. Using a 
mouse model in which NK cells are arrested at an immature stage of development,
and a gene expression profiling approach, we uncovered transient normal NK cell
expression of a homeobox transcription factor (TF) family, called Distal-less
(Dlx), which had been primarily implicated in murine CNS, craniofacial, limb, and
skin development. Our studies demonstrate that Dlx1, Dlx2, and Dlx3 are
transiently expressed in immature Mac-1(lo) NK cells within the BM, with Dlx3
being the predominantly expressed member. These genes are expressed in a
temporally regulated pattern with overlapping waves of expression, and they
display functional redundancy. Expression is extinguished in fully mature splenic
NK cells, and persistent expression of Dlx genes leads to functionally immature
NK cells arrested at the Mac-1(lo) stage. Whereas conventional splenic NK cells
develop but are arrested at an immature stage, there appears to be a complete
failure to develop CD127(+) thymic NK cells when Dlx genes are persistently
expressed. We also observed that T and B cells fail to develop in the context of 
persistent Dlx1 expression. Thus, these studies indicate that Dlx TFs play a
functional role in lymphocyte development.

PMCID: PMC2504821
PMID: 18664585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Placenta. 2008 Jul;29(7):624-30. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2008.04.006. Epub 2008
Jun 2.

Novel homeobox genes are differentially expressed in placental microvascular
endothelial cells compared with macrovascular cells.

Murthi P(1), Hiden U, Rajaraman G, Liu H, Borg AJ, Coombes F, Desoye G, Brennecke
SP, Kalionis B.

Author information: 
(1)Pregnancy Research Centre, Department of Perinatal Medicine, The Royal Women's
Hospital, Carlton, Victoria, Australia. padma@unimelb.edu.au

Angiogenesis is fundamental to normal placental development and aberrant
angiogenesis contributes substantially to placental pathologies. The complex
process of angiogenesis is regulated by transcription factors leading to the
formation of endothelial cells that line the microvasculature. Homeobox genes are
important transcription factors that regulate vascular development in embryonic
and adult tissues. We have recently shown that placental homeobox genes HLX,
DLX3, DLX4, MSX2 and GAX are expressed in placental endothelial cells. Hence, the
novel homeobox genes TLX1, TLX2, TGIF, HEX, PHOX1, MEIS2, HOXB7, and LIM6 were
detected that have not been reported in endothelial cells previously.
Importantly, these homeobox genes have not been previously reported in placental 
endothelial cells and, with the exception of HEX, PHOX1 and HOXB7, have not been 
described in any other endothelial cell type. Reverse transcriptase PCR was
performed on cDNA from freshly isolated placental microvascular endothelial cells
(PLEC), and the human placental microvascular endothelial cell line HPEC. cDNAs
prepared from control term placentae, human microvascular endothelial cells
(HMVEC) and human umbilical vein macrovascular endothelial cells (HUVEC) were
used as controls. PCR analyses showed that all novel homeobox genes tested were
expressed by all endothelial cells types. Furthermore, real-time PCR analyses
revealed that homeobox genes TLX1, TLX2 and PHOX1 relative mRNA expression levels
were significantly decreased in HUVEC compared with microvascular endothelial
cells, while the relative mRNA expression levels of MEIS2 and TGIF were
significantly increased in macrovascular cells compared with microvascular
endothelial cells. Thus we have identified novel homeobox genes in microvascular 
endothelial cells and have shown that homeobox genes are differentially expressed
between micro- and macrovascular endothelial cells.

PMID: 18514308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jul 18;283(29):20198-208. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709562200. Epub
2008 May 19.

Molecular consequences of a frameshifted DLX3 mutant leading to
Tricho-Dento-Osseous syndrome.

Duverger O(1), Lee D, Hassan MQ, Chen SX, Jaisser F, Lian JB, Morasso MI.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Skin Biology Unit, NIAMS, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The homeodomain protein Distal-less-3 (Dlx3) plays a crucial role during
embryonic development. This transcription factor is known to be essential for
placental formation and to be involved in skin and skeletal organogenesis. In
humans, a frameshift mutation in the coding sequence of the DLX3 gene results in 
an ectodermal dysplasia called Tricho-Dento-Osseous syndrome (TDO). The main
features of this autosomal dominant disorder are defects in hair, teeth, and
bone. To investigate the functional alterations caused by the mutated DLX3(TDO)
isoform ex vivo, we used tetracycline-inducible osteoblastic and keratinocyte
cell lines and calvarial derived osteoblasts in which the expression of DLX3(WT) 
and/or DLX3(TDO) could be regulated and monitored. Immunocytochemical analysis
revealed that both DLX3(WT) and DLX3(TDO) recombinant proteins are targeted to
the nucleus. However, as demonstrated by electrophoresis mobility shift assay,
DLX3(TDO) is not able to bind to the canonical Dlx3 binding site. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that the frameshifted C-terminal domain in DLX3(TDO) is accountable
for the loss of DNA binding activity because the C-terminal domain in DLX3(WT) is
not required for DNA binding activity. Although DLX3(TDO) alone cannot bind to a 
Dlx3 responsive element, when DLX3(WT) and DLX3(TDO) are co-expressed they form a
complex that can bind DNA. Concomitant with the inability to bind DNA, DLX3(TDO) 
has a defective transcriptional activity. Moreover, the transcriptional activity 
of DLX3(WT) is significantly reduced in the presence of the mutated isoform,
indicating that DLX3(TDO) has a dominant negative effect on DLX3(WT)
transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC2459267
PMID: 18492670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Endocrinology. 2008 Jul;149(7):3643-55. doi: 10.1210/en.2007-1100. Epub 2008 Apr 
10.

Glucocorticoids induce human glycoprotein hormone alpha-subunit gene expression
in the gonadotrope.

Sasson R(1), Luu SH, Thackray VG, Mellon PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, University of California-San Diego, 9500 
Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0674, USA.

The human glycoprotein hormone alpha-subunit (alphaGSU) gene is transcriptionally
regulated by glucocorticoids in a cell type-specific fashion. In direct contrast 
to repression of alphaGSU by glucocorticoids in placenta, glucocorticoid receptor
(GR) modulation in the pituitary is little understood. We show that
glucocorticoids stimulate the alphaGSU promoter in immortalized pituitary
gonadotrope-derived LbetaT2 cells, whereas estrogens, androgens, and progestins
have no significant effect. Moreover, GR acts in a dose-dependent manner at
physiological concentrations of glucocorticoids. Transient transfection of GR
with dexamethasone (Dex) treatment further stimulates the alphaGSU promoter, but 
this induction is severely diminished using a receptor mutated in the DNA-binding
domain. Truncation and cis mutations demonstrate that glucocorticoid response
element 2 (GRE2) and cAMP-response element 2 (CRE2) within -168 bp of the human
alphaGSU promoter are critical for induction. Moreover, dominant-negative
CRE-binding protein markedly inhibits basal but also Dex induction of alphaGSU
promoter activity. Additionally, GR specifically binds to GRE2 in the human
alphaGSU promoter in vitro and to the 5' region of the endogenous mouse alphaGSU 
gene in vivo. Furthermore, overexpression of the homeobox factor, Distal-less 3
that regulates this gene in placental cells through a site partially overlapping 
GRE2, blocks Dex induction of alphaGSU in gonadotrope cells, indicating that
placenta-specific expression of Dlx3 may interfere with GR, resulting in
repression in placental cells vs. induction in gonadotrope cells. These results
demonstrate the stimulatory role played by glucocorticoids in alphaGSU gene
expression in the pituitary gonadotrope, in contrast to repression in placental
cells, and highlight the tissue-specific nature of steroid hormone action.

PMCID: PMC2453092
PMID: 18403486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Cell Physiol. 2008 Sep;216(3):688-97. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21448.

Physiological implications of DLX homeoproteins in enamel formation.

Lézot F(1), Thomas B, Greene SR, Hotton D, Yuan ZA, Castaneda B, Bolaños A, Depew
M, Sharpe P, Gibson CW, Berdal A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR 872, Paris, F-75006 France. frederic.lezot@crc.jussieu.fr

Tooth development is a complex process including successive stages of initiation,
morphogenesis, and histogenesis. The role of the Dlx family of homeobox genes
during the early stages of tooth development has been widely analyzed, while
little data has been reported on their role in dental histogenesis. The
expression pattern of Dlx2 has been described in the mouse incisor; an inverse
linear relationship exists between the level of Dlx2 expression and enamel
thickness, suggesting a role for Dlx2 in regulation of ameloblast differentiation
and activity. In vitro data have revealed that DLX homeoproteins are able to
regulate the expression of matrix proteins such as osteocalcin. The aim of the
present study was to analyze the expression and function of Dlx genes during
amelogenesis. Analysis of Dlx2/LacZ transgenic reporter mice, Dlx2 and Dlx1/Dlx2 
null mutant mice, identified spatial variations in Dlx2 expression within molar
tooth germs and suggests a role for Dlx2 in the organization of preameloblastic
cells as a palisade in the labial region of molars. Later, during the secretory
and maturation stages of amelogenesis, the expression pattern in molars was found
to be similar to that described in incisors. The expression patterns of the other
Dlx genes were examined in incisors and compared to Dlx2. Within the ameloblasts 
Dlx3 and Dlx6 are expressed constantly throughout presecretory, secretory, and
maturation stages; during the secretory phase when Dlx2 is transitorily switched 
off, Dlx1 expression is upregulated. These data suggest a role for DLX
homeoproteins in the morphological control of enamel. Sequence analysis of the
amelogenin gene promoter revealed five potential responsive elements for DLX
proteins that are shown to be functional for DLX2. Regulation of amelogenin in
ameloblasts may be one method by which DLX homeoproteins may control enamel
formation. To conclude, this study establishes supplementary functions of Dlx
family members during tooth development: the participation in establishment of
dental epithelial functional organization and the control of enamel morphogenesis
via regulation of amelogenin expression.

PMID: 18366088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Dent Res. 2008 Apr;87(4):354-7.

DLX3 mutation in a new family and its phenotypic variations.

Lee SK(1), Lee ZH, Lee SJ, Ahn BD, Kim YJ, Lee SH, Kim JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology & Dental Research Institute,
School of Dentistry, Seoul National University, 275-1 Yongon-dong, Chongno-gu,
Seoul 110-768, Korea.

Tricho-dento-osseous syndrome (TDO) is an autosomal-dominant disease
characterized by curly hair at birth, enamel hypoplasia, taurodontism, and a
thick cortical bone. A common DLX3 gene mutation (c.571_574delGGGG) has been
identified in multiple families with variable clinical phenotypes. Recently,
another DLX3 gene mutation (c.561_562delCT) was reported to cause amelogenesis
imperfecta with taurodontism (AIHHT). We identified a Korean family with
overlapping phenotypes of TDO and AIHHT. We performed mutational analysis to
discover its genetic etiology. The identified mutation was c.561_562delCT
mutation in the DLX3 gene. The enamel was hypomature and hypoplastic. The
characteristic taurodontic features were not identified. Increased bone density
or thickness could not be revealed by cephalometric, hand-wrist, and panoramic
radiographs. Affected individuals reported that their nails were brittle, and
they had curly hair at birth. This study clearly showed that the c.561_562delCT
mutation had not only enamel defects, but also other clinical phenotypes
resembling those of TDO syndrome.

PMID: 18362318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Biol Reprod. 2008 Jul;79(1):115-24. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.107.066647. Epub 2008
Mar 5.

The role of homeobox protein distal-less 3 and its interaction with ETS2 in
regulating bovine interferon-tau gene expression-synergistic transcriptional
activation with ETS2.

Ezashi T(1), Das P, Gupta R, Walker A, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri
65211, USA. ezashit@missouri.edu

Distal-less 3 (DLX3), a homeodomain transcription factor required for placental
development in the mouse, modestly transactivates hCG-alpha subunit gene (hCGA)
expression in human choriocarcinoma cells. Because hCG and interferon-tau (IFNT) 
are expressed in trophectoderm of primates and ruminants, respectively, we have
tested the hypothesis that DLX3 regulates the genes for IFNT (IFNT). A bovine
IFNT1 promoter (-457 to +66), linked to a luciferase (luc) reporter, was
transactivated approximately 20-fold by overexpressing DLX3 in human JAr cells.
Elimination of a potential DLX3-binding site (-54 GATAATGAG -46) by either
truncation or mutagenesis abolished this effect. A sequence (-59 to -44)
encompassing this site bound DLX3 specifically. Coexpression of DLX3 and ETS2,
which is known to be a key regulator of IFNT expression, increased reporter
activity by more than 250-fold, whereas deletion of the established ETS2 site
(-79 to -70) eliminated the ability of DLX3 to transactivate the gene.
Conversely, mutation of the DLX3 site significantly reduced the transactivational
effects of ETS2. Both DLX3 and ETS2 are coexpressed in JAr cells and in an
IFNT-producing, bovine trophoblast cell line, CT-1. The two can be
immunoprecipitated together as a complex from CT-1 cells, and RNAi-mediated,
partial knockdown of DLX3 expression reduced the production of IFNT by
approximately 50+. Together, these results suggest that DLX3 has a central role
in controlling IFNT gene expression by associating with ETS2 on the IFNT
promoter.

PMID: 18322277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Dev Biol. 2008 Apr 15;316(2):458-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.01.001. Epub 2008 
Jan 16.

Expression and function of Dlx genes in the osteoblast lineage.

Li H(1), Marijanovic I, Kronenberg MS, Erceg I, Stover ML, Velonis D, Mina M,
Heinrich JG, Harris SE, Upholt WB, Kalajzic I, Lichtler AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, 263 Farmington Avenue, CT 06030, USA.

Our laboratory and others have shown that overexpression of Dlx5 stimulates
osteoblast differentiation. Dlx5(-/-)/Dlx6(-/-) mice have more severe
craniofacial and limb defects than Dlx5(-/-), some of which are potentially due
to defects in osteoblast maturation. We wished to investigate the degree to which
other Dlx genes compensate for the lack of Dlx5, thus allowing normal development
of the majority of skeletal elements in Dlx5(-/-) mice. Dlx gene expression in
cells from different stages of the osteoblast lineage isolated by FACS sorting
showed that Dlx2, Dlx5 and Dlx6 are expressed most strongly in less mature
osteoblasts, whereas Dlx3 is very highly expressed in differentiated osteoblasts 
and osteocytes. In situ hybridization and Northern blot analysis demonstrated the
presence of endogenous Dlx3 mRNA within osteoblasts and osteocytes. Dlx3 strongly
upregulates osteoblastic markers with a potency comparable to Dlx5. Cloned chick 
or mouse Dlx6 showed stimulatory effects on osteoblast differentiation. Our
results suggest that Dlx2 and Dlx6 have the potential to stimulate osteoblastic
differentiation and may compensate for the absence of Dlx5 to produce relatively 
normal osteoblastic differentiation in Dlx5 knockout mice, while Dlx3 may play a 
distinct role in late stage osteoblast differentiation and osteocyte function.

PMCID: PMC2679944
PMID: 18280462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Feb 1;146A(3):343-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32132.

DLX3 c.561_562delCT mutation causes attenuated phenotype of tricho-dento-osseous 
syndrome.

Wright JT(1), Hong SP, Simmons D, Daly B, Uebelhart D, Luder HU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, The University of North, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina 27599, USA.Tim_Wright@Dentistry.unc.edu

The distal-less homeobox gene DLX3 is expressed in a variety of tissues including
placenta, skin, hair, teeth, and bone. Mutation of DLX3 (c.571_574delGGGG) causes
the tricho-dento-osseous syndrome (TDO), characterized by abnormal hair, teeth,
and bone. Evaluation of a kindred segregating the DLX3 c.561_562delCT mutation
revealed distinct changes in the hair, teeth, and bones as has been observed with
the DLX3 c.571_574delGGGG mutation. Previously, the DLX3 c.561_562delCT mutation 
was associated with autosomal dominant amelogenesis imperfecta with taurodontism.
The present study shows that the DLX3 c.560_561delCT mutation causes an
attenuated TDO phenotype with less severe hair, tooth, and bone manifestations
compared with individuals having the DLX3 c.571_574delGGGG mutation. Careful
phenotyping of individuals with allelic DLX3 mutations reveals marked differences
in phenotypic severity indicating that the carboxy-terminus of the DLX3 protein
is critical in determining its function during development in these different
tissues.

PMID: 18203197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Bone. 2008 Jan;42(1):162-71. Epub 2007 Sep 19.

A 4 bp deletion mutation in DLX3 enhances osteoblastic differentiation and bone
formation in vitro.

Choi SJ(1), Song IS, Ryu OH, Choi SW, Hart PS, Wu WW, Shen RF, Hart TC.

Author information: 
(1)Human Craniofacial Genetics Section, National Institute of Dental and
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, USA.

A 4 base-pair deletion mutation in the Distal-less 3 (DLX3) gene is etiologic for
Tricho-Dento-Osseous syndrome (TDO). A cardinal feature of TDO is an increased
thickness and density of bone. We tested the effects of the DLX3 gene mutation
responsible for TDO on the osteoblastic differentiation of preosteoblastic
MC3T3E1 cells and multipontent mesenchymal C2C12 cells. Differential expression
analysis of C2C12 cells transfected with wild type DLX3 or mutant DLX3 was
performed and desmin gene expression, an early myoblastic differentiation marker 
in mesenchymal cells, was evaluated by RT-PCR, western blot analysis, and desmin 
promoter transcriptional activity. Transfection of wild type DLX3 into MC3T3E1
and C2C12 cells increased alkaline phosphatase-2 activity, mineral deposition,
and promoter activities of the osteocalcin and type 1 collagen genes compared to 
empty vector transfected cells. Transfection of mutant DLX3 into these cells
further enhanced alkaline phosphatase activity, mineral deposition, and
osteocalcin promoter activities, but did not further enhance type 1 collagen
promoter activity. Transfection of mutant DLX3 into C2C12 cells markedly down
regulated desmin gene expression, and protein expression of desmin and MyoD,
while increasing protein expression of osterix and Runx2. These results
demonstrate that the DLX3 deletion mutation associated with TDO enhances
mesenchymal cell differentiation to an osteoblastic lineage rather than a
myoblastic lineage by changing the fate of mesenchymal cells. This DLX3 mutation 
also accelerates the differentiation of osteoprogenitor cells to osteoblasts at
later stages of osteogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2253671
PMID: 17950683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Oncol Rep. 2007 Aug;18(2):417-23.

Down-regulation of DLX3 expression in MLL-AF4 childhood lymphoblastic leukemias
is mediated by promoter region hypermethylation.

Campo Dell'Orto M(1), Banelli B, Giarin E, Accordi B, Trentin L, Romani M, te
Kronnie G, Basso G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University of Padova, I-35128 Padova, Italy.

Hypermethylation of CpG islands is the most well defined epigenetic change in
neoplasia and plays an important role in the inactivation or silencing of cancer 
related genes. DLX genes (1-7), with large CpG islands in their 5' region, are
implicated in a number of processes among which haematopoiesis. They are
characterized by highly dynamic spatio-temporal expression and supposed to be
involved in resistance to apoptosis of several tumor cell lines. In acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) hypermethylation is a common phenomenon frequently
associated with poor prognosis in specific genetic childhood leukemia subgroups. 
These data together with the presence of large CpG islands in the up-stream
regions of the DLX genes make them attractive candidates for methylation
regulated gene expression and leukemia related aberrancies. To validate the role 
of DLX genes in paediatric B-ALL cells, we studied two cell lines and two groups 
of patients with paediatric chromosomal rearrangements: MLL-AF4 and TEL-AML1,
respectively. Analysis of methylation and gene expression patterns of DLX3 in 64 
specimens of B-lineage ALL revealed that DLX3 presents aberrant methylation in
paediatric B-ALL patients. In vitro experiments with 5-Aza-2'dC on leukemia cell 
lines, confirmed by Western blot analysis, indicated that the methylation of DLX3
CpG islands has a functional role and interferes with the DLX3 gene and DLX3
protein expression in B-ALL cells. Importantly, hypermethylation of DLX3
significantly reduces its expression in MLL-AF4 rearranged leukemias while
methylation is almost absent in TEL-AML1 positive ALL specimens. These results
show that differential DLX3 methylation could be a new epigenetic marker for
genotypic B-cell leukemia subgroup with high-risk features.

PMID: 17611665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Int J Paediatr Dent. 2007 Jul;17(4):259-66.

Severely hypoplastic amelogenesis imperfecta with taurodontism.

Pavlic A(1), Lukinmaa PL, Nieminen P, Kiukkonen A, Alaluusua S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric and Preventive Dentistry, University of Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia. alenka.pavlic@mf.uni-lj.si

BACKGROUND: The prominent dental feature of a boy was severely hypoplastic enamel
in both primary and permanent teeth.
CASE REPORT: Many permanent teeth were already infected while emerging in the
oral cavity. Panoramic radiograph showed enlarged and elongated pulp chambers
(taurodontism) in the permanent first molars. The clinical and radiological
diagnosis was either hypomaturation-hypoplastic amelogenesis imperfecta with
taurodontism (AIHHT) or tricho-dento-osseous syndrome (TDO). Histological
examination of the upper right permanent first molar revealed thin lamellar or
somewhat thicker amorphous enamel on approximal surface only with no rods or
incremental lines visible. Histologically, the Witkop type AIG designated 'enamel
agenesis' cannot be excluded. The medical and dental history of the family
members, as well as the boy's medical examination, was noncontributing. He had
thick, blond, curly hair. The bone structure of the jaws and skull was normal.
For genetic analysis, DLX3 gene was sequenced but no mutation was found.
CONCLUSIONS: Since the gene defect of TDO has been localized only in the DLX3
gene, the more probable diagnosis was AI.

PMID: 17559453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Orthod Craniofac Res. 2007 May;10(2):45-52.

Developmental biology and genetics of dental malformations.

Hu JC(1), Simmer JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics and Pediatric Dentistry, University of Michigan
School of Dentistry, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

The synthesis of tooth development biology with human studies focusing on
inherited conditions that specifically interfere with tooth development is
improving our understanding of normal and pathological tooth formation. The type 
of inherited dental malformations observed in a given kindred relate to when,
during odontogenesis, the defective gene is critically expressed. Information
about the protein encoded by the defective gene and the resulting dental
phenotype helps us understand the major processes underway at different stages
during tooth development. Genes affecting early tooth development (PAX9, MSX1,
and AXIN2) are associated with familial tooth agenesis or oligodontia. Genes
expressed by odontoblasts (COL1A1, COL1A2, and DSPP), and ameloblasts (AMELX,
ENAM, MMP20, and KLK4) during the crown formation stage, are associated with
dentinogenesis imperfecta, dentin dysplasia, and amelogenesis imperfecta. Late
genes expressed during root formation (ALPL and DLX3) are associated with
cementum agenesis (hypophosphatasia) and taurodontism. Understanding the
relationships between normal tooth development and the dental pathologies
associated with inherited diseases improves our ability to diagnose and treat
patients suffering the manifestations of inherited dental disorders.

PMID: 17552940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2007 Jun;79(6):465-82.

Altered localization of gene expression in both ectoderm and mesoderm is
associated with a murine strain difference in retinoic acid-induced forelimb
ectrodactyly.

Shimizu H(1), Lee GS, Beedanagari SR, Collins MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, UCLA School of Public Health, Los
Angeles, California 90095, USA.

BACKGROUND: Defects in digit number or fusion as a teratogenic response are well 
documented in humans and intensively studied in various mouse models. Maternal
exposure to excess levels of all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) at gestational day 9.5 
induces postaxial ectrodactyly (digit loss) in the murine C57BL/6N strain but not
in the SWV/Fnn strain.
METHODS: Whole-mount in situ hybridization was used to examine the differential
expression of limb patterning genes at the transcriptional level between the two 
mouse strains following the maternal exposure to a teratogenic level of RA. The
detection of a gene with altered expression was followed by either the evaluation
of other genes that were synexpressed or with an assessment of downstream genes.
RESULTS: In the C57BL/6N limb bud following maternal RA administration,
gene-specific perturbations were observed within hours of the RA injection in the
posterior pre-AER (apical ectodermal ridge) (Fgf8, Dlx3, Bmp4, Sp8, but not Dlx2 
or p63), whereas these genes were normally expressed in the SWV/Fnn limb bud.
Furthermore, although RA caused comparable reductions of Shh expression between
the strains in the 12 h after administration, some Shh downstream genes were
differentially expressed (e.g., Gli1, Ptc, and Hoxd13), whereas others were not
(e.g., Fgf4, Bmp4, and Gremlin).
CONCLUSIONS: It is proposed that altered gene expression in both pre-AER and
mesoderm is involved in the pathogenesis of postaxial digit loss, and that
because the alterations in the pre-AER occur relatively early in the temporal
sequence of events, those changes are candidates for an initiating factor in the 
malformation.

PMID: 17335046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Development. 2007 Jan;134(1):13-8.

Homeobox gene Dlx3 is regulated by p63 during ectoderm development: relevance in 
the pathogenesis of ectodermal dysplasias.

Radoja N(1), Guerrini L, Lo Iacono N, Merlo GR, Costanzo A, Weinberg WC, La
Mantia G, Calabrò V, Morasso MI.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Skin Biology Unit, NIAMS, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Ectodermal dysplasias (EDs) are a group of human pathological conditions
characterized by anomalies in organs derived from epithelial-mesenchymal
interactions during development. Dlx3 and p63 act as part of the transcriptional 
regulatory pathways relevant in ectoderm derivatives, and autosomal mutations in 
either of these genes are associated with human EDs. However, the functional
relationship between both proteins is unknown. Here, we demonstrate that Dlx3 is 
a downstream target of p63. Moreover, we show that transcription of Dlx3 is
abrogated by mutations in the sterile alpha-motif (SAM) domain of p63 that are
associated with ankyloblepharon-ectodermal dysplasia-clefting (AEC) dysplasias,
but not by mutations found in ectrodactylyectodermal dysplasia-cleft lip/palate
(EEC), Limb-mammary syndrome (LMS) and split hand-foot malformation (SHFM)
dysplasias. Our results unravel aspects of the transcriptional cascade of events 
that contribute to ectoderm development and pathogenesis associated with p63
mutations.

PMID: 17164413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Endocrinology. 2007 Mar;148(3):1246-54. Epub 2006 Nov 16.

Analysis of the gene regulatory program induced by the homeobox transcription
factor distal-less 3 in mouse placenta.

Han L(1), Dias Figueiredo M, Berghorn KA, Iwata TN, Clark-Campbell PA, Welsh IC, 
Wang W, O'brien TP, Lin DM, Roberson MS.

Author information: 
(1)T3-004d Veterinary Research Tower, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cornell 
University, Ithaca, New York 14853. msr14@cornell.edu.

Dlx3, a homeodomain transcription factor, is essential for placental development 
in the mouse. The Dlx3(-/-) mouse embryo dies at embryonic d 9.5-10 putatively
due to placental failure. To develop a more comprehensive understanding of the
gene profile regulated by Dlx3, microarray analysis was used to determine
differences in gene expression within the placenta of Dlx3(+/+) and Dlx3(-/-)
mice. Array analysis revealed differential expression of 401 genes, 33 genes in
which signal to log ratio values of null/wild-type were lower than -0.5 or higher
than 0.5. To corroborate these findings, quantitative real-time PCR was used to
confirm differential expression for 11 genes, nine of which displayed reduced
expression and two with enhanced expression in the Dlx3(-/-) mouse. Loss of Dlx3 
resulted in a marked reduction (>60%) in mRNA expression of placental growth
factor (Pgf), a member of the vascular endothelial growth factor family.
Consistent with these results, Pgf secretion from placental explants tended to be
reduced in the Dlx3(-/-) mice, compared with wild type. To investigate mechanisms
of Dlx3 regulation of Pgf gene transcription, we cloned 5.2 kb of the Pgf 5'
flanking sequence for use in reporter gene assays. Expression of the Pgf promoter
luciferase reporter containing at least three Dlx3 binding sites was increased
markedly by overexpression of Dlx3 supporting the conclusion that Dlx3 may have a
direct effect on Pgf promoter activity. These studies provide a novel view of the
transcriptome regulated by Dlx3 in mouse placenta. Dlx3 is specifically required 
for full expression and secretion of Pgf in vivo. Moreover, in vitro studies
support the conclusion that Dlx3 is sufficient to directly modulate expression of
the Pgf gene promoter in placental cells.

PMID: 17110422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Biol Chem. 2006 Dec 29;281(52):40515-26. Epub 2006 Oct 23.

BMP2 commitment to the osteogenic lineage involves activation of Runx2 by DLX3
and a homeodomain transcriptional network.

Hassan MQ(1), Tare RS, Lee SH, Mandeville M, Morasso MI, Javed A, van Wijnen AJ, 
Stein JL, Stein GS, Lian JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

Several homeodomain (HD) proteins are critical for skeletal patterning and
respond directly to BMP2 as an early step in bone formation. RUNX2, the earliest 
transcription factor proven essential for commitment to osteoblastogenesis, is
also expressed in response to BMP2. However, there is a gap in our knowledge of
the regulatory cascade from BMP2 signaling to the onset of osteogenesis. Here we 
show that BMP2 induces DLX3, a homeodomain protein that activates Runx2 gene
transcription. Small interfering RNA knockdown studies in osteoblasts validate
that DLX3 is a potent regulator of Runx2. Furthermore in Runx2 null cells, DLX3
forced expression suffices to induce transcription of Runx2, osteocalcin, and
alkaline phosphatase genes, thus defining DLX3 as an osteogenic regulator
independent of RUNX2. Our studies further show regulation of the Runx2 gene by
several homeodomain proteins: MSX2 and CDP/cut repress whereas DLX3 and DLX5
activate endogenous Runx2 expression and promoter activity in non-osseous cells
and osteoblasts. These HD proteins exhibit distinct temporal expression profiles 
during osteoblast differentiation as well as selective association with Runx2
chromatin that is related to Runx2 transcriptional activity and recruitment of
RNA polymerase II. Runx2 promoter mutagenesis shows that multiple HD elements
control expression of Runx2 in relation to the stages of osteoblast maturation.
Our studies establish mechanisms for commitment to the osteogenic lineage
directly through BMP2 induction of HD proteins DLX3 and DLX5 that activate Runx2,
thus delineating a transcriptional regulatory pathway mediating osteoblast
differentiation. We propose that the three homeodomain proteins MSX2, DLX3, and
DLX5 provide a key series of molecular switches that regulate expression of Runx2
throughout bone formation.

PMID: 17060321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jul 21;281(29):20357-67. Epub 2006 May 10.

Smad6 represses Dlx3 transcriptional activity through inhibition of DNA binding.

Berghorn KA(1), Clark-Campbell PA, Han L, McGrattan M, Weiss RS, Roberson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853,
USA.

Dlx3 (Distal-less 3) is a homeobox-containing transcription factor required for
normal placental development in mice. Here we demonstrate that Dlx3 interacts
with Smad6, a member of a larger family of transcriptional regulators generally
thought to regulate transforming growth factor beta/bone morphogenetic protein
signaling. Immunocytochemical and immunoprecipitation studies demonstrate
overlapping nuclear localization and physical interaction between Dlx3 and Smad6 
in human choriocarcinoma cells and in differentiated trophoblasts from human
placenta. In vitro protein interaction studies mapped the Smad6 interaction
domain within Dlx3 to residues 80-163, a region of Dlx3 that includes a portion
of the homeodomain. Dlx3 and Dlx4 share homology within this region, and Dlx4 was
also found to bind Smad6. Using the Esx1 gene promoter as a model for a
Dlx3-responsive gene, studies demonstrate two near consensus Dlx3 binding sites
within the proximal 2.3 kb of the transcription start site. Interestingly,
binding of Dlx3 to one of these two sites was inhibited by interaction with
Smad6. Consistent with this result, expression of an Esx1 promoter luciferase
reporter was increased by overexpression of Dlx3; this effect was reversed with
co-expression of Smad6. Further, small interference RNA-mediated knockdown of
endogenous Smad6 increased Dlx3-dependent expression of the Esx1 gene promoter.
Thus, Smad6 appears to functionally interact with Dlx3, altering the ability of
Dlx3 to bind target gene promoters. Smad6 appears to play a modulatory role in
the regulation of Dlx3-dependent gene transcription within placental
trophoblasts.

PMID: 16687405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Placenta. 2007 Feb-Mar;28(2-3):219-23. Epub 2006 May 2.

Homeobox genes are differentially expressed in macrovascular human umbilical vein
endothelial cells and microvascular placental endothelial cells.

Murthi P(1), So M, Gude NM, Doherty VL, Brennecke SP, Kalionis B.

Author information: 
(1)Pregnancy Research Centre, Department of Perinatal Medicine, The Royal Women's
Hospital, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia. padma@unimelb.edu.au

Angiogenesis is fundamental to normal placental development. Aberrant
angiogenesis within the placental terminal villi is a characteristic of
significant placental pathologies and includes structural and vascular
abnormalities as well as altered endothelial cell function, which substantially
impacts on maternal-fetal exchange. Homeobox gene transcription factors regulate 
vascular development in embryonic and adult tissues, but their role in the
placental microvasculature is not well known. In this study, we isolated and
enriched human placental microvascular endothelial cells (PLEC) by a
perfusion-based method and compared homeobox gene expression between PLEC and
macrovascular human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). Reverse
transcriptase PCR detected mRNA expression of homeobox genes DLX3, DLX4, MSX2,
GAX and HLX1 in both PLEC and HUVEC. DLX4 and HLX1 have not been previously
detected in PLEC and with the exception of GAX, none of these homeobox genes have
been previously identified in HUVEC. There was lower expression of HLX1 mRNA in
HUVEC compared with PLEC. Using real-time PCR analysis PLEC HLX1 mRNA expression 
relative to housekeeping gene GAPDH was 0.9+/-0.06 fold of the calibrator (n=6)
versus 0.2+/-0.06 (n=6) for HUVEC, p<0.001. These data provided evidence of
heterogeneity in homeobox gene expression between microvascular PLEC and
macrovascular HUVEC that most likely reflects significant differences in
endothelial cell function in the two different cellular environments.

PMID: 16647116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Int J Dev Biol. 2006;50(1):71-5.

Dlx3 is expressed in the ventral forebrain of chicken embryos: implications for
the evolution of the Dlx gene family.

Zhu H(1), Bendall AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Ontario,
Canada.

The archetypal genomic arrangement of vertebrate Dlx genes is as three bigene
clusters (Dlx1/2, Dlx3/4, Dlx5/6). Phylogenetic sequence analysis of mouse and
zebrafish Dlx clusters supports the notion that the Dlx3/4 cluster is more
derived and the absence of expression of either Dlx3 or Dlx4 in the central
nervous system, as reported to date, is consistent with this. Together, these
observations have prompted a model in which cis-regulatory elements, responsible 
for directing Dlx gene transcription in the forebrain, were lost from the Dlx3/4 
bigene cluster prior to the divergence of tetrapods from fish. Here, we describe 
Dlx3 expression in the forebrain of chicken embryos; this constitutes the first
documented evidence of expression of either Dlx3 or Dlx4 in the central nervous
system of a vertebrate. Our observations have implications for models of the
evolutionary history of the Dlx gene family, for the genomic organization of Dlx 
genes in birds and for functional redundancy of Dlx gene function during avian
forebrain development.

PMID: 16323080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Anat. 2005 Nov;207(5):501-61.

Reassessing the Dlx code: the genetic regulation of branchial arch skeletal
pattern and development.

Depew MJ(1), Simpson CA, Morasso M, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, King's College London, Guy's Hospital,
London, UK. michael.depew@kcl.ac.uk

The branchial arches are meristic vertebrate structures, being metameric both
between each other within the rostrocaudal series along the ventrocephalic
surface of the embryonic head and within each individual arch: thus, just as each
branchial arch must acquire a unique identity along the rostrocaudal axis, each
structure within the proximodistal axis of an arch must also acquire a unique
identity. It is believed that regional specification of metameric structures is
controlled by the nested expression of related genes resulting in a regional
code, a principal that is though to be demonstrated by the regulation of
rostrocaudal axis development in animals exerted by the nested HOM-C/Hox homeobox
genes. The nested expression pattern of the Dlx genes within the murine branchial
arch ectomesenchyme has more recently led to the proposal of a Dlx code for the
regional specification along the proximodistal axis of the branchial arches (i.e.
it establishes intra-arch identity). This review re-examines this hypothesis, and
presents new work on an allelic series of Dlx loss-of-function mouse mutants that
includes various combinations of Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx3, Dlx5 and Dlx6. Although we
confirm fundamental aspects of the hypothesis, we further report a number of
novel findings. First, contrary to initial reports, Dlx1, Dlx2 and Dlx1/2
heterozygotes exhibit alterations of branchial arch structures and Dlx2-/- and
Dlx1/2-/- mutants have slight alterations of structures derived from the distal
portions of their branchial arches. Second, we present evidence for a role for
murine Dlx3 in the development of the branchial arches. Third, analysis of
compound Dlx mutants reveals four grades of mandibular arch transformations and
that the genetic interactions of cis first-order (e.g. Dlx5 and Dlx6), trans
second-order (e.g. Dlx5 and Dlx2) and trans third-order paralogues (e.g. Dlx5 and
Dlx1) result in significant and distinct morphological differences in mandibular 
arch development. We conclude by integrating functions of the Dlx genes within
the context of a hypothesized general mechanism for the establishment of pattern 
and polarity in the first branchial arch of gnathostomes that includes regionally
secreted growth factors such as Fgf8 and Bmp and other transcription factors such
as Msx1, and is consistent both with the structure of the conserved gnathostome
jaw bauplan and the elaboration of this bauplan to meet organismal end-point
designs.

PMCID: PMC1571560
PMID: 16313391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Dent Res. 2005 Dec;84(12):1117-26.

Genes and related proteins involved in amelogenesis imperfecta.

Stephanopoulos G(1), Garefalaki ME, Lyroudia K.

Author information: 
(1)Diploma in Dental Science, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece.

Dental enamel formation is a remarkable example of a biomineralization process.
The exact mechanisms involved in this process remain partly obscure. Some of the 
genes encoding specific enamel proteins have been indicated as candidate genes
for amelogenesis imperfecta. Mutational analyses within studied families have
supported this hypothesis. Mutations in the amelogenin gene (AMELX) cause
X-linked amelogenesis imperfecta, while mutations in the enamelin gene (ENAM)
cause autosomal-inherited forms of amelogenesis imperfecta. Recent reports
involve kallikrein-4 (KLK4), MMP-20, and DLX3 genes in the etiologies of some
cases. This paper focuses mainly on the candidate genes involved in amelogenesis 
imperfecta and the proteins derived from them, and reviews current knowledge on
their structure, localization within the tissue, and correlation with the various
types of this disorder.

PMID: 16304440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 2005 Dec;100(6):736-42. Epub
2005 Oct 5.

Clinical features of tricho-dento-osseous syndrome and presentation of three new 
cases: an addition to clinical heterogeneity.

Islam M(1), Lurie AG, Reichenberger E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral and Maxillofacial Radiology, Department of Oral Health and
Diagnostic Sciences, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT
06030-3705, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Tricho-dento-osseous dysplasia is a rare autosomal dominant disorder
which involves increased bone density, enamel hypoplasia, enlarged pulp chambers,
and molar taurodontism. This study discusses the phenotypic variability of this
condition and describes 3 new cases from a large family.
STUDY DESIGN: Three affected females and 1 unaffected female from the same family
were clinically and radiographically evaluated. Mutation analysis was performed
in the candidate gene DLX3. Phenotypes of affected individuals from 3 generations
were compared to an unaffected control.
RESULTS: All affected subjects show increased bone density in long bones and
increased thickness and bone density in the skull, especially the skull base.
Mandibles are within the upper normal size limits and display increased
trabeculation and bone density. No bone loss or regression of the alveolar ridge 
occurs in older subjects after teeth have been lost.
CONCLUSION: The mutation in DLX3 has positive effects on bone density throughout 
life. Although the mutation in this family is identical with mutations found in
other families it results in clinical and phenotypic variability.

PMID: 16301156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Hum Genet. 2006;51(1):38-46. Epub 2005 Oct 25.

PAX9 and TGFB3 are linked to susceptibility to nonsyndromic cleft lip with or
without cleft palate in the Japanese: population-based and family-based candidate
gene analyses.

Ichikawa E(1), Watanabe A, Nakano Y, Akita S, Hirano A, Kinoshita A, Kondo S,
Kishino T, Uchiyama T, Niikawa N, Yoshiura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Tokyo Dental College, Chiba,
Japan.

The prevalence of nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (CL/P) and 
cleft palate only (CPO) are believed to be higher in the Japanese than in
Americans, Europeans or Africans. The purpose of this study was to investigate,
in a Japanese population, relationships between CL/P or CPO and seven candidate
genes (TGFB3, DLX3, PAX9, CLPTM1, TBX10, PVRL1, TBX22) that showed positive
associations in other populations and are expressed in the oral/lip region in
developing mice. We first searched for mutations in these genes among 112 CL/P
and 16 CPO patients, and found a heterozygous missense mutation (640A > G, S214G)
in exon 3 of PAX9 in two sibs with CL/P and their phenotypically normal mother
from a Japanese family. A population-based case-control analysis and a
family-based transmission disequilibrium test (TDT), using single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), and two-SNP haplotypes of the genes, between the 112 CL/P
cases with their parents and 192 controls indicated a significant association at 
one SNP site, IVS1 + 5321, in TGFB3 with a P-value of 0.0016. Population-based
haplotyping revealed that the association was most significant for haplotype
"A/A" consisting of IVS1 + 5321 and IVS1 - 1572; TDT also gave a P-value of
0.0252 in this haplotype.

PMID: 16247549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Bone. 2005 Dec;37(6):799-809. Epub 2005 Sep 19.

Expression pattern of Dlx3 during cell differentiation in mineralized tissues.

Ghoul-Mazgar S(1), Hotton D, Lézot F, Blin-Wakkach C, Asselin A, Sautier JM,
Berdal A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Oro-faciale et Pathologie INSERM U 714, 15-21 rue de
l'Ecole de Médecine 75270, Universités Paris 7 and Paris 6-IFR58, Paris Cedex 06,
France.

The present study was designed to compare the expression pattern of Dlx3 in four 
different mineralized tissues because of: 1-its role in skeleton patterning,
2-its expression in dental epithelium and mesenchyme during morphogenesis, 3-the 
membranous and endochondral bone and tooth phenotype of tricho-dento-osseous
syndrome related to Dlx3 gene mutation and 4-recently emerging knowledge on Dlx
family members in the bone field. Ameloblasts, odontoblasts, osteoblasts and
chondrocytes were analyzed in vitro and in vivo. Dlx3 transcripts were detected
by RT-PCR in established model systems (microdissected dental epithelium and
mesenchyme; primary cultures of rat chondrocytes), as recently performed in
osteoblasts in vitro. A human 414-bp Dlx3 probe was generated. A 4.5-kb human
Dlx3 sense RNA was identified in maxillo-facial samples by Northern blotting.
Immunolabeling and in situ hybridization were performed in mice from Theiler
stage E 14.5 until birth. In teeth, although Dlx3 was still expressed in
differentiated ameloblasts, it was down regulated during odontoblast
polarization. During endochondral bone formation, Dlx3 protein was detected in
chondrocytes and was most strongly expressed in the prehypertrophic cartilage
zone and in differentiating and differentiated osteoblasts of metaphyseal
periosteum. In vitro, real-time PCR studies supported this upregulation in
prehypertrophic chondrocytes, closely correlated with Ihh variations. In
membranous bone, Dlx3 was present in preosteoblasts, osteoblasts and
osteoid-osteocytes. The present data on Dlx3 and recently published functional
studies show that this transcription factor may be instrumental during growth in 
the control of matrix deposition and biomineralization in the entire skeleton.

PMID: 16172034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Endocrinol. 2005 Aug;186(2):315-23.

Developmental expression of the homeobox protein Distal-less 3 and its
relationship to progesterone production in mouse placenta.

Berghorn KA(1), Clark PA, Encarnacion B, Deregis CJ, Folger JK, Morasso MI,
Soares MJ, Wolfe MW, Roberson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853,
USA. kab35@cornell.edu

Distal-less 3 (Dlx3) is a homeobox factor that functions as a placental-specific 
transcriptional regulator. Dlx3 null mice (-/-) have compromised placental
development and do not survive in utero past embryonic day (E) 9.5. The current
studies were undertaken to examine the expression of Dlx3 in mouse placenta
during gestation, and to determine whether Dlx3 was involved in placental
progesterone production. Dlx3 was not detectable at E8.5 but was detected in E9.5
placenta with continuing but diminished expression through E15.5. Dlx3
immuno-localization was restricted to the labyrinth, was nuclear and was found in
cytokeratin-positive cells. Previous studies in choriocarcinoma cell lines
support the conclusion that Dlx3 is required for expression of 3'-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase VI (3betaHSD VI), an obligate enzyme in the production of
progesterone by trophoblast giant cells. In a rat trophoblast stem cell line
(Rcho-1), Dlx3 expression was non-detectable in Rcho-1 cells induced to
differ-entiate using mitogen withdrawal. In vitro progesterone production in
placental cultures and 3betaHSD VI mRNA from Dlx3 (+/+), (+/-) and (-/-) mice
were equivalent. In situ hybridization for 3betaHSD VI revealed mRNA expression
restricted to trophoblast giants cells with no detectable expression in the
labyrinth suggesting that Dlx3 and 3betaHSD VI were not colocalized within the
placenta. These studies support the conclusion that Dlx3 protein expression is
restricted to the labyrinth region of the murine placenta into late gestation and
that Dlx3 does not appear to be expressed in trophoblast giant cells. Further,
loss of Dlx3 was not correlated with synthesis of progesterone from E9.5 mouse
placentas.

PMID: 16079257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Comp Neurol. 2005 Feb 28;483(1):48-65.

Dlx gene expression during chick inner ear development.

Brown ST(1), Wang J, Groves AK.

Author information: 
(1)Gonda Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, House Ear Institute, Los
Angeles, California 90057-1922, USA.

Members of the Dlx gene family play essential roles in the development of the
zebrafish and mouse inner ear, but little is known regarding Dlx genes and avian 
inner ear development. We have examined the inner ear expression patterns of
Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx3, Dlx5, and Dlx6 during the first 7 days of chicken embryonic
development. Dlx1 and Dlx2 expression was seen only in nonneuronal cells of the
cochleovestibular ganglion and nerves from stage 21 to stage 32. Dlx3 marks the
otic placode beginning at stage 9 and becomes limited to epithelium adjacent to
the hindbrain as invagination of the placode begins. Dlx3 expression then
resolves to the dorsal otocyst and gradually becomes limited to the endolymphatic
sac by stage 30. Dlx5 and Dlx6 expression in the developing inner ear is first
seen at stages 12 and 13, respectively, in the rim of the otic pit, before
spreading throughout the dorsal otocyst. As morphogenesis proceeds, Dlx5 and Dlx6
expression is seen throughout the forming semicircular canals and endolymphatic
structures. During later stages, both genes are seen to mark the distal surface
of the forming canals and display expression complementary to that of BMP4 in the
vestibular sensory regions. Dlx5 expression is also seen in the lagena macula and
the cochlear and vestibular nerves by stage 30. These findings suggest important 
roles for Dlx genes in the vestibular and neural development of the avian inner
ear.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15672396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Mar 1;133A(2):138-41.

DLX3 mutation associated with autosomal dominant amelogenesis imperfecta with
taurodontism.

Dong J(1), Amor D, Aldred MJ, Gu T, Escamilla M, MacDougall M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Dental School, University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, MC 7888, San Antonio, TX
78229, USA.

Amelogenesis imperfecta hypoplastic-hypomaturation with taurodontism (AIHHT) is
an autosomal dominant (AD) trait associated with enamel defects and enlarged pulp
chambers. In this study, we mapped an AIHHT family to human chromosome 17 q21-q22
(lod score 3.3) and identify a two basepair deletion (CT) at nucleotide 560 in
DLX3 associated with the disease. This mutation causes a frameshift altering the 
last two amino acids of the DNA-binding homeodomain introducing a premature stop 
codon truncating the protein by 88 amino acids. This is the first report of a
mutation within the homeodomain of DLX3. Previous studies have shown a DLX3
mutation outside the homeodomain associated with tricho-dento-osseous syndrome
(TDO) suggesting TDO and some forms of AIHHT are allelic.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15666299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Oct;24(20):9248-61.

Dlx3 transcriptional regulation of osteoblast differentiation: temporal
recruitment of Msx2, Dlx3, and Dlx5 homeodomain proteins to chromatin of the
osteocalcin gene.

Hassan MQ(1), Javed A, Morasso MI, Karlin J, Montecino M, van Wijnen AJ, Stein
GS, Stein JL, Lian JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 55
Lake Ave., North, Worcester, MA 01655-0106, USA.

Genetic studies show that Msx2 and Dlx5 homeodomain (HD) proteins support
skeletal development, but null mutation of the closely related Dlx3 gene results 
in early embryonic lethality. Here we find that expression of Dlx3 in the mouse
embryo is associated with new bone formation and regulation of osteoblast
differentiation. Dlx3 is expressed in osteoblasts, and overexpression of Dlx3 in 
osteoprogenitor cells promotes, while specific knock-down of Dlx3 by RNA
interference inhibits, induction of osteogenic markers. We characterized gene
regulation by Dlx3 in relation to that of Msx2 and Dlx5 during osteoblast
differentiation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed a molecular switch
in HD protein association with the bone-specific osteocalcin (OC) gene. The
transcriptionally repressed OC gene was occupied by Msx2 in proliferating
osteoblasts, while Dlx3, Dlx5, and Runx2 were recruited postproliferatively to
initiate transcription. Dlx5 occupancy increased over Dlx3 in mature osteoblasts 
at the mineralization stage of differentiation, coincident with increased RNA
polymerase II occupancy. Dlx3 protein-DNA interactions stimulated OC promoter
activity, while Dlx3-Runx2 protein-protein interaction reduced Runx2-mediated
transcription. Deletion analysis showed that the Dlx3 interacting domain of Runx2
is from amino acids 376 to 432, which also include the transcriptionally active
subnuclear targeting sequence (376 to 432). Thus, we provide cellular and
molecular evidence for Dlx3 in regulating osteoprogenitor cell differentiation
and for both positive and negative regulation of gene transcription. We propose
that multiple HD proteins in osteoblasts constitute a regulatory network that
mediates development of the bone phenotype through the sequential association of 
distinct HD proteins with promoter regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC517873
PMID: 15456894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Bone. 2004 Oct;35(4):988-97.

Increased bone density associated with DLX3 mutation in the tricho-dento-osseous 
syndrome.

Haldeman RJ(1), Cooper LF, Hart TC, Phillips C, Boyd C, Lester GE, Wright JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, School of Dentistry Brauer Hall CB, The
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7450, USA.

Tricho-dento-osseous syndrome (TDO) (OMIM #190320) is an autosomal dominant
disorder characterized and named for the three most commonly affected tissues
hair, teeth, and bones. Common to all individuals with TDO studied to date is a
four base-pair deletion in the DLX3 gene on chromosome 17q21. This mutation is
associated with a variable bone phenotype that includes alteration in
intramembranous bone formation in the skull. The purpose of this study was to
characterize and compare endochondral bone phenotypes and variability at central 
and peripheral locations of the skeleton by evaluating bone density in
individuals having the same DLX3, 4 bp DEL,NT3198 mutation (OMIM 600525) and
non-affected family members using dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA).
Thirty-four individuals (20 TDO-affected and 14 non-affected) participated in
this prospective study. All participants were evaluated for the DLX3 mutation
associated with TDO. All subjects received DEXA scans at common,
literature-supported osteoporotic test regions including: (1) non-dominant distal
radius/ulna, (2) femoral neck, and (3) lumbar spine L2-4. There was a significant
increase (P < 0.05) in bone mineral density in TDO-affected individuals compared 
with control individuals at each test region. The markedly increased bone density
in individuals having the DLX3, 4 bp DEL,NT3198 mutation shows that this
alteration affects both endochondral and intramembranous bone formation and
suggests that the DLX3 gene is important in bone formation and/or homeostasis of 
the appendicular skeleton.

PMID: 15454107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Dev Biol. 2004 Jul 15;271(2):439-66.

Molecular anatomy of placode development in Xenopus laevis.

Schlosser G(1), Ahrens K.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Research Institute, University of Bremen, 28334 Bremen, Germany.
gschloss@uni-bremen.de

We analyzed the spatiotemporal pattern of expression of 15 transcription factors 
(Six1, Six4, Eya1, Sox3, Sox2, Pax6, Pax3, Pax2, Pax8, Dlx3, Msx1, FoxI1c, Tbx2, 
Tbx3, Xiro1) during placode development in Xenopus laevis from neural plate to
late tail bud stages. Out of all genes investigated, only the expression of Eya1,
Six1, and Six4 is maintained in all types of placode (except the lens) throughout
embryonic development, suggesting that they may promote generic placodal
properties and that their crescent-shaped expression domain surrounding the
neural plate defines a panplacodal primordium from which all types of placode
originate. Double-labeling procedures were employed to reveal the precise
position of this panplacodal primordium relative to neural plate, neural crest,
and other placodal markers. Already at neural plate stages, the panplacodal
primordium is subdivided into several subregions defined by particular
combinations of transcription factors allowing us to identify the approximate
regions of origin of various types of placode. Whereas some types of placode were
already prefigured by molecularly distinct areas at neural plate stages, the
epibranchial, otic, and lateral line placodes arise from a common posterior
placodal area (characterized by Pax8 and Pax2 expression) and acquire
differential molecular signatures only after neural tube closure. Our findings
argue for a multistep mechanism of placode induction, support a combinatorial
model of placode specification, and suggest that different placodes evolved from 
a common placodal primordium by successive recruitment of new inducers and target
genes.

PMID: 15223346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Endocrinology. 2004 Mar;145(3):1096-105. Epub 2003 Dec 11.

A role for CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta in the basal regulation of the
distal-less 3 gene promoter in placental cells.

Holland MP(1), Bliss SP, Berghorn KA, Roberson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cornell University College of Veterinary
Medicine, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

The homeodomain protein Distal-less 3 (Dlx3) is essential for normal placental
development in mice. Dlx3-null mice die by embryonic day 10.0 due to placental
failure. The aim of our studies was to examine the transcriptional regulation and
expression of Dlx3 in choriocarcinoma cell lines and primary trophoblasts from
human placenta. A Dlx3 promoter fragment coupled to a luciferase reporter gene
was sufficient to increase luciferase activity more than 11-fold over a
luciferase control vector in choriocarcinoma cells, but not in a heterologous
gonadotrope cell line. A 5' deletion series of the Dlx3 promoter revealed that a 
13-nucleotide CCAAT box-containing element was required for basal expression in
choriocarcinoma cell lines. Mutation of the CCAAT box within the context of the
full-length promoter resulted in reduced basal activation of the Dlx3 reporter
gene, suggesting that the CCAAT box was required for full basal expression.
Western blot analysis revealed that Dlx3, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha
(C/EBP alpha), and C/EBP beta were present in choriocarcinoma cells and isolated 
trophoblasts from term human placentas. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
revealed the formation of a specific complex between choriocarcinoma cell nuclear
extracts and the Dlx3 CCAAT box sequence. Competition and antibody
electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed that CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein beta (C/EBP beta) binds the Dlx3 CCAAT box sequence. Overexpression of
C/EBP beta was sufficient to increase basal expression of a Dlx3 reporter gene in
a dose-dependent manner. These studies provide the first insight into the
mechanism(s) of Dlx3 gene expression in placental cells and suggest a role for
C/EBP beta in the basal regulation of the Dlx3 gene.

PMID: 14670999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Leukoc Biol. 2003 Aug;74(2):302-5.

DLX genes as targets of ALL-1: DLX 2,3,4 down-regulation in t(4;11) acute
lymphoblastic leukemias.

Ferrari N(1), Palmisano GL, Paleari L, Basso G, Mangioni M, Fidanza V, Albini A, 
Croce CM, Levi G, Brigati C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro
IST, Genova, Italy.

Dlx genes constitute a gene family thought to be essential in morphogenesis and
development. We show here that in vertebrate cells, Dlx genes appear to be part
of a regulatory cascade initiated by acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)-1, a
master regulator gene whose disruption is implicated in several human acute
leukemias. The expression of Dlx2, Dlx3, Dlx5, Dlx6, and Dlx7 was absent in All-1
-/- mouse embryonic stem cells and reduced in All-1 +/- cells. In leukemic
patients affected by the t(4;11)(q21;q23) chromosomal abnormality, the expression
of DLX2, DLX3, and DLX4 was virtually abrogated. Our data indicate that Dlx genes
are downstream targets of ALL-1 and could be considered as important tools for
the study of the early leukemic cell phenotype.

PMID: 12885948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Struct Funct Genomics. 2003;3(1-4):151-9.

The role of gene duplication in the evolution and function of the vertebrate
Dlx/distal-less bigene clusters.

Sumiyama K(1), Irvine SQ, Ruddle FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
PO Box 208103, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

The Dlx gene family controls developmental patterning principally in the
pharyngeal and cranial regions. We review the structure and function of these
genes in the vertebrates and relate these properties to their evolution. We
particularly focus on the Dlx3-7 bigene cluster which we postulate to be more
derived phylogenetically and functionally than the other two bigene clusters,
Dlx1-2 and Dlx5-6. We stress the transcriptional control of the Dlx3-7 bigene
cluster, and postulate its control by Dlx1-2.

PMID: 12836694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Histol Histopathol. 2003 Jul;18(3):849-54.

Characterization and mRNA expression in an unusual odontogenic lesion in a
patient with tricho-dento-osseous syndrome.

Dodds AP(1), Cox SA, Suggs CA, Boyd C, Ruiz R, Hart TC, Wright JT.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. Pediatric Dentistry, School of Dentistry, The University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, 27599-7455, USA. anne_dodds@dentistry.unc.edu

Odontogenic lesions are rare, but can be associated with significant morbidity.
While their molecular determinants are unknown, they likely express many genes
common to normal odontogenesis. This study evaluated the histology and mRNA
expression of an unusual odontogenic lesion in a patient with a confirmed history
of tricho-dento-osseous syndrome.METHODS: Decalcified, frozen 8 micro m sections 
of the lesion were cut and mounted on glass slides and stained with
hematoxylin/eosin for analysis. The expression of multiple genes associated with 
normal odontogenesis and related pathologies were evaluated by RT-PCR, where
possible in samples of the hard and soft tissue components of the lesion.
RESULTS: Histological examination showed the lesion had large areas of irregular,
dentine-like material, enamel matrix, areas of woven immature bone and multiple
fully mineralised tooth crowns. Although most of the gene transcripts were
amplified from both samples, some, including DLX3/7 and Collagen I demonstrated
differential expression.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows the gene expression profile of aberrant
odontogenesis with associated odontoma formation is similar to that of normal
tooth and the genes expressed in other odontogenic lesions. While the role of
altered gene expression in the development of such lesions has previously been
postulated from transgenic models, this is the only report of an odontogenic
lesion in a patient with TDO, and begins to elucidate possible gene interactions 
key to its development.

PMID: 12792897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Oncol Rep. 2003 Jul-Aug;10(4):973-7.

Induction of apoptosis by fenretinide in tumor cell lines correlates with DLX2,
DLX3 and DLX4 gene expression.

Ferrari N(1), Paleari L, Palmisano GL, Tammaro P, Levi G, Albini A, Brigati C.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro IST, Largo Rosanna Benzi 10,
16132 Genoa, Italy.

We investigated a possible relationship between apoptosis induction by
fenretinide (4HPR) and the expression of a group of genes thought to be essential
in morphogenesis and development, the DLX genes. We analyzed their expression
under normal conditions or upon 4HPR stimulation in several tumor cell lines. We 
show that DLX2, DLX3 and DLX4 were expressed at higher levels in cell lines which
where more sensitive to apoptotic induction, whereas DLX 5 and 6 appeared to
segregate in a distinct functional compartment. Our data support the notion that 
DLX2, 3, 4 genes could participate in the control of 4HPR-mediated apoptosis,
making them important molecules for the monitoring of therapy efficacy in cancer 
patients.

PMID: 12792755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Dev Dyn. 2003 Jun;227(2):291-300.

Phenotype of the zebrafish masterblind (mbl) mutant is dependent on genetic
background.

Sanders LH(1), Whitlock KE.

Author information: 
(1)Field of Genetics and Development/Neurobiology and Behavior, Department of
Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA.

The zebrafish masterblind (mbl) mutant is characterized by the lack of olfactory 
placodes and optic vesicles, reduced telencephalon, an expanded epiphysis
(Heisenberg et al. [1996] Development 123:191-203), and enlarged jaw. To
understand the cellular events giving rise to the olfactory placode defect of
this mutant, we examined the expression pattern of the distal-less-3 (dlx3) gene 
in mbl. In the mutant, dlx3, which is normally expressed in the developing nose
and ear, showed reduced expression in the olfactory placode field, but normal
expression in the developing ear. To determine whether the loss of dlx3
expression was due to cell loss, we assayed cell death by using TUNEL labeling.
Although cell death in the mutant was not concentrated in the region of dlx3
expression, there was increased cell death in the forebrain, epiphysis, and jaw
region, as compared with that in wild-type controls. This cell death phenotype
was cyclical in nature, showing an increase and decrease in cell death on a
roughly 24-hr cycle. Further analysis showed that this cyclical phenotype was
specific to the genetic background. The severity of the mbl phenotype, including 
cell death, expanded epiphysis, and enlarged jaw, decreased when the mutation was
moved from the original "TL" background to the "AB" background. Thus, the
severity of developmental defects in the mbl mutant is strongly dependent on
genetic background. We examined the contribution of cell death to the morphologic
defects of mbl by blocking cell death by using zVADfmk, a known caspase
inhibitor. We found that this treatment partially rescued the expanded jaw defect
and that this rescue was dependent on the genetic background. Therefore, the mbl 
mutant phenotypes result, in part, from genetic background effects that alter the
pattern of programmed cell death early in development.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12761856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Development. 2003 Jun;130(11):2543-54.

Zebrafish foxi one modulates cellular responses to Fgf signaling required for the
integrity of ear and jaw patterning.

Nissen RM(1), Yan J, Amsterdam A, Hopkins N, Burgess SM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

We identified four insertional alleles of foxi one (foo), an embryonic lethal
mutation in zebrafish that displays defects in both otic placode and the jaw. In 
foo/foo embryos the otic placode is split into two smaller placodes and mutant
embryos show a dorsoventral (DV) cartilage defect manifested as a reduced
hyomandibular and reduced third and fourth branchial arches. We identified foxi
one (foo), the zebrafish ortholog of Foxi1 (FREAC6, FKHL10, HFH-3, Fkh10) and a
member of the forkhead domain transcriptional regulator family, as the gene
mutated in foo/foo embryos. foo is expressed in otic placode precursor cells, and
foo/foo embryos lack placodal pax8 expression and have disorganized otic
expression of pax2.1 and dlx3. Third stream neural crest cell migration, detected
by dlx2 and krox20 expression, is aberrant in that it invades the otic placode
territory. foo is expressed in pharyngeal pouch endoderm and is required for
pouch expression of pax8 and proper patterning of other markers in the pouch such
as nkx2.3. In foo/foo embryos, we observed a failure to maintain fgf3 expression 
in the pouches, followed by apoptosis of neural crest cells in adjacent arches.
We conclude that foo expression is essential for pax8 expression probably
downstream of Fgf signaling in a conserved pathway jointly required for integrity
of patterning in the otic placode and pharyngeal pouches. We propose that correct
placement of survival/proliferation cues is essential for shaping the pharyngeal 
cartilages and that evolutionary links between jaw and ear formation can be
traced to Fgf-Foxi1-Pax8 pathways.

PMID: 12702667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Genome Res. 2003 Apr;13(4):533-43.

Regulatory roles of conserved intergenic domains in vertebrate Dlx bigene
clusters.

Ghanem N(1), Jarinova O, Amores A, Long Q, Hatch G, Park BK, Rubenstein JL, Ekker
M.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Health Research Institute and Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1Y 4E9.

Dlx homeobox genes of vertebrates are generally arranged as three bigene clusters
on distinct chromosomes. The Dlx1/Dlx2, Dlx5/Dlx6, and Dlx3/Dlx7 clusters likely 
originate from duplications of an ancestral Dlx gene pair. Overlaps in expression
are often observed between genes from the different clusters. To determine if the
overlaps are a result of the conservation of enhancer sequences between
paralogous clusters, we compared the Dlx1/2 and the Dlx5/Dlx6 intergenic regions 
from human, mouse, zebrafish, and from two pufferfish, Spheroides nephelus and
Takifugu rubripes. Conservation between all five vertebrates is limited to four
sequences, two in Dlx1/Dlx2 and two in Dlx5/Dlx6. These noncoding sequences are
>75% identical over a few hundred base pairs, even in distant vertebrates.
However, when compared to each other, the four intergenic sequences show a much
more limited similarity. Each intergenic sequence acts as an enhancer when tested
in transgenic animals. Three of them are active in the forebrain with overlapping
patterns despite their limited sequence similarity. The lack of sequence
similarity between paralogous intergenic regions and the high degree of sequence 
conservation of orthologous enhancers suggest a rapid divergence of Dlx
intergenic regions early in chordate/vertebrate evolution followed by fixation of
cis-acting regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC430168
PMID: 12670995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Dev Biol. 2003 Mar 15;255(2):230-7.

Galphaq and Galpha11 proteins mediate endothelin-1 signaling in neural
crest-derived pharyngeal arch mesenchyme.

Ivey K(1), Tyson B, Ukidwe P, McFadden DG, Levi G, Olson EN, Srivastava D, Wilkie
TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, , Dallas, TX 75390-9104, USA.

Endothelin-A (ET(A)) is a G-protein-coupled receptor expressed in the neural
crest-derived mesenchyme of the pharyngeal arches during craniofacial
development. Targeted deletion of the ET(A) receptor or its ligand endothelin-1
(ET-1) causes cleft palate and hypoplasia of the mandible, otic cup, and tympanic
ring. Previously we showed that Galpha(q)/Galpha(11)-null mice die around E11.0, 
whereas Galpha(q)((-/-))Galpha(11)((+/-)) mice survive to birth with hypomorphic 
phenotypes similar to, but less severe than, ET(A) or ET-1-null mice. To
determine whether ET-1 signaling is transduced by Galpha(q)/Galpha(11) proteins, 
we examined the expression patterns of several ET-1 dependent and independent
transcription factors in Galpha(q)/Galpha(11)-deficient embryos. Expression of
genes encoding the ET-1-dependent transcription factors Dlx3, Dlx6, dHAND, and
eHAND was specifically downregulated in the pharyngeal arches of
Galpha(q)/Galpha(11)-deficient mice. In contrast, pharyngeal arch expression of
the homeobox gene Msx1, which is not regulated by ET-1 signaling, was maintained 
in these embryos. We conclude that the Galpha(q) and Galpha(11) proteins serve as
the intracellular mediators of ET-1 signaling in the pharyngeal arch mesenchyme.

PMID: 12648486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Apr 1;100(7):4030-4. Epub 2003 Mar 17.

Regulation of Dlx3 gene expression in visceral arches by evolutionarily conserved
enhancer elements.

Sumiyama K(1), Ruddle FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06511, USA.

The mammalian Distal-less (Dlx) clusters (Dlx1-2, Dlx5-6, and Dlx3-7) have a
nested expression pattern in developing visceral (branchial) arches. Genetic
regulatory mechanisms controlling Dlx spatial expression within the visceral
arches have not yet been defined. Here we show that an enhancer in the Dlx3-7
cluster can regulate the visceral arch specific expression pattern of the Dlx3
gene. We have used a 79-kb transgene construct containing the entire Dlx3-7
bigene cluster with a LacZ reporter inserted in frame in the first exon of the
Dlx3 gene. Visceral arch expression is absent when a 4-kb element located within 
the Dlx3-7 intergenic region is deleted. A 245-bp element (I37-2) whose DNA
sequence is highly conserved between human and mouse located within the
4kb-deleted region can drive visceral arch expression when fused to a hsp68-lacZ 
reporter transgene construct. Reporter expression is detected in 9.5 and 10.5
days postcoitum transgenic embryos in a manner consistent with the endogenous
Dlx3 expression pattern in the mesenchyme of the first and second visceral
arches. Thus the I37-2 element is both necessary and sufficient for Dlx3
expression. The I37-2 element contains several putative binding sites for several
transcription factors including Dlx and other homeodomain proteins within the
evolutionarily conserved region. Significantly, the I37-2 element shows a
sequence-match including a Dlx binding site to a cis-element in the Dlx5-6
intermediate region designated mI56i [Zerucha, T., Stuhmer, T., Hatch, G., Park, 
B. K., Long, Q., Yu, G., Gambarotta, A., Schultz, J. R., Rubenstein, J. L. &
Ekker, M. (2000) J. Neurosci. 20, 709-721], despite distant phylogenetic
relationship between these clusters. Our results provide evidence for a concerted
role for DLX auto- and cross-regulation in the establishment of a nested
expression pattern for Dlx3-7 and Dlx5-6 clusters within the visceral arches.

PMCID: PMC153042
PMID: 12642674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Placenta. 2003 Feb-Mar;24(2-3):123-30.

Genes, development and evolution of the placenta.

Cross JC(1), Baczyk D, Dobric N, Hemberger M, Hughes M, Simmons DG, Yamamoto H,
Kingdom JC.

Author information: 
(1)Genes & Development Research Group, Department of Biochemistry & Molecular
Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
jcross@ucalgary.ca

Through studies of transgenic and mutant mice, it is possible to describe
molecular pathways that control the development of all major trophoblast cell
subtypes and structures of the placenta. For example, the proliferation of
trophoblast stem cells is dependent on FGF signalling and downstream
transcription factors Cdx2, Eomes and Err2. Several bHLH transcription factors
regulate the progression from trophoblast stem cells to spongiotrophoblast and to
trophoblast giant cells (Id1/2, Mash2, Hand1, Stra13). Intercellular actions
critical for maintaining stable precursor cell populations are dependent on the
gap junction protein Cx31 and the growth factor Nodal. Differentiation towards
syncytiotrophoblast as well as the initiation of chorioallantoic (villous)
morphogenesis is regulated by the Gcm1 transcription factor, and subsequent
labyrinth development is dependent on Wnt, HGF and FGF signalling. These insights
suggest that most of the genes that evolved to regulate placental development are
either identical to ones used in other organ systems (e.g., FGF and epithelial
branching morphogenesis), were co-opted to take on new functions (e.g.,
AP-2gamma, Dlx3, Hand1), or arose via gene duplication to take on a specialized
placental function (e.g., Gcm1, Mash2). Many of the human orthologues of these
critical genes show restricted expression patterns that are consistent with a
conserved function. Such information is aiding the comparison of the human and
mouse placenta. In addition, the prospect of a conserved function clearly
suggests potential mechanisms for explaining complications of human placental
development.

PMID: 12596737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Development. 2003 Apr;130(7):1353-65.

Two endothelin 1 effectors, hand2 and bapx1, pattern ventral pharyngeal cartilage
and the jaw joint.

Miller CT(1), Yelon D, Stainier DY, Kimmel CB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, 1254 University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.
ctm@stanford.edu

A conserved endothelin 1 signaling pathway patterns the jaw and other pharyngeal 
skeletal elements in mice, chicks and zebrafish. In zebrafish, endothelin 1 (edn1
or sucker) is required for formation of ventral cartilages and joints in the
anterior pharyngeal arches of young larvae. Here we present genetic analyses in
the zebrafish of two edn1 downstream targets, the bHLH transcription factor Hand2
and the homeobox transcription factor Bapx1, that mediate dorsoventral (DV)
patterning in the anterior pharyngeal arches. First we show that edn1-expressing 
cells in the first (mandibular) and second (hyoid) pharyngeal arch primordia are 
located most ventrally and surrounded by hand2-expressing cells. Next we show
that along the DV axis of the early first arch primordia, bapx1 is expressed in
an intermediate domain, which later marks the jaw joint, and this expression
requires edn1 function. bapx1 function is required for formation of the jaw
joint, the joint-associated retroarticular process of Meckel's cartilage, and the
retroarticular bone. Jaw joint expression of chd and gdf5 also requires bapx1
function. Similar to edn1, hand2 is required for ventral pharyngeal cartilage
formation. However, the early ventral arch edn1-dependent expression of five
genes (dlx3, EphA3, gsc, msxe and msxb) are all present in hand2 mutants.
Further, msxe and msxb are upregulated in hand2 mutant ventral arches. Slightly
later, an edn1-dependent ventral first arch expression domain of gsc is absent in
hand2 mutants, providing a common downstream target of edn1 and hand2. In hand2
mutants, bapx1 expression is present at the joint region, and expanded ventrally.
In addition, expression of eng2, normally restricted to first arch dorsal
mesoderm, expands ventrally in hand2 and edn1 mutants. Thus, ventral pharyngeal
specification involves repression of dorsal and intermediate (joint region)
fates. Together our results reveal two critical edn1 effectors that pattern the
vertebrate jaw: hand2 specifies ventral pharyngeal cartilage of the lower jaw and
bapx1 specifies the jaw joint.

PMID: 12588851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jan 21;100(2):532-7. Epub 2003 Jan 2.

Induction of neural crest in Xenopus by transcription factor AP2alpha.

Luo T(1), Lee YH, Saint-Jeannet JP, Sargent TD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

We report experiments with Xenopus laevis, using both intact embryos and
ectodermal explants, showing that the transcription factor AP2alpha is positively
regulated by bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and Wnt signaling, and that this
activation is an essential step in the induction of neural crest (NC). Ectopic
expression of AP2alpha is sufficient to activate high-level expression of
NC-specific genes such as Slug and Sox9, which can occur as isolated domains
within the neural plate as well as by expansion of endogenous NC territories.
AP2alpha also has the property of inducing NC in isolated ectoderm in which Wnt
signaling is provided but BMP signaling is minimized by overexpression of
chordin. Like other NC regulatory factors, activation of AP2alpha requires some
attenuation of endogenous BMP signaling; however, this process occurs at a lower 
threshold for AP2alpha. Furthermore, AP2alpha expression domains are larger than 
for other NC factors. Loss-of-function experiments with antisense AP2alpha
morpholino oligonucleotides result in severe reduction in the NC territory. These
results support a central role for AP2alpha in NC induction. We propose a model
in which AP2alpha expression, along with inactivation of NC inhibitory factors
such as Dlx3, establish a feedback loop comprising AP2alpha, Sox9, and Slug,
leading to and maintaining NC specification.

PMCID: PMC141030
PMID: 12511599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Development. 2002 Jul;129(13):3127-36.

Concerted action of two dlx paralogs in sensory placode formation.

Solomon KS(1), Fritz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Sensory placodes are ectodermal thickenings that give rise to elements of the
vertebrate cranial sensory nervous system, including the inner ear and nose.
Although mutations have been described in humans, mice and zebrafish that perturb
ear and nose development, no mutation is known to prevent sensory placode
formation. Thus, it has been postulated that a functional redundancy exists in
the genetic mechanisms that govern sensory placode development. We describe a
zebrafish deletion mutation, b380, which results in a lack of both otic and
olfactory placodes. The b380 deletion removes several known genes and expressed
sequence tags, including dlx3 and dlx7, two transcription factors that share a
homoeobox domain similar in sequence to the Drosophila Distal-less gene. dlx3 and
dlx7 are expressed in an overlapping pattern in the regions that produce the otic
and olfactory placodes in zebrafish. We present evidence suggesting that it is
specifically the removal of these two genes that leads to the otic and olfactory 
phenotype of b380 mutants. Using morpholinos, antisense oligonucleotides that
effectively block translation of target genes, we find that functional reduction 
of both dlx genes contributes to placode loss. Expression patterns of the otic
marker pax2.1, olfactory marker anxV and eya1, a marker of both placodes, in
morpholino-injected embryos recapitulate the reduced expression of these genes
seen in b380 mutants. We also examine expression of dlx3 and dlx7 in the
morpholino-injected embryos and present evidence for existence of auto- and
cross-regulatory control of expression among these genes. We demonstrate that
dlx3 is necessary and sufficient for proper otic and olfactory placode
development. However, our results indicate that dlx3 and dlx7 act in concert and 
their importance in placode formation is only revealed by inactivating both
paralogs.

PMID: 12070088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Development. 2002 May;129(9):2099-108.

Fgf3 and Fgf8 are required together for formation of the otic placode and
vesicle.

Maroon H(1), Walshe J, Mahmood R, Kiefer P, Dickson C, Mason I.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, New Hunt's House, King's College
London, Guy's Campus, London SE1 9RT, UK.

Fgf3 has long been implicated in otic placode induction and early development of 
the otocyst; however, the results of experiments in mouse and chick embryos to
determine its function have proved to be conflicting. In this study, we
determined fgf3 expression in relation to otic development in the zebrafish and
used antisense morpholino oligonucleotides to inhibit Fgf3 translation.
Successful knockdown of Fgf3 protein was demonstrated and this resulted in a
reduction of otocyst size together with reduction in expression of early markers 
of the otic placode. fgf3 is co-expressed with fgf8 in the hindbrain prior to
otic induction and, strikingly, when Fgf3 morpholinos were co-injected together
with Fgf8 morpholinos, a significant number of embryos failed to form otocysts.
These effects were made manifest at early stages of otic development by an
absence of early placode markers (pax2.1 and dlx3) but were not accompanied by
effects on cell division or death. The temporal requirement for Fgf signalling
was established as being between 60% epiboly and tailbud stages using the Fgf
receptor inhibitor SU5402. However, the earliest molecular event in induction of 
the otic territory, pax8 expression, did not require Fgf signalling, indicating
an inductive event upstream of signalling by Fgf3 and Fgf8. We propose that Fgf3 
and Fgf8 are required together for formation of the otic placode and act during
the earliest stages of its induction.

PMID: 11959820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Jan 22;99(2):780-5. Epub 2002 Jan 15.

Genomic structure and functional control of the Dlx3-7 bigene cluster.

Sumiyama K(1), Irvine SQ, Stock DW, Weiss KM, Kawasaki K, Shimizu N, Shashikant
CS, Miller W, Ruddle FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06511, USA.

The Dlx genes are involved in early vertebrate morphogenesis, notably of the
head. The six Dlx genes of mammals are arranged in three convergently transcribed
bigene clusters. In this study, we examine the regulation of the Dlx3-7 cluster
of the mouse. We obtained and sequenced human and mouse P1 clones covering the
entire Dlx3-7 cluster. Comparative analysis of the human and mouse sequences
revealed several highly conserved noncoding regions within 30 kb of the
Dlx3-7-coding regions. These conserved elements were located both 5' of the
coding exons of each gene and in the intergenic region 3' of the exons,
suggesting that some enhancers might be shared between genes. We also found that 
the protein sequence of Dlx7 is evolving more rapidly than that of Dlx3. We
conducted a functional study of the 79-kb mouse genomic clone to locate
cis-element activity able to reproduce the endogenous expression pattern by using
transgenic mice. We inserted a lacZ reporter gene into the first exon of the Dlx3
gene by using homologous recombination in yeast. Strong lacZ expression in
embryonic (E) stage E9.5 and E10.5 mouse embryos was found in the limb buds and
first and second visceral arches, consistent with the endogenous Dlx3 expression 
pattern. This result shows that the 79-kb region contains the major cis-elements 
required to direct the endogenous expression of Dlx3 at stage E10.5. To test for 
enhancer location, we divided the construct in the mid-intergenic region and
injected the Dlx3 gene portion. This shortened fragment lacking Dlx7-flanking
sequences is able to drive expression in the limb buds but not in the visceral
arches. This observation is consistent with a cis-regulatory enhancer-sharing
model within the Dlx bigene cluster.

PMCID: PMC117382
PMID: 11792834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Jan 15;30(2):515-22.

Bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) transactivates Dlx3 through Smad1 and Smad4:
alternative mode for Dlx3 induction in mouse keratinocytes.

Park GT(1), Morasso MI.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Skin Biology Unit, NIAMS, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Expression of the Dlx3 homeodomain gene is induced in terminally differentiated
epidermal cells. Dlx3 regulates gene expression in skin and plays important roles
in patterning of the embryonic ectoderm through differential sensitivity to bone 
morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling. We analyzed the expression of BMP family
members in murine keratinocytes; BMP-2 is expressed in proliferative basal and
differentiated suprabasal keratinocytes. BMP-2 induced transcription of Dlx3
within 12 h of treatment of keratinocytes cultured in vitro. We proceeded to
delineate the BMP-2-responsive region to an area between -1917 and -1747 in the
Dlx3 promoter. Gel shift assays with recombinant Smad1 and Smad4 demonstrated
that this DNA fragment (-1917 to -1747) was competent in the formation of
protein-DNA complexes. By deletion and mutational analyses we localized a
Smad1/Smad4-binding site containing a GCAT motif, which showed similarity to
other TGF-beta family responsive elements. Supershift assays with keratinocyte
nuclear extracts and antibodies against members of the Smad family showed that
this motif was able to form a complex with Smad1. Mutation of the
Smad1/Smad4-binding site inhibited transcriptional activation of the Dlx3 gene by
BMP-2. In the hair follicle, where Dlx3 is expressed in the hair matrix cells,
BMP-2 also activates Dlx3 transcription. These results provide a possible
mechanism of action for the BMP signaling pathway on the regulation of Dlx3.

PMCID: PMC99823
PMID: 11788714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mol Reprod Dev. 2001 Nov;60(3):331-7.

Distinct roles for Distal-less genes Dlx3 and Dlx5 in regulating ectodermal
development in Xenopus.

Luo T(1), Matsuo-Takasaki M, Sargent TD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, 6 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD
20892-2790, USA.

In vertebrates, there are six or more copies of genes related to the Drosophila
pattern formation homeodomain gene Distal-less. Among this family, Dlx3 and Dlx5 
share extensive sequence homology and have similar, but distinctive, expression
patterns, suggesting that these two factors may have substantially redundant
developmental functions. Here we show that at the earliest phases of
embryogenesis in Xenopus, there are significant differences between Dlx3 and Dlx5
expression and that this correlates with different functions in the restriction
of neural crest and neural plate boundaries, respectively.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11599044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Int J Dev Biol. 2001 Jun;45(4):681-4.

Differential regulation of Dlx gene expression by a BMP morphogenetic gradient.

Luo T(1), Matsuo-Takasaki M, Lim JH, Sargent TD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-2790, USA.

Three members of the vertebrate Distal-less gene family, Dlx3, 5 and 6, are
transcribed in early gastrula embryos of Xenopus laevis. This expression is
confined to ectoderm and is excluded from the presumptive neural plate region.
Expression of all three genes is dependent upon BMP signaling, with significant
differences in how the three genes respond to the BMP antagonist chordin. This
correlates with the different expression domain boundaries in vivo for Dlx3
compared to Dlx5 and 6, suggesting that BMP signal attenuation could be the
primary factor in determining these different patterns in the gastrula ectoderm.

PMID: 11461005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mamm Genome. 2001 Jun;12(6):426-35.

Unravelling the complex genetics of cleft lip in the mouse model.

Juriloff DM(1), Harris MJ, Brown CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, 6174
University Boulevard, Vancouver, B.C., V6T 1Z3, Canada.
juriloff@interchange.ubc.ca

Nonsyndromic cleft lip in "A" strain mice and humans is genetically complex and
is distinct from isolated cleft palate. Cleft lip embryos recovered in 2.4% of
1485 first backcross (BC1) segregants from a cross of A/WySnJ (24% cleft lip) and
C57BL/6J (no cleft lip) in A/WySnJ mothers, and in testcrosses of 10 recombinant 
inbred (RI) strains (AXB/Pgn or BXA/Pgn), were used for gene mapping and for
inference of genetic architecture. The A/WySnJ maternal genotype increased cleft 
lip risk in reciprocal crosses; the relevant genetic difference between AXB-6/Pgn
(8%) and A/WySnJ (24%) is entirely maternal. A combination of new mapping panels 
(325 meioses), new markers, and a recombinant cleft lip embryo redefined the
location of a recessive factor essential to cleft lip risk, clf1, and candidate
genes Itgb3 and Crhr, to between D11Mit146/360 and D11Mit166/147. A screen of 54 
YACs for 46 genes and SSLP loci located Wnt15, Wnt3, Crhr, Mtapt, Itgb3, Dlx3,
and Dlx7 within the clf1 candidate region. The clf2 locus was newly mapped to
Chromosome (Chr) 13 by a genome screen of BC1 segregants, and further defined to 
a 4-cM region between D13Mit13/54 and D13Mit231 by strain distribution patterns
of cleft lip liability and markers in testcrossed RI strains. Specific
combinations of marker genotypes associated with cleft lip risk indicated that
high risk in A/WySnJ mice is caused by epistatic interaction between clf1 and
clf2 in the context of a genetic maternal effect. Human homologs of clf1 and clf2
are expected to be on 17q and 5q/9q.

PMID: 11353389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. FEBS Lett. 2001 May 4;496(1):60-5.

Phosphorylation of murine homeodomain protein Dlx3 by protein kinase C.

Park GT(1), Denning MF, Morasso MI.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Skin Biology, NIAMS, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

The Dlx3 homeodomain gene is expressed in terminally differentiated murine
epidermal cells. As demonstrated for differentiation-specific granular markers,
Dlx3 is activated in primary mouse keratinocytes cultured in vitro by increasing 
the level of the extracellular Ca(2+). This activation is mediated through a
protein kinase C-dependent (PKC) pathway. In this study, we investigated whether 
PKC can modulate the activity of murine Dlx3 protein. Using in vitro kinase
assays, we show that PKC enzymes phosphorylate the Dlx3 protein. Using
keratinocyte nuclear extracts for the kinase reaction, we determined that Dlx3
protein is phosphorylated, and the phosphorylation is inhibited by the
PKC-specific inhibitor GF109203X, suggesting that Dlx3 is phosphorylated by PKC
in vivo. Of the PKC isoforms present in the epidermis, we tested alpha, delta,
epsilon and zeta. Dlx3 is primarily phosphorylated by PKC alpha. By deletion and 
mutational analysis, we show that the serine residue S(138), located in the
homeodomain of Dlx3 protein, was specifically phosphorylated by PKC. The
phosphorylation of purified Dlx3 proteins by PKC partially inhibited formation of
complexes between Dlx3 protein and DNA. These results suggest that Dlx3 protein
can be directly phosphorylated by PKC and this affects the DNA binding activity
of Dlx3.

PMCID: PMC1283141
PMID: 11343707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Exp Zool. 2000 Oct 15;288(3):235-41.

Differential expression of orthologous Dlx genes in zebrafish and mice:
implications for the evolution of the Dlx homeobox gene family.

Quint E(1), Zerucha T, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Loeb Health Research Institute at the Ottawa Hospital, Ontario, Canada.

Dlx homeobox genes of vertebrates are often organised as physically linked pairs 
in which the two genes are transcribed convergently (tail-to-tail arrangement).
Three such Dlx pairs have been found in mouse, human, and zebrafish and are
thought to have originated from the duplication of an ancestral gene pair. These 
pairs include Dlx1/Dlx2, Dlx7/Dlx3, and Dlx6/Dlx5 (the zebrafish orthologue of
Dlx5 is named dlx4). Expression patterns of physically linked Dlx genes overlap
extensively. Furthermore, orthologous Dlx genes often show highly similar
expression patterns. We analysed Dlx expression during the gastrula and early
somitogenesis of the mouse and zebrafish. It was found that expression of the
mouse Dlx6 gene takes place in the rostral ectoderm and presumptive olfactory and
otic placodes with patterns similar to the previously reported expression of the 
physically linked Dlx5 gene. However, we observed only very weak expression of
the mouse Dlx3 gene at the same stage. This contrasts with the expression of dlx 
genes in zebrafish where dlx3 and dlx7, but not dlx4 and dlx6 are expressed
during gastrulation in the rostral ectoderm and presumptive placodes. Thus, Dlx
expression patterns at early stages are better conserved between paralogous pairs
of physically linked genes than between orthologous pairs. This suggests that
early expression of Dlx genes existed prior to the duplications that led to the
multiple pairs of physically linked genes but was differentially conserved in
different paralogs in zebrafish and mice.

PMID: 11069141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Int J Dev Biol. 2000;44(6):619-26.

Multiple functions of Dlx genes.

Merlo GR(1), Zerega B, Paleari L, Trombino S, Mantero S, Levi G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Morphogenesis, National Cancer Institute-IST, Genova, 
Italy.

Dlx genes comprise a highly conserved family of homeobox genes homologous to the 
distal-less (Dll) gene of Drosophila. They are thought to act as transcription
factors. All Dlx genes are expressed in spatially and temporally restricted
patterns in craniofacial primordia, basal telencephalon and diencephalon, and in 
distal regions of extending appendages, including the limb and the genital bud.
Most of them are expressed during morphogenesis of sensory organs and during
migration of neural crest cells and interneurons. In addition, Dlx5 and Dlx6 are 
expressed in differentiating osteoblasts. Gene targeting of Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx3 and 
Dlx5 in the mouse germ-line has revealed functions in craniofacial patterning,
sensory organ morphogenesis, osteogenesis and placental formation. However, no
effect on limb development has yet been revealed from gene inactivation studies. 
A role for these genes in limb development is however suggested by the linkage of
the Split Foot/Hand Malformation human syndrome to a region containing DLX5 and
DLX6. As for most transcription factors, these genes seem to have multiple
functions at different stages of development or in different tissues and cell
types.

PMID: 11061425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Cell Sci. 2000 Nov;113 ( Pt 22):4013-23.

The Dlx3 protein harbors basic residues required for nuclear localization,
transcriptional activity and binding to Msx1.

Bryan JT(1), Morasso MI.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Skin Biology, National Institute of Arthritis, Musculoskeletal
and Skin Diseases, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The murine Dlx3 protein is a putative transcriptional activator that has been
implicated during development and differentiation of epithelial tissue. Dlx3
contains a homeodomain and mutational analysis has revealed two regions, one
N-terminal and one C-terminal to the homeodomain, that act as transcriptional
activators in a yeast one-hybrid assay. In addition to transactivation, data are 
presented to demonstrate specific DNA binding and an association between Dlx3 and
the Msx1 protein in vitro. Immunohistochemical analysis confirmed coexpression of
Dlx3 and Msx1 proteins in the differentiated layers of murine epidermal tissues. 
Transcription factor function requires nuclear localization. In this study, the
intracellular localization of the green fluorescent protein fused to Dlx3 was
examined in keratinocytes induced to differentiate by calcium and is shown to
localize to the nucleus. A bipartite nuclear localization signal (NLS) was
identified by mutational analysis and shown to be sufficient for nuclear
localization. This was demonstrated by insertion of the Dlx3 bipartite NLS
sequence into a cytoplasmic fusion protein, GFP-keratin 14, which functionally
redirected GFP-keratin 14 expression to the nucleus. Further analysis of Dlx3 NLS
mutants revealed that the Dlx3 NLS sequences are required for specific DNA
binding, transactivation potential and interactions with the Msx1 protein.

PMCID: PMC1317294
PMID: 11058088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Development. 2000 Sep;127(17):3815-28.

sucker encodes a zebrafish Endothelin-1 required for ventral pharyngeal arch
development.

Miller CT(1), Schilling TF, Lee K, Parker J, Kimmel CB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, Eugene, OR 97403-1254, USA.
miller@uoneuro.uoregon.edu

Mutation of sucker (suc) disrupts development of the lower jaw and other ventral 
cartilages in pharyngeal segments of the zebrafish head. Our sequencing,
cosegregation and rescue results indicate that suc encodes an Endothelin-1
(Et-1). Like mouse and chick Et-1, suc/et-1 is expressed in a central core of
arch paraxial mesoderm and in arch epithelia, both surface ectoderm and
pharyngeal endoderm, but not in skeletogenic neural crest. Long before
chondrogenesis, suc/et-1 mutant embryos have severe defects in ventral arch
neural crest expression of dHAND, dlx2, msxE, gsc, dlx3 and EphA3 in the anterior
arches. Dorsal expression patterns are unaffected. Later in development, suc/et-1
mutant embryos display defects in mesodermal and endodermal tissues of the
pharynx. Ventral premyogenic condensations fail to express myoD, which correlates
with a ventral muscle defect. Further, expression of shh in endoderm of the first
pharyngeal pouch fails to extend as far laterally as in wild types. We use mosaic
analyses to show that suc/et-1 functions nonautonomously in neural crest cells,
and is thus required in the environment of postmigratory neural crest cells to
specify ventral arch fates. Our mosaic analyses further show that suc/et-1
nonautonomously functions in mesendoderm for ventral arch muscle formation.
Collectively our results support a model for dorsoventral patterning of the
gnathostome pharyngeal arches in which Et-1 in the environment of the
postmigratory cranial neural crest specifies the lower jaw and other ventral arch
fates.

PMID: 10934026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Dev Dyn. 2000 Aug;218(4):545-53.

Regulation and function of Dlx3 in vertebrate development.

Beanan MJ(1), Sargent TD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Dlx3 is a homeodomain transcription factor in vertebrates, related to Distal-less
in Drosophila, that is expressed in differentiating epidermal cells, in neural
crest, hair follicles, dental epithelium and mesenchyme, the otic and olfactory
placodes, limb bud, placenta, and in the cement gland, which is located in the
extreme anterior neural plate in Xenopus embryos. This factor behaves as a
transcriptional activator, and positively regulates gene expression in the skin, 
and negatively regulates central nervous system markers in Xenopus epidermis and 
anterior neural plate. A mutation in the DLX3 gene is associated with a
hereditary syndrome in humans, and loss of Dlx3 function is a developmental
lethal in gene-targeted mice, where it is essential for proper modeling of the
labyrinthine layer of the placenta. In this review, we discuss the evolution,
expression, regulation, and function of Dlx3 in mouse, amphibians, and zebrafish.
Published 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10906774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Mech Dev. 2000 Mar 1;91(1-2):227-35.

Regulation of early expression of Dlx3, a Xenopus anti-neural factor, by
beta-catenin signaling.

Beanan MJ(1), Feledy JA, Sargent TD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The ectoderm of the pre-gastrula Xenopus embryo has previously been shown to be
at least partially patterned along the dorsal-ventral axis. The early expression 
of the anti-neural homeodomain gene Dlx3 is localized to the ventral ectoderm by 
a mechanism that occurs prior to gastrulation and is independent of the Spemann
organizer. The repression of Dlx3 is mediated by signaling though beta-catenin,
but is probably not dependent on the induction of the Xnr3 or chordin genes by
beta-catenin. We propose a model in which this early regulation of Dlx3 accounts 
for the pro-neural bias of dorsal ectoderm.

PMID: 10704847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Mech Dev. 1999 Dec;89(1-2):189-93.

Expression of DLX3 in chick embryos.

Pera E(1), Kessel M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für biophysikalische Chemie, Abteilung Molekulare
Zellbiologie, Am Fassberg, D-37077, Göttingen, Germany.

Higher vertebrates appear to possess six genes encoding a homeodomain of the
distal-less type. We report the cloning and expression pattern of the chicken
DLX3 gene, a homeobox gene highly related to the DLX5 gene with regard to both
the encoded protein structure and the expression pattern. DLX3 RNA was observed
during the development of the olfactory and otic placodes, in the distal portion 
of the first and second visceral arch mesenchyme, in the growing limb buds, and
in the tail tip. No expression occurs in the central nervous system.

PMID: 10559497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Biol Chem. 1999 Sep 10;274(37):26599-608.

Regulation of the Dlx3 homeobox gene upon differentiation of mouse keratinocytes.

Park GT(1), Morasso MI.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Skin Biology, NIAMS, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

The Distal-less Dlx3 homeodomain gene is expressed in terminally differentiated
murine epidermal cells, and there is evidence to support an essential role as a
transcriptional regulator of the terminal differentiation process in these cells.
In an attempt to determine the factors that induce Dlx3 gene expression, we have 
cloned the 1.2-kilobase pair proximal region of murine gene and analyzed its
cis-regulatory elements and potential trans-acting factors. The proximal region
of the Dlx3 gene has a canonical TATA box and CCAAT box, and the transcription
start site was located 205 base pairs upstream from the initiation of translation
site. Serial deletion analysis showed that the region between -84 and -34 confers
the maximal promoter activity both in undifferentiated and differentiated primary
mouse keratinocytes. Gel retardation assays and mutational analysis demonstrated 
that the transcriptional regulator NF-Y (also referred to as CBF) binds to a
CCAAT box motif within this region and is responsible for the majority of the
Dlx3 promoter activity. In addition, an Sp1-binding site was located immediately 
upstream of transcription start site that acts as a positive regulatory element
of the Dlx3 promoter, independent of the CCAAT box motif. Importantly, elements
residing between +30 to +60 of the Dlx3 gene are responsible for the
Ca(2+)-dependent induction of Dlx3 during keratinocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1317293
PMID: 10473625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Clin Genet. 1999 Jul;56(1):35-40.

Tricho-dento-osseous syndrome and amelogenesis imperfecta with taurodontism are
genetically distinct conditions.

Price JA(1), Wright JT, Walker SJ, Crawford PJ, Aldred MJ, Hart TC.

Author information: 
(1)Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Amelogenesis imperfecta of the hypomaturation-hypoplasia type with taurodontism
(AIHHT) is inherited as a highly penetrant autosomal dominant trait. These dental
findings are similar to those of another autosomal dominant condition, the
tricho-dento-osseous syndrome (TDO), from which AIHHT differs primarily by lack
of changes in the hair and bones. TDO is characterized by a highly variable
clinical phenotype. While enamel hypoplasia and taurodontism appear to be present
in all TDO cases, non-dental features may be absent, with approximately half of
TDO cases losing the kinky/curly hair phenotype seen in infancy by adolescence,
and in almost 20% of cases, osseous changes are not evident. The genetic basis
for AIHHT is unknown and it has been questioned whether AIHHT and TDO are
separate conditions or a spectrum of disease. The genetic basis for TDO has
recently been identified as a deletion mutation in the distal-less 3 (DLX3)
transcription factor gene. To determine if AIHHT and TDO represent variable
expression of a common DLX3 gene mutation, allelic mutations of the DLX3 gene, or
mutations in DLX7 (the linked paralogue to DLX3 on chromosome 17), we have
performed mutational analysis and sequencing studies of the DLX3 and DLX7 genes
in three individuals (two affected and one unaffected) from a family with AIHHT. 
Results of the analysis demonstrate that AIHHT and TDO are not due to a common
DLX3 gene mutation. Sequence analyses of the DLX3 and DLX7 genes suggest AIHHT is
not due to genetic mutations or polymorphisms in the exons of these genes. These 
results suggest that AI-HHT and TDO are two genetically distinct conditions.

PMID: 10466415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Dev Biol. 1999 Aug 15;212(2):455-64.

Inhibitory patterning of the anterior neural plate in Xenopus by homeodomain
factors Dlx3 and Msx1.

Feledy JA(1), Beanan MJ, Sandoval JJ, Goodrich JS, Lim JH, Matsuo-Takasaki M,
Sato SM, Sargent TD.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, 20892, USA.

Patterning of the embryonic ectoderm is dependent upon the action of negative
(antineural) and positive (neurogenic) transcriptional regulators. Msx1 and Dlx3 
are two antineural genes for which the anterior epidermal-neural boundaries of
expression differ, probably due to differential sensitivity to BMP signaling in
the ectoderm. In the extreme anterior neural plate, Dlx3 is strongly expressed
while Msx1 is silent. While both of these factors prevent the activation of genes
specific to the nascent central nervous system, Msx1 inhibits anterior markers,
including Otx2 and cement gland-specific genes. Dlx3 has little, if any, effect
on these anterior neural plate genes, instead providing a permissive environment 
for their expression while repressing more panneural markers, including
prepattern genes belonging to the Zic family and BF-1. These properties define a 
molecular mechanism for translating the organizer-dependent morphogenic gradient 
of BMP activity into spatially restricted gene expression in the prospective
anterior neural plate.

PMID: 10433834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Feb 1;27(3):764-70.

Transcriptional activation by the homeodomain protein distal-less 3.

Feledy JA(1), Morasso MI, Jang SI, Sargent TD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, NICHD and Laboratory of Skin Biology, NIAMS,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

PCR-based methods and mobility shift competition assays were used to determine
the basic biochemical features of the homeodomain transcription factor
Distal-less 3 (Dlx3), including an optimal DNA binding site, the binding constant
and dissociation rates of this protein. Expression of Dlx3 protein in either HeLa
cells or Xenopus embryos resulted in strong activation of a model target gene
construct containing three tandem copies of the Dlx3 binding site upstream from
the TATA element. In addition, deletion analysis revealed that transcriptional
activation by Dlx3 depends on two subdomains located on either side of the
homeobox: removal of either subdomain resulted in complete loss of Dlx3 function.
These observations provide new insight regarding the function of Dlx3 in
vertebrate development and tissue differentiation and also suggest a mechanism
for the dominant inheritance pattern of a hereditary disease resulting from
mutation of the DLX3 gene in human.

PMCID: PMC148245
PMID: 9889271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Jan 5;96(1):162-7.

Placental failure in mice lacking the homeobox gene Dlx3.

Morasso MI(1), Grinberg A, Robinson G, Sargent TD, Mahon KA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA. morasso@nih.gov

Dlx3 is a homeodomain transcription factor and a member of the vertebrate
Distal-less family. Targeted deletion of the mouse Dlx3 gene results in embryonic
death between day 9.5 and day 10 because of placental defects that alter the
development of the labyrinthine layer. In situ hybridization reveals that the
Dlx3 gene is initially expressed in ectoplacental cone cells and chorionic plate,
and later in the labyrinthine trophoblast of the chorioallantoic placenta, where 
major defects are observed in the Dlx3 -/- embryos. The expression of structural 
genes, such as 4311 and PL-1, which were used as markers to follow the fate of
different derivatives of the placenta, was not affected in the Dlx3-null embryos.
However, by day 10.5 of development, expression of the paired-like homeodomain
gene Esx1 was strongly down-regulated in affected placenta tissue, suggesting
that Dlx3 is required for the maintenance of Esx1 expression, normal placental
morphogenesis, and embryonic survival.

PMCID: PMC15110
PMID: 9874789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Med Genet. 1998 Oct;35(10):825-8.

A common DLX3 gene mutation is responsible for tricho-dento-osseous syndrome in
Virginia and North Carolina families.

Price JA(1), Wright JT, Kula K, Bowden DW, Hart TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest University Medical School,
Winston-Salem, NC, USA.

Tricho-dento-osseous syndrome (TDO) is characterised by a variable clinical
phenotype primarily affecting the hair, teeth, and bone. Different clinical
features are observed between and within TDO families. It is not known whether
the variable clinical features are the result of genetic heterogeneity or
clinical variability. A gene for TDO was localised recently to chromosome 17q21
in four North Carolina families, and a 4 bp deletion in the human distal-less 3
gene (DLX3) was identified in all affected members. A previous genetic linkage
study in a large Virginia kindred with TDO indicated possible linkage to the ABO,
Gc, and Kell blood group loci. To examine whether TDO exhibits genetic
heterogeneity, we have performed molecular genetic analysis to determine whether 
affected members of this Virginia kindred have the DLX3 gene deletion identified 
in North Carolina families. Results show that affected subjects (n=3) from the
Virginia family have the same four nucleotide deletion previously identified in
the North Carolina families. A common haplotype for three genetic markers
surrounding the DLX3 gene was identified in all affected subjects in the North
Carolina and Virginia families. These findings suggest that all people with TDO
who have been evaluated have inherited the same DLX3 gene deletion mutation from 
a common ancestor. The variable clinical phenotype observed in these North
Carolina and Virginia families, which share a common gene mutation, suggests that
clinical variability is not the result of genetic heterogeneity at the major
locus, but may reflect genetic heterogeneity at other epigenetic loci or
contributing environmental factors or both.

PMCID: PMC1051457
PMID: 9783705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Hum Hered. 1998 Sep-Oct;48(5):288-90.

Identification of a CA/TG repeat polymorphism proximal to the human DLX3 gene.

Price JA(1), Bowden DW, Hart TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Bowman 
Gray Campus, Winston-Salem, N.C., USA.

PMID: 9748700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Hum Mol Genet. 1998 Mar;7(3):563-9.

Identification of a mutation in DLX3 associated with tricho-dento-osseous (TDO)
syndrome.

Price JA(1), Bowden DW, Wright JT, Pettenati MJ, Hart TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Bowman 
Gray Campus, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Tricho-dento-osseous syndrome (TDO) is an autosomal dominant disorder
characterized by abnormal hair, teeth and bone. The main clinical manifestations 
of TDO include taurodontism, enamel hypoplasia, kinky, curly hair at birth and
increased thickness and density of the cranial bones. These pleiotropic clinical 
features suggest the role of a developmental gene modulating
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions. We recently mapped the TDO locus to
chromosome 17q21, a region that includes two members of the distal-less homeobox 
gene family, DLX3 and DLX7. In this paper we describe genomic cloning and
sequencing of both human DLX3 and DLX7 and identification of a 4 bp deletion in
human DLX3 which correlates with the TDO phenotype in six families. The observed 
mutation is predicted to cause a frameshift and premature termination codon,
resulting in a functionally altered DLX3. This first report of a human mutation
in the DLX genes is consistent with murine studies indicating their important
role in the development of hair, teeth and bone.

PMID: 9467018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Genomics. 1997 Nov 1;45(3):580-90.

Relationship between the genomic organization and the overlapping embryonic
expression patterns of the zebrafish dlx genes.

Ellies DL(1), Stock DW, Hatch G, Giroux G, Weiss KM, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Civic Hospital, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, K1Y 4E9, Canada.

To understand the relationship between the expression and the genomic
organization of the zebrafish dlx genes, we have determined the genomic structure
of the dlx2 and dlx4 loci. This led to the identification of the zebrafish dlx1
and dlx6 genes, which are closely linked to dlx2 and dlx4, respectively.
Therefore, the inverted convergent configuration of Dlx genes is conserved among 
vertebrates. Analysis of the expression patterns of dlx1 and dlx6 showed striking
similarities to those of dlx2 and dlx4, respectively, the genes to which they are
linked. Furthermore, the expression patterns of dlx3 and dlx7, which likely
constitute a third pair of convergently transcribed genes, are indistinguishable.
Thus, the overlapping expression patterns of linked Dlx genes during embryonic
development suggest that they share cis-acting sequences that control their
spatiotemporal expression. The evolutionary conservation of the genomic
organization and combinatorial expression of Dlx genes in distantly related
vertebrates suggest tight control mechanisms that are essential for their
function during development.

Copyright 1997 Academic Press.

PMID: 9367683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Gene. 1997 Mar 10;187(1):55-61.

Isolation and identification of homeobox genes from the human placenta including 
a novel member of the Distal-less family, DLX4.

Quinn LM(1), Johnson BV, Nicholl J, Sutherland GR, Kalionis B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Flinders University of South
Australia, Adelaide.

We have carried out a DNA binding site screen of a 32-week human placental cDNA
library using a consensus homeodomain binding site as a probe. This study
represents the first library screen carried out to isolate homeobox genes from
the human placenta. We have shown that three homeobox genes known to be expressed
in the embryo, HB24, GAX and MSX2 are also expressed in the placenta. We have
also identified a novel homeobox gene, DLX4, that shows 85% sequence identity
with the homeodomain encoded by the Drosophila Distal-less (Dll) gene. DLX4
therefore represents a new member of the Distal-less family of homeobox genes.
This is the first evidence that members of the Distal-less family of homeobox
genes are expressed in the placenta. Using fluorescence in situ hybridisation
(FISH), DLX4 has been assigned to human chromosome 17q21-q22. This places DLX4 in
the same region of chromosome 17 as another member of the Distal-less family,
DLX3 (Scherer et al., 1995), and the HOX-B homeobox gene cluster (Acampora et
al., 1989: Boncinelli et al., 1991). Members of the Distal-less family (DLX1 and 
DLX2; DLX5 and DLX6) are found as closely linked pairs on human chromosomes
(Simeone et al., 1994). We predict that DLX3 and DLX4 are closely linked and have
arisen through gene duplication and divergence from a common ancestral precursor.

PMID: 9073066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Biochem Cell Biol. 1997;75(5):613-22.

Cross-interactions between two members of the Dlx family of homeobox-containing
genes during zebrafish development.

Zerucha T(1), Muller JP, Chartrand N, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Civic Hospital Loeb Research Institute, ON, Canada.

The Dlx homeobox genes of vertebrates are transcribed in multiple cells of the
embryo with overlapping patterns but often with different onsets of expression.
Here we describe the interaction between two dlx genes, dlx3 and dlx4, during
zebrafish development. The observation that dlx3 expression precedes that of dlx4
in the otic vesicle led us to investigate whether dlx3 had the ability to control
expression of dlx4. Truncated versions of dlx3 were overexpressed in zebrafish
embryos and the expression patterns of dlx4 were examined later in development.
Overexpression of truncated forms of Dlx3 or of a Dlx3-Dlx2 chimera was found to 
result in perturbations in dlx4 expression. In addition, cotransfection
experiments indicated the ability of Dlx3 to activate transcription through a
1.7-kb fragment of the 5' flanking region of dlx4. These results suggest that
dlx4 is one of the target genes of dlx3 in embryos and that cross-regulatory
interactions between Dlx genes may be one of the mechanisms responsible for their
overlapping expression.

PMID: 9551183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Genomics. 1996 Dec 15;38(3):314-24.

Genomic analysis of a new mammalian distal-less gene: Dlx7.

Nakamura S(1), Stock DW, Wydner KL, Bollekens JA, Takeshita K, Nagai BM, Chiba S,
Kitamura T, Freeland TM, Zhao Z, Minowada J, Lawrence JB, Weiss KM, Ruddle FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA.

We have cloned a new Dlx gene (Dlx7) from human and mouse that may represent the 
mammalian orthologue of the newt gene NvHBox-5. The homeodomains of these genes
are highly similar to all other vertebrate Dlx genes, and regions of similarity
also exist between mammalian Dlx7 and a subset of vertebrate Dlx genes downstream
of the homeodomain. The sequence divergence between human and mouse Dlx7 in these
regions is greater than that predicted from comparisons of other vertebrate Dlx
genes, however, and there is little sequence similarity upstream of the
homeodomain both between these two genes and with other Dlx genes. We present
evidence for alternative splicing of mouse Dlx7 upstream of the homeodomain that 
may account for some of this divergence. We have mapped human DLX7 distal to the 
5' end of the HOXB cluster at an estimated distance of between 1 and 2 Mb by
FISH. Both the human and the mouse Dlx7 are shown to be closely linked to Dlx3 in
a convergently transcribed orientation. These mapping results support the
possibility that vertebrate distal-less genes have been duplicated in concert
with the Hox clusters.

PMID: 8975708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Cell Biol. 1996 Dec;135(6 Pt 2):1879-87.

Regulation of epidermal differentiation by a Distal-less homeodomain gene.

Morasso MI(1), Markova NG, Sargent TD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The Distal-less-related homeodomain gene Dlx3 is expressed in terminally
differentiated murine epidermal cells. Ectopic expression of this gene in the
basal cell layer of transgenic skin results in a severely abnormal epidermal
phenotype and leads to perinatal lethality. The basal cells of affected mice
ceased to proliferate, and expressed the profilaggrin and loricrin genes which
are normally transcribed only in the latest stages of epidermal differentiation. 
All suprabasal cell types were diminished and the stratum corneum was reduced to 
a single layer. These data indicate that Dlx3 misexpression results in
transformation of basal cells into more differentiated keratinocytes, suggesting 
that this homeoprotein is an important regulator of epidermal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1283140
PMID: 8991098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Dev Biol. 1996 Nov 1;179(2):427-35.

A mutation in zebrafish affecting a localized cellular function required for
normal ear development.

Riley BB(1), Grunwald DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station 77843-3258, USA. 
briley@bio.tamu.edu

Zebrafish holds great potential as a model system for studying inner ear
development because genetic techniques are highly efficient and inner ear
development is a conspicuous and manipulable feature of zebrafish embryogenesis. 
Here we describe analysis of a semilethal dominant mutation, termed monolith
(mnl), that specifically perturbs formation of the anterior (utricular) otolith
in the developing ear. Other than the utricular otolith deficiency, all
structures in the ear appear morphologically normal in mutant embryos, including 
posterior otoliths and all sensory epithelia. Expression patterns of several ear 
marker genes (msxC, msxD, and dlx3) also appear normal in the mutant. To identify
the cell type(s) affected by the mnl mutation, chimeras were generated by
transplanting dye-labeled +/+ cells into unlabeled mnl/mnl host embryos. Roughly 
half of such chimeras formed utricular otoliths normally, indicating that the
transplanted wild-type cells rescued their mutant hosts. Detailed analysis of +/+
cell fates revealed that virtually all chimeras in which +/+ cells formed support
cells in the utricular sensory epithelium were rescued. In contrast, wild-type
cells forming other cell types (such as hair cells) or colonizing other regions
of the host were not sufficient to facilitate rescue. These data indicate that
support cells are required for normal otolith formation, providing the first
experimentally established role for support cells in vertebrate sensory
epithelia. The data also provide the first clear indication that otolith
formation is controlled independently in different regions of the ear by
localized cellular functions.

PMID: 8903357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Dev Dyn. 1996 Feb;205(2):183-95.

Secondary axis induction by heterospecific organizers in zebrafish.

Hatta K(1), Takahashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene 97403-1254, USA.

To investigate the inductive activities of the vertebrate organizer, we
transplanted the chicken organizer (Hensen's node) into zebrafish gastrula and
analyzed resulting secondary axes. Grafted Hensen's node did not differentiate or
participate in the secondary axis. It also did not induce a secondary notochord
or expression of the genes normally expressed by the fish organizer including no 
tail, axial, goosecoid. Nevertheless, it recruited fish cells to organize a
variety of tissues: the dorsal portion of the central nervous system including
Rohon-Beard sensory neurons, otic vesicles, dorsal pigment stripe, dorsal fin,
somites, heart, and pronephric ducts. Enlarged neural plate induced by the
organizer was shown by the expression pattern of dlx3 and msxB genes, which
demarcates the early presumptive neural tissue. In addition, Hensen's node of an 
earlier stage chicken embryo displayed differential movement in zebrafish from
that of a later stage. This might reflect unknown differences in properties
between the organizer at two different developmental stages related to its normal
organizer activity. To create a model system to study the molecular mechanisms of
the organizer, we next transplanted genetically modified mouse cells into
zebrafish embryos. We found that Wnt3A-transfected NIH3T3 cells are much more
potent in inducing a secondary axis than NIH3T3 cells alone. These results
suggest that formation of a variety of tissues are controlled by signalling from 
the organizer itself with no requirement of participation of the
organizer-derived tissues. Additionally, the activities of the organizer may
involve a function of Wnt-family genes.

PMID: 8834478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Mamm Genome. 1995 Apr;6(4):310-1.

Assignment of the human homolog of mouse Dlx3 to chromosome 17q21.3-q22 by
analysis of somatic cell hybrids and fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Scherer SW(1), Heng HH, Robinson GW, Mahon KA, Evans JP, Tsui LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.

PMID: 7613049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Neurosci. 1994 Jun;14(6):3475-86.

Combinatorial expression of three zebrafish genes related to distal-less: part of
a homeobox gene code for the head.

Akimenko MA(1), Ekker M, Wegner J, Lin W, Westerfield M.

Author information: 
(1)Loeb Institute for Medical Research, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

We describe analysis of zebrafish distal-less-related homeobox genes that may
serve as specifiers of positional information in anterior regions of the CNS and 
in peripheral structures. We isolated three zebrafish genes, dlx2, dlx3, and
dlx4, by screening embryonic cDNA libraries. Comparisons of the predicted
sequences of the Dlx2, Dlx3, and Dlx4 proteins with distal-less proteins from
other species suggest that vertebrate distal-less genes can be divided into four 
orthologous groups. We observed similarities but also unique features of the
expression patterns of the zebrafish dlx genes. Among the three genes, dlx3 alone
is expressed during gastrulation. Shortly after gastrulation, cells in the
ventral forebrain rudiment express dlx2 and dlx4, but not dlx3, and hindbrain
neural crest cells express only dlx2. Presumptive precursor cells of the
olfactory placodes express dlx3 and dlx4 but not dlx2. Transcripts of dlx3 and
dlx4 are present in overlapping subsets of cells in the auditory vesicle and in
cells of the median fin fold, whereas dlx2 is never expressed in the auditory
vesicle and only at low levels in localized regions of the median fin fold. Cells
of the visceral arches and their primordia express all three dlx genes, but with 
different developmental time courses. We suggest that combinatorial expression of
the dlx genes is part of a homeobox gene code specifying pattern formation or
cell fate determination in the forebrain, in peripheral structures of the head,
and in the fins.

PMID: 7911517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1990 Apr;31(4):681-8.

A herpes simplex type 1 ICPO deletion mutant demonstrates diminished
pathogenicity during acute ocular infection in different host animals.

Gordon YJ(1), Romanowski E, Balouris C, Araullo-Cruz T.

Author information: 
(1)Eye and Ear Institute of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213.

We compared a previously characterized herpes simplex type 1 alpha 0 deletion
mutant, dlx3.1, which produced no functional ICP0, with its wild-type parental
strain, KOS, during acute ocular infection of different host animals. Acute
pathogenicity of the viral strains in NZ rabbits, Balb/c and A/J mice was
evaluated by keratitis scores, ocular and trigeminal ganglionic viral titers, and
host survival. We found that dlx3.1 was significantly less pathogenic than KOS.
Host differences proved very important in the evaluation of acute pathogenicity. 
A species-dependent enhancement of ocular pathogenicity was demonstrated for
dlx3.1 following a larger viral inoculum and host immunosuppression. We conclude 
that alpha 0 gene function appears to play an important role during acute ocular 
pathogenicity of HSV-1 in animal models. Furthermore, in vivo pathogenicity
studies contribute important information in the evaluation of essential viral
gene function.

PMID: 2159449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Virol. 1987 Mar;61(3):829-39.

Deletion mutants in the gene encoding the herpes simplex virus type 1
immediate-early protein ICP0 exhibit impaired growth in cell culture.

Sacks WR, Schaffer PA.

We report the construction and characterization of deletion mutants in the herpes
simplex virus type 1 gene encoding the immediate-early protein ICP0. In the event
that ICP0 proved to play an essential role in virus replication, ICP0-transformed
Vero cells were generated to serve as permissive hosts for such mutants. Two
mutants, dlX0.7 and dlX3.1, were isolated in these cells by a marker
rescue-transfer procedure involving the rescue of an ICP4 deletion mutant and the
simultaneous insertion of a linked deletion in the ICP0 gene. Mutant dlX0.7
contained a 700-base-pair deletion in both copies of ICP0. The deletion lay
entirely within the transcript specified by the gene. dlX0.7 induced the
synthesis of an ICP0-specific mRNA that was approximately 0.7 kilobases smaller
than the corresponding mRNA specified by wild-type virus. The 3.1-kilobase
deletion in both copies of the ICP0 gene in mutant dlX3.1 removed the majority of
the transcriptional-regulatory signals and coding sequences, retaining only
sequences at the 3' end of the gene. As expected, no ICP0-specific mRNA was
detected in dlX3.1-infected Nero cells (G418-resistant Vero cells). Both mutants 
grew in all cells tested, although their burst sizes were 10- to 100-fold lower
than that of wild-type virus. Although the plaque sizes of dlX0.7 and dlX3.1 were
equally small on Nero and ICP0-transformed cells, the plating efficiency of the
mutants was 15- to 50-fold greater on ICP0-transformed cells than on Nero cells. 
The mutants exhibited modest interference with the growth of wild-type virus in
mixed infections, an effect that was abolished by UV irradiation of the mutants, 
implying that interference required viral gene expression. Polypeptide profiles
generated by the mutants in Nero cells were qualitatively similar to that of
wild-type virus. Quantitatively, only slight reductions in the levels of certain 
late viral polypeptides were observed, a phenomenon also borne out by analysis of
viral glycoproteins. Both mutants induced the synthesis of significant, although 
reduced, levels of viral DNA relative to wild-type virus. Taken together, the
results demonstrate that ICP0 is not essential for productive infection in cell
culture but that this protein plays a significant role in viral growth, as
indicated by the impaired abilities of the mutants to replicate.

PMCID: PMC254026
PMID: 3027408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


