
1. Tumour Biol. 2016 Jan 11. [Epub ahead of print]

DLX4 hypermethylation is a prognostically adverse indicator in de novo acute
myeloid leukemia.

Zhou JD(1), Zhang TJ(1), Wang YX(1), Yang DQ(1), Yang L(1), Ma JC(2), Wen XM(2), 
Yang J(1), Lin J(3), Qian J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Affiliated People's Hospital of Jiangsu University, 
8 Dianli Rd., 212002, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.
(2)Laboratory Center, Affiliated People's Hospital of Jiangsu University, 8
Dianli Rd., 212002, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China. (3)Laboratory
Center, Affiliated People's Hospital of Jiangsu University, 8 Dianli Rd., 212002,
Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China. linjiangmail@sina.com.
(4)Department of Hematology, Affiliated People's Hospital of Jiangsu University, 
8 Dianli Rd., 212002, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.
qianjun0007@hotmail.com.

Hypermethylation of distal-less homeobox 4 (DLX4) has been increasingly
identified in several cancers. Our study was aimed to determine the role of DLX4 
methylation in regulating DLX4 expression and further analyze its clinical
significance in de novo acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients. DLX4 methylation
level was detected by real-time quantitative methylation-specific PCR and
bisulfite sequencing PCR. Treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC) was
used for demethylation studies. Clinical significance of DLX4 methylation was
obtained by the comparison between the patients with and without DLX4
methylation. DLX4 was significantly methylated in AML patients compared with
controls (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). DLX4 methylation was negatively associated with DLX7 (the
shorter DLX4 isoform) (R<U+2009>=<U+2009>-0.202, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.021) but not BP1 (the longer DLX4
isoform) (R<U+2009>=<U+2009>-0.049, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.582) expression in AML patients. DLX7 and BP1
messenger RNA (mRNA) were significantly increased after 5-aza-dC treatment in
leukemic cell lines THP1 and Kasumi-1. DLX4 methylated patients showed
significantly higher frequency of U2AF1 mutation compared with DLX4 unmethylated 
patients (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.043). Both all AML and non-M3 patients with DLX4 methylation
presented significantly lower complete remission rate than those with DLX4
unmethylation (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001 and <0.001, respectively). DLX4 methylated cases had
significantly shorter overall survival than DLX4 unmethylated cases among both
all AML (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003), non-M3 AML (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001), and cytogenetically normal AML
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.032). Multivariate analysis confirmed that DLX4 methylation was
independent risk factor in both all AML and non-M3 patients. Our study indicates 
that DLX4 hypermethylation is negatively associated with DLX7 expression and
predicts poor clinical outcome in de novo AML patients.

PMID: 26753961  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Cell Syst. 2015 Nov 25;1(5):326-337.

Master regulators of infiltrate recruitment in autoimmune disease identified
through network-based molecular deconvolution.

Chen JC(1), Cerise JE(2), Jabbari A(2), Clynes R(2), Christiano AM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Herbert Irving Pavilion, Columbia University, 161
Fort Washington Avenue, New York, NY, 10032, USA ; Department of Systems Biology,
Columbia University, 1130 Saint Nicholas Avenue, New York, NY, 10032, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Herbert Irving Pavilion, Columbia University, 161
Fort Washington Avenue, New York, NY, 10032, USA. (3)Department of Dermatology,
Herbert Irving Pavilion, Columbia University, 161 Fort Washington Avenue, New
York, NY, 10032, USA ; Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia
University, 701 West 168th Street, New York, NY, 10032, USA.

Network-based molecular modeling of physiological behaviors has proven invaluable
in the study of complex diseases such as cancer, but these approaches remain
largely untested in contexts involving interacting tissues such as autoimmunity. 
Here, using Alopecia Areata (AA) as a model, we have adapted regulatory network
analysis to specifically isolate physiological behaviors in the skin that
contribute to the recruitment of immune cells in autoimmune disease. We use
context-specific regulatory networks to deconvolve and identify skin-specific
regulatory modules with IKZF1 and DLX4 as master regulators (MRs). These MRs are 
sufficient to induce AA-like molecular states in vitro in three cultured cell
lines, resulting in induced NKG2D-dependent cytotoxicity. This work demonstrates 
the feasibility of a network-based approach for compartmentalizing and targeting 
molecular behaviors contributing to interactions between tissues in autoimmune
disease.

PMCID: PMC4670983 [Available on 2016-11-25]
PMID: 26665180  [PubMed]


3. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2015;146(3):195-203. doi: 10.1159/000439155. Epub 2015 Oct 
28.

Copy Number Analysis of the DLX4 and ERBB2 Genes in South African Breast Cancer
Patients.

Langa BC, Oliveira MM, Pereira SR, Lupicki K, Marian C, Govender D, Panieri E,
Hiss D, Cavalli IJ, Abdul-Rasool S, Cavalli LR.

Breast cancer is one of the main causes of cancer death among South African
women. Although several risk factors can be attributed to the observed high
mortality rate, the biology of the tumors is not extensively investigated. Copy
number gain of the DLX4 homeobox gene has been observed in breast cancer in
association with poor prognosis and specific racial groups. Therefore, we aimed
to assess the copy number and prognostic role of DLX4 in breast cancer from South
African patients. Due to the co-location of ERBB2 and DLX4 in the 17q21 region,
its copy number was also evaluated. Our results in the analysis of 66 cases
demonstrated copy number gains of DLX4 and ERBB2 in 24.1 and 29.7% of the cases, 
respectively. Linear regression analysis showed no dependency between the copy
number alterations in these genes. Although not significant, patients with DLX4
and ERBB2 gains presented a higher frequency of advanced-grade tumors. In
addition, copy number alterations of these genes were not significantly
differently observed in the 3 main racial groups of the Western Cape population: 
Colored, White, and Black. These findings indicate that gains of DLX4 and ERBB2
occur in South African breast cancer patients irrespectively of their race and
factors known to influence prognosis.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26524685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Duodecim. 2015;131(16):1443-50.

[Bullous pemphigoid--a cause of itching of the skin with increasing incidence].

[Article in Finnish]

Huilaja L, Försti AK, Tasanen K.

Bullous pemphigoid (BP) is an autoimmune bullous dermatosis of the elderly with
increasing incidence. Autoantibodies against dermal collagen XVII cause severe
pruritus and large, tense bullae that are clinically evident. Immunofluorescence 
analysis on perilesional skin is used in the diagnostics and serum BP1 80 levels 
parallel the disease activity. Topical or systemic steroids are mainly used as
treatment, but adjuvant immunosuppressive medication may also be needed. Patients
with bullous pemphigoid are more likely to have neurological diseases as
comorbidity. In addition, mortality is significantly increased, possibly due to
long-term use of systemic corticosteroids.

PMID: 26485937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2015 Oct 20. pii:
/j/cclm.ahead-of-print/cclm-2015-0536/cclm-2015-0536.xml. doi:
10.1515/cclm-2015-0536. [Epub ahead of print]

Hypermethylation of DLX4 predicts poor clinical outcome in patients with
myelodysplastic syndrome.

Zhang TJ, Zhou JD, Yang DQ, Wang YX, Yao DM, Ma JC, Wen XM, Guo H, Lin J, Qian J.

BACKGROUND: Hypermethylation of DLX4 (distal-less homeobox 4) has been disclosed 
in a variety of cancers. Our work was aimed to examine the pattern of DLX4
methylation and further investigate its clinical relevance in patients with
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS).
METHODS: Real-time quantitative methylation-specific PCR and bisulfite sequencing
PCR were carried out to detect the level of DLX4 methylation. Clinical
significance of DLX4 methylation was analyzed between the DLX4 hypermethylated
and non-hypermethylated patients.
RESULTS: DLX4 was significantly hypermethylated in MDS patients than controls
(p<0.001). No significant differences were observed between the hypermethylated
and non-hypermethylated MDS patients in white blood cells, platelets, age, WHO
classifications, FAB classifications, IPSS risks, and common gene mutations
(p>0.05). However, DLX4 hypermethylated patients tended to have higher hemoglobin
(HB) than DLX4 non-hypermethylated patients (p=0.079). Moreover, there was a
trend that male patients, poor karyotype patients, and IPSS Int-2/High patients
had a higher frequency of DLX4 hypermethylation (p=0.067, 0.065, and 0.068). DLX4
hypermethylated patients had significantly shorter overall survival than DLX4
non-hypermethylated patients (p=0.004). Multivariate analysis confirmed the
prognostic value of DLX4 methylation in MDS patients (p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicated that DLX4 hypermethylation was a frequent event 
and acted as an independent prognostic biomarker in de novo MDS patients.

PMID: 26485746  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Calcif Tissue Int. 2015 Oct 19. [Epub ahead of print]

Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type I Caused by COL1A1 Deletions.

Bardai G(1), Lemyre E(2), Moffatt P(1), Palomo T(1), Glorieux FH(1), Tung J(3),
Ward L(3), Rauch F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Shriners Hospital for Children and McGill University, 1529 Cedar Avenue,
Montréal, QC, H3G 1A6, Canada. (2)Hôpital Sainte-Justine, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ontario, Canada. (4)Shriners Hospital 
for Children and McGill University, 1529 Cedar Avenue, Montréal, QC, H3G 1A6,
Canada. frauch@shriners.mcgill.ca.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) type I is usually caused by COL1A1 stop or
frameshift mutations, leading to COL1A1 haploinsufficiency. Here we report on 12 
individuals from 5 families who had OI type I due to an unusual
cause-heterozygous deletions of the entire COL1A1 gene. The deletions were
initially detected by semiconductor-based sequencing of genomic DNA and confirmed
by quantitative PCR. Array comparative genomic hybridization in DNA of the index 
patient in each family showed that deletion size varied from 18.5 kb to 2.23 Mb
between families, encompassing between 1 and 47 genes (COL1A1 included). The
skeletal phenotype of the affected individuals was similar to that of patients
with haploinsufficiency caused by COL1A1 stop or frameshift mutations. However,
one individual with a deletion that included also DLX3 and DLX4 had tooth
discoloration and bone fragility. Three individuals from 2 families had deletions
that included also CACNA1G, and these individuals had learning disabilities.
These features are not usually observed in COL1A1 haploinsufficiency, but are in 
accordance with previously described individuals in whom deletions included the
same genes. In summary, we found deletions of COL1A1 in 5 out of 161 families
(3 %) with OI type I that were evaluated. Deletions encompassing not only COL1A1 
but also neighboring genes can lead to contiguous gene syndromes that may include
dental involvement and learning disability.

PMID: 26478226  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Leuk Lymphoma. 2016 Apr;57(4):828-34. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2015.1088648. Epub
2015 Dec 23.

BP1 overexpression is associated with adverse prognosis in de novo acute myeloid 
leukemia.

Zhou JD(1), Yang J(1), Guo H(2), Deng ZQ(2), Wen XM(2), Yang L(1), Yin JY(1),
Xiao GF(2), Lin J(1), Qian J(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Hematology, Affiliated People's Hospital of Jiangsu University
, Zhenjiang , Jiangsu , People's Republic of China ; (2)b Laboratory Center ,
Affiliated People's Hospital of Jiangsu University , Zhenjiang , Jiangsu ,
People's Republic of China.

To investigate DLX4 isoforms expression and their clinical significance in acute 
myeloid leukemia (AML). DLX4 transcript variant 1 (BP1) expression was
significantly up-regulated in AML patients compared with normal controls.
However, DLX4 transcript variant 2 (DLX7) was significantly down-regulated in AML
patients. Both in the overall AML and the non-M3 AML cohorts, those patients with
high BP1 expression (BP1(high)) showed significantly lower rates of complete
remission than those with low BP1 expression (BP1(low)). BP1(high) cases had
significantly shorter overall survival than BP1(low) cases in the overall AML
cohort, non-M3 AML, and cytogenetically normal AML (CN-AML). Multivariate
analysis confirmed the independent prognostic value of BP1 expression among both 
the overall AML cohort and non-M3 AML as well as CN-AML patients. However, we did
not observe the impact of DLX7 expression on prognosis in AML patients. Our study
reveals that BP1 overexpression serves as an independent risk factor in de novo
AML patients.

PMID: 26325005  [PubMed - in process]


8. J Cell Sci. 2015 Aug 15;128(16):3055-67. doi: 10.1242/jcs.168187. Epub 2015 Jul
24.

The homeobox gene DLX4 regulates erythro-megakaryocytic differentiation by
stimulating IL-1ß and NF-<U+03BA>B signaling.

Trinh BQ(1), Barengo N(1), Kim SB(2), Lee JS(2), Zweidler-McKay PA(3), Naora
H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Box 108, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Department of Systems Biology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Box 950, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (3)Division of
Pediatrics, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe
Boulevard, Box 853, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (4)Department of Molecular and
Cellular Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe
Boulevard, Box 108, Houston, TX 77030, USA hnaora@mdanderson.org.

Megakaryocyte and erythroid development are tightly controlled by a repertoire of
cytokines, but it is not clear how cytokine-activated signaling pathways are
controlled during development of these two lineages. Here, we identify that
expression of DLX4, a transcription factor encoded by a homeobox gene, increases 
during megakaryopoiesis but decreases during erythropoiesis. Enforced expression 
of DLX4 in CD34(+) stem and progenitor cells and in bipotent K562 cells induced
lineage markers and morphologic features of megakaryocytes and repressed
erythroid marker expression and hemoglobin levels. Converse results were obtained
when DLX4 was knocked down. Gene Ontology and Gene Set Enrichment Analyses of
genome-wide changes in gene expression revealed that DLX4 induces a
megakaryocytic transcriptional program and inhibits an erythroid transcriptional 
program. DLX4 also induced gene signatures that are associated with nuclear
factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) signaling. The ability of DLX4 to promote megakaryocyte
development at the expense of erythroid generation was diminished by blocking
NF-<U+03BA>B activity or by repressing IL1B, a transcriptional target of DLX4.
Collectively, our findings indicate that DLX4 exerts opposing effects on the
megakaryocytic and erythroid lineages in part by inducing IL-1ß and NF-<U+03BA>B
signaling.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4541043
PMID: 26208636  [PubMed - in process]


9. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Aug 7;463(4):1250-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.06.095. Epub 2015 Jun 15.

Epigenetic inactivation of DLX4 is associated with disease progression in chronic
myeloid leukemia.

Zhou JD(1), Wang YX(1), Zhang TJ(1), Yang DQ(1), Yao DM(2), Guo H(2), Yang L(1), 
Ma JC(2), Wen XM(2), Yang J(1), Lin J(3), Qian J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Affiliated People's Hospital of Jiangsu University, 
Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, PR China. (2)Laboratory Center, Affiliated People's Hospital 
of Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, PR China. (3)Laboratory Center,
Affiliated People's Hospital of Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, PR China.
Electronic address: linjiangmail@sina.com. (4)Department of Hematology,
Affiliated People's Hospital of Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, PR China.
Electronic address: qianjun0007@hotmail.com.

Aberrant DNA methylation of various genes has been identified to be associated
with disease progression in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). Our study was
intended to investigate DLX4 methylation pattern in different clinical stages of 
CML and further determine its role in regulating DLX4 expression. Real-time
quantitative methylation-specific PCR and bisulfite sequencing PCR were applied
to detect DLX4 methylation. 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC) was used for
demethylation studies. DLX4 was significantly hypermethylated in CML patients
(P = 0.002) especially in blastic phase (BC) stage (P < 0.001) as compared with
controls. Moreover, DLX4 methylation level in BC stage was significantly higher
than in chronic phase (CP) stage (P < 0.001). DLX4 methylation density was
significantly increased during the progression of CML among the tested two
patients (P < 0.001). DLX4 hypermethylation occurred with the highest incidence
in BC stage (83%), lower incidence in acute phase (AP) stage (43%), and the
lowest incidence in CP stage (26%) (P = 0.001). Moreover, t(9; 22) with
additional alteration cases had significantly higher frequency of DLX4
hypermethylation compared with the other cytogenetics (P = 0.010). Significantly 
negative correlation was observed between DLX4 methylation and DLX4-TV2 (the
shorter DLX4 isoform) expression (R = -0.382, P = 0.001, n = 78) but not between 
DLX4 methylation and BP1 (the longer DLX4 isoform) expression (R = 0.134,
P = 0.244, n = 78) in CML patients. Both DLX4-TV2 and BP1 mRNA were significantly
increased after 5-aza-dC treatment in K562 cell line (P < 0.001). Our study
indicated that hypermethylation of DLX4 correlated with disease progression of
CML. Moreover, DLX4 expression was regulated by its methylation in CML.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26086097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Chin Med Assoc. 2015 Aug;78(8):438-45. doi: 10.1016/j.jcma.2015.05.002. Epub
2015 Jun 13.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition-related factors in solid tumor and
hematological malignancy.

Chou YS(1), Yang MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University School of
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC; Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of
Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC; Division of
Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Lo-Hsu Foundation, Lotung Poh-Ai
Hospital, Luodong, Yilan, Taiwan, ROC. (2)Institute of Clinical Medicine,
National Yang-Ming University School of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC; Division
of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Taipei Veterans General
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. Electronic address: mhyang2@vghtpe.gov.tw.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process plays pivotal roles in
regulatory mechanisms of embryogenesis and wound healing physiologically, and
organ fibrosis, cancer progression, and metastasis pathologically. EMT is
classified as primary, secondary, and tertiary during embryonic development. EMT 
contributes to repair of tissue injury and fibrogenesis by re-epithelialization
and regeneration of fibroblasts, respectively. The hallmarks of EMT include loss 
of contact inhibition, remodeling of extracellular matrix, and reorganization of 
cytoskeleton, along with expression of mesenchymal markers and reduction of
epithelial markers. Cancer cells acquire stemness, migration and invasive
capability, evade apoptosis, and initiate metastasis to distant organs. Several
EMT regulators including Snail, Zeb1, Zeb2, and Twist in solid tumor and Sox4,
distal-less homeobox gene 4 (DLX4), Prdm14, Bmi1, and the forkhead box family in 
hematological malignancy are reviewed with regard to their signaling pathways,
regulatory mechanisms, and clinical interactions.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Taiwan.

PMID: 26078096  [PubMed - in process]


11. Am J Pathol. 2015 Aug;185(8):2298-308. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2015.04.004. Epub
2015 Jun 9.

The homeoprotein DLX4 stimulates NF-<U+03BA>B activation and CD44-mediated
tumor-mesothelial cell interactions in ovarian cancer.

Haria D(1), Trinh BQ(1), Ko SY(1), Barengo N(1), Liu J(2), Naora H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (2)Department of Pathology, University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (3)Department of Molecular and Cellular
Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
Electronic address: hnaora@mdanderson.org.

Ovarian cancers often highly express inflammatory cytokines and form implants
throughout the peritoneal cavity. However, the mechanisms that drive inflammatory
signaling and peritoneal metastasis of ovarian cancer are poorly understood. We
previously identified that high expression of DLX4, a transcription factor
encoded by a homeobox gene, is associated with reduced survival of ovarian cancer
patients. In this study, we identified that DLX4 stimulates attachment of ovarian
tumor cells to peritoneal mesothelial cells in vitro and increases the numbers of
peritoneal implants in xenograft models. DLX4 induced expression of the cell
surface molecule CD44 in ovarian tumor cells, and inhibition of CD44 abrogated
the ability of DLX4 to stimulate tumor-mesothelial cell interactions. The
induction of CD44 by DLX4 was attributed to increased activity of NF-<U+03BA>B that was 
stimulated by the inflammatory cytokine IL-1ß, a transcriptional target of DLX4. 
The stimulatory effects of DLX4 on CD44 levels and tumor-mesothelial cell
interactions were abrogated when IL-1ß or NF-<U+03BA>B was inhibited in tumor cells.
Furthermore, DLX4 expression levels strongly correlated with NF-<U+03BA>B activation and
disease stage in clinical specimens of ovarian cancer. Collectively, these
findings indicate that DLX4 induces CD44 by stimulating IL-1ß-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B
activity, thereby promoting peritoneal metastasis of ovarian cancer.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4530135 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26067154  [PubMed - in process]


12. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Aug 1;24(15):4340-52. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv167. Epub 2015 May 
7.

DLX4 is associated with orofacial clefting and abnormal jaw development.

Wu D(1), Mandal S(1), Choi A(1), Anderson A(1), Prochazkova M(2), Perry H(3),
Gil-Da-Silva-Lopes VL(4), Lao R(5), Wan E(5), Tang PL(5), Kwok PY(6), Klein O(7),
Zhuan B(8), Slavotinek AM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (2)Division of Craniofacial Anomalies, Department of
Orofacial Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA,
USA, Laboratory of Transgenic Models of Diseases, Institute of Molecular Genetics
of the ASCR, v. v.i., Prague, Czech Republic, Program in Craniofacial Biology,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94114, USA.
(3)Division of Craniofacial Anomalies, Department of Orofacial Sciences,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. (4)Department of
Medical Genetics, University of Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. (5)Cardiovascular
Research Institute, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, USA
and. (6)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, USA and Institute for Human Genetics, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. (7)Department of Pediatrics,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA, Division
of Craniofacial Anomalies, Department of Orofacial Sciences, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA, Institute for Human Genetics, 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA, Program in
Craniofacial Biology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 
94114, USA. (8)Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine, Ministry of Education, School 
and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, China. (9)Department of
Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143,
USA, Institute for Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA, slavotia@ucsf.edu.

Cleft lip and/or palate (CL/P) are common structural birth defects in humans. We 
used exome sequencing to study a patient with bilateral CL/P and identified a
single nucleotide deletion in the patient and her similarly affected
sonc.546_546delG, predicting p.Gln183Argfs*57 in the Distal-less 4 (DLX4) gene. 
The sequence variant was absent from databases, predicted to be deleterious and
was verified by Sanger sequencing. In mammals, there are three Dlx homeobox
clusters with closely located gene pairs (Dlx1/Dlx2, Dlx3/Dlx4, Dlx5/Dlx6). In
situ hybridization showed that Dlx4 was expressed in the mesenchyme of the murine
palatal shelves at E12.5, prior to palate closure. Wild-type human DLX4, but not 
mutant DLX4_c.546delG, could activate two murine Dlx conserved regulatory
elements, implying that the mutation caused haploinsufficiency. We showed that
reduced DLX4 expression after short interfering RNA treatment in a human cell
line resulted in significant up-regulation of DLX3, DLX5 and DLX6, with reduced
expression of DLX2 and significant up-regulation of BMP4, although the increased 
BMP4 expression was demonstrated only in HeLa cells. We used antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides to target the orthologous Danio rerio gene, dlx4b, and found
reduced cranial size and abnormal cartilaginous elements. We sequenced DLX4 in
155 patients with non-syndromic CL/P and CP, but observed no sequence variants.
From the published literature, Dlx1/Dlx2 double homozygous null mice and Dlx5
homozygous null mice both have clefts of the secondary palate. This first finding
of a DLX4 mutation in a family with CL/P establishes DLX4 as a potential cause of
human clefts.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4492397 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25954033  [PubMed - in process]


13. Mol Cancer. 2015 Apr 30;14:97. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0368-3.

The homeoprotein DLX4 controls inducible nitric oxide synthase-mediated
angiogenesis in ovarian cancer.

Trinh B(1), Ko SY(2), Haria D(3), Barengo N(4), Naora H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. bqtrinh@mdanderson.org. (2)Department of 
Molecular and Cellular Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, 77030, USA. sko@mdanderson.org. (3)Department of Molecular and
Cellular Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX,
77030, USA. DDHaria@mdanderson.org. (4)Department of Molecular and Cellular
Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
ngbareng@mdanderson.org. (5)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology,
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
hnaora@mdanderson.org.

BACKGROUND: Homeobox genes encode transcription factors that control patterning
of virtually all organ systems including the vasculature. Tumor angiogenesis is
stimulated by several homeobox genes that are overexpressed in tumor cells, but
the mechanisms of these genes are poorly understood. In this study, we
investigated the mechanisms by which DLX4, a homeobox gene that is associated
with increased tumor microvessel density, stimulates ovarian tumor angiogenesis.
METHODS: Expression of DLX4 and nitric oxide synthases was analyzed in publicly
available transcriptional profiles of ovarian cancer clinical specimens. Levels
of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) were evaluated by quantitative RT-PCR, 
flow cytometry and nitric oxide assays using ovarian cancer cell lines in which
DLX4 was overexpressed or knocked down. Signal Transducer and Activator of
Transcription 1 (STAT1) expression and activity were evaluated by luciferase
reporter assays, immunofluorescence staining, Western blot and
immunoprecipitation. Endothelial cell growth and tumor angiogenesis were
evaluated in in vitro assays and xenograft models.
RESULTS: We identified that DLX4 induces expression of iNOS, an enzyme that
stimulates angiogenesis by generating nitric oxide. Analysis of datasets of two
independent patient cohorts revealed that high DLX4 expression in ovarian cancer 
is strongly associated with elevated expression of iNOS but not of other nitric
oxide synthases. Studies using STAT1-expressing and STAT1-deficient cells
revealed that DLX4 interacts with STAT1 and induces iNOS expression in part by
stimulating STAT1 activity. Expression of DLX4 in ovarian cancer cells stimulated
endothelial cell growth in vitro and increased microvessel density in xenograft
models, and these stimulatory effects of DLX4 were abrogated when its induction
of iNOS was inhibited.
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that DLX4 promotes ovarian tumor angiogenesis
in part by stimulating iNOS expression.

PMCID: PMC4427985
PMID: 25924901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Ann Thorac Surg. 2015 May;99(5):1746-54. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2014.12.058.
Epub 2015 Mar 29.

Methylated DLX4 Predicts Response to Pathologic Stage I Non-Small Cell Lung
Cancer Resection.

Harada H(1), Miyamoto K(2), Yamashita Y(3), Taniyama K(4), Ohdan H(5), Okada
M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Surgery, National Hospital Organization Kure Medical
Center and Chugoku Cancer Center, Kure, Hiroshima, Japan; Institute for Clinical 
Research, National Hospital Organization Kure Medical Center and Chugoku Cancer
Center, Kure, Hiroshima, Japan. Electronic address: haradah@kure-nh.go.jp.
(2)Institute for Clinical Research, National Hospital Organization Kure Medical
Center and Chugoku Cancer Center, Kure, Hiroshima, Japan; Department of Surgery, 
National Hospital Organization Higashihiroshima Medical Center, Higashihiroshima,
Hiroshima, Japan. (3)Department of Respiratory Surgery, National Hospital
Organization Kure Medical Center and Chugoku Cancer Center, Kure, Hiroshima,
Japan; Institute for Clinical Research, National Hospital Organization Kure
Medical Center and Chugoku Cancer Center, Kure, Hiroshima, Japan. (4)Institute
for Clinical Research, National Hospital Organization Kure Medical Center and
Chugoku Cancer Center, Kure, Hiroshima, Japan. (5)Department of Surgery,
Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan. (6)Department of Surgical Oncology,
Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.

Comment in
    Ann Thorac Surg. 2015 May;99(5):1754.

BACKGROUND: Surgery with curative intent is the standard treatment for patients
with stage I non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Even after curative resection,
however, many patients have recurrent disease. Thus, there is a need to identify 
molecular biomarkers for the biological characteristics and prognosis of tumors.
METHODS: Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction analysis was performed
for the distal-less homeobox 4 (DLX4) gene in cancer tissues from 109 patients
who underwent curative resection for pathologic stage I NSCLC from June 2005 to
November 2011. We investigated possible correlations between DLX4 methylation
status and disease outcome.
RESULTS: Methylated DLX4 was detected in 54 of 109 patients (49.5%). No
significant relationship between DLX4 methylation status and clinicopathologic
features was found. Multivariate logistic regression analysis revealed that DLX4 
methylation was an independent risk factor for recurrence (p < 0.0001). Patients 
with DLX4 methylation showed significantly poorer recurrence-free,
cancer-specific, and overall survival than patients without DLX4 methylation (p <
0.0001, p = 0.0001, p = 0.0004, respectively). Cox's proportional hazard
regression analysis revealed that DLX4 methylation was an independent risk factor
for poor prognosis regarding recurrence-free, cancer-specific, and overall
survival (p < 0.0001, p = 0.0005, p = 0.0018, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Methylated DLX4 is a potential biomarker that predicts poor
prognosis after curative resection of pathologic stage I NSCLC. Identification of
patients with methylated DLX4 may assist stratification for appropriate adjuvant 
treatment strategies.

Copyright © 2015 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 25825198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jul;12(1):1375-80. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3554. Epub 2015 Mar
27.

Regulation of the oncogenic function of distal-less 4 by microRNA-122 in
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Xie XH(1), Xu XP(2), Sun CY(1), Yu ZJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, P.R. China. (2)Department of Endocrinology, 
Second Hospital of Zhengzhou, Zhengzhou, Henan 450006, P.R. China.

Distal-less 4 (DLX4) is a member of the DLX family of homeobox genes. Recent
reports have suggested that abnormal expression of DLX4 is present in several
types of human tumors, including breast cancer, leukemia and colon cancer.
However, the function and the mechanistic regulation of DLX4 in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) are elusive. In the present study, a proportion of hepatocellular
carcinomas were identified to exhibit upregulated DLX4 expression. This study
proposed that the overexpression of DLX4 is associated with the downregulation of
miR-122, an underexpressed miRNA in human HCC. Functional studies have
demonstrated that the downregulation of DLX4 in hepatocellular carcinoma cell
lines is regulated by miR-122 through binding to its 3'UTR. Furthermore, a DLX4
overexpression vector lacking the 3'UTR was shown to abolish miR-122-induced
inhibition of proliferation in the HCC cell line Hep3B. These results gave new
insight into the mechanism of the miR-122/DLX4 axis in HCC.

PMID: 25823567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Diagn Cytopathol. 2015 Jun;43(6):462-70. doi: 10.1002/dc.23256. Epub 2015 Jan 22.

Aberrant DNA methylation of DLX4 and SIM1 is a predictive marker for disease
progression of uterine cervical low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion.

Sakane J(1), Taniyama K, Miyamoto K, Saito A, Kuraoka K, Nishimura T, Sentani K, 
Oue N, Yasui W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Hiroshima University Institute of
Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima, Japan; Institute for Clinical
Research, National Hospital Organization Kure Medical Center and Chugoku Cancer
Center, Kure, Japan; Department of Diagnostic Pathology, National Hospital
Organization Kure Medical Center and Chugoku Cancer Center, Kure, Japan.

BACKGROUND: A few uterine cervical low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions
(LSILs) are known to progress with high-risk human papillomavirus (hrHPV).
METHODS: One hundred and thirteen patients were classified into four groups
according to their cervical cytology, hrHPV infection, and follow up. Cytology
samples were examined for aberrant DNA methylation of DLX4 and SIM1 genes and
protein expressions. CaSki cells were treated with 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine
(5-aza-dC).
RESULTS: Group 1 was negative for intraepithelial lesions or malignancies. LSIL
in group 2 showed a continuance of LSIL for longer than 365 days and LSIL in
group 3 showed an upgrading to high-grade (H) SIL or higher (HSIL+) within 365
days of LSIL diagnosis. Group 4 was squamous cell carcinoma. All but group 1 were
infected with hrHPV. Significant differences existed in the frequency of DNA
methylation between groups 2 and 3 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.044), between groups 3 and 4
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.020) for DLX4, and between groups 1 and 3 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0003), and groups 2 and 3
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005) for the SIM1 gene. DLX4 protein expression was significantly reduced 
in the DLX4 methylation positive tissues (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.008). The 5-aza-dC treatment
restored DLX4 mRNA expressions of CaSki cells (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.005). The LSIL cases with
DNA methylation of the SIM1 gene, or both genes, progressed faster to HSIL+ than 
did the others (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.033 and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.045, respectively).
CONCLUSION: Aberrant DNA methylation of the DLX4 and SIM1 genes should be a novel
progression marker for uterine cervical LSIL with hrHPV infection.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25614457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Sci Rep. 2014 Dec 4;4:7283. doi: 10.1038/srep07283.

The homeobox gene DLX4 promotes generation of human induced pluripotent stem
cells.

Tamaoki N(1), Takahashi K(2), Aoki H(3), Iida K(1), Kawaguchi T(1), Hatakeyama
D(1), Inden M(4), Chosa N(5), Ishisaki A(5), Kunisada T(3), Shibata T(1), Goshima
N(6), Yamanaka S(2), Tezuka K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Science, Gifu University Graduate School 
of Medicine, 1-1 Yanagido, Gifu City, Gifu 501-1194, Japan. (2)Center for iPS
Cell Research and Application, Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (3)Department of Tissue and Organ Development,
Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1 Yanagido, Gifu City, Gifu
501-1194, Japan. (4)Laboratory of Medical Therapeutics and Molecular
Therapeutics, Gifu Pharmaceutical University, 1-25-4 Daigaku-Nishi, Gifu
501-1195, Japan. (5)Division of Cellular Biosignal Sciences, Department of
Biochemistry, Iwate Medical University, 19-1 Uchimaru, Morioka, Iwate 020-8505,
Japan. (6)Molecular Profiling Research Center for Drug Discovery, National
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, 2-4-7 Aomi, Koto-ku,
Tokyo 135-0064, Japan.

The reprogramming of somatic cells into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) by
defined transcription factors has been a well-established technique and will
provide an invaluable resource for regenerative medicine. However, the low
reprogramming efficiency of human iPSC is still a limitation for clinical
application. Here we showed that the reprogramming potential of human dental pulp
cells (DPCs) obtained from immature teeth is much higher than those of mature
teeth DPCs. Furthermore, immature teeth DPCs can be reprogrammed by OCT3/4 and
SOX2, conversely these two factors are insufficient to convert mature teeth DPCs 
to pluripotent states. Using a gene expression profiles between these two DPC
groups, we identified a new transcript factor, distal-less homeobox 4 (DLX4),
which was highly expressed in immature teeth DPCs and significantly promoted
human iPSC generation in combination with OCT3/4, SOX2, and KLF4. We further show
that activation of TGF-ß signaling suppresses the expression of DLX4 in DPCs and 
impairs the iPSC generation of DPCs. Our findings indicate that DLX4 can
functionally replace c-MYC and supports efficient reprogramming of immature teeth
DPCs.

PMCID: PMC4255186
PMID: 25471527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Cancer Genet. 2014 May;207(5):177-87. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2014.04.007. Epub 
2014 May 2.

Increased copy number of the DLX4 homeobox gene in breast axillary lymph node
metastasis.

Torresan C(1), Oliveira MM(1), Pereira SR(2), Ribeiro EM(1), Marian C(3), Gusev
Y(4), Lima RS(5), Urban CA(6), Berg PE(7), Haddad BR(8), Cavalli IJ(1), Cavalli
LR(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Federal University of Paraná, Curitiba, PR, Brazil.
(2)Department of Biology, Federal University of Maranhão, São Luis, MA, Brazil.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara,
Romania. (4)Innovation Center for Biomedical Informatics, Lombardi Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA. (5)Breast Unit,
Hospital Nossa Senhora das Graças, Curitiba, PR, Brazil. (6)Breast Unit, Hospital
Nossa Senhora das Graças, Curitiba, PR, Brazil; Positivo University, Curitiba,
PR, Brazil. (7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, George
Washington University Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA. (8)Department of
Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University,
Washington, DC, USA. (9)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA. Electronic address:
lrc@georgetown.edu.

DLX4 is a homeobox gene strongly implicated in breast tumor progression and
invasion. Our main objective was to determine the DLX4 copy number status in
sentinel lymph node (SLN) metastasis to assess its involvement in the initial
stages of the axillary metastatic process. A total of 37 paired samples of SLN
metastasis and primary breast tumors (PBT) were evaluated by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, quantitative polymerase chain reaction and array comparative
genomic hybridization assays. DLX4 increased copy number was observed in 21.6% of
the PBT and 24.3% of the SLN metastasis; regression analysis demonstrated that
the DLX4 alterations observed in the SLN metastasis were dependent on the ones in
the PBT, indicating that they occur in the primary tumor cell populations and are
maintained in the early axillary metastatic site. In addition, regression
analysis demonstrated that DLX4 alterations (and other DLX and HOXB family
members) occurred independently of the ones in the HER2/NEU gene, the main
amplification driver on the 17q region. Additional studies evaluating DLX4 copy
number in non-SLN axillary lymph nodes and/or distant breast cancer metastasis
are necessary to determine if these alterations are carried on and maintained
during more advanced stages of tumor progression and if could be used as a
predictive marker for axillary involvement.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24947980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Neoplasma. 2014;61(3):318-23.

DLX4 as a prognostic marker for hepatocellular carcinoma.

Gao Y, Li Z, Guo X, Liu Y, Zhang K.

Distal-less homeobox gene 4 (DLX4) has been shown to play a role in
carcinogenesis. The value of DLX4 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has not been 
fully investigated. Here, we sought to quantify the expression of DLX4 in
association with the clinicopathological features and prognosis in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). We examined DLX4 expression in 45 HCC tissues and matched
adjacent noncancerous tissues by quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) and Western
blotting. Furthermore, 226 HCC samples were analyzed for DLX4 expression by
immunohistochemistry. The expression of DLX4 was significantly elevated in HCC
tissues in comparison with that in adjacent non-cancerous tissues (P<0.01). The
high expression of DLX4 in HCC was significantly correlated with tumor size,
histopathologic classifications, and serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP). Kaplan-Meier 
survival analysis revealed that increased expression of DLX4 correlated with poor
clinical outcomes of HCC patients (P<0.01). Subsequent multivariate analysis
showed that DLX4 expression was an independent prognostic biomarker for overall
survival of HCC patients. These results suggest that high expression of DLX4
predicts HCC prognosis, and DLX4 may be potentially an important therapeutic
target for HCC.

PMID: 24824934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Cyst Fibros. 2014 May;13(3):281-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jcf.2013.10.005. Epub 2013
Oct 23.

Anti-BPIFA1/SPLUNC1: a new autoantibody prevalent in patients with endstage
cystic fibrosis.

Budding K(1), van de Graaf EA(2), Hoefnagel T(3), Hack CE(4), Otten HG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Translational Immunology, University Medical Centre Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. Electronic address: k.budding@umcutrecht.nl.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University Medical Centre Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. (3)Laboratory for Translational Immunology, University 
Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (4)Laboratory for Translational
Immunology, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands;
Department of Rheumatology, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands; Department of Dermatology, University Medical Centre Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Bactericidal/permeability increasing protein fold containing family A
(BPIFA) 1, is a secreted protein of the upper airways that shares structural
homology with BPI and exhibits comparable antimicrobial capacities. We
hypothesized that CF patients have circulating IgG or IgA anti-BPIFA1
autoantibodies, similarly as reported for BPI autoantibodies.
METHODS: We analyzed pre- and post-transplantation sera from 67 endstage lung
disease patients who underwent lung transplantation (LTx) because of COPD (n=27),
CF (n=25), and ILD (n=15).
RESULTS: Anti-BPIFA1 (48%) and anti-BPI (92%) were elevated in CF patients
compared to healthy controls, with anti-BPIFA1 IgG isotype being most prevalent, 
whereas anti-BPI is of the IgA isotype. Levels of anti-BPI autoantibodies
significantly declined post-LTx, whereas anti-BPIFA1 did not. No relation was
found between autoantibodies against BPIFA1 and BPI.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that BPIFA1 is a novel target for autoantibodies
in CF. The function of these autoantibodies needed to be investigated in future
studies.

© 2013.

PMID: 24269518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2013;77(5):1035-41. Epub 2013 May 7.

Teratogenic factors affect transcription factor expression.

Kojima T(1), Asano S, Takahashi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Chemical compounds are produced every day, many with adverse effects on human
health, and hence it is vital to predict the risks to humans simply, rapidly, and
accurately. Teratogens have a serious impact on fetal development. This has been 
studied mainly by phenotypic analysis of experimental animals. However, since
phenotypes can vary within different species, we established a new evaluation
system based on our recent finding that teratogens influence Hox gene expression 
in mice. Similarly to the Hox gene expression changes, the expression patterns of
several transcription factors involved in development, including the Dlx, Irx,
Sall, and T-box families, were altered after 6 h of exposure to retinoic acid
(RA) or 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). The expression changes in
Dlx4, Dlx6, Irx5, Sall2, Sall3, Sall4, Tbx10, and Tbx22 were linked to
teratogen-induced phenotypes, and our results indicate that expression changes in
developmental transcription factors can help to predict teratogenic risk.

PMID: 23649242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2013 Jun;51(1):22-6. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2012.12.005. Epub
2013 Mar 7.

Fetal hemoglobin in sickle cell anemia: genetic studies of the Arab-Indian
haplotype.

Ngo D(1), Bae H, Steinberg MH, Sebastiani P, Solovieff N, Baldwin CT, Melista E, 
Safaya S, Farrer LA, Al-Suliman AM, Albuali WH, Al Bagshi MH, Naserullah Z,
Akinsheye I, Gallagher P, Luo HY, Chui DH, Farrell JJ, Al-Ali AK, Alsultan A.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence in Sickle Cell Disease, Department of Medicine, Boston
University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. duyen.ngo@bmc.org

Comment in
    Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2014 Apr;52(4):175.

Sickle cell anemia is common in the Middle East and India where the HbS gene is
sometimes associated with the Arab-Indian (AI) ß-globin gene (HBB) cluster
haplotype. In this haplotype of sickle cell anemia, fetal hemoglobin (HbF) levels
are 3-4 fold higher than those found in patients with HbS haplotypes of African
origin. Little is known about the genetic elements that modulate HbF in AI
haplotype patients. We therefore studied Saudi HbS homozygotes with the AI
haplotype (mean HbF 19.2±7.0%, range 3.6 to 39.6%) and employed targeted
genotyping of polymorphic sites to explore cis- and trans- acting elements
associated with high HbF expression. We also described sequences which appear to 
be unique to the AI haplotype for which future functional studies are needed to
further define their role in HbF modulation. All cases, regardless of HbF
concentration, were homozygous for AI haplotype-specific elements cis to HBB.
SNPs in BCL11A and HBS1L-MYB that were associated with HbF in other populations
explained only 8.8% of the variation in HbF. KLF1 polymorphisms associated
previously with high HbF were not present in the 44 patients tested. More than
90% of the HbF variance in sickle cell patients with the AI haplotype remains
unexplained by the genetic loci that we studied. The dispersion of HbF levels
among AI haplotype patients suggests that other genetic elements modulate the
effects of the known cis- and trans-acting regulators. These regulatory elements,
which remain to be discovered, might be specific in the Saudi and some other
populations where HbF levels are especially high.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3647015
PMID: 23465615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Cancer Res. 2013 Jan 15;73(2):1000-10. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3538. Epub
2012 Dec 7.

Dual functions of the homeoprotein DLX4 in modulating responsiveness of tumor
cells to topoisomerase II-targeting drugs.

Trinh BQ(1), Ko SY, Barengo N, Lin SY, Naora H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas 77054, USA.

Topoisomerase II (TOP2)-targeting poisons such as anthracyclines and etoposide
are commonly used for cancer chemotherapy and kill tumor cells by causing
accumulation of DNA double-strand breaks (DSB). Several lines of evidence
indicate that overexpression of TOP2A, the gene encoding topoisomerase IIa,
increases sensitivity of tumor cells to TOP2 poisons, but it is not clear why
some TOP2A-overexpressing (TOP2A-High) tumors respond poorly to these drugs. In
this study, we identified that TOP2A expression is induced by DLX4, a
homeoprotein that is overexpressed in breast and ovarian cancers. Analysis of
breast cancer datasets revealed that TOP2A-high cases that also highly expressed 
DLX4 responded more poorly to anthracycline-based chemotherapy than TOP2A-high
cases that expressed DLX4 at low levels. Overexpression of TOP2A alone in tumor
cells increased the level of DSBs induced by TOP2 poisons. In contrast, DLX4
reduced the level of TOP2 poison-induced DSBs irrespective of its induction of
TOP2A. DLX4 did not stimulate homologous recombination-mediated repair of DSBs.
However, DLX4 interacted with Ku proteins, stimulated DNA-dependent protein
kinase activity, and increased erroneous end-joining repair of DSBs. Whereas DLX4
did not reduce levels of TOP2 poison-induced DSBs in Ku-deficient cells, DLX4
stimulated DSB repair and reduced the level of TOP2 poison-induced DSBs when Ku
was reconstituted in these cells. Our findings indicate that DLX4 induces TOP2A
expression but reduces sensitivity of tumor cells to TOP2 poisons by stimulating 
Ku-dependent repair of DSBs. These opposing activities of DLX4 could explain why 
some TOP2A-overexpressing tumors are not highly sensitive to TOP2 poisons.

PMCID: PMC3549009
PMID: 23222298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Obes Surg. 2013 May;23(5):594-601. doi: 10.1007/s11695-012-0820-z.

Preoperative prediction of growth hormone (GH)/insulin-like growth factor-1
(IGF-1) axis modification and postoperative changes in candidates for bariatric
surgery.

Mittempergher F(1), Pata G, Crea N, Di Betta E, Vilardi A, Chiesa D, Nascimbeni
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical & Surgical Sciences, 1st Division of General Surgery,
University of Brescia School of Medicine, Brescia, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Several factors alter the growth hormone (GH)/insulin-like growth
factor-1 (IGF-1) axis in obese patients, but GH/IGF-1 correlation with
anthropometric parameters and lipid metabolism is still unclear. We evaluated
this relationship and the postoperative axis modifications in candidates for
bariatric surgery.
METHODS: Eighty-eight patients (males/females (M/F), 34/54) scheduled for
bariatric surgery (biliopancreatic diversion or laparoscopic-adjustable gastric
banding) between 2008 and 2010 were included in this observational, open,
prospective study.
RESULTS: Preoperative serum GH concentrations were found near the lowest limit of
normal range in both sexes, with males showing the lowest values (130 vs. 1,405
pg/ml; p < 0.01). Serum concentrations of IGF-1 were within the normal range
(M/F, 179/168.5 ng/ml), whereas IGF-binding protein (BP)1 and 3 values were at
the lowest limits of normal range in both sexes (M/F 1.8/3.1 µg/ml and M/F
4.1/4.2 µg/ml, respectively). A statistically significant inverse correlation was
found between GH, IGF-1, and IGF-BP1-3 values and total cholesterol,
LDL-cholesterol, and triglycerides values in both sexes. GH and IGF-BP1-3 values 
were also inversely related to waist circumference and waist/hip ratio (WHR). GH,
IGF-1, and IGF-BP1 and 3 values (35 cases) increased 1 year postoperatively in
both sexes, mainly after malabsorptive procedures.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support the hypothesis that GH deficiency associated
with low levels of binding proteins in obese patients may be an endocrine
response to visceral fat and high levels of non-esterified fatty acids,
assessable in daily clinical practice by WHR, total and LDL-cholesterol, and
triglycerides. In these patients, malabsorptive procedures might be the treatment
of choice due to the metabolic adaptations induced.

PMID: 23179244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Aug 21;92(31):2219-21.

[Effects of all trans retinoic acid on the expression alterations of beta-protein
1 in human breast cancer cell lines of MDA-MB-468 and MCF-7].

[Article in Chinese]

Su J(1), Li MQ, Zhong GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou 450052, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of all trans retinoic acid (ATRA) on the cell
proliferation and expression alterations of beta-protein 1 (BP1) in human breast 
cancer cells lines of MDA-MB-468 and MCF-7.
METHOD: The proliferation changes were detected by thiazolyl blue tetrazolium
bromide (MTT) after the treatment of ATRA. At the dose of 10(-5) mol/L ATRA, the 
expression of BP1 was measured by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) and immunochemistry.
RESULTS: After the treatment of ATRA, the proliferation of cells and the
expression of BP1 decreased. Optical density ratio (ODR) of each group decreased 
from 0.85 ± 0.01, 0.71 ± 0.01 to 0.75 ± 0.02, 0.72 ± 0.06 at 24 h, 0.55 ± 0.01,
0.52 ± 0.05 at 48 h and 0.34 ± 0.02, 0.48 ± 0.03 at 72 h. Significant differences
existed among different time groups (P < 0.01). The mean optical density (MOD) of
each group decreased from 0.509 ± 0.081, 0.826 ± 0.015 to 0.509 ± 0.081, 0.826 ± 
0.015 at 24 h, 0.270 ± 0.022, 0.641 ± 0.041 at 48 h and 0.145 ± 0.019 and 0.206 ±
0.179 at 72 h. Significant differences existed among different time groups (P <
0.01).
CONCLUSION: ATRA can inhibit the proliferation and the expression of BP1 in
breast cancer cells. And BP1 gene may become a therapeutic target for the
ATRA-mediated inhibited growth of breast cancer cells.

PMID: 23158431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Int J Biol Sci. 2012;8(8):1178-87. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.4458. Epub 2012 Oct 13.

DLX4 upregulates TWIST and enhances tumor migration, invasion and metastasis.

Zhang L(1), Yang M, Gan L, He T, Xiao X, Stewart MD, Liu X, Yang L, Zhang T, Zhao
Y, Fu J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Epigenetics and Oncology, The Research Center for
Preclinical Medicine, Luzhou Medical College, Luzhou 646000, China.

The distal-less homeobox gene 4 (DLX4) is a member of the DLX family of homeobox 
genes. Although absent from most normal adult tissues, DLX4 is widely expressed
in leukemia, lung, breast, ovarian and prostate cancers. However the molecular
targets, mechanisms and pathways that mediate the role of DLX4 in tumor
metastasis are poorly understood. In this study, we found that DLX4 induces
cancer cells to undergo epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) through TWIST.
Overexpression of DLX4 increased expression of TWIST expression in cancer cell
lines, resulting in increased migratory and invasive capacity. Likewise, knocking
down expression of DLX4 decreased TWIST expression and the migration ability of
cancer cell lines. DLX4 bound to regulatory regions of the TWIST gene. Both
western blotting and immunohistochemistry staining showed that the expression of 
DLX4 and TWIST are correlated in most of breast tumors. Taken together, these
data from both cell models and tumor tissues demonstrate that DLX4 not only
upregulates TWIST expression but also induces EMT and tumor metastasis.
Altogether, we propose a new pathway in which DLX4 drives expression of TWIST to 
promote EMT, cancer migration, invasion and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3477687
PMID: 23091415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Oncol Rep. 2013 Jan;29(1):125-32. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.2077. Epub 2012 Oct 9.

Identification of DNA methylation of SOX9 in cervical cancer using methylated-CpG
island recovery assay.

Wu JH(1), Liang XA, Wu YM, Li FS, Dai YM.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing 100026, PR China.

The aim of the present study was to identify novel methylation markers for
cervical cancer screening and to test the clinical application of the most
promising biomarker in cervical scrapings. Methylated-CpG island recovery
assay-based microarray analysis was carried out on a discovery set consisting of 
cervical cancer tissue and normal cervical tissue to identify significantly
hypermethylated genes. Five hundred and four CpG islands, corresponding to 378
genes, were differentially methylated between cervical cancer tissue and normal
cervical tissue. Among them, 30 genes were significantly hypermethylated. Of the 
30 genes, SOX9, PKLR and DLX4 were selected for further validation by direct
bisulfite sequencing. The SOX9 gene revealed complete methylation in the cervical
cancer tissue and complete non-methylation in the normal control tissue. A
TaqMan-based real-time PCR assay was performed to detect the methylation levels
of the SOX9 gene in 156 cervical scrapings, including 48 normal cervical
scrapings, 30 scrapings with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 1 (CIN1), 30
scrapings with CIN2-3 and 48 scrapings with squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). The
methylation levels (methylation score) of the SOX9 gene increased significantly
with the severity of cervical squamous lesions. The area under the receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC) revealed that the methylation score of
the SOX9 gene could be used to segregate SCC/CIN2-3 from CIN1/normal (AUC, 0.961;
p=0.000). At the optimal cut-off value, a sensitivity of 92.3% and a specificity 
of 89.7% were obtained. In conclusion, SOX9 methylation is frequently involved in
cervical carcinogenesis, and may provide a valuable molecular biomarker for early
detection of cervical cancer.

PMID: 23064448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2012 Dec;318(8):639-50. doi: 10.1002/jez.b.22469. Epub
2012 Sep 5.

Theria-specific homeodomain and cis-regulatory element evolution of the Dlx3-4
bigene cluster in 12 different mammalian species.

Sumiyama K(1), Miyake T, Grimwood J, Stuart A, Dickson M, Schmutz J, Ruddle FH,
Myers RM, Amemiya CT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Population Genetics, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima,
Japan. ksumiyam@lab.nig.ac.jp

The mammalian Dlx3 and Dlx4 genes are configured as a bigene cluster, and their
respective expression patterns are controlled temporally and spatially by
cis-elements that largely reside within the intergenic region of the cluster.
Previous work revealed that there are conspicuously conserved elements within the
intergenic region of the Dlx3-4 bigene clusters of mouse and human. In this paper
we have extended these analyses to include 12 additional mammalian taxa
(including a marsupial and a monotreme) in order to better define the nature and 
molecular evolutionary trends of the coding and non-coding functional elements
among morphologically divergent mammals. Dlx3-4 regions were fully sequenced from
12 divergent taxa of interest. We identified three theria-specific amino acid
replacements in homeodomain of Dlx4 gene that functions in placenta. Sequence
analyses of constrained nucleotide sites in the intergenic non-coding region
showed that many of the intergenic conserved elements are highly conserved and
have evolved slowly within the mammals. In contrast, a branchial
arch/craniofacial enhancer I37-2 exhibited accelerated evolution at the branch
between the monotreme and therian common ancestor despite being highly conserved 
among therian species. Functional analysis of I37-2 in transgenic mice has shown 
that the equivalent region of the platypus fails to drive transcriptional
activity in branchial arches. These observations, taken together with our
molecular evolutionary data, suggest that theria-specific episodic changes in the
I37-2 element may have contributed to craniofacial innovation at the base of the 
mammalian lineage.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3651898
PMID: 22951979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Reprod Sci. 2012 Oct;19(10):NP1; author reply NP2. doi: 10.1177/1933719112451149.
Epub 2012 Jul 10.

Re: Regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition by homeobox gene DLX4 in
JEG-3 trophoblast cells: a role in preeclampsia.

Murthi P, Kalionis B.

Comment on
    Reprod Sci. 2011 Nov;18(11):1138-45.

PMID: 22786607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Tumour Biol. 2012 Apr;33(2):287-96. doi: 10.1007/s13277-011-0282-2. Epub 2011 Dec
6.

DNA methylation biomarkers for lung cancer.

Rauch TA(1), Wang Z, Wu X, Kernstine KH, Riggs AD, Pfeifer GP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope, Duarte, CA
91010, USA.

Changes in DNA methylation patterns are an important characteristic of human
cancer including lung cancer. In particular, hypermethylation of CpG islands is a
signature of malignant progression. Methylated CpG islands are promising
diagnostic markers for the early detection of cancer. However, the full extent
and sequence context of DNA hypermethylation in lung cancer has remained unknown.
We have used the methylated CpG island recovery assay and high-resolution
microarray analysis to find hypermethylated CpG islands in squamous cell
carcinomas (SCC) and adenocarcinomas of the lung. Each tumor contained several
hundred hypermethylated CpG islands. In an initial microarray screen, 36 CpG
islands were methylated in five of five (=100%) of the SCC tumors tested and 52
CpG islands were methylated in at least 75% of the adenocarcinomas tested (n=8). 
Using sodium-bisulfite-based approaches, 12 CpG islands (associated with the
BARHL2, EVX2, IRX2, MEIS1, MSX1, NR2E1, OC2, OSR1, OTX1, PAX6, TFAP2A, and ZNF577
genes) were confirmed to be methylated in 85% to 100% of the squamous cell
carcinomas and 11 CpG islands (associated with the CHAD, DLX4, GRIK2, KCNG3,
NR2E1, OSR1, OTX1, OTX2, PROX1, RUNX1, and VAX1 genes) were methylated in >80% of
the adenocarcinomas. From the list of genes that were methylated in lung
adenocarcinomas, we identified the gene FAT4 and found that this gene was
methylated in 39% of the tumors. FAT4 is the closest mammalian homologue of the
Drosophila tumor suppressor Fat which is an important component of the Hippo
growth control pathway. Many of these newly discovered methylated CpG islands
hold promise for becoming biomarkers for the early detection of lung cancer.

PMID: 22143938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. BMC Evol Biol. 2011 Oct 18;11:307. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-11-307.

The homology of odontodes in gnathostomes: insights from Dlx gene expression in
the dogfish, Scyliorhinus canicula.

Debiais-Thibaud M(1), Oulion S, Bourrat F, Laurenti P, Casane D, Borday-Birraux
V.

Author information: 
(1)Evolution des familles multigéniques, Laboratoire Evolution Génome et
Spéciation, UPR CNRS, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

BACKGROUND: Teeth and tooth-like structures, together named odontodes, are
repeated organs thought to share a common evolutionary origin. These structures
can be found in gnathostomes at different locations along the body: oral teeth in
the jaws, teeth and denticles in the oral-pharyngeal cavity, and dermal denticles
on elasmobranch skin. We, and other colleagues, had previously shown that teeth
in any location were serially homologous because: i) pharyngeal and oral teeth
develop through a common developmental module; and ii) the expression patterns of
the Dlx genes during odontogenesis were highly divergent between species but
almost identical between oral and pharyngeal dentitions within the same species. 
Here we examine Dlx gene expression in oral teeth and dermal denticles in order
to test the hypothesis of serial homology between these odontodes.
RESULTS: We present a detailed comparison of the first developing teeth and
dermal denticles (caudal primary scales) of the dogfish (Scyliorhinus canicula)
and show that both odontodes develop through identical stages that correspond to 
the common stages of oral and pharyngeal odontogenesis. We identified six Dlx
paralogs in the dogfish and found that three showed strong transcription in teeth
and dermal denticles (Dlx3, Dlx4 and Dlx5) whereas a weak expression was detected
for Dlx1 in dermal denticles and teeth, and for Dlx2 in dermal denticles. Very
few differences in Dlx expression patterns could be detected between tooth and
dermal denticle development, except for the absence of Dlx2 expression in teeth.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our histological and expression data strongly
suggest that teeth and dermal denticles develop from the same developmental
module and under the control of the same set of Dlx genes. Teeth and dermal
denticles should therefore be considered as serial homologs developing through
the initiation of a common gene regulatory network (GRN) at several body
locations. This mechanism of heterotopy supports the 'inside and out' model that 
has been recently proposed for odontode evolution.

PMCID: PMC3217942
PMID: 22008058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Reprod Sci. 2011 Nov;18(11):1138-45. doi: 10.1177/1933719111408112. Epub 2011 May
20.

Regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition by homeobox gene DLX4 in JEG-3
trophoblast cells: a role in preeclampsia.

Sun YY(1), Lu M, Xi XW, Qiao QQ, Chen LL, Xu XM, Feng YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Affiliated First Hospital of Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. sunyy1976@hotmail.com

Comment in
    Reprod Sci. 2012 Oct;19(10):NP1; author reply NP2.

The pathogenesis of preeclampsia is unclear but is thought to be related to
shallow trophoblast invasion. An invasive phenotype is acquired by trophoblasts
through the process of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). We proposed that 
EMT in trophoblasts is deregulated in preeclampsia. The homeobox gene DLX4 plays 
an important role in epithelial-mesenchymal interactions during embryonic and
placental development. To elucidate the role of DLX4 in trophoblast EMT and
preeclampsia, we investigated the expression of DLX4 in preeclampsia-affected
placentas and the effect of DLX4 on EMT in trophoblast-derived JEG-3 cells. DLX4 
expression was downregulated in preeclampsia-affected placentas and hypoxic JEG-3
cells. Knockdown of DLX4 by RNA interference (RNAi) inhibited the motility and
invasion ability of JEG-3 cells, decreased the expression of E-cadherin, and
upregulated the expression of the E-cadherin repressor Snail. Our findings
suggest that decreased expression of DLX4 leads to the pathogenesis of
preeclampsia by inhibiting EMT in trophoblasts and provides new insight into the 
pathophysiological mechanism of preeclampsia.

PMID: 21602546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Oncogene. 2011 Jun 16;30(24):2718-29. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.4. Epub 2011 Feb 7.

Homeodomain protein DLX4 counteracts key transcriptional control mechanisms of
the TGF-ß cytostatic program and blocks the antiproliferative effect of TGF-ß.

Trinh BQ(1), Barengo N, Naora H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77054, USA.

The antiproliferative activity of transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) is
essential for maintaining normal tissue homeostasis and is lost in many types of 
tumors. Gene responses that are central to the TGF-ß cytostatic program include
activation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, p15(Ink4B) and
p21(WAF1/Cip1), and repression of c-myc. These gene responses are tightly
regulated by a repertoire of transcription factors that include Smad proteins and
Sp1. The DLX4 homeobox patterning gene encodes a transcription factor that is
absent from most normal adult tissues, but is expressed in a wide variety of
malignancies, including lung, breast, prostate and ovarian cancers. In this
study, we demonstrate that DLX4 blocks the antiproliferative effect of TGF-ß.
DLX4 inhibited TGF-ß-mediated induction of p15(Ink4B) and p21(WAF1/Cip1)
expression. DLX4 bound and prevented Smad4 from forming complexes with Smad2 and 
Smad3, but not with Sp1. However, DLX4 also bound and inhibited DNA-binding
activity of Sp1. In addition, DLX4 induced expression of c-myc independently of
TGF-ß/Smad signaling. The ability of DLX4 to counteract key transcriptional
control mechanisms of the TGF-ß cytostatic program could explain, in part, the
resistance of tumors to the antiproliferative effect of TGF-ß.

PMCID: PMC3116964
PMID: 21297662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. BMC Cancer. 2010 Nov 25;10:649. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-649.

Mutually exclusive expression of DLX2 and DLX5/6 is associated with the
metastatic potential of the human breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231.

Morini M(1), Astigiano S, Gitton Y, Emionite L, Mirisola V, Levi G, Barbieri O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Genova, Largo R, Benzi 10, 
16132 Genova, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The DLX gene family encodes for homeobox transcription factors
involved in the control of morphogenesis and tissue homeostasis. Their expression
can be regulated by Endothelin1 (ET1), a peptide associated with breast cancer
invasive phenotype. Deregulation of DLX gene expression was found in human solid 
tumors and hematologic malignancies. In particular, DLX4 overexpression
represents a possible prognostic marker in ovarian cancer. We have investigated
the role of DLX genes in human breast cancer progression.
METHODS: MDA-MB-231 human breast carcinoma cells were grown in vitro or injected 
in nude mice, either subcutaneously, to mimic primary tumor growth, or
intravenously, to mimic metastatic spreading. Expression of DLX2, DLX5 and DLX6
was assessed in cultured cells, either treated or not with ET1, tumors and
metastases by RT-PCR. In situ hybridization was used to confirm DLX gene
expression in primary tumors and in lung and bone metastases. The expression of
DLX2 and DLX5 was evaluated in 408 primary human breast cancers examining the
GSE1456 and GSE3494 microarray datasets. Kaplan-Meier estimates for disease-free 
survival were calculated for the patients grouped on the basis of DLX2/DLX5
expression.
RESULTS: Before injection, or after subcutaneous growth, MDA-MB-231 cells
expressed DLX2 but neither DLX5 nor DLX6. Instead, in bone and lung metastases
resulting from intravenous injection we detected expression of DLX5/6 but not of 
DLX2, suggesting that DLX5/6 are activated during metastasis formation, and that 
their expression is alternative to that of DLX2. The in vitro treatment of
MDA-MB-231 cells with ET1, resulted in switch from DLX2 to DLX5 expression. By
data mining in microarray datasets we found that expression of DLX2 occurred in
21.6% of patients, and was significantly correlated with prolonged disease-free
survival and reduced incidence of relapse. Instead, DLX5 was expressed in a small
subset of cases, 2.2% of total, displaying reduced disease-free survival and high
incidence of relapse which was, however, non-significantly different from the
other groups due to the small size of the DLX+ cohort. In all cases, we found
mutually exclusive expression of DLX2 and DLX5.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies indicate that DLX genes are involved in human breast
cancer progression, and that DLX2 and DLX5 genes might serve as prognostic
markers.

PMCID: PMC3003273
PMID: 21108812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Int J Biol Sci. 2010 Sep 10;6(5):513-24.

BP1, an isoform of DLX4 homeoprotein, negatively regulates BRCA1 in sporadic
breast cancer.

Kluk BJ(1), Fu Y, Formolo TA, Zhang L, Hindle AK, Man YG, Siegel RS, Berg PE,
Deng C, McCaffrey TA, Fu SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Genomic Medicine, George Washington
University Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Several lines of evidence point to an important role for BP1, an
isoform of DLX4 homeobox gene, in breast carcinogenesis and progression. BRCA1 is
a well-known player in the etiology of breast cancer. While familial breast
cancer is often marked by BRCA1 mutation and subsequent loss of heterozygosity,
sporadic breast cancers exhibit reduced expression of wild type BRCA1, and loss
of BRCA1 expression may result in tumor development and progression.
METHODS: The Cister algorithm and Genomatix program were used to identify
potential BP1 binding sites in BRCA1 gene. Real-time PCR, Western blot and
immunohistochemistry analysis were performed to verify the expression of BRCA1
and BP1 in cell lines and breast cancer tissues. Double-stranded siRNA
transfection was carried out for silencing BP1 expression. ChIP and EMSA were
used to confirm that BP1 specifically binds to BRCA1.
RESULTS: A putative BP1 binding site was identified in the first intron of BRCA1,
which was confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipiation and electrophoresis mobility 
shift assay. BP1 and BRCA1 expression were inversely correlated in breast cancer 
cell lines and tissues, suggesting that BP1 may suppress BRCA1 transcription
through consensus sequence binding.
CONCLUSIONS: BP1 homeoprotein represses BRCA1 expression through direct binding
to its first intron, which is consistent with a previous study which identified a
novel transcriptional repressor element located more than 500 base pairs into the
first intron of BRCA1, suggesting that the first intron plays an important role
in the negative regulation of BRCA1. Although further functional studies are
necessary to confirm its repressor activity towards BRCA1, the elucidation of the
role of BP1 in breast tumorigenesis holds great promise in establishing BP1 as a 
novel target for drug therapy.

PMCID: PMC2945279
PMID: 20877436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Cancer. 2010 Jun 24;1:54-62.

BP1 Homeoprotein Enhances Metastatic Potential in ER-negative Breast Cancer.

Fu Y(1), Lian Y, Kim KS, Zhang L, Hindle AK, Brody F, Siegel RS, McCaffrey TA, Fu
SW.

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Medicine, Division of Genomic Medicine, George Washington
University Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA.

Tumor invasion and metastasis remain a major cause of mortality in breast cancer 
patients. It was reported that BP1, a homeobox isoform of DLX4, is overexpressed 
in 80% of breast cancer patients and in 100% of estrogen receptor negative (ER-) 
tumors. The prevalence of BP1 positive cells and the intensity of BP1
immunoreactivity increased with the extent of ductal proliferation and
tumorigenesis. These findings imply that BP1 may play an important role in ER-
breast cancer. We sought to determine the effects and mechanisms of BP1 on cell
proliferation and metastasis using ER- Hs578T cells as a model. Cells were
transfected with either pcDNA3.2 plasmid containing BP1 gene, or pcDNA3.2 vector,
then selected and cloned. Overexpression of BP1 increased cell proliferation rate
by 2-5 fold (p<0.005), and enhanced the in vitro invasive activity by 25-65 fold 
(p<0.001). Microarray experiments were performed to identify differentially
expressed genes when BP1 is overexpressed. The gene expression profile of the
transfected cell lines were compared, resulting in 71 differentially expressed
genes with a fold-change of >=2.0. Of those genes, 49 were up-regulated and 22
were down-regulated. Significant pathways were identified involving cell
proliferation and metastasis. These data demonstrated that overexpression of BP1 
significantly enhanced cell proliferation and metastatic potential in ER- Hs578T 
cells. Further analysis with more ER- cell lines and patient samples is warranted
to establish BP1 as a therapeutic target for ER- breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2931348
PMID: 20842225  [PubMed]


37. Epigenetics. 2010 Aug 16;5(6):499-508. Epub 2010 Aug 16.

Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling of chronic lymphocytic leukemia allows
identification of epigenetically repressed molecular pathways with clinical
impact.

Tong WG(1), Wierda WG, Lin E, Kuang SQ, Bekele BN, Estrov Z, Wei Y, Yang H,
Keating MJ, Garcia-Manero G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA.

We performed a genome-wide analysis of aberrant DNA methylation in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) using methylated CpG island amplification (MCA)
coupled with a promoter microarray. We identified 280 potential targets of
aberrant DNA methylation in CLL. These genes were located more frequently in
chromosomes 19 (16%, p=0.001), 16 (11%, p=0.001), 17 (10%, p=0.02) and 11 (9%,
p=0.02) and could be grouped in several functional networks. Methylation status
was confirmed for 22 of these genes (SOX11, DLX1, FAM62C, SOX14, RSPO1, ADCY5,
HAND2,SPOCK, MLL, ING1, PRIMA1, BCL11B, LTBP2, BNC1, NR2F2, SALL1, GALGT2, LHX1, 
DLX4, KLK10, TFAP2 and APP) in 78 CLL patients by pyrosequencing. As a proof of
principle, we analyzed the expression of 2 genes, PRIMA1 and APP, in primary
cells and of GALGT2, TFAP2C and PRIMA1 in leukemia cells. There was an inverse
association between methylation and gene expression. This could be reversed by
treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine in cell lines. Treatment in a clinical
trial with 5-azacitidine resulted in decreased methylation of LINE, DLX4 and
SALL1 in the peripheral blood B-cells of patients with CLL. IgVH mutational
status or ZAP-70 expression were not associated with specific methylation
profiles. By multivariate analysis, methylation of LINE and APP was associated
with shorter overall survival (p = 0.045 and 0.0035, respectively). This study
demonstrates that aberrant DNA methylation is common and has potential prognostic
and therapeutic value in CLL.

PMCID: PMC3322493
PMID: 20484983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cancer Biomark. 2009;5(1):9-17. doi: 10.3233/CBM-2009-0563.

BP1, a putative signature marker for inflammatory breast cancer and tumor
aggressiveness.

Man YG(1), Schwartz A, Levine PH, Teal C, Berg PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic and Breast Pathology, Armed Forces Institute of
Pathology and American Registry of Pathology, Washington, DC, USA.
man@afip.osd.mil

Our previous studies revealed that beta protein 1 (BP1) was barely detectable in 
normal human breasts, but was seen in 21%, 46%, and 81% of hyperplastic, in situ,
and invasive breast lesions, respectively. Our current study attempted to assess 
BP1 expression in inflammatory breast cancer (IBC), a very aggressive subtype of 
breast cancers characterized by extensive lympho-vascular invasion and
involvement of dermal lymphatics. Paraffin-embedded tissue sections from 45 cases
of IBC (nine with paired metastatic lymph nodes) and different controls were
assayed immunohistochemically for BP1 expression. Positive BP1 immunoreactivities
were present in all IBC cases. Strikingly, all cancer cells metastasized to lymph
nodes and cells within lymphatic channels were uniformly and strongly
immunoreactive to BP1. The percentage of BP1 positive cells and the intensity of 
BP1 immunostaining in IBC cases were significantly greater than those in non-IBC 
cases. Our findings suggest that BP1 may possess properties of onco-proteins that
promote tumor progression, invasion, and metastasis, representing a putative
signature marker for IBC and tumor aggressiveness.

PMID: 19242057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Int J Dermatol. 2008 Dec;47(12):1245-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-4632.2008.03824.x.

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and indirect immunofluorescence testing
in a bullous pemphigoid and pemphigoid gestationis.

Barnadas MA(1), Rubiales MV, González MJ, Puig L, García P, Baselga E, Pujol R,
Alomar A, Gelpí C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Sta. Creu i St. Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
mbarnadas@hsp.santpau.es

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is an excellent tool for detection of
circulating antibodies against the NC16A portion of BP180 antigen. We compared
the sensitivity and specificity of a commercially available BP180-NC16a domain
ELISA with that of an indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) testing in the evaluation
of bullous pemphigoid (BP) and pemphigoid gestationis (PG), and analyzed the
relationship between ELISA results and the presence of IgG deposition, in an
epidermal or combined pattern, on direct immunofluorescence (DIF) testing of
salt-split skin. ELISA was performed on serum from 28 patients (24 BP, 4 PG) and 
50 controls. IIF testing was performed on serum from 27 patients and 98 controls.
For the group of 28 patients with BP or PG, ELISA had a sensitivity of 93% and
specificity of 96% (P < 0.001), while sensitivity was 74% and specificity 96% (P 
< 0.001) for IIF testing. In these patients, ELISA has a higher sensitivity than 
IIF testing, but similar specificity. Evaluation of controls who had IgG
deposition on the dermal side of salt-split skin on DIF testing showed
specificity for the ELISA of 100% (all four cases negative) and 80% for IIF
testing (one of five positive). Positive ELISA correlated with a diagnosis of BP 
or PG only in patients who had IgG at the basement membrane zone (BMZ) by DIF
testing. Overall, ELISA appears to have greater sensitivity and specificity for
BP or PG than does IIF testing.

PMID: 19126009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Int J Biol Sci. 2009;5(1):1-12. Epub 2008 Dec 3.

Genome-wide analysis of BP1 transcriptional targets in breast cancer cell line
Hs578T.

Song Y(1), Dang C, Fu Y, Lian Y, Hottel J, Li X, McCaffrey T, Fu SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong
University College of Medicine, Shaanxi, China.

Homeobox genes are known to be critically important in tumor development and
progression. The BP1 (Beta Protein 1) gene, an isoform of DLX4, belongs to the
Distal-less (DLX) subfamily of homeobox genes and encodes a
homeodomain-containing transcription factor. Our studies have shown that the BP1 
gene was overexpressed in 81% of primary breast cancer and its expression was
closely correlated with the progression of breast cancer. However, the exact role
of BP1 in breast has yet to be elucidated. Therefore, it is important to explore 
the potential transcriptional targets of BP1 via whole genome-scale screening. In
this study, we used the chromatin immunoprecipitation on chip (ChIP-on-chip) and 
gene expression microarray assays to identify candidate target genes and gene
networks, which are directly regulated by BP1 in ER negative (ER-) breast cancer 
cells. After rigorous bioinformatic and statistical analysis for both
ChIP-on-chip and expression microarray gene lists, 18 overlapping genes were
noted and verified. Those potential target genes are involved in a variety of
tumorigenic pathways, which sheds light on the functional mechanisms of BP1 in
breast cancer development and progression.

PMCID: PMC2597730
PMID: 19119308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008 Nov;187(1):19-24. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2008.07.004.

Amplification of the BP1 homeobox gene in breast cancer.

Cavalli LR(1), Man YG, Schwartz AM, Rone JD, Zhang Y, Urban CA, Lima RS, Haddad
BR, Berg PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, 3800 Reservoir Rd, Room S165A - LL Lombardi Building, Washington, DC 
20007, USA. lrc@georgetown.edu

The homeobox gene BP1 is expressed in over 80% of breast cancers and is
associated with tumor progression and invasion. However, the mechanism of BP1
activation in these tumors remains unknown. Therefore our aim in this study is to
assess the amplification status of the BP1 gene in breast cancer and to determine
whether BP1 protein expression is caused by gene amplification in these tumors.
BP1 amplification and expression were assessed in 36 samples. Twenty primary
breast tumors (PBT) and 14 sentinel lymph node (SLN) metastases were analyzed
using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and immunohistochemistry (IHC),
respectively. Because of the close proximity of BP1 and HER2/NEU genes on 17q,
correlation between their amplification/expression was also investigated.
Increased BP1 copy number was observed in 33% of the cases, with a frequency of
36% and 29% in the PBT and SLN metastasis, respectively. BP1 protein was
expressed in 91% of the samples: in all of the PBT with increased BP1 copy number
and 65% of PBT with normal copy number. HER2/NEU amplification was detected in
22% of the cases. Concordance between BP1 and HER2/NEU copy numbers was found in 
68% of the PBT and 90% of the SLN metastasis. In conclusion, we demonstrated that
the BP1 homeobox gene is amplified in breast cancer, both in PBT and SLN
metastasis, with a significant correlation with HER2/NEU amplification.
Considering that BP1 expression was observed in cases with both increased and
normal BP1 copy number, we conclude that other mechanisms in addition to gene
amplification play a role in BP1 protein expression.

PMID: 18992636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mod Pathol. 2009 Jan;22(1):1-6. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.168. Epub 2008 Oct
17.

BP1, a homeoprotein, is significantly expressed in prostate adenocarcinoma and is
concordant with prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia.

Schwartz AM(1), Man YG, Rezaei MK, Simmens SJ, Berg PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The George Washington University Medical Center,
Washington DC 20037, USA. aschwartz@mfa.gwu.edu

BP1 is a member of the homeobox gene superfamily of transcription factors that
are essential for early development. Significant mRNA expression and
immunohistochemical reactivity of BP1 is present in a majority of breast cancers 
and in all cases of inflammatory breast cancer. This study attempts to determine 
whether BP1 expression is detectable in prostate cancer, another hormone
dependent solid tumor, and whether this expression correlates with
histopathologic and prognostic factors. Paraffin sections from radical
prostatectomy cancer specimens and from tissue microarray sections of prostate
cancer, obtained from the Prostate Cancer Tissue Registry (NIH), were assayed for
BP1 immunoreactivity. Immunoreactivity scoring by two independent pathologists,
using a three-tiered system (0, 1+, 2+), was recorded and correlated with Gleason
scoring and prostatic specific antigen (PSA) biochemical recurrence. Ki-67
(MIB-1) immunoreactivity was performed to assess proliferation. Kappa and
Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel statistical analyses were used to assess interobserver
agreement and pathobiologic correlations. Significant BP1 immunoreactivity (2+)
was identified in approximately 70% of prostatic adenocarcinomas, whether the
analysis was performed on tissue sections (50 cases) or tissue microarray
platforms (123 cases). BP1 immunoreactivity was seen in <5% of normal acinar
cells. The agreement between two separate observers was very good, with
kappa-statistics >0.7. In tissue sections, 12 cases with paired carcinoma and
prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) showed concordance with strong
immunoreactivity. Gleason scores or prostatic specific antigen (PSA) biochemical 
recurrences were not correlated with strong BP1 immunoreactivity. Tumor
proliferation, assayed with Ki-67 (MIB-1) immunoreactivity, was higher in cancer 
cells that were BP1 immunoreactive, relative to those that were BP1 non-reactive.
These findings suggest that BP1 is an important upstream factor in the
carcinogenic pathway of prostate cancer and that the expression of BP1 may
reflect or directly contribute to tumor progression and/or invasion.

PMID: 18931648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2008 Nov-Dec;41(3):244-51. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2008.05.008. 
Epub 2008 Jul 25.

BP1 motif in the human beta-globin promoter affects beta-globin expression during
embryonic/fetal erythropoiesis in transgenic mice bearing the human beta-globin
gene.

Zoueva OP(1), Garrett LJ, Bodine D, Rodgers GP.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Clinical Hematology Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, NIH 9000 Rockville Pike, Building 31, Room 9A52,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The binding of the transcription factor BP1 (beta protein 1) to its site on the
promoter of the adult beta-globin gene has a silencing effect on beta-globin
transcription in vitro. To better understand the mechanism of BP1's negative
regulation of beta-globin expression, we developed transgenic mice bearing a
human beta-globin locus-containing cosmid. Specifically, we introduced a mutated 
BP1 binding site (mtBP1) into the promoter of the beta-globin gene sequence of
this cosmid construct. In the mtBP1 mice, we detected a more than a 20-fold
increase in human beta-globin expression in the yolk sac-derived blood at E10.5, 
a 3-fold increase in fetal livers at E13.5, and an approximately 1.4-fold
increase in adult reticulocytes compared with control mice bearing the human
beta-globin gene with the wild-type BP1 binding site sequence (wtBP1). Our in
vivo observations support the contention that the BP1 binding site of the
beta-globin promoter plays an important role in the regulation of transcription
of the adult beta-globin gene.

PMCID: PMC2585064
PMID: 18656399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Genome Res. 2008 Sep;18(9):1433-45. doi: 10.1101/gr.078378.108. Epub 2008 Jun 18.

Long noncoding RNAs in mouse embryonic stem cell pluripotency and
differentiation.

Dinger ME(1), Amaral PP, Mercer TR, Pang KC, Bruce SJ, Gardiner BB,
Askarian-Amiri ME, Ru K, Soldà G, Simons C, Sunkin SM, Crowe ML, Grimmond SM,
Perkins AC, Mattick JS.

Author information: 
(1)ARC Special Research Centre for Functional and Applied Genomics, Institute for
Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St Lucia QLD 4072, Australia.

The transcriptional networks that regulate embryonic stem (ES) cell pluripotency 
and lineage specification are the subject of considerable attention. To date such
studies have focused almost exclusively on protein-coding transcripts. However,
recent transcriptome analyses show that the mammalian genome contains thousands
of long noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs), many of which appear to be expressed in a
developmentally regulated manner. The functions of these remain untested. To
identify ncRNAs involved in ES cell biology, we used a custom-designed microarray
to examine the expression profiles of mouse ES cells differentiating as embryoid 
bodies (EBs) over a 16-d time course. We identified 945 ncRNAs expressed during
EB differentiation, of which 174 were differentially expressed, many correlating 
with pluripotency or specific differentiation events. Candidate ncRNAs were
identified for further characterization by an integrated examination of
expression profiles, genomic context, chromatin state, and promoter analysis.
Many ncRNAs showed coordinated expression with genomically associated
developmental genes, such as Dlx1, Dlx4, Gata6, and Ecsit. We examined two novel 
developmentally regulated ncRNAs, Evx1as and Hoxb5/6as, which are derived from
homeotic loci and share similar expression patterns and localization in mouse
embryos with their associated protein-coding genes. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation, we provide evidence that both ncRNAs are associated with
trimethylated H3K4 histones and histone methyltransferase MLL1, suggesting a role
in epigenetic regulation of homeotic loci during ES cell differentiation. Taken
together, our data indicate that long ncRNAs are likely to be important in
processes directing pluripotency and alternative differentiation programs, in
some cases through engagement of the epigenetic machinery.

PMCID: PMC2527704
PMID: 18562676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Placenta. 2008 Jul;29(7):624-30. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2008.04.006. Epub 2008
Jun 2.

Novel homeobox genes are differentially expressed in placental microvascular
endothelial cells compared with macrovascular cells.

Murthi P(1), Hiden U, Rajaraman G, Liu H, Borg AJ, Coombes F, Desoye G, Brennecke
SP, Kalionis B.

Author information: 
(1)Pregnancy Research Centre, Department of Perinatal Medicine, The Royal Women's
Hospital, Carlton, Victoria, Australia. padma@unimelb.edu.au

Angiogenesis is fundamental to normal placental development and aberrant
angiogenesis contributes substantially to placental pathologies. The complex
process of angiogenesis is regulated by transcription factors leading to the
formation of endothelial cells that line the microvasculature. Homeobox genes are
important transcription factors that regulate vascular development in embryonic
and adult tissues. We have recently shown that placental homeobox genes HLX,
DLX3, DLX4, MSX2 and GAX are expressed in placental endothelial cells. Hence, the
novel homeobox genes TLX1, TLX2, TGIF, HEX, PHOX1, MEIS2, HOXB7, and LIM6 were
detected that have not been reported in endothelial cells previously.
Importantly, these homeobox genes have not been previously reported in placental 
endothelial cells and, with the exception of HEX, PHOX1 and HOXB7, have not been 
described in any other endothelial cell type. Reverse transcriptase PCR was
performed on cDNA from freshly isolated placental microvascular endothelial cells
(PLEC), and the human placental microvascular endothelial cell line HPEC. cDNAs
prepared from control term placentae, human microvascular endothelial cells
(HMVEC) and human umbilical vein macrovascular endothelial cells (HUVEC) were
used as controls. PCR analyses showed that all novel homeobox genes tested were
expressed by all endothelial cells types. Furthermore, real-time PCR analyses
revealed that homeobox genes TLX1, TLX2 and PHOX1 relative mRNA expression levels
were significantly decreased in HUVEC compared with microvascular endothelial
cells, while the relative mRNA expression levels of MEIS2 and TGIF were
significantly increased in macrovascular cells compared with microvascular
endothelial cells. Thus we have identified novel homeobox genes in microvascular 
endothelial cells and have shown that homeobox genes are differentially expressed
between micro- and macrovascular endothelial cells.

PMID: 18514308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Clin Biochem. 2008 Jul;41(10-11):824-30. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2008.03.011. 
Epub 2008 Apr 4.

Prognostic significance of BP1 mRNA expression level in patients with non-small
cell lung cancer.

Yu M(1), Wan Y, Zou Q.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Advanced Research in Environmental Genomics (CAREG), University of 
Ottawa, 20 Marie Curie, Ottawa, ON, Canada K1N 6N5. myu073@uottawa.ca

OBJECTIVES: To examine the association of BP1 mRNA level with tumor
characteristics and clinical prognosis in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Tumor specimens from 98 NSCLC patients who underwent surgical
resection were quantitatively determined for BP1 mRNA expression by real-time
RT-PCR.
RESULTS: BP1 mRNA was expressed at significantly higher levels in tumors than in 
adjacent nontumorous tissues and normal lung samples. The level of BP1 transcript
was significantly associated with tumor histological type and cell
differentiation grade, but not related with other clinicopathological factors and
p53 mutations. Patients with high BP1 mRNA expression had a poorer prognosis in
terms of both disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) rates.
Additionally, BP1 mRNA expression level was an independent prognostic factor for 
DFS.
CONCLUSIONS: BP1 may be part of a pathway contributing to NSCLC development
and/or progression. BP1 mRNA level could be a novel prognostic marker for NSCLC.

PMID: 18420035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Ann Hematol. 2008 Mar;87(3):195-203. Epub 2007 Nov 20.

Overexpression of BP1, a homeobox gene, is associated with resistance to
all-trans retinoic acid in acute promyelocytic leukemia cells.

Awwad RT(1), Do K, Stevenson H, Fu SW, Lo-Coco F, Costello M, Campbell CL, Berg
PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The George Washington
University Medical Center, Ross Building, Room 533, 2300 Eye Street, NW,
Washington, DC, 20037, USA.

BP1, a homeobox gene, is overexpressed in the bone marrow of 63% of acute myeloid
leukemia patients. In this study, we compared the growth-inhibitory and
cyto-differentiating activities of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) in NB4
(ATRA-responsive) and R4 (ATRA-resistant) acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)
cells relative to BP1 levels. Expression of two oncogenes, bcl-2 and c-myc, was
also assessed. NB4 and R4 cells express BP1, bcl-2, and c-myc; the expression of 
all three genes was repressed after ATRA treatment of NB4 cells but not R4 cells.
To determine whether BP1 overexpression affects sensitivity to ATRA, NB4 cells
were transfected with a BP1-expressing plasmid and treated with ATRA. In cells
overexpressing BP1: (1) proliferation was no longer inhibited; (2)
differentiation was reduced two- to threefold; (3) c-myc was no longer repressed.
These and other data suggest that BP1 may regulate bcl-2 and c-myc expression.
Clinically, BP1 levels were elevated in all pretreatment APL patients tested,
while BP1 expression was decreased in 91% of patients after combined ATRA and
chemotherapy treatment. Two patients underwent disease relapse during follow-up; 
one patient exhibited a 42-fold increase in BP1 expression, while the other
showed no change. This suggests that BP1 may be part of a pathway involved in
resistance to therapy. Taken together, our data suggest that BP1 is a potential
therapeutic target in APL.

PMID: 18026954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Cancer Sci. 2008 Jan;99(1):173-8. Epub 2007 Nov 12.

Expression level of beta protein 1 mRNA in Chinese breast cancer patients: a
potential molecular marker for poor prognosis.

Yu M(1), Yang Y, Shi Y, Wang D, Wei X, Zhang N, Niu R.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Breast Cancer Prevention and Treatment, Cancer
Hospital and Institute, Tianjin Medical University, Huanhuxi Road, Hexi District,
Tianjin 300060, China.

Recent studies revealed high ectopic beta protein 1 (BP1) expression in breast
cancer. Remarkably, up to 100% (18/18) of estrogen receptor (ER)-negative tumors 
and 89% (25/28) of tumors from African American women were BP1-positive. However,
the role of BP1 in breast cancer development and its clinical significance still 
has not been well defined. In the present study, we analyzed the quantitative
level of BP1 mRNA in breast carcinomas using real-time polymerase chain reaction 
and aimed to elucidate its association with tumor characteristics and patient
prognosis. Our data showed that BP1 mRNA was expressed at significantly higher
levels in tumors with lymph node metastasis, with a high histological grade, and 
in those that were of ER-negative status. Furthermore, overexpression of BP1 was 
significantly associated with poor outcome of patients harboring tumors with a
high histological grade and negative ER. Using both in vitro and in vivo systems,
we also showed that the transcript level of BP1 was positively correlated to the 
growth rate of breast tumor cells. Taken together, our results support the notion
that BP1 might contribute to breast neoplastic transformation or tumor
progression and suggest for the first time that BP1 mRNA level has potential as a
prognostic predictor for breast cancer.

PMID: 17999690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Breast Cancer Res. 2007;9(5):R60.

BP1 transcriptionally activates bcl-2 and inhibits TNFalpha-induced cell death in
MCF7 breast cancer cells.

Stevenson HS(1), Fu SW, Pinzone JJ, Rheey J, Simmens SJ, Berg PE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, 37 Convent Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

INTRODUCTION: We have previously shown that the Beta Protein 1 (BP1) homeodomain 
protein is expressed in 81% of invasive ductal breast carcinomas, and that
increased BP1 expression correlates with tumor progression. The purpose of our
current investigation was to determine whether elevated levels of BP1 in breast
cancer cells are associated with increased cell survival.
METHODS: Effects on cell viability and apoptosis of MCF7 cells stably
overexpressing BP1 were determined using MTT and Annexin V assays, and through
examination of caspase activation. TNFalpha was used to induce apoptosis. The
potential regulation of apoptosis-associated genes by BP1 was studied using
real-time PCR and western blot analyses. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays,
site-directed mutagenesis, and transient assays were performed to specifically
characterize the interaction of BP1 with the promoter of the bcl-2 gene.
RESULTS: Stable overexpression of BP1 led to inhibition of apoptosis in MCF7
breast cancer cells challenged with TNFalpha. Increased BP1 resulted in reduced
processing and activation of caspase-7, caspase-8, and caspase-9, and
inactivation of the caspase substrate Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase (PARP).
Increased levels of full-length PARP and a decrease in procaspase-8 were also
associated with BP1 overexpression. The bcl-2 gene is a direct target of BP1
since: (i) BP1 protein bound to a consensus binding sequence upstream of the
bcl-2 P1 promoter in vitro. (ii) MCF7 cells overexpressing BP1 showed increased
levels of bcl-2 mRNA and protein. (iii) Transient assays indicated that increased
bcl-2 promoter activity is due to direct binding and modulation by BP1 protein.
BP1 expression also prevented TNFalpha-mediated downregulation of bcl-2 mRNA and 
protein.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest mechanisms by which increased BP1 may impart a
survival advantage to breast cancer cells, which could lead to increased
resistance to therapeutic agents in patients.

PMCID: PMC2242656
PMID: 17854498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Ai Zheng. 2007 Jul;26(7):709-14.

[Expression and Significance of BP1 Gene and Cyclin D1 Gene in Breast Cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Song YC(1), Fu SD, Wen XP, Ma ZH, Dang CX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology Surgery,The First Affiliated Hospital, Medical College,
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, 710061, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: BP1, a novel transcriptional factor, belongs to DLX
family of homeobox genes. Recent researches showed that BP1 gene is correlated to
genesis of breast cancer, but its correlation to cell cycle control factor has
not been reported yet. This study was to observe the expression of BP1 in breast 
cancer, and to make clear its correlation to Cyclin D1.
METHODS: The expression of BP1 and Cyclin D1 in 86 specimens of human breast
cancer and 20 specimens of normal breast tissue (3 cm away from primary tumor)
was detected by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). BP1
poly antibody was made and was certificated by Western blot. The expression of
BP1 and Cyclin D1 in 86 specimens of human breast cancer were detected by
immunohistochemistry; their correlation was analyzed.
RESULTS: The positive rate of BP1 mRNA was significanlty higher in breast cancer 
than in normal breast tissues (69.8% vs. 0, P < 0.001). The positive rate of
Cyclin D1 mRNA was 64.0% in breast cancer. BP1 mRNA and Cyclin D1 mRNA were
co-expressed in 52 specimens of breast cancer, and simultaneously negative in 23 
specimens (P = 0.227); BP1 protein and Cyclin D1 protein were co-expressed in 43 
specimens, and simultaneously negative in 31 specimens (P = 0.146).
CONCLUSIONS: BP1 gene is highly expressed in breast cancer. There is
co-expression of Cyclin D1 and BP1 in breast cancer. BP1 gene may promote the
genesis of breast cancer through regulating the expression of Cyclin D1.

PMID: 17626745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Aug 17;360(1):181-7. Epub 2007 Jun 12.

The endoplasmic reticulum stress-inducible protein Niban regulates eIF2alpha and 
S6K1/4E-BP1 phosphorylation.

Sun GD(1), Kobayashi T, Abe M, Tada N, Adachi H, Shiota A, Totsuka Y, Hino O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Oncology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 
2-1-1 Hongo, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.

The Niban/NIBAN gene is specifically expressed in hereditary renal carcinomas of 
model animals and in human malignancies, including renal cancers. Although the
expression profiles of Niban/NIBAN suggest that it plays an important role in
carcinogenesis, no functional information has yet been reported. In this study,
we found that the levels of Niban/NIBAN mRNA and protein were induced by
treatment with tunicamycin, an inducer of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. To
elucidate Niban's in vivo function, we generated a Niban knockout mouse.
Niban(-/-) mouse showed no obvious phenotype. Unexpectedly, we found that
eukaryotic translational initiation factor (eIF) 2alpha phosphorylation, which is
up-regulated during ER stress, was increased in Niban(-/-) cells relative to
wild-type control cells. In addition, decreased phosphorylation of p70 ribosomal 
S6 subunit kinase (S6K) 1 and eukaryotic initiation factor 4E-binding protein
(4E-BP) 1 was also detected in Niban(-/-) cells. Similar effects were observed
following transfection of NIBAN-specific interfering RNAs in HeLa cells. Thus,
Niban positively affects protein translation machineries. Additionally,
suppression of NIBAN expression in HeLa cells promoted apoptosis. Together these 
results suggest that Niban is involved in the ER stress response, and that Niban 
can modulate cell death signaling by regulating translation.

PMID: 17588536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Am J Pathol. 2007 May;170(5):1594-606.

A homeobox gene related to Drosophila distal-less promotes ovarian tumorigenicity
by inducing expression of vascular endothelial growth factor and fibroblast
growth factor-2.

Hara F(1), Samuel S, Liu J, Rosen D, Langley RR, Naora H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Therapeutics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77054, USA.

Homeobox genes control developmental patterning and are increasingly being found 
to be deregulated in tumors. The DLX4 homeobox gene maps to the 17q21.3-q22
region that is amplified in some epithelial ovarian cancers. Because
amplification of this region correlates with poor prognosis, we investigated
whether DLX4 overexpression contributes to aggressive behavior of this disease.
DLX4 was not detected in normal ovary and cystadenomas, whereas its expression in
ovarian carcinomas was strongly associated with high tumor grade and advanced
disease stage. Overexpression of DLX4 in ovarian cancer cells promoted growth in 
low serum and colony formation. Imaging of mice bearing intraperitoneal tumors
revealed that DLX4 overexpression substantially increased tumor burden. Tumors
that overexpressed DLX4 were more vascularized than vector-control tumors.
Conditioned medium of DLX4-overexpressing tumor cells was more effective than
medium conditioned by vector-control cells in stimulating endothelial cell
growth. These observations were associated with the ability of DLX4 to induce
expression of vascular endothelial growth factor as well as intracellular and
secreted isoforms of fibroblast growth factor-2. Moreover, increased levels of
these fibroblast growth factor-2 isoforms induced vascular endothelial growth
factor expression in tumor cells. This study reveals a novel role for a homeobox 
gene in ovarian tumorigenicity by its induction of a proangiogenic,
growth-stimulatory molecular program.

PMCID: PMC1854954
PMID: 17456765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007 Feb;6(2):524-31.

Role of placenta growth factor in malignancy and evidence that an antagonistic
PlGF/Flt-1 peptide inhibits the growth and metastasis of human breast cancer
xenografts.

Taylor AP(1), Goldenberg DM.

Author information: 
(1)Garden State Cancer Center, Center for Molecular Medicine and Immunology, 520 
Belleville Avenue, Belleville, NJ 07109, USA. ataylor@gscancer.org

The angiogenic growth factor placenta growth factor (PlGF) is implicated in
several pathologic processes, including the growth and spread of cancer. We found
by immunohistochemistry that 36% to 60% and 65% of primary breast cancers express
PlGF and its receptor Flt-1, respectively. These findings suggest that PlGF may
be active in tumor growth and metastasis beyond its role in angiogenesis. It was 
found that exogenously added PlGF (2 nmol/L), in contrast to vascular endothelial
growth factor (2 nmol/L), significantly stimulated in vitro motility and invasion
of the human breast tumor lines MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231. A PlGF-2/Flt-1-inhibiting
peptide, binding peptide 1 (BP1), that binds Flt-1 at or near the heparin-binding
site was identified and synthesized. Both PlGF-stimulated motility and invasion
were prevented by treatment with BP1 (P < 0.05), as well as by anti-PlGF
antibody. Treatment of mice bearing s.c. MDA-MB-231 with BP1 (200 mug i.p., twice
per week) decreased the number of spontaneous metastatic lung nodules by 94% (P <
0.02), whereas therapy of animals with orthotopic mammary fat pad tumors
decreased pulmonary metastases by 82% (P < 0.02). These results indicate, for the
first time, that PlGF stimulates the metastatic phenotype in these breast cancer 
cells, whereas therapy with a PlGF-2/Flt-1 heparin-blocking peptide reduces the
growth and metastasis of human breast cancer xenografts.

PMID: 17308051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Oncogene. 2007 Jul 5;26(31):4600-8. Epub 2007 Jan 29.

Identification of a metastasis signature and the DLX4 homeobox protein as a
regulator of metastasis by combined transcriptome approach.

Tomida S(1), Yanagisawa K, Koshikawa K, Yatabe Y, Mitsudomi T, Osada H, Takahashi
T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Center for Neurological Diseases and
Cancer, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

Although widespread metastasis is the major cause of human lung cancer-related
deaths, its underlying mechanism remains largely unclear. Our genome-wide
comparison of the expression profiles of a highly metastatic lung cancer cell
line, NCI-H460-LNM35 (LNM35), and its parental clone, NCI-H460-N15 (N15),
resulted in the identification of a cancer metastasis signature composed of 45
genes. Through gene ontology analysis, our study also provided insights into how 
this 45-gene metastasis signature may contribute to the acquisition of metastatic
potential. By applying the signature to datasets of human cancer cases, we could 
demonstrate significant associations with a subset of cases with poor prognosis
not only for the two datasets of cancers of the lung but also for cancers of the 
breast. Furthermore, we were able to show that enforced expression of the DLX4
homeobox gene, which was identified as a gene with significant downregulation in 
LNM35 as well as with significant association with favorable prognosis for lung
cancer patients, markedly inhibited in vitro motility and invasion as well as in 
vivo metastasis via both hematogenous and lymphogenous routes. Taken together,
these findings indicate that our combined transcriptome analysis is an efficient 
approach in the search for genes possessing both clinical usefulness in terms of 
prognostic prediction in human cancer cases and clear functional relevance for
studying cancer biology in relation to metastasis.

PMID: 17260014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Am J Hematol. 2007 May;82(5):342-8.

The study of sequence configuration and functional impact of the (AC)n(AT)xTy
motif in human beta-globin gene promoter.

Chan PK(1), Ma ES, Philipsen S, Tan-Un KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Kadoorie Biological Science Building, The University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China.

In this report we examine the (AC)n(AT)xTy motif residing -530 bp 5' upstream of 
the beta-globin gene in Chinese thalassaemic patients. This motif is a putative
binding site for a repressor protein, termed beta protein 1 (BP1) (Berg et al.,
Nucleic Acids Res 1989;17:8833-8852). Variations in the (AC)n(AT)xTy repeats
affect the binding affinity of BP1, thereby altering the expression of the
beta-globin gene. Eight different configurations of this repeat motif are
identified in our population of Chinese beta-thalassaemia patients. A
(AC)3(AT)7T5 motif was identified among these thalassaemia patients and its
influence in beta-globin gene expression was studied using stable transfection
assay in murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells. Our data demonstrated that the
(AC)3(AT)7T5 motif has a moderately strong repressor effect on the expression of 
the cis-linked beta-globin gene. The high affinity of BP1 for this motif may
result in the suppression of the transcription of the beta-globin gene (Berg et
al., Am J Hematol 1991;36:42-47). We postulate that silencer elements in the
beta-globin promoter play an important role in modifying the clinical
presentation of the disease.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17133428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Mol Hum Reprod. 2006 Dec;12(12):763-9. Epub 2006 Oct 24.

Homeobox gene DLX4 expression is increased in idiopathic human fetal growth
restriction.

Murthi P(1), Said JM, Doherty VL, Donath S, Nowell CJ, Brennecke SP, Kalionis B.

Author information: 
(1)Pregnancy Research Centre, Department of Perinatal Medicine, The Royal Women's
Hospital, Victoria, Australia. padma@unimelb.edu.au

Idiopathic fetal growth restriction (FGR) is often associated with placental
insufficiency. Previously, we isolated and characterized homeobox gene DLX4 from 
the placenta and provided evidence that DLX4 may regulate placental development. 
Here, we have investigated whether DLX4 expression levels were altered in
idiopathic FGR. FGR-affected placentae were collected based on strict clinical
criteria. DLX4 mRNA expression was analysed in placentae obtained from
pregnancies complicated by idiopathic FGR and gestation-matched control
pregnancies (n = 25 each). Initial RT-PCR results showed a qualitative increase
in DLX4 mRNA in both FGR-affected placentae and gestation-matched controls.
Real-time PCR showed a 3-fold increase in DLX4 mRNA levels in FGR-affected
placentae compared with gestation-matched controls (P < 0.005). Western
immunoblotting using a rabbit DLX4 polyclonal antibody revealed significantly
increased levels of DLX4 protein in term FGR-affected placentae compared with
term controls [5500.1 +/- 21.8 (n = 10) versus 3533.2 +/- 22.4 (n = 10); P <
0.001]. Qualitative immunohistochemical analyses of term placentae showed
moderately increased immunoreactivity for DLX4 antigen in the FGR-affected
placentae in syncytiotrophoblasts, residual cytotrophoblast cells and endothelial
cells of the fetal capillaries compared with gestation-matched control term
placentae. We conclude that the increased expression of homeobox gene DLX4 may be
a contributing factor to the developmental abnormalities seen in the FGR-affected
placentae.

PMID: 17062780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Exp Cell Res. 2006 Nov 15;312(19):3880-91. Epub 2006 Sep 1.

Impaired nuclear import of mammalian Dlx4 proteins as a consequence of rapid
sequence divergence.

Coubrough ML(1), Bendall AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph,
Ontario, Canada N1G 2W1.

Dlx genes encode a developmentally important family of transcription factors with
a variety of functions and sites of action during vertebrate embryogenesis. The
murine Dlx4 gene is an enigmatic member of the family; little is known about the 
normal developmental function(s) of Dlx4. Here, we show that Dlx4 is expressed in
the murine placenta and in a trophoblast cell line where the protein localizes to
both the nucleus and cytoplasm. Despite the presence of several
leucine/valine-rich motifs that match known nuclear export sequences, cytoplasmic
Dlx4 is not due to CRM-1-mediated nuclear export. Rather, nuclear import of Dlx4 
is compromised by specific residues that flank the nuclear localization signal.
One of these residues represents a novel conserved feature of the Dlx4 protein in
placental mammals, and the second represents novel variation within mouse Dlx4
isoforms. Comparison of orthologous protein sequences reveals a particularly high
rate of non-synonymous change in the coding regions of mammalian Dlx4 genes.
Since impaired nuclear localization is unlikely to enhance the function of a
nuclear transcription factor, these data point to reduced selection pressure as
the basis for the rapid divergence of the Dlx4 gene within the mammalian clade.

PMID: 17011548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006;34(18):5232-7. Epub 2006 Sep 26.

BP1 is a negative modulator of definitive erythropoiesis.

Mpollo MS(1), Beaudoin M, Berg PE, Beauchemin H, D'Agati V, Trudel M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Development, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montreal, Faculte de Medecine de l'Universite de Montreal, 110 ouest avenue des
Pins, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H2W 1R7.

Beta protein 1 (BP1), a human homeotic transcription factor, is expressed during 
hematopoeisis in the erythroid lineage. To determine the in vivo role of BP1 in
erythropoiesis, we have undertaken two complementary approaches using enforced
BP1 expression in both transgenic mice and embryonic stem (ES) cells. Despite
repeated attempts, only one adult transgenic BP1 founder mouse among 121 mice was
obtained. This mouse presumably survived due to transgene mosaicism because the
transgene could not be transmitted. This mouse expressed BP1 and displayed
splenomegaly, extramedullary erythropoiesis and severe amyloidosis A in the
kidney, a phenotype compatible with thalassemia. Consistently, the presence of
BP1 transgene in fetuses was associated with paleness and lethality. In ES cells,
BP1 expression in primary differentiation appeared to antagonize adult
beta-globin expression. In secondary differentiation, BP1 expression reduced
significantly beta-globin gene expression in both primitive and definitive
erythroid cells, whereas it impaired only the definitive erythroid cell
differentiation. These studies showed that BP1 can negatively modulate adult
beta-globin gene expression and definitive erythroid cell differentiation, and
suggest that BP1 could play a role in thalassemia.

PMCID: PMC1636446
PMID: 17003054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2006 Aug;26(8):1173-5.

[Clinicopathological significance of homeobox BP1 mRNA expression in lung cancer 
tissue].

[Article in Chinese]

Xian YS(1), Dang CX, Yan CX, Li HP, Fu SW, Wang ZR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 
Xi'an 710061, China. yinshengxian@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of beta-protein 1 (BP(1)) gene, a novel 
member of DLX homeobox gene family, in lung cancer tissue and its relationship
with clinical features of lung cancer.
METHODS: RT-PCR was employed for detecting BP(1) gene expression in the lung
cancer tissues, adjacent tissues, non-cancer lung tissues of 46 lung cancer
patients.
RESULTS: Thirty-six lung cancer tissues and 6 adjacent tissues but none of the
normal tissues were found to have BP(1) gene overexpression, showing significant 
difference in BP(1) expression between the tissues (P<0.01). Significant
difference in BP1 gene overexpression was noted between well differentiated
cancers (13 of out 21) and poorly differentiated cancers (22 of the 25), but not 
between cancers of different stages or between squamous carcinoma and
adenocarcinoma.
CONCLUSION: BP(1) gene expression is up-regulated in human lung cancer in related
to the differentiation level of lung cancer but not to the clinical stage.

PMID: 16939914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jul 21;281(29):20357-67. Epub 2006 May 10.

Smad6 represses Dlx3 transcriptional activity through inhibition of DNA binding.

Berghorn KA(1), Clark-Campbell PA, Han L, McGrattan M, Weiss RS, Roberson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853,
USA.

Dlx3 (Distal-less 3) is a homeobox-containing transcription factor required for
normal placental development in mice. Here we demonstrate that Dlx3 interacts
with Smad6, a member of a larger family of transcriptional regulators generally
thought to regulate transforming growth factor beta/bone morphogenetic protein
signaling. Immunocytochemical and immunoprecipitation studies demonstrate
overlapping nuclear localization and physical interaction between Dlx3 and Smad6 
in human choriocarcinoma cells and in differentiated trophoblasts from human
placenta. In vitro protein interaction studies mapped the Smad6 interaction
domain within Dlx3 to residues 80-163, a region of Dlx3 that includes a portion
of the homeodomain. Dlx3 and Dlx4 share homology within this region, and Dlx4 was
also found to bind Smad6. Using the Esx1 gene promoter as a model for a
Dlx3-responsive gene, studies demonstrate two near consensus Dlx3 binding sites
within the proximal 2.3 kb of the transcription start site. Interestingly,
binding of Dlx3 to one of these two sites was inhibited by interaction with
Smad6. Consistent with this result, expression of an Esx1 promoter luciferase
reporter was increased by overexpression of Dlx3; this effect was reversed with
co-expression of Smad6. Further, small interference RNA-mediated knockdown of
endogenous Smad6 increased Dlx3-dependent expression of the Esx1 gene promoter.
Thus, Smad6 appears to functionally interact with Dlx3, altering the ability of
Dlx3 to bind target gene promoters. Smad6 appears to play a modulatory role in
the regulation of Dlx3-dependent gene transcription within placental
trophoblasts.

PMID: 16687405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Placenta. 2007 Feb-Mar;28(2-3):219-23. Epub 2006 May 2.

Homeobox genes are differentially expressed in macrovascular human umbilical vein
endothelial cells and microvascular placental endothelial cells.

Murthi P(1), So M, Gude NM, Doherty VL, Brennecke SP, Kalionis B.

Author information: 
(1)Pregnancy Research Centre, Department of Perinatal Medicine, The Royal Women's
Hospital, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia. padma@unimelb.edu.au

Angiogenesis is fundamental to normal placental development. Aberrant
angiogenesis within the placental terminal villi is a characteristic of
significant placental pathologies and includes structural and vascular
abnormalities as well as altered endothelial cell function, which substantially
impacts on maternal-fetal exchange. Homeobox gene transcription factors regulate 
vascular development in embryonic and adult tissues, but their role in the
placental microvasculature is not well known. In this study, we isolated and
enriched human placental microvascular endothelial cells (PLEC) by a
perfusion-based method and compared homeobox gene expression between PLEC and
macrovascular human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). Reverse
transcriptase PCR detected mRNA expression of homeobox genes DLX3, DLX4, MSX2,
GAX and HLX1 in both PLEC and HUVEC. DLX4 and HLX1 have not been previously
detected in PLEC and with the exception of GAX, none of these homeobox genes have
been previously identified in HUVEC. There was lower expression of HLX1 mRNA in
HUVEC compared with PLEC. Using real-time PCR analysis PLEC HLX1 mRNA expression 
relative to housekeeping gene GAPDH was 0.9+/-0.06 fold of the calibrator (n=6)
versus 0.2+/-0.06 (n=6) for HUVEC, p<0.001. These data provided evidence of
heterogeneity in homeobox gene expression between microvascular PLEC and
macrovascular HUVEC that most likely reflects significant differences in
endothelial cell function in the two different cellular environments.

PMID: 16647116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Sep;34(9):602.

[The expression of BP1 mRNA and its clinical significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Y, Zheng WQ, Ni CR.

PMID: 16468317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005;1054:433-8.

Genetic analysis of candidate modifier polymorphisms in Hb E-beta 0-thalassemia
patients.

Sripichai O(1), Whitacre J, Munkongdee T, Kumkhaek C, Makarasara W, Winichagoon
P, Abel K, Braun A, Fucharoen S.

Author information: 
(1)Thalassemia Research Center, Institute of Science and Technology for Research 
and Development, Mahidol University, Salaya, Phuttamonthon 4 Rd. Phuttamonthon,
Nakornpathom 73170, Thailand.

Hemoglobin E (Hb E)-beta-thalassemia patients display a range of clinical
severities, from nearly asymptomatic to transfusion-dependent thalassemia major. 
Given this clinical heterogeneity, additional genetic factors modifying disease
severity remain to be discovered. Association studies are being conducted to
elucidate the role of genetic polymorphisms as disease severity modifiers in Hb
E-beta-thalassemia patients. Using strict scoring criteria, 1060 Hb
E-beta-thalassemia patients were categorized into mild, moderate, and severe
groups. Taking a candidate gene approach, we found no statistically significant
differences between the mild and severe patients groups in allelic or genotypic
frequencies for single nucleotide polymorphisms within five genes known to
influence globin gene expression and erythropoiesis.

PMID: 16339693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Int J Dev Biol. 2006;50(1):71-5.

Dlx3 is expressed in the ventral forebrain of chicken embryos: implications for
the evolution of the Dlx gene family.

Zhu H(1), Bendall AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Ontario,
Canada.

The archetypal genomic arrangement of vertebrate Dlx genes is as three bigene
clusters (Dlx1/2, Dlx3/4, Dlx5/6). Phylogenetic sequence analysis of mouse and
zebrafish Dlx clusters supports the notion that the Dlx3/4 cluster is more
derived and the absence of expression of either Dlx3 or Dlx4 in the central
nervous system, as reported to date, is consistent with this. Together, these
observations have prompted a model in which cis-regulatory elements, responsible 
for directing Dlx gene transcription in the forebrain, were lost from the Dlx3/4 
bigene cluster prior to the divergence of tetrapods from fish. Here, we describe 
Dlx3 expression in the forebrain of chicken embryos; this constitutes the first
documented evidence of expression of either Dlx3 or Dlx4 in the central nervous
system of a vertebrate. Our observations have implications for models of the
evolutionary history of the Dlx gene family, for the genomic organization of Dlx 
genes in birds and for functional redundancy of Dlx gene function during avian
forebrain development.

PMID: 16323080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Placenta. 2006 Apr-May;27(4-5):375-83. Epub 2005 Jun 21.

Inhibition of DLX4 promotes apoptosis in choriocarcinoma cell lines.

Sun Y(1), Lu X, Yin L, Zhao F, Feng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Fudan University, 419 Fangxie Road,
Shanghai 200011, China.

Homeodomain (HDM) proteins encoded by homeobox (HBX) genes represent a large
family of transcriptional factors that control differentiation and development in
certain cell types. DLX4 is a member of Distal-less (DLX) family of HBX genes.
Recent studies have demonstrated that abnormal expression of DLX4 is present in
several types of human tumors, such as breast cancer, leukemia and colon cancer. 
In the present study, we investigated DLX4 mRNA and protein expression in both
normal placental tissues and human choriocarcinoma cell lines. Also, using RNA
interference (RNAi) technique, we knocked down the expression of DLX4 and
examined apoptosis in JEG-3 cells. Our studies demonstrated that DLX4 RNAi
inhibited DLX4 mRNA expression and decreased DLX4 protein mass specifically and
effectively, potentially enhancing apoptosis. Moreover, we examined expression of
caspase-3 and caspase-8, and found that both caspases were increased after DLX4
knockdown. However, DLX4 RNAi did not influence Bax expression in JEG-3 cells. In
conclusion, this study suggests that DLX4 may be involved in the survival of
human choriocarcinoma cells, which may be mediated by the inhibition of
apoptosis. The detailed mechanism needs further investigation.

PMID: 15975650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2005 Apr;90(3):241-7.

Expression of BP1, a novel homeobox gene, correlates with breast cancer
progression and invasion.

Man YG(1), Fu SW, Schwartz A, Pinzone JJ, Simmens SJ, Berg PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic and Breast Pathology, Armed Forces Institute of
Pathology, The George Washington University Medical Center, 2300 Eye Street,
Washington, DC 20037, USA.

BACKGROUND: Our previous studies revealed that the mRNA encoded by BP1, a member 
of the homeobox gene superfamily of transcription factors, was expressed in
leukemia and infiltrating breast ductal carcinoma (IDC). This study investigated 
the immunohistochemical profile of BP1, to determine whether the expression of
BP1 protein correlated with breast tumor progression and invasion and whether BP1
was co-localized with erbB2.
DESIGN: Paraffin sections from normal reduction mammoplasties (n = 34) and a
variety of in situ and invasive breast cancers (n = 270) were either singly
immunostained for BP1, or doubly immunostained for BP1 plus either erbB2 or
Ki-67.
RESULTS: The prevalence of BP1 positive cells and the intensity of BP1
immunoreactivity increased with the extent of ductal proliferation and
carcinogenesis. BP1 expression was barely detectable in normal reduction
mammoplasties compared to distinct staining in 21, 46, and 81% of hyperplastic,
in situ, and infiltrating lesions, respectively. In cases with co-existing
normal, hyperplastic, in situ, and invasive lesions, the tumor cells of the
invasive lesions consistently showed the highest frequency and the highest
intensity of BP1 immunostaining, followed by in situ tumor cells. Double
immunostaining revealed that BP1 co-localized with a subset of erbB2 positive
cells in all 15 in situ and IDC tumors examined, and that BP1 positive cells had 
a substantially higher proliferation rate than morphologically similar cells
without BP1 expression.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that BP1 is an important upstream factor in an
oncogenic pathway, and that expression of BP1 may reliably reflect or directly
contribute to tumor progression and/or invasion.

PMID: 15830137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Int J Cancer. 2005 Sep 1;116(3):407-14.

Identification of 20 genes aberrantly methylated in human breast cancers.

Miyamoto K(1), Fukutomi T, Akashi-Tanaka S, Hasegawa T, Asahara T, Sugimura T,
Ushijima T.

Author information: 
(1)Carcinogenesis Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Chuo-ku,
Tokyo, Japan.

Aberrant methylation of CpG islands (CGI) not only plays a role in gene
silencing, but is also a potential cancer biomarker. To identify more CGI
aberrantly methylated in human breast cancers, we carried out a genome-wide
search for aberrant methylation, using methylation-sensitive-representational
difference analysis. CGI in 5' upstream regions of 20 genes, TSPAN-2, AK5,
LOC284999, HOXD11, FLJ25161, XT3, PCDH10, PCDHGB6, SIM1, LOC346978, COE2, TDH
(FLJ25033), LOC346419, FLJ33790, GJB2, AMN, LOC201164, DLX4, DCC and FOXA2, were 
found to be methylated in at least one of 8 breast cancer cell lines. Fifteen of 
the 20 genes were methylated in more than one of 21 primary breast cancers in
Stages I or II, and especially, those of LOC346978, HOXD11, SIM1, PCDHGB6 and
FLJ25161 were methylated in more than 10 cancers. All the breast cancers had some
aberrant methylation. Among the 13 genes whose CGI were completely methylated in 
one or more cell lines, FOXA2 and XT3 were expressed in normal human mammary
epithelial cells (HMEC) and were not expressed in cancer cell lines with complete
methylation. The other 11 genes examined were barely expressed, or not expressed 
even in HMEC. Our results showed that breast cancer cells accumulate aberrant
methylation of the CGI identified here. This may serve as markers for early-stage
breast cancers and suggests that aberrant methylation targets transcriptionally
inactive genes in vivo.

PMID: 15818620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Exp Hematol. 2004 Aug;32(8):700-8.

Inhibition of beta protein 1 expression enhances beta-globin promoter activity
and beta-globin mRNA levels in the human erythroleukemia (K562) cell line.

Zoueva OP(1), Rodgers GP.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Clinical Hematology Branch, National Institute of Diabetes &
Digestive & Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA.

OBJECTIVE: In this paper, we report new observations related to the mechanism of 
the negative regulation of the important adult beta-globin gene in the erythroid 
cells at the embryonic-fetal stage of their development. We focused on the role
of the silencer II region located upstream of the beta-globin gene, which along
with its cognate binding protein BP1, negatively regulates beta-globin
transcription.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We prepared plasmid constructs containing the wild-type
silencer II sequence, a mutated silencer II sequence, or a mutated control
sequence in the beta-globin promoter 690-bp insert, which in turn was linked to
an enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) reporter gene. A human
erythroleukemia cell line (K562) with embryonic-fetal phenotype was transfected
with these EGFP constructs.
RESULTS: Flow cytometry and fluorescence digital imaging showed about threefold
increase in the beta-globin promoter activity of the mutated silencer II
construct. Introduction of a small interfering RNA (siRNA) complementary to BP1
into the cells caused a 75% decrease in BP1 expression and a simultaneous
approximately 40% elevation of beta-globin promoter activity as well as an
increase in beta-globin mRNA levels, as compared with controls. We detected no
changes in the mRNA levels of positive regulators of hemoglobin transcription
such as EKLF and GATA-1.
CONCLUSION: Our results support the involvement of BP1 in the mechanism of the
negative regulation of beta-globin transcription. A better understanding of this 
mechanism may lay the groundwork for novel gene therapy approaches to inhibit the
expression of abnormal structural variants of adult beta globin, such as sickle
hemoglobin.

PMID: 15308321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Ai Zheng. 2004 Jul;23(7):855-9.

[Clinicopathological significance of homeobox gene BP1 mRNA expression in human
breast cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Yu M(1), Yang Y, Niu RF, Shi YR, Wei XY, Zhang L, Wang DF.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Central Laboratory, Tianjin Cancer Institute & Hospital, Tianjin,
300060, P.R.China. tmustephen@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Beta protein 1 (BP1) gene, a novel member of DLX homeobox
gene family, is located in 17q21-22 region and overexpressed in both acute
myeloid leukemia and acute T cell lymphocytic leukemia. However, the reports on
the function of BP1 in solid tumors are rare. The study was designed to determine
the expression of BP1 gene in breast cancer and to analyze its relationship with 
various clinicopathological factors.
METHODS: With beta-actin gene as a reference, BP1 mRNA expression was detected in
82 breast cancer tissues and 12 near adjacent tissues and 10 far adjacent tissues
using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: The expression rates of BP1 in near and far adjacent tissues were 16.67%
(2/12) and 0% (0/10), respectively; while the expression rate in breast cancer
group was 64.63% (53/82). There were statistically significant differences among 
the three groups (P< 0.05). Overexpression of BP1 in breast cancer was correlated
with histological grade (P< 0.05). Nevertheless, no correlation was found between
BP1 expression and other clinicopathological factors, including tumor size, lymph
nodal metastasis, family history, pathological type, menarcheal age, primiparous 
age, number of pregnancy, menopausal status, ER status and PR status (P >0.05).
CONCLUSION: BP1 gene is of upregulated expression in breast tumors and could be
regarded as a new and vital biomarker in breast cancer research.

PMID: 15248928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Anticancer Res. 2004 Mar-Apr;24(2B):955-62.

Expression and localization of homeodomain proteins DLX4, HB9 and HB24 in
malignant and benign human colorectal tissues.

Hollington P(1), Neufing P, Kalionis B, Waring P, Bentel J, Wattchow D, Tilley
WD.

Author information: 
(1)Dame Roma Mitchell Cancer Research Laboratories, University of Adelaide,
Hanson Institute, IMVS, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to identify homeobox genes expressed in
the human colon and to determine whether their expression levels were altered
between matched non-malignant and malignant colon tissues.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Homeobox genes expressed in colon tissue were identified
by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Antibodies were
raised to the homeodomain proteins DLX4, HB9 and HB24 and immunohistochemistry
was performed on 3 moderately-differentiated tumors and their corresponding
non-malignant colon tissue samples.
RESULTS: The RT-PCR screen identified expression of DLX4, HB9, HB24 and MSX2 in
the normal colon. Immunoaffinity purified polyclonal antisera raised against
DLX4, HB9 and HB24 detect specific immunoreactivity in glandular epithelial
cells, stromal cells of the lamina propria but not in the submucosa. Nuclear
epithelial immunoreactivity of all three antibodies decreased in
moderately-differentiated tumors compared to the corresponding matched
non-malignant mucosa. These data suggest that differential expression of HB9,
HB24 and DLX4 may be associated with colorectal carcinogenesis.

PMID: 15161049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Jan;25(1):38-40.

[Expression of BP1 gene in adult acute leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Li H(1), Xu KL, Pan XY, Wang HY, Li ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, the Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College,
Xuzhou 221002, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the expression of beta protein 1 (BP1) gene in adult acute 
leukemia (AL) and its relationship with acute leukemia.
METHODS: Expression of BP1 gene mRNA was detected in 70 adult AL, 10 normal
controls and HEL cell line, by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR).
RESULTS: No detectable BP1 gene was found in peripheral blood or bone marrow
cells of normal controls and 20 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in complete
remission (CR) stage. BP1 gene was highly expressed in HEL cell line, 57% (20/35)
of AML and 80% (8/10) of AML-M(5) cases. BP1 gene could not be detected in adult 
acute lymphoid leukemia.
CONCLUSION: BP1 gene was highly expressed in AML. It might be used as a molecular
marker of AML.

PMID: 14990078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 16;279(16):16767-77. Epub 2004 Jan 29.

The Gtx homeodomain transcription factor exerts neuroprotection using its
homeodomain.

Hashimoto Y(1), Tsuji O, Kanekura K, Aiso S, Niikura T, Matsuoka M, Nishimoto I.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology and Anatomy, KEIO University School of Medicine,
35 Shinanomachi, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Certain cases of familial Alzheimer's disease are caused by mutants of
amyloid-beta precursor protein (AbetaPP), including V642I-AbetaPP,
K595N/M596L-AbetaPP (NL-AbetaPP), A617G-AbetaPP, and L648P-AbetaPP. By using an
unbiased functional screening with transfection and expression of a human brain
cDNA library, we searched for genes that protect neuronal cells from toxicity by 
V642I-AbetaPP. One protective clone was identical to the human GTX, a neuronal
homeobox gene. Human Gtx (hGtx) inhibited caspase inhibitor-sensitive neuronal
cell death not only by V642I-AbetaPP but also by L648P-, NL-, A617G-AbetaPP,
apolipoprotein E4, and Abeta. The region of hGtx responsible for this rescue
function was specified to be its homeodomain (Lys148-His207). The rescue function
was shared by DLX4, a distal-less family gene with a homeodomain only 38.3%
homologous to that of hGtx, suggesting that this function would be generally
shared by homeodomains. The neuroprotective function of hGtx was attributable to 
hGtx-stimulated production and secretion of insulin-like growth factor-I. This
study provides molecular clues to understand how neuronal cells developmentally
regulate themselves against cell death as well as to develop reagents effective
in curative therapeutics of Alzheimer's disease.

PMID: 14754886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Arch Oral Biol. 2003 Dec;48(12):843-50.

mRNA expression and phenotype of odontogenic tumours in the v-Ha-ras transgenic
mouse.

Dodds AP(1), Cannon RE, Suggs CA, Wright JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department Pediatric Dentistry, UNC School of Dentistry, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Manning Drive, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
anne_dodds@dentistry.unc.edu

Ameloblastomas are the most common odontogenic neoplasia in humans, and although 
typically considered locally invasive and benign, frequently recur subsequent to 
surgical resection. The Tg.AC transgenic mouse carrying the v-Ha-ras oncogene has
been found to spontaneously develop ameloblastoma-like tumours (35% by 1 year of 
age) that are rare in the wild type FVB background strain.OBJECTIVE: The purpose 
of this study was to characterise the mRNA expression of genes in the mouse
tumours that are either expressed in human ameloblastomas or essential for normal
odontogenesis and to correlate the expression to the histological phenotype.
STUDY METHODS: Histological, immunohistochemical and RT-PCR studies were used to 
evaluate clinically demonstrable odontogenic tumours occurring spontaneously in
seven Tg.AC v-Ha-ras transgenic mice (homozygous, at 7 months of age or
heterozygous at 11 months of age).
RESULTS: Most genes profiled were expressed in all tumour samples, however three 
(amelogenin, matrix metalloproteinase-20 (MMP-20) and Dlx7) displayed
differential expression. In addition, only the most highly differentiated tumour 
stained positively for collagen. In most cases, the variable expression could be 
explained by reference to the histological phenotype, although differences in
gene expression were apparent within the Type 2 and the mixed phenotype tumours.
CONCLUSIONS: These data confirm that many of the genes thought to be important in
odontogenesis and odontogenic tumour formation in humans are also expressed in
these murine ameloblastoma-like tumours however genes associated with terminal
differentiation of ameloblasts demonstrate differential expression between the
tumour phenotypes.

PMID: 14596874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Leukoc Biol. 2003 Aug;74(2):302-5.

DLX genes as targets of ALL-1: DLX 2,3,4 down-regulation in t(4;11) acute
lymphoblastic leukemias.

Ferrari N(1), Palmisano GL, Paleari L, Basso G, Mangioni M, Fidanza V, Albini A, 
Croce CM, Levi G, Brigati C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro
IST, Genova, Italy.

Dlx genes constitute a gene family thought to be essential in morphogenesis and
development. We show here that in vertebrate cells, Dlx genes appear to be part
of a regulatory cascade initiated by acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)-1, a
master regulator gene whose disruption is implicated in several human acute
leukemias. The expression of Dlx2, Dlx3, Dlx5, Dlx6, and Dlx7 was absent in All-1
-/- mouse embryonic stem cells and reduced in All-1 +/- cells. In leukemic
patients affected by the t(4;11)(q21;q23) chromosomal abnormality, the expression
of DLX2, DLX3, and DLX4 was virtually abrogated. Our data indicate that Dlx genes
are downstream targets of ALL-1 and could be considered as important tools for
the study of the early leukemic cell phenotype.

PMID: 12885948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Struct Funct Genomics. 2003;3(1-4):151-9.

The role of gene duplication in the evolution and function of the vertebrate
Dlx/distal-less bigene clusters.

Sumiyama K(1), Irvine SQ, Ruddle FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
PO Box 208103, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

The Dlx gene family controls developmental patterning principally in the
pharyngeal and cranial regions. We review the structure and function of these
genes in the vertebrates and relate these properties to their evolution. We
particularly focus on the Dlx3-7 bigene cluster which we postulate to be more
derived phylogenetically and functionally than the other two bigene clusters,
Dlx1-2 and Dlx5-6. We stress the transcriptional control of the Dlx3-7 bigene
cluster, and postulate its control by Dlx1-2.

PMID: 12836694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Anticancer Res. 2003 Mar-Apr;23(2B):1479-88.

Expression and localization of homeodomain proteins DLX4/HB9 in normal and
malignant human breast tissues.

Neufing PJ(1), Kalionis B, Horsfall DJ, Ricciardelli C, Stahl J, Vivekanandan S, 
Raymond W, Tilley WD.

Author information: 
(1)Dame Roma Mitchell Cancer Research Laboratories, University of Adelaide,
Hanson Institute, PO BOx 14, Rundle Mall, Adelaide S.A. 5000, Australia.
petra.neufing@imvs.sa.gov.au

BACKGROUND: Alterations in the control of gene expression is a key event in
neoplastic transformation. Investigating the expression of transcription factors 
such as homeodomain proteins may therefore allow better characterization of
molecular mechanisms underlying the transformation process.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Expression of homeodomain proteins DLX4 and HB9 was
detected by RT-PCR and immunohistochemically in 24 breast tumors and their
corresponding non-malignant tissue.
RESULTS: Although the percentage of nuclei expressing both DLX4 (p = 0.001) and
HB9 (p = 0.0001) is increased in breast carcinoma, their intensity of nuclear
staining is decreased compared to non-malignant nuclei. Furthermore HB9 nuclear
immunoreactivity decreased progressively with increasing tumor grade (p = 0.001).
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that the reduction in malignant nuclear DLX4
immunoreactivity is an earlier event in breast carcinogenesis than the
progressive loss of HB9 expression observed with increasing tumor grade. With
further study and in conjunction with standard criterion of pathology, these
findings may help to predict the malignant behaviour of some breast cancers.

PMID: 12820413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Breast Cancer Res. 2003;5(4):R82-7. Epub 2003 Apr 22.

Correlation of expression of BP1, a homeobox gene, with estrogen receptor status 
in breast cancer.

Fu SW(1), Schwartz A, Stevenson H, Pinzone JJ, Davenport GJ, Orenstein JM,
Gutierrez P, Simmens SJ, Abraham J, Poola I, Stephan DA, Berg PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The George Washington
University Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA.

BACKGROUND: BP1 is a novel homeobox gene cloned in our laboratory. Our previous
studies in leukemia demonstrated that BP1 has oncogenic properties, including as 
a modulator of cell survival. Here BP1 expression was examined in breast cancer, 
and the relationship between BP1 expression and clinicopathological data was
determined.
METHODS: Total RNA was isolated from cell lines, tumors, and matched normal
adjacent tissue or tissue from autopsy. Reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction was performed to evaluate BP1 expression. Statistical analysis was
accomplished with SAS.
RESULTS: Analysis of 46 invasive ductal breast tumors demonstrated BP1 expression
in 80% of them, compared with a lack of expression in six normal breast tissues
and low-level expression in one normal breast tissue. Remarkably, 100% of tumors 
that were negative for the estrogen receptor (ER) were BP1-positive, whereas 73% 
of ER-positive tumors expressed BP1 (P = 0.03). BP1 expression was also
associated with race: 89% of the tumors of African American women were
BP1-positive, whereas 57% of those from Caucasian women expressed BP1 (P = 0.04).
However, there was no significant difference in BP1 expression between grades I, 
II, and III tumors. Interestingly, BP1 mRNA expression was correlated with the
ability of malignant cell lines to cause breast cancer in mice.
CONCLUSION: Because BP1 is expressed abnormally in breast tumors, it could
provide a useful target for therapy, particularly in patients with ER-negative
tumors. The frequent expression of BP1 in all tumor grades suggests that
activation of BP1 is an early event.

PMCID: PMC165014
PMID: 12817998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Oncol Rep. 2003 Jul-Aug;10(4):973-7.

Induction of apoptosis by fenretinide in tumor cell lines correlates with DLX2,
DLX3 and DLX4 gene expression.

Ferrari N(1), Paleari L, Palmisano GL, Tammaro P, Levi G, Albini A, Brigati C.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro IST, Largo Rosanna Benzi 10,
16132 Genoa, Italy.

We investigated a possible relationship between apoptosis induction by
fenretinide (4HPR) and the expression of a group of genes thought to be essential
in morphogenesis and development, the DLX genes. We analyzed their expression
under normal conditions or upon 4HPR stimulation in several tumor cell lines. We 
show that DLX2, DLX3 and DLX4 were expressed at higher levels in cell lines which
where more sensitive to apoptotic induction, whereas DLX 5 and 6 appeared to
segregate in a distinct functional compartment. Our data support the notion that 
DLX2, 3, 4 genes could participate in the control of 4HPR-mediated apoptosis,
making them important molecules for the monitoring of therapy efficacy in cancer 
patients.

PMID: 12792755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Development. 2003 May;130(10):2213-24.

Fgf3 and Fgf8 dependent and independent transcription factors are required for
otic placode specification.

Liu D(1), Chu H, Maves L, Yan YL, Morcos PA, Postlethwait JH, Westerfield M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA. Gene
Tools, LLC, 1 Summerton Way, Philomath, OR 97370, USA.

The vertebrate inner ear develops from the otic placode, an ectodermal thickening
that forms adjacent to the presumptive hindbrain. Previous studies have suggested
that competent ectodermal cells respond to signals from adjacent tissues to form 
the placode. Members of the Fgf family of growth factors and the Dlx family of
transcription factors have been implicated in this signal-response pathway. We
show that compromising Fgf3 and Fgf8 signaling blocks ear development; only a few
scattered otic cells form. Removal of dlx3b, dlx4b and sox9a genes together also 
blocks ear development, although a few residual cells form an otic epithelium.
These cells fail to form if sox9b function is also blocked. Combined loss of Fgf 
signaling and the three transcription factor genes, dlx3b, dlx4b and sox9a, also 
completely eliminates all indications of otic cells. Expression of sox9a but not 
dlx3b, dlx4b or sox9b requires Fgf3 and Fgf8. Our results provide evidence for
Fgf3- and Fgf8-dependent and -independent genetic pathways for otic specification
and support the notion that Fgf3 and Fgf8 function to induce both the otic
placode and the epithelial organization of the otic vesicle.

PMID: 12668634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Development. 2002 Dec;129(23):5323-37.

Shh signaling within the dental epithelium is necessary for cell proliferation,
growth and polarization.

Gritli-Linde A(1), Bei M, Maas R, Zhang XM, Linde A, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biochemistry, Sahlgrenska Academy at Göteborg University,
Sweden.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh), a member of the mammalian Hedgehog (Hh) family, plays a key
role during embryogenesis and organogenesis. Tooth development, odontogenesis, is
governed by sequential and reciprocal epithelial-mesenchymal interactions.
Genetic removal of Shh activity from the dental epithelium, the sole source of
Shh during tooth development, alters tooth growth and cytological organization
within both the dental epithelium and mesenchyme of the tooth. In this model it
is not clear which aspects of the phenotype are the result of the direct action
of Shh on a target tissue and which are indirect effects due to deficiencies in
reciprocal signalings between the epithelial and mesenchymal components. To
distinguish between these two alternatives and extend our understanding of Shh's 
actions in odontogenesis, we have used the Cre-loxP system to remove Smoothened
(Smo) activity in the dental epithelium. Smo, a seven-pass membrane protein is
essential for the transduction of all Hh signals. Hence, removal of Smo activity 
from the dental epithelium should block Shh signaling within dental epithelial
derivatives while preserving normal mesenchymal signaling. Here we show that
Shh-dependent interactions occur within the dental epithelium itself. The dental 
mesenchyme develops normally up until birth. In contrast, dental epithelial
derivatives show altered proliferation, growth, differentiation and polarization.
Our approach uncovers roles for Shh in controlling epithelial cell size,
organelle development and polarization. Furthermore, we provide evidence that Shh
signaling between ameloblasts and the overlying stratum intermedium may involve
subcellular localization of Patched 2 and Gli1 mRNAs, both of which are targets
of Shh signaling in these cells.

PMID: 12403705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Curr Protein Pept Sci. 2001 Sep;2(3):245-59.

Life and death in the placenta: new peptides and genes regulating human
syncytiotrophoblast and extravillous cytotrophoblast lineage formation and
renewal.

Morrish DW(1), Dakour J, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, 362 Heritage Medical Research
Center, Edmonton, Alberta, T6G 2S2, Canada. dmorrish@gpu.srv.ualberta.ca

Differential techniques have revealed several novel genes and peptides involved
in trophoblast development including PL74/gdf15/MIC-1, a TGFbeta family cytokine 
that controls apoptosis and differentiation, PL48, a new serine-threonine protein
kinase, serum and glucocorticoid-induced kinase, PBK-1, a tunicamycin-responsive 
gene, a cathepsin D-like gene (DAP-1) and hypoxia- regulated genes HRF-1,2,6,8
and HIF-1alpha, HIF-1beta, and hEPAS-1. Syncytin, a cell fusion- inducing gene,
has been cloned from placenta where it regulates cell fusion. ERV-3 has also been
demonstrated to promote cell fusion. These two genes represent the first
demonstrated functions of endogenous retroviral sequences in human tissues.
Endoglin, PlGF, TGFbeta3, IGF-II, IGFBP-1, and a placental IGFBP protease have
found new roles in regulating cytotrophoblast proliferation and invasiveness. A
specific placental p105 rasGAP protein has been identified. The homeobox genes
DLX4, HB24, MSX2 and MOX2 also likely play a role in development at the
epithelial-mesenchymal boundary. Transcription factors such as TEF-5, Hand1, HEB,
HASH-2 and two genes represented by ESTs may have regulatory roles in placental
development. Evidence suggests that the placenta has an unusual two-cell system
for apoptosis regulation in which the cytotrophoblast may direct later apoptotic 
events in the syncytium, and with syncytialization possibly triggered by the
"phosphatidylserine flip". Thus, the placenta is both a rich source of new
growth-regulatory substances, and a model system for originating new paradigms of
developmental biology.

PMID: 12369935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Development. 2002 Jul;129(13):3127-36.

Concerted action of two dlx paralogs in sensory placode formation.

Solomon KS(1), Fritz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Sensory placodes are ectodermal thickenings that give rise to elements of the
vertebrate cranial sensory nervous system, including the inner ear and nose.
Although mutations have been described in humans, mice and zebrafish that perturb
ear and nose development, no mutation is known to prevent sensory placode
formation. Thus, it has been postulated that a functional redundancy exists in
the genetic mechanisms that govern sensory placode development. We describe a
zebrafish deletion mutation, b380, which results in a lack of both otic and
olfactory placodes. The b380 deletion removes several known genes and expressed
sequence tags, including dlx3 and dlx7, two transcription factors that share a
homoeobox domain similar in sequence to the Drosophila Distal-less gene. dlx3 and
dlx7 are expressed in an overlapping pattern in the regions that produce the otic
and olfactory placodes in zebrafish. We present evidence suggesting that it is
specifically the removal of these two genes that leads to the otic and olfactory 
phenotype of b380 mutants. Using morpholinos, antisense oligonucleotides that
effectively block translation of target genes, we find that functional reduction 
of both dlx genes contributes to placode loss. Expression patterns of the otic
marker pax2.1, olfactory marker anxV and eya1, a marker of both placodes, in
morpholino-injected embryos recapitulate the reduced expression of these genes
seen in b380 mutants. We also examine expression of dlx3 and dlx7 in the
morpholino-injected embryos and present evidence for existence of auto- and
cross-regulatory control of expression among these genes. We demonstrate that
dlx3 is necessary and sufficient for proper otic and olfactory placode
development. However, our results indicate that dlx3 and dlx7 act in concert and 
their importance in placode formation is only revealed by inactivating both
paralogs.

PMID: 12070088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Apr;22(8):2505-14.

BP1, a homeodomain-containing isoform of DLX4, represses the beta-globin gene.

Chase MB(1), Fu S, Haga SB, Davenport G, Stevenson H, Do K, Morgan D, Mah AL,
Berg PE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

In earlier studies we identified a putative repressor of the human beta-globin
gene, termed beta protein 1 (BP1), which binds to two silencer DNA sequences
upstream of the adult human beta-globin gene and to a negative control region
upstream of the adult delta-globin gene. Further studies demonstrated an inverse 
correlation between the binding affinity of the BP1 protein for the distal
beta-globin silencer sequence and the severity of sickle cell anemia, suggesting 
a possible role for BP1 in determining the production of hemoglobin S. We have
now cloned a cDNA expressing the BP1 protein. Sequencing revealed that BP1 is a
member of the homeobox gene family and belongs to the subfamily called
Distal-less (DLX), genes important in early development. Further analysis showed 
that BP1 is an isoform of DLX4. BP1 protein has repressor function towards the
beta-globin promoter, acting through the two beta-globin DNA silencers,
demonstrated in transient transfection assays. Strong BP1 expression is
restricted to placenta and kidney tissue, with no expression in 48 other human
tissues. BP1 exhibits regulated expression in the human erythroid cell line
MB-02, where its expression decreases upon induction of the beta-globin gene. BP1
is thus the first member of the DLX family with known DNA binding sites and a
function in globin gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC133721
PMID: 11909945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Jan 22;99(2):780-5. Epub 2002 Jan 15.

Genomic structure and functional control of the Dlx3-7 bigene cluster.

Sumiyama K(1), Irvine SQ, Stock DW, Weiss KM, Kawasaki K, Shimizu N, Shashikant
CS, Miller W, Ruddle FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06511, USA.

The Dlx genes are involved in early vertebrate morphogenesis, notably of the
head. The six Dlx genes of mammals are arranged in three convergently transcribed
bigene clusters. In this study, we examine the regulation of the Dlx3-7 cluster
of the mouse. We obtained and sequenced human and mouse P1 clones covering the
entire Dlx3-7 cluster. Comparative analysis of the human and mouse sequences
revealed several highly conserved noncoding regions within 30 kb of the
Dlx3-7-coding regions. These conserved elements were located both 5' of the
coding exons of each gene and in the intergenic region 3' of the exons,
suggesting that some enhancers might be shared between genes. We also found that 
the protein sequence of Dlx7 is evolving more rapidly than that of Dlx3. We
conducted a functional study of the 79-kb mouse genomic clone to locate
cis-element activity able to reproduce the endogenous expression pattern by using
transgenic mice. We inserted a lacZ reporter gene into the first exon of the Dlx3
gene by using homologous recombination in yeast. Strong lacZ expression in
embryonic (E) stage E9.5 and E10.5 mouse embryos was found in the limb buds and
first and second visceral arches, consistent with the endogenous Dlx3 expression 
pattern. This result shows that the 79-kb region contains the major cis-elements 
required to direct the endogenous expression of Dlx3 at stage E10.5. To test for 
enhancer location, we divided the construct in the mid-intergenic region and
injected the Dlx3 gene portion. This shortened fragment lacking Dlx7-flanking
sequences is able to drive expression in the limb buds but not in the visceral
arches. This observation is consistent with a cis-regulatory enhancer-sharing
model within the Dlx bigene cluster.

PMCID: PMC117382
PMID: 11792834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cereb Cortex. 2002 Jan;12(1):75-85.

Expression from a Dlx gene enhancer marks adult mouse cortical GABAergic neurons.

Stühmer T(1), Puelles L, Ekker M, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, LPPI, University of California at San Francisco, 401 Parnassus
Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143-0984, USA.

In this paper we analyse the expression pattern of a zebrafish dlx4/6
enhancer/reporter construct in embryonic transgenic mice. We show that the
pattern of LacZ/beta-galactosidase in cells that tangentially migrate from the
ganglionic eminences to the cerebral cortex is identical to that of various
subpallial markers, namely Dlx and GAD genes, that are known to label this
population. Because beta-galactosidase activity persists long after expression of
the Dlx genes and the transgene becomes undetectable, we were able to analyse the
beta-galactosidase-positive cell population of the mature cortex through X-gal
staining and immunohistochemistry. We show that this population is largely
identical with the adult cortical and hippocampal interneuron population,
providing further evidence for their subpallial origin.

PMID: 11734534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Gene. 2001 Oct 31;278(1-2):131-9.

Distinct functions of two isoforms of a homeobox gene, BP1 and DLX7, in the
regulation of the beta-globin gene.

Fu S(1), Stevenson H, Strovel JW, Haga SB, Stamberg J, Do K, Berg PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The George Washington
University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

Homeotic proteins are transcription factors that regulate the expression of
multiple genes involved in development and differentiation. We previously
isolated a cDNA encoding such a protein from the human leukemia cell line K562,
termed Beta Protein 1 (BP1), which is involved in negative regulation of the
human beta-globin gene. Sequence comparison revealed that BP1 is a member of the 
distal-less (DLX) family of homeobox genes and that it shares its homeodomain and
3' sequences with another DLX cDNA, DLX7. BP1 and DLX7 exhibit unique 5' regions,
diverging at nucleotide 565 of BP1. We mapped this new distal-less family member 
BP1 to chromosome 17q21-22 by FISH and PCR, which is the same locus to which DLX7
has been mapped. These results strongly suggest that BP1 and DLX7 are isoforms
(derived from the same gene). Since our previous data demonstrated that BP1 and
DLX7 are frequently co-expressed, we determined whether DLX7 is also involved in 
the negative regulation of the beta-globin gene. Mobility shift assays
demonstrated that both BP1 and DLX7 proteins, synthesized in vitro, bind to the
same BP1 binding site. However, using transient assays, we showed that although
BP1 represses activity of a reporter gene through either of two silencer DNA
sequences upstream of the beta-globin gene, DLX7 did not show repressor activity 
against the beta-globin promoter. Further characterization of these apparent
isoforms is of significance since they are jointly expressed in acute myeloid
leukemia and in many leukemia cell lines.

PMID: 11707330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Exp Zool. 2000 Oct 15;288(3):235-41.

Differential expression of orthologous Dlx genes in zebrafish and mice:
implications for the evolution of the Dlx homeobox gene family.

Quint E(1), Zerucha T, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Loeb Health Research Institute at the Ottawa Hospital, Ontario, Canada.

Dlx homeobox genes of vertebrates are often organised as physically linked pairs 
in which the two genes are transcribed convergently (tail-to-tail arrangement).
Three such Dlx pairs have been found in mouse, human, and zebrafish and are
thought to have originated from the duplication of an ancestral gene pair. These 
pairs include Dlx1/Dlx2, Dlx7/Dlx3, and Dlx6/Dlx5 (the zebrafish orthologue of
Dlx5 is named dlx4). Expression patterns of physically linked Dlx genes overlap
extensively. Furthermore, orthologous Dlx genes often show highly similar
expression patterns. We analysed Dlx expression during the gastrula and early
somitogenesis of the mouse and zebrafish. It was found that expression of the
mouse Dlx6 gene takes place in the rostral ectoderm and presumptive olfactory and
otic placodes with patterns similar to the previously reported expression of the 
physically linked Dlx5 gene. However, we observed only very weak expression of
the mouse Dlx3 gene at the same stage. This contrasts with the expression of dlx 
genes in zebrafish where dlx3 and dlx7, but not dlx4 and dlx6 are expressed
during gastrulation in the rostral ectoderm and presumptive placodes. Thus, Dlx
expression patterns at early stages are better conserved between paralogous pairs
of physically linked genes than between orthologous pairs. This suggests that
early expression of Dlx genes existed prior to the duplications that led to the
multiple pairs of physically linked genes but was differentially conserved in
different paralogs in zebrafish and mice.

PMID: 11069141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Leukemia. 2000 Nov;14(11):1867-75.

BP1, a new homeobox gene, is frequently expressed in acute leukemias.

Haga SB(1), Fu S, Karp JE, Ross DD, Williams DM, Hankins WD, Behm F, Ruscetti FW,
Chang M, Smith BD, Becton D, Raimondi SC, Berg PE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, USA.

Aberrant expression of homeobox genes has been described in primary leukemia
blasts. We recently cloned a new cDNA, BP1, which is a member of the homeobox
gene family. BP1 expression was investigated in bone marrow samples from acute
myeloid leukemia (AML), acute T cell lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) and pre-B cell
ALL. Expression levels of two apparent isoforms of BP1, DLX7 and DLX4, were
measured in the same samples. They are weakly if at all detectable in normal bone
marrow, PHA-stimulated T cells or B cells. BP1 RNA was highly expressed in 63% of
AML cases, including 81% of the pediatric and 47% of the adult cases, and in 32% 
of T-ALL cases, but was not found in any of the pre-B ALL cases. Coexpression of 
BP1, DLX7 and DLX4 occurred in a significant number of leukemias. Our data,
including co-expression of BP1 with c-myb and GATA-1, markers of early
progenitors, suggest that BP1 expression occurs in primitive cells in AML.
Analysis of CD34+ and CD34- normal bone marrow cells revealed BP1 is expressed in
CD34- cells and virtually extinguished in CD34+ cells. Ectopic expression of BP1 
in the leukemia cell line K562 increased clonogenicity, consistent with a role
for BP1 in leukemogenesis. The presence of BP1 RNA in leukemic blasts may
therefore be a molecular marker for primitive cells and/or may indicate that BP1 
is an important upstream factor in an oncogenic pathway.

PMID: 11069021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Placenta. 2000 Mar-Apr;21 Suppl A:S50-4.

The homeobox genes MSX2 and MOX2 are candidates for regulating
epithelial-mesenchymal cell interactions in the human placenta.

Quinn LM(1), Latham SE, Kalionis B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynaecology and Reproductive Medicine, Flinders
University of South Australia, Bedford Park, Australia.

Homeobox genes of the Msx and Mox families are coexpressed in the vertebrate
embryo in regions of epithelial-mesenchymal interactions. Here we show that a
member of each family is expressed in extra-embryonic structures where epithelial
and mesenchymal cell layers contact. In situ hybridization studies on first
trimester human placental sections reveal that MSX2 and MOX2 are expressed
predominantly in the cytotrophoblast cell layer. In term placenta, MSX2 and MOX2 
are expressed in the syncytiotrophoblast. This is the first study to describe the
expression of MOX2 in human tissues and to show that members of the Msx and Mox
families of homeobox genes are expressed where epithelial and mesenchymal cell
layers contact in the human placenta. A combinatorial code of homeobox genes that
includes members of the Msx, Mox and Dlx families has been predicted to regulate 
epithelial-mesenchymal cell interactions in the vertebrate embryo. We have shown 
that MSX2, MOX2, DLX4 and the HB24 homeobox gene are expressed in the epithelial 
and mesenchymal cell types that form the placenta. We predict that this
combination of homeobox genes is involved in regulating epithelial-mesenchymal
cell interactions in extraembryonic tissues.

PMID: 10831122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Exp Hematol. 2000 Apr;28(4):433-41.

Overexpression of the homeobox gene DLX-7 inhibits apoptosis by induced
expression of intercellular adhesion molecule-1.

Shimamoto T(1), Ohyashiki K, Takeshita K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
takashis@cb3.so-net.ne.jp

OBJECTIVE: DLX genes constitute a subfamily of divergent homeobox genes. We have 
previously reported that inhibition of DLX-7 expression by an antisense
oligonucleotide caused apoptosis in the K562 erythroleukemia cell line, which
highly expresses DLX-7. In this study, we have constructed an expression vector
encoding human DLX-7, and examined the effects of overexpression of DLX-7 in the 
IL-3-dependent lymphoid precursor cell line Ba/F3.
METHODS: DLX-7 expression vector was electroporated into Ba/F3 cells, and
generate a DLX-7 expressing Ba/F3 cells. Northern blot analysis was performed to 
determine DLX-7 gene expression. WST-1 assay was used to cell proliferation
assay. To detect apoptosis, we performed TUNEL assay. Expression of cell surface 
adhesion molecules was examined by FACS analysis.
RESULTS: Growth properties of DLX-7-transfected Ba/F3 cells in the presence of
IL-3, did not differ from those of control Ba/F3 cells. However, in the absence
of IL-3, DLX-7-transfected cells abrogated growth dependence on cytokines due to 
inhibition of apoptosis. Because adhesion properties of DLX-7-transfected cells
increase, we examined expression of adhesion molecules in these cells. Expression
of intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1 and ICAM-2 were markedly upregulated 
in DLX-7-transfected cells. Both anti-ICAM-1 antibody and anti-LFA-1 antibody
blocked the aggregation of DLX-7-transfected cells. Moreover, in the absence of
IL-3, cytokine-independent cell growth was blocked by anti-ICAM-1 antibody.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that DLX-7 overexpression blocks apoptosis and
that ICAM-1 expression induced by DLX-7 contributes to this antiapoptotic effect.

PMID: 10781901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Neurosci. 2000 Jan 15;20(2):709-21.

A highly conserved enhancer in the Dlx5/Dlx6 intergenic region is the site of
cross-regulatory interactions between Dlx genes in the embryonic forebrain.

Zerucha T(1), Stühmer T, Hatch G, Park BK, Long Q, Yu G, Gambarotta A, Schultz
JR, Rubenstein JL, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Loeb Health Research Institute at the Ottawa Hospital and Department of
Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1Y 4E9, Canada.

Four Dlx homeobox genes, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, and Dlx6 are expressed in the same
primordia of the mouse forebrain with temporally overlapping patterns. The four
genes are organized as two tail-to-tail pairs, Dlx1/Dlx2 and Dlx5/Dlx6, a genomic
arrangement conserved in distantly related vertebrates like zebrafish. The
Dlx5/Dlx6 intergenic region contains two sequences of a few hundred base pairs,
remarkably well conserved between mouse and zebrafish. Reporter transgenes
containing these two sequences are expressed in the forebrain of transgenic mice 
and zebrafish with patterns highly similar to endogenous Dlx5 and Dlx6
expression. The activity of the transgene is drastically reduced in mouse mutants
lacking both Dlx1 and Dlx2, consistent with the decrease in endogenous Dlx5 and
Dlx6 expression. These results suggest that cross-regulation by Dlx proteins,
mediated by the intergenic sequences, is essential for Dlx5 and Dlx6 expression
in the forebrain. This hypothesis is supported by cotransfection and DNA-protein 
binding experiments. We propose that the Dlx genes are part of a highly conserved
developmental pathway that regulates forebrain development.

PMID: 10632600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Pediatr Res. 1999 Dec;46(6):650-6.

Comparative study of MSX-2, DLX-5, and DLX-7 gene expression during early human
tooth development.

Davideau JL(1), Demri P, Hotton D, Gu TT, MacDougall M, Sharpe P, Forest N,
Berdal A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie-Odontologie, Université Paris VII, France.

Msx and Dlx family transcription factors are key elements of craniofacial
development and act in specific combinations with growth factors to control the
position and shape of various skeletal structures in mice. In humans, the
mutations of MSX and DLX genes are associated with specific syndromes, such as
tooth agenesis, craniosynostosis, and tricho-dento-osseous syndrome. To establish
some relationships between those reported human syndromes, previous experimental 
data in mice, and the expression patterns of MSX and DLX homeogenes in the human 
dentition, we investigated MSX-2, DLX-5, and DLX-7 expression patterns and
compared them in orofacial tissues of 7.5- to 9-wk-old human embryos by using in 
situ hybridization. Our data showed that MSX-2 was strongly expressed in the
progenitor cells of human orofacial skeletal structures, including mandible and
maxilla bones, Meckel's cartilage, and tooth germs, as shown for DLX-5. DLX-7
expression was restricted to the vestibular lamina and, later on, to the
vestibular part of dental epithelium. The comparison of MSX-2, DLX-5, and DLX-7
expression patterns during the early stages of development of different human
tooth types showed the existence of spatially ordered sequences of homeogene
expression along the vestibular/lingual axis of dental epithelium. The expression
of MSX-2 in enamel knot, as well as the coincident expression of MSX-2, DLX-5,
and DLX-7 in a restricted vestibular area of dental epithelium, suggests the
existence of various organizing centers involved in the control of human tooth
morphogenesis.

PMID: 10590019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Clin Genet. 1999 Jul;56(1):35-40.

Tricho-dento-osseous syndrome and amelogenesis imperfecta with taurodontism are
genetically distinct conditions.

Price JA(1), Wright JT, Walker SJ, Crawford PJ, Aldred MJ, Hart TC.

Author information: 
(1)Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Amelogenesis imperfecta of the hypomaturation-hypoplasia type with taurodontism
(AIHHT) is inherited as a highly penetrant autosomal dominant trait. These dental
findings are similar to those of another autosomal dominant condition, the
tricho-dento-osseous syndrome (TDO), from which AIHHT differs primarily by lack
of changes in the hair and bones. TDO is characterized by a highly variable
clinical phenotype. While enamel hypoplasia and taurodontism appear to be present
in all TDO cases, non-dental features may be absent, with approximately half of
TDO cases losing the kinky/curly hair phenotype seen in infancy by adolescence,
and in almost 20% of cases, osseous changes are not evident. The genetic basis
for AIHHT is unknown and it has been questioned whether AIHHT and TDO are
separate conditions or a spectrum of disease. The genetic basis for TDO has
recently been identified as a deletion mutation in the distal-less 3 (DLX3)
transcription factor gene. To determine if AIHHT and TDO represent variable
expression of a common DLX3 gene mutation, allelic mutations of the DLX3 gene, or
mutations in DLX7 (the linked paralogue to DLX3 on chromosome 17), we have
performed mutational analysis and sequencing studies of the DLX3 and DLX7 genes
in three individuals (two affected and one unaffected) from a family with AIHHT. 
Results of the analysis demonstrate that AIHHT and TDO are not due to a common
DLX3 gene mutation. Sequence analyses of the DLX3 and DLX7 genes suggest AIHHT is
not due to genetic mutations or polymorphisms in the exons of these genes. These 
results suggest that AI-HHT and TDO are two genetically distinct conditions.

PMID: 10466415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Mol Hum Reprod. 1998 May;4(5):497-501.

Homeobox genes DLX4 and HB24 are expressed in regions of epithelial-mesenchymal
cell interaction in the adult human endometrium.

Quinn LM(1), Kilpatrick LM, Latham SE, Kalionis B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Flinders University of South
Australia, Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park, Australia.

The adult human endometrium rapidly cycles through stages of cell proliferation, 
differentiation and degeneration. Inappropriate endometrial cell differentiation 
is a contributing factor in diseases such as endometrial carcinoma and
endometriosis. We have identified two homeobox genes that may play a role in the 
control of endometrial cell differentiation and development. In-situ mRNA
hybridization experiments were used to show differential expression of DLX4 at
different phases of the endometrial cycle. Higher levels of DLX4 expression were 
observed in proliferative phase endometrial epithelium compared with secretory
phase endometrial epithelium. The HB24 homeobox gene was shown to be expressed in
both the proliferative and secretory phase endometrial epithelium. We predict
that DLX4 and HB24 will be required for the transcriptional control of genes
important for endometrial cell differentiation. Furthermore, we propose that DLX4
and HB24 are part of a conserved combinatorial code of homeobox genes that are
required for controlling epithelial-mesenchymal cell interactions in the
endometrium.

PMID: 9665637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Hum Mol Genet. 1998 Mar;7(3):563-9.

Identification of a mutation in DLX3 associated with tricho-dento-osseous (TDO)
syndrome.

Price JA(1), Bowden DW, Wright JT, Pettenati MJ, Hart TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Bowman 
Gray Campus, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Tricho-dento-osseous syndrome (TDO) is an autosomal dominant disorder
characterized by abnormal hair, teeth and bone. The main clinical manifestations 
of TDO include taurodontism, enamel hypoplasia, kinky, curly hair at birth and
increased thickness and density of the cranial bones. These pleiotropic clinical 
features suggest the role of a developmental gene modulating
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions. We recently mapped the TDO locus to
chromosome 17q21, a region that includes two members of the distal-less homeobox 
gene family, DLX3 and DLX7. In this paper we describe genomic cloning and
sequencing of both human DLX3 and DLX7 and identification of a 4 bp deletion in
human DLX3 which correlates with the TDO phenotype in six families. The observed 
mutation is predicted to cause a frameshift and premature termination codon,
resulting in a functionally altered DLX3. This first report of a human mutation
in the DLX genes is consistent with murine studies indicating their important
role in the development of hair, teeth and bone.

PMID: 9467018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Placenta. 1998 Jan;19(1):87-93.

A distal-less class homeobox gene, DLX4, is a candidate for regulating
epithelial-mesenchymal cell interactions in the human placenta.

Quinn LM(1), Latham SE, Kalionis B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Flinders University of South
Australia, Bedford Park, Australia.

Homeobox genes of the Distal-less (Dlx) family are expressed in the vertebrate
embryo in regions where epithelial cell layers contact adjacent mesenchymal
cells. This study shows that the human Dlx family member, DLX4, is expressed in
the placenta, primarily in regions where epithelial and mesenchymal cell layers
contact. In situ hybridization studies at first trimester human placental
sections revealed that DLX4 was expressed predominantly in the cytotrophoblast
stem cell layer. In term placenta, DLX4 was expressed in the syncytiotrophoblast.
Northern analysis revealed two DLX4 transcripts in first trimester placenta of
2.8 and 3.0 kb. Elevated levels of DLX4 mRNA were detected in a choriocarcinoma
derived cell line when compared with a cytotrophoblast cell line and normal
placenta. This is the first study to show that a member of the Dlx family of
homeobox genes is expressed in regions of epithelial and mesenchymal cell layer
contact in the human. Accumulated evidence from several studies suggest that a
combinatorial code of homeobox genes is required to regulate
epithelial-mesenchymal cell interactions in the vertebrate embryo. It is
predicted that a similar combination of homeobox genes, that includes DLX4, is
involved in regulating epithelial-mesenchymal cell interactions in extraembryonic
tissues. DLX4 may also have a role in the regulation of the genes important for
trophoblast invasion since the level of expression in trophoblast cell lines
reflects invasive potential.

PMID: 9481790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Genomics. 1997 Nov 1;45(3):580-90.

Relationship between the genomic organization and the overlapping embryonic
expression patterns of the zebrafish dlx genes.

Ellies DL(1), Stock DW, Hatch G, Giroux G, Weiss KM, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Civic Hospital, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, K1Y 4E9, Canada.

To understand the relationship between the expression and the genomic
organization of the zebrafish dlx genes, we have determined the genomic structure
of the dlx2 and dlx4 loci. This led to the identification of the zebrafish dlx1
and dlx6 genes, which are closely linked to dlx2 and dlx4, respectively.
Therefore, the inverted convergent configuration of Dlx genes is conserved among 
vertebrates. Analysis of the expression patterns of dlx1 and dlx6 showed striking
similarities to those of dlx2 and dlx4, respectively, the genes to which they are
linked. Furthermore, the expression patterns of dlx3 and dlx7, which likely
constitute a third pair of convergently transcribed genes, are indistinguishable.
Thus, the overlapping expression patterns of linked Dlx genes during embryonic
development suggest that they share cis-acting sequences that control their
spatiotemporal expression. The evolutionary conservation of the genomic
organization and combinatorial expression of Dlx genes in distantly related
vertebrates suggest tight control mechanisms that are essential for their
function during development.

Copyright 1997 Academic Press.

PMID: 9367683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Apr 1;94(7):3245-9.

Inhibition of DLX-7 homeobox gene causes decreased expression of GATA-1 and c-myc
genes and apoptosis.

Shimamoto T(1), Nakamura S, Bollekens J, Ruddle FH, Takeshita K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, New York University Medical Center, NY 10016, USA.

The DLX gene family is a family of divergent homeobox genes which are related to 
the Drosophila distal-less (Dll) gene and has been reported to be expressed
primarily in the forebrain and craniofacial structures. We have previously
identified a new member of this family, DLX-7. We now report that this gene is
expressed in normal hematopoietic cells and leukemia cell lines with erythroid
characteristics. We used an antisense oligonucleotide targeted against the
translation start site of DLX-7 mRNA to inhibit its expression in a human
erythroleukemia cell line K562, which expresses DLX-7 at a high level. The
antisense oligonucleotide efficiently reduced the DLX-7 mRNA, while control
oligonucleotides, including a mutant oligonucleotide identical to the antisense
sequence except for four nucleotide mismatches, had no effect on DLX-7 mRNA
level. Inhibition of DLX-7 expression decreased the plating efficiency by
approximately 70% compared with control. The antisense treatment caused
apoptosis, as shown by the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated
deoxyuridine triphosphate-digoxigenin nick end labeling (TUNEL) method.
Down-regulation of DLX-7 expression by antisense treatment was associated with a 
reduction in GATA-1 and c-myc mRNA levels. Thus, we conclude that DLX-7 is
expressed in hematopoietic cells and that the inhibition of its expression
results in the decreased levels of GATA-1 and c-myc genes, with an accompanying
induction of apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC20354
PMID: 9096378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Gene. 1997 Mar 10;187(1):55-61.

Isolation and identification of homeobox genes from the human placenta including 
a novel member of the Distal-less family, DLX4.

Quinn LM(1), Johnson BV, Nicholl J, Sutherland GR, Kalionis B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Flinders University of South
Australia, Adelaide.

We have carried out a DNA binding site screen of a 32-week human placental cDNA
library using a consensus homeodomain binding site as a probe. This study
represents the first library screen carried out to isolate homeobox genes from
the human placenta. We have shown that three homeobox genes known to be expressed
in the embryo, HB24, GAX and MSX2 are also expressed in the placenta. We have
also identified a novel homeobox gene, DLX4, that shows 85% sequence identity
with the homeodomain encoded by the Drosophila Distal-less (Dll) gene. DLX4
therefore represents a new member of the Distal-less family of homeobox genes.
This is the first evidence that members of the Distal-less family of homeobox
genes are expressed in the placenta. Using fluorescence in situ hybridisation
(FISH), DLX4 has been assigned to human chromosome 17q21-q22. This places DLX4 in
the same region of chromosome 17 as another member of the Distal-less family,
DLX3 (Scherer et al., 1995), and the HOX-B homeobox gene cluster (Acampora et
al., 1989: Boncinelli et al., 1991). Members of the Distal-less family (DLX1 and 
DLX2; DLX5 and DLX6) are found as closely linked pairs on human chromosomes
(Simeone et al., 1994). We predict that DLX3 and DLX4 are closely linked and have
arisen through gene duplication and divergence from a common ancestral precursor.

PMID: 9073066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Biochem Cell Biol. 1997;75(5):613-22.

Cross-interactions between two members of the Dlx family of homeobox-containing
genes during zebrafish development.

Zerucha T(1), Muller JP, Chartrand N, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Civic Hospital Loeb Research Institute, ON, Canada.

The Dlx homeobox genes of vertebrates are transcribed in multiple cells of the
embryo with overlapping patterns but often with different onsets of expression.
Here we describe the interaction between two dlx genes, dlx3 and dlx4, during
zebrafish development. The observation that dlx3 expression precedes that of dlx4
in the otic vesicle led us to investigate whether dlx3 had the ability to control
expression of dlx4. Truncated versions of dlx3 were overexpressed in zebrafish
embryos and the expression patterns of dlx4 were examined later in development.
Overexpression of truncated forms of Dlx3 or of a Dlx3-Dlx2 chimera was found to 
result in perturbations in dlx4 expression. In addition, cotransfection
experiments indicated the ability of Dlx3 to activate transcription through a
1.7-kb fragment of the 5' flanking region of dlx4. These results suggest that
dlx4 is one of the target genes of dlx3 in embryos and that cross-regulatory
interactions between Dlx genes may be one of the mechanisms responsible for their
overlapping expression.

PMID: 9551183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mech Dev. 1997 Jan;61(1-2):23-36.

Specific craniofacial cartilage dysmorphogenesis coincides with a loss of dlx
gene expression in retinoic acid-treated zebrafish embryos.

Ellies DL(1), Langille RM, Martin CC, Akimenko MA, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Treatments of zebrafish embryos with retinoic acid (RA), a substance known to
cause abnormal craniofacial cartilage development in other vertebrates, result in
dose- and stage-dependent losses of dlx homeobox gene expression in several
regions of the embryo. Dlx expression in neural crest cells migrating from the
hindbrain and in the visceral arch primordia is particularly sensitive to RA
treatment. The strongest effects are observed when RA is administered prior to or
during crest cell migration but effects can also be observed if RA is applied
when the cells have entered the primordia of the arches. Losses of dlx expression
correlate either with the loss of cartilage elements originating from hindbrain
neural crest cells or with abnormal morphology of these elements. Cartilage
elements that originate from midbrain neural crest cells, which do not express
dlx genes, are less affected. Taken together with the observation that the normal
patterns of visceral arch dlx expression just prior to cartilage condensation
resemble the morphology of the cartilage elements that are about to
differentiate, our results suggest that dlx genes are an important part of a
multi-step process in the development of a subset of craniofacial cartilage
elements.

PMID: 9076675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Genomics. 1996 Dec 15;38(3):314-24.

Genomic analysis of a new mammalian distal-less gene: Dlx7.

Nakamura S(1), Stock DW, Wydner KL, Bollekens JA, Takeshita K, Nagai BM, Chiba S,
Kitamura T, Freeland TM, Zhao Z, Minowada J, Lawrence JB, Weiss KM, Ruddle FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA.

We have cloned a new Dlx gene (Dlx7) from human and mouse that may represent the 
mammalian orthologue of the newt gene NvHBox-5. The homeodomains of these genes
are highly similar to all other vertebrate Dlx genes, and regions of similarity
also exist between mammalian Dlx7 and a subset of vertebrate Dlx genes downstream
of the homeodomain. The sequence divergence between human and mouse Dlx7 in these
regions is greater than that predicted from comparisons of other vertebrate Dlx
genes, however, and there is little sequence similarity upstream of the
homeodomain both between these two genes and with other Dlx genes. We present
evidence for alternative splicing of mouse Dlx7 upstream of the homeodomain that 
may account for some of this divergence. We have mapped human DLX7 distal to the 
5' end of the HOXB cluster at an estimated distance of between 1 and 2 Mb by
FISH. Both the human and the mouse Dlx7 are shown to be closely linked to Dlx3 in
a convergently transcribed orientation. These mapping results support the
possibility that vertebrate distal-less genes have been duplicated in concert
with the Hox clusters.

PMID: 8975708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Connect Tissue Res. 1995;32(1-4):35-40.

Dlx and other homeobox genes in the morphological development of the dentition.

Weiss KM(1), Ruddle FH, Bollekens J.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Genetics, Penn State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

The dentition is a segmental system whose evolution and morphology bears analogy 
to the evolution of segmentation in the vertebral column and limb. Combinatorial 
expression of members of the large "Hox" class of homeobox regulatory genes has
been shown to play an important role in positional specification in these
skeletal systems. This raises the possibility that homeobox genes are also used
for positional specification in the dentition, and several homeobox genes are
known to be expressed in developing teeth. To identify additional dentally
expressed homeobox genes, cDNA from from murine tooth germs at 9.5, 14.5, and
17.5 days gestational age was amplified by PCR using sets of degenerate primers
to the homeodomains of 18 different classes of homeobox genes. Amplification
products were cloned and sequenced and compared to known gene sequences. To date 
this approach has confirmed the presence of Msx1, Msx2, Dlx1, and Dlx2, and
identified several other homeobox genes not previously known to be expressed in
teeth: Dbx, MHox, and Mox2A, plus an a additional Dlx gene, Dlx7. The Msx and Dlx
genes are the best current candidates for a combinatorial mechanism that controls
the differentiation of structures within and between teeth, and perhaps also the 
evolution of those structures.

PMID: 7554933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Neurosci. 1994 Jun;14(6):3475-86.

Combinatorial expression of three zebrafish genes related to distal-less: part of
a homeobox gene code for the head.

Akimenko MA(1), Ekker M, Wegner J, Lin W, Westerfield M.

Author information: 
(1)Loeb Institute for Medical Research, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

We describe analysis of zebrafish distal-less-related homeobox genes that may
serve as specifiers of positional information in anterior regions of the CNS and 
in peripheral structures. We isolated three zebrafish genes, dlx2, dlx3, and
dlx4, by screening embryonic cDNA libraries. Comparisons of the predicted
sequences of the Dlx2, Dlx3, and Dlx4 proteins with distal-less proteins from
other species suggest that vertebrate distal-less genes can be divided into four 
orthologous groups. We observed similarities but also unique features of the
expression patterns of the zebrafish dlx genes. Among the three genes, dlx3 alone
is expressed during gastrulation. Shortly after gastrulation, cells in the
ventral forebrain rudiment express dlx2 and dlx4, but not dlx3, and hindbrain
neural crest cells express only dlx2. Presumptive precursor cells of the
olfactory placodes express dlx3 and dlx4 but not dlx2. Transcripts of dlx3 and
dlx4 are present in overlapping subsets of cells in the auditory vesicle and in
cells of the median fin fold, whereas dlx2 is never expressed in the auditory
vesicle and only at low levels in localized regions of the median fin fold. Cells
of the visceral arches and their primordia express all three dlx genes, but with 
different developmental time courses. We suggest that combinatorial expression of
the dlx genes is part of a homeobox gene code specifying pattern formation or
cell fate determination in the forebrain, in peripheral structures of the head,
and in the fins.

PMID: 7911517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


